NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PATENT LAWS AND INNOVATION:
EVIDENCE FROM ECONOMIC HISTORY
Petra Moser
Working Paper 18631
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18631

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012

I wish to thank David Autor, Eric Hilt, Ryan Lampe, Stephanie Lee, Xing Li, Joel Mokyr, Hoan Nguyen,
John List, Paul Rhode, Chang-Tai Hseih, Carlos Serrano, Timothy Taylor, Joel Watson, and Gavin
Wright for helpful suggestions, and the National Science Foundation for support through NSF Grant
SES0921859 and CAREER Grant 1151180. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Petra Moser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Patent Laws and Innovation: Evidence from Economic History
Petra Moser
NBER Working Paper No. 18631
December 2012
JEL No. K0,L24,L4,N0,O3,O31,O33,O34,Q16,Q55
ABSTRACT
What is the optimal system of intellectual property rights to encourage innovation? Empirical evidence
from economic history can help to inform important policy questions that have been difficult to answer
with modern data: 1) Does the existence of strong patent laws encourage innovation? And 2) May
patent laws influence the direction – as opposed to the rate – of technical change? Economic history
can also help to shed light on the effectiveness of policy tools that are intended to address problems
with the current patent system: 3) How do patent pools, as a mechanism to mitigate litigation risks,
influence the creation of new technologies? 4) Will compulsory licensing, as a mechanism to improve
access to essential innovations in developing countries, discourage innovation in the developing countries?
This essay summarizes results of existing research and highlights promising areas for future research.

Petra Moser
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
pmoser@stanford.edu

What is the optimal system of intellectual property rights to encourage innovation? In the
most basic theoretical models, patents pose a tradeoff between the social benefits from stronger
incentives for invention and losses in consumer welfare as a result of monopoly pricing
(Nordhaus 1969). But providing stronger patents for early generations of inventors may also
weaken incentives to invest in research and development for later generations (for example,
Scotchmer 1991 in this journal), so that the overall effects of stronger patents on innovation are
difficult to predict. Negative incentive effects are particularly severe if the boundaries of
intellectual property are poorly defined, so that later generations of inventors place themselves at
risk of ruinous litigation. Litigation risks are exacerbated when incumbents build “thickets” of
strategic patents that cover little innovative progress and instead serve as a legal weapon to
protect incumbents’ profits (Shapiro 2001; Hall and Ziedonis 2001). Recent patent wars over
smart phones and tablet computers have moved these issues to the forefront of policy debates,
but the underlying tensions are substantially more general. Empirical analyses that exploit a
wealth of historical datasets and exogenous variation, when done carefully, can help to improve
our understanding of these tensions and inform contemporary patent policy.
Empirical analyses of historical data have emphasized the role of patent laws in creating
incentives to invent, promoting innovation, and encouraging economic growth (for example,
Khan and Sokoloff 1993; Lamoreaux and Sokoloff 1999; Khan 2005). In the absence of
economy-wide data on the quantity of innovations, patent counts have become the standard
measure of innovation (for example, Schmookler 1962, 1966; Sokoloff 1988; Moser and Voena
2012), fuelled in part by the creation of National Bureau of Economic Research dataset of US
patents and citations between 1976 and 2002 (Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg 2001), and more
recently by the availability of historical patent data since 1920 through a collaboration between
the United States Patent and Trademark Office and Google Patents.
Patent data may, however, fail to capture innovation that occurs outside of the patent
system—for example, in countries without patent laws or in industries in which inventors rely on
alternative mechanisms to protect their intellectual property. In fact, survey data for the late
twentieth century indicate that commercial research and development labs in most industries
deem alternative mechanisms, such as secrecy and lead-time (being the first firm to offer a new
product) to be more effective than patents (Levin, Klevorick, Nelson, and Winter 1987; Cohen,
Nelson, and Walsh 2000). Historical accounts also indicate that innovation often occurs

2	  

independently of patents as a result of knowledge sharing (Allen 1983; Nuvolari 2004; Thomson
2009) or cultural attitudes that encourage risk taking (Landes 1969) and scientific
experimentation (Mokyr 2009).
Historical events—including a series of prominent technology exhibitions that started
with the 1851 Crystal Palace world’s fair in London—have created rich archival records on
innovation within and outside of the patent system, which offer opportunities to measure the
share and the characteristics of innovations that occur outside of the patent system. Data on
exhibits and prizes that international juries awarded to the most innovative exhibits make it
possible to examine innovation in countries without patent laws, and thus to exploit a large
amount of credibly exogenous variation in patent laws to investigate the effects of patent laws on
innovation. Patent laws that were in force in the mid-nineteenth century had largely been adopted
ad hoc according to idiosyncratic allegiances of national rulers (Penrose 1951, p. 13) and before
interest groups from individual industries had learned to lobby for stronger patents. Scientific
breakthroughs that reduced the effectiveness of alternative mechanisms to protect intellectual
property created exogenous shifts towards patenting, which make it possible to examine the role
that patents play, for example, in the diffusion of ideas. Historical events, such as the creation of
the first patent pool in 1856 and the compulsory licensing of enemy-owned US patents as a result
of World War I, create opportunities to examine the effects of policies that strengthen or weaken
the monopoly power of patents.
To use historical evidence to guide patent policies today, one must carefully compare
historical and modern institutions, political conditions, and changes in the technological
characteristics of industries over time. Empirical evidence from economic history, however, can
help to inform important policy questions that have proven difficult to answer with modern data.
For example, does the existence of strong patent laws encourage innovation? What proportion of
innovations is patented? And is this share constant across industries and over time? How does
patenting affect the diffusion of knowledge? And how effective are prominent mechanisms, such
as patent pools and compulsory licensing, that have been proposed to address problems with the
patent system?.1
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1

In addition to patents, innovation policy includes other types of intellectual property rights, such as copyrights,
which protect books, music, and software. National governments have also begun to increasingly use prizes as an
alternative mechanism to encourage innovation. More generally, the ability to attract high-skilled scientists and

	  
3	  

Have Patent Laws Increased the Rate of Innovation?

In 1474, the Venetian Republic began to offer exclusive rights to inventors and
entrepreneurs who had invented or brought new technologies to Venice. Intended to attract
skilled artisans, the Republic’s rudimentary patent system was copied by other European rulers
to promote economic development and, more frequently, reward political and financial support
(David 1994, p. 134; Boldrin and Levin 2008, p. 43-44). In 1623, Britain’s Statute of
Monopolies transferred the right of granting monopolies from King James I to Parliament. North
and Thomas (1973) argue that this shift, which replaced a royal prerogative to sell monopolies by
a legal property rights in ideas, played a critical role in encouraging Britain’s Industrial
Revolution. In 1797, the first article of the U.S. Constitution instructed Congress to “promote
the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times to Authors and Inventors
to the exclusive Right to their respective Writings and Discoveries.” This provision established
the foundation for the world’s first modern patent system, which Khan and Sokoloff (1998 and
2001) argue was instrumental in encouraging technological progress and economic growth in the
United States.
Recent interpretations, however, content that patents played no major role in encouraging
technological development and economic growth during Britain’s Industrial Revolution (Clark
2006; Mokyr 2009; Allen 2009). Mokyr (2009), for example, emphasizes the importance of a
shift towards science-based experimentation during the Enlightenment in setting the stage for
Europe’s Industrial Revolution. Alternative accounts of U.S. innovation have emphasized the
importance of relative factor prices, and in particular, the high costs of labor relative to the
abundance of natural resources, as an impetus for mechanization, and for the development of a
specifically American system of manufacturing (Rothbarth 1946; Habbakuk 1962; Rosenberg
1963, 1969, 1972; Hounshell 1985). 	  
Historical variation in 19th century patent laws — when several countries had not yet
adopted patent laws or abolished them for political reasons — offers unique opportunities to
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
workers is likely to be a key factor in determining rates of innovation. Economic history also offers rich
opportunities to explore the effectiveness of these alternative mechanisms; see for example Li, MacGarvie, and
Moser 2012; Moser, Voena, and Waldinger 2012, and Moser and Nicholas 2012.

4	  

investigate the effects of patent laws on innovation. Switzerland, for example, had no patents
until the country adopted a rudimentary patent system in 1888 and switched towards a fullfledged system in 1907 (Schiff 1971). Denmark provided limited patent protection for up to five
years in 1874, but waited until 1894 to enact an official patent law (Agnew 1874, p. 430; Boult
1895, p. 136). The Netherlands abolished its patent system in 1869 after a political victory of the
free-trade movement, which reflected a common view of patents as a form of protectionism and
rejected them as a restriction on trade (Schiff 1971). Even for countries with patent laws, the
strength of patents was far from uniform. In 1876, for example, patents in Denmark and Greece
expired after five years, while patents in other countries lasted for a minimum of twelve years
(Lerner 2000). Inventors around the world were also heavily dependent on domestic patent laws
because patenting abroad was prohibitively expensive and – until the Paris Convention of 1883 –
national patent systems discriminated heavily against foreign patentees (Bilir and Moser, 2012).
Analyses of technologies that were exhibited 19th century world’s fairs exploit such
variation to examine differences in innovation for countries with and without patent laws.
Exhibition catalogues, which guided visitors through the vast grounds of nineteenth- and early
twentieth-century technology fairs, list all exhibits. Collecting these data and matching them
with reports on prize-winning innovations, as well with patent data and with geographic
information, makes it possible to examine the number and the characteristics of innovations that
occurred inside and outside of the patent system - which has been difficult to accomplish with
patent counts as the standard source of innovation.
Exhibition data are available for the Crystal Palace Exhibition in London in 1851, the
American Centennial Exhibition in Philadelphia in 1876, the World’s Columbian Exhibition in
Chicago in 1893, and the Panama-Pacific International Exposition in San Francisco in 1915. In
1851, the Crystal Palace, a 1,848-foot long greenhouse of cast-iron and glass, was the largest
enclosed space on earth; it housed 17,062 exhibitors from 40 countries. At a time when London
had fewer than two million inhabitants, more than six million entry tickets were sold for the
Crystal Palace. In 1876, visitors at the U.S. Centennial Exhibition would have had to walk more
than the distance of a marathon to see 30,864 exhibitors from 35 countries; almost ten million
people visited the fair (Kroker 1975, p. 146). In 1893, the World’s Columbian Exposition
covered 717 acres of land and water in Jackson Park by Lake Michigan; it attracted 27.5 million
visitors. In 1915, San Francisco’s Marina and Presidio was converted to a fairground; it

5	  

welcomed 30,000 exhibitors from 32 countries and 19 million visitors.
Analyses of exhibits 1851 and 1876 reveal a surprising amount of high-quality
innovations in countries without patent laws. In 1851, Switzerland and Denmark contributed 110
exhibits per million people, compared with a mean of 55 and a median of 36 per million in
population for all countries (Moser 2005). Swiss exhibits were also more likely to win prizes for
exceptional novelty and usefulness. In 1851, 43 percent of Swiss exhibits won a prize, compared
with a mean of 35 percent and a median of 33 percent for all countries. In 1876, Switzerland
contributed 168 exhibits per million in population, compared with a mean of 87 and a median of
61 for all countries (Moser and Zimring 2012). The Netherlands—which had abolished patents
in 1869—won more prizes per exhibit than any other country, with 86 percent, compared with a
mean of 46 and a median of 45 percent for all countries.
The world’s fair data also indicate that only a small share of innovations were patented,
calling into question the role of intellectual property rights in encouraging Britain’s Industrial
Revolution. In 1851, 11 percent of British exhibits were patented. These results are consistent
with historical accounts, which emphasize the importance of cultural factors (Clark 2006; Mokyr
2009) as well as systems of collective invention without patents. For example, improvements in
Cornish steam engines (Nuvolari 2004) and in blast furnaces in Cleveland’s iron industry in the
United Kingdom were shared freely within a system of collective invention (Allen 1983), in
which patenting was rare.2
Data on prize-winning British exhibits help to shed light on the interaction between the
quality of inventions and inventors’ decision to use patents. Existing theoretical models indicate
that firms may decide to keep important innovations secret because patents require disclosure,
which is risky if patents are ineffective at blocking competitors from using a patented invention
(Anton and Yao 2004; Horstmann, MacDonald, Slivinski 1985). Exhibition data, however,
indicate that high-quality innovations are slightly more likely to be patented: In 1851, 15 percent
of British exhibits that won prizes for exceptional usefulness and quality were patented,
compared with 11 percent of average-quality exhibits.	  
Exhibition data on the share of innovations without patents make it possible to examine
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
2

Inventions within systems of collective invention were predominantly incremental (or micro-, rather than macro
inventions, Mokyr 1990), which Landes (1969, p.92) argues “were probably more important in the long run than the
major inventions that have been remembered in history books.”

6	  

how the characteristics of patent institutions influence inventors’ use of patents. Khan and
Sokoloff (1998, 2001, in this journal) have credited the design and low costs of patenting under
the US system with encouraging technical progress and economic growth through the
“democratization” of invention. In the mid 19th-century, British inventors faced a drawn-out and
expensive process, with exorbitant legal fees and bribes (MacLeod 1988, p. 76) in addition to
official fees of $37,000 (in 2000 US dollars, Lerner 2000).3 By comparison, US inventors could
mail in their applications and paid only $618 in fees (in 2000 US dollars, Lerner 2000). By
Patenting rates, however, were only slightly higher for US compared with British exhibits—at 15
compared with 11 percent (Moser 2012, p. 54).
US courts have also always been more likely to uphold the patent rights of early
generations of inventors, while British courts tended to be more anti-patent (Dutton 1984; Khan
2005). This pro-patent bias may, however, have discouraged U.S. rates of innovation as early as
the mid-19th century, anticipating problems with the current system (Bessen and Meurer 2008).
In 1846, for example, the US Patent and Trademark Office issued patent 4,750 to Elias Howe for
an Improvement in Sewing Machines. Howe’s patent was broad enough to cover most
commercially viable sewing machines at the time. Like a twenty-first century “patent troll,”
Howe used his patent to threaten litigation, instead of commercializing his invention. In 1852, a
District Court upheld Howe’s patent, and he began to collect license fees of $25 per machine,
roughly one-fifth the average price of a sewing machine (Lampe and Moser 2012).	  When other
firms sued based on their own patents, and production came to a near halt in the 1851–1856
“sewing machine wars” (Bissell 1999, p. 84)..By 1867, Howe had received $2 million in license
fees (Parton, 1867), roughly $27.8 million in 2011 dollars.4

Did the Creation of Plant Patents in 1930 Encourage Innovation?

Throughout the early twentieth century, living organisms such as livestock, bacteria, and
plants could not be patented. After World War I, however, concerns about food security
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3

Reforms of the British and other European patent systems during the “Patent Controversy” (1855-1873) may have
been triggered by the Crystal Palace exhibition and the unexpected quality of US innovations (Machlup and Penrose
1950; Rosenberg 1969, p. 2).
4
Using the GDP deflator, conversions based on Officer and Williamson 2011.

7	  

motivated the creation of intellectual property rights for plants that propagate asexually (through
roots rather than seeds) in the US Plant Patent Act of 1930. Breeders of food crops had argued
that, in the absence of effective alternative mechanisms, they were heavily dependent on patent
rights to recover large development costs. The Stark Brothers Nursery, for example, had built a
large cage, armed with a burglar alarm, to prevent competitors from stealing cuttings of the first
Golden Delicious apple tree, as shown in Figure 1. By creating plant patents, Congress hoped to
encourage domestic innovation and the development of a domestic US plant breeding industry.
Nearly half of all US plant patents between 1930 and 1970, however, were for roses,
suggesting that the 1930 legislation may have missed its target of establishing food security
(Moser and Rhode 2012, pp. 418–420). Anecdotal evidence indicates that the creation of plant
patents may have facilitated the development of a research-based U.S. rose breeding industry.
Similar to pharmaceutical R&D today, it took up to twelve years to develop a new rose, and
fewer than one in 1,000 seedlings typically proved commercially successful (Robb 1964, p. 389;
Stewart 2007, p. 131). Once a new rose had been developed, it was easy for competitors to copy
and propagate through cuttings, so that original breeders could not rely on secrecy or being first
to recuperate their costs of R&D. Until World War II, U.S. nurseries had depended on imported
nursery stock from Europe, but in the 1940s roughly a decade after the Plant Patent Act,
commercial nurseries, which account for the majority of plant patents, began to build mass
hybridization programs for roses in the 1940s.
Data on registrations of newly-created roses between 1916 and 1970, as an alternative
measure of innovation, however, suggest that the impact of plant patents was limited.
Registration data suggest that U.S. breeders created fewer new roses after 1931. Moreover, less
than 20 percent of new rose varieties registered after 1930 were patented (Moser and Rhode
2012, pp. 429-434). In fact, information on lineage indicates that most roses that are
commercially successful today descended from the breeding efforts of public-sector plant
scientists that preceded the creation of plant patents. Instead, historical records suggest that the
US rose industry received a boost when World War II cut off rose supplies from European
competitors and US breeders began to produce their own nursery stock based on licensed
European roses.

Patents, Secrecy, and the Direction of Technical Change

8	  

Exhibition data also indicate that the share of innovations that inventors chose to patent
varied strongly across industries. For example, fewer than 5 percent of Britain’s chemical
exhibits in 1851, 10 percent of scientific instruments, and 8 percent of exhibits in food
processing were patented, compared with 20 percent of manufacturing machinery (Moser 2012).
Remarkably, U.S. inventors appear to have relied on patents –and avoided patents – in the same
industries despite vast differences between the British and the American patent system.
Historical accounts suggest that variation in the effectiveness of secrecy, as an alternative
to patents, was instrumental in determining variation in the use of patents. Secrecy was an
effective mechanism to protect mid-nineteenth-century improvements in chemicals, because
science had not yet evolved enough to allow competitors to reverse engineer them. With crude
analytical tools, valuable dyes such as indigo and madder red proved impervious to industrial
espionage until the late nineteenth century (Haber 1958, p. 83). Secrecy was also effective in
protecting improvements in the production of scientific instruments, such as the rectangular
prisms of Swiss glassmaker T. Daguet of Soleure and the optical instruments of Danish makers
(Bericht I, 1852 pp. 813–19, 930–41). Watchmakers in the Swiss Valleé de Joux, for example,
maintained tight secrecy surrounding an improved mechanism to measure minutes by agreeing
not to take apprentices between 1823 and 1840 (Jaquet and Chapuis, 1945 p. 165).
But if inventors’ dependence on patents varies across industries, patent laws may
influence the direction of technical change (Moser 2005): In countries without patent laws,
inventors depend entirely on secrecy, lead time, and other alternatives to patents to protect their
intellectual property. As a result, investments in R&D may be most attractive in industries in
which secrecy is effective enough to guarantee exclusive rights that are strong enough to allow
inventors to recuperate their investments. In countries with patent laws, inventors can use legal
protection to establish exclusivity in any industry, so that factors other than the effectiveness of
secrecy determine the direction of technical change.
Cross-country comparisons of exhibition data confirm that innovation in countries
without patent laws focused on a narrow set of industries, in which secrecy was effective. At the
Crystal Palace, one-fourth of exhibits from countries without patent laws were scientific
instruments, compared with one-seventh of exhibits from other countries (Moser 2005).

9	  

Countries without patent laws also had larger shares of innovations in textiles, especially dyes,
and in food processing.
In food processing, the history of margarine illustrates the effectiveness of secrecy
relative to patents. The French chemist Mège Mouriès, for example, believed his invention to be
protected by a patent, and disclosed the process of producing margarine from suet to two Dutch
entrepreneurs Jurgens and van den Bergh. Jurgens and van den Bergh began to manufacture
margarine in 1871—two years after the Netherlands had abolished patent laws in response to a
victory of the free-trade movement. After a falling-out, van den Bergh kept his improvements
secret, and Jurgens was unable to reverse-engineer the superior taste of van den Bergh margarine
(which allowed for its commercialization) until 1905 (Schiff 1971).
More generally, the share of Dutch innovations in food processing experienced a marked
increase after the Netherlands abolished patents in 1869. In 1851, 11 percent of exhibits from
the Netherlands were related to food processing. In 1876, 37 percent of Dutch exhibits,
including a disproportionate amount of award-winners, originated from this industry (Moser
2005). Many other innovations in the field, including milk chocolate, baby foods, and readymade soups, were made in Switzerland and the Netherlands when neither country offered patents
(Schiff 1971, pp. 52–58).
Survey data for the late 20th-century indicate that the relative effectiveness of secrecy and
patents continued to vary across industries. For example, respondents from 634 American
research and development labs in 1983 (Levin, Klevorick, Nelson, and Winter 1987), and from
1,478 American firms in 1994 (Cohen, Nelson, and Walsh 2000) report that today secrecy is
more effective than patents as a mechanism to protect intellectual property in most industries.
Harhoff and Hoisl (2006) present comparable evidence for European countries. Only for
pharmaceuticals and chemical inventions, patents are consistently rated as an effective
mechanism to protect intellectual property. Compared with mid 19th-century reports, which
emphasize the effectiveness of secrecy to protect chemical inventions, these results indicate that
the effectiveness of secrecy varies not only across industries, but also over time.
Scientific breakthroughs, which lowered the effectiveness of secrecy, may be one
important factor that determines inventors’ propensity to patent. In chemicals, for example,
analytical advances such as August Kekulé’s model of the benzene ring in 1865 and Dmitrii
Mendeleev’s publication of the periodic table in 1869, transformed chemical analysis in the

10	  

second half of the 19th- century. As a result of these advances, it became much riskier to protect
chemicals through secrecy (Haber, 1958, p. 81). At the same time, these analytical advances had
no effects innovations in machinery, which had always been easy to copy.
Moser (2012) exploits this differential shift to examine the effects of exogenous changes
in the effectiveness of secrecy on inventors’ propensity to patent. Difference-in-differences
comparisons reveal a significant shift towards patenting in response to analytical advances: In
1851 and 1876, 0 and 5 percent of US chemical innovations were patented, respectively. In 1893
and 1915, 19 and 20 percent of US chemical innovations were patented, respectively. During the
same time, patenting rates in manufacturing machinery—an industry in which secrecy was
always ineffective—stayed roughly constant between 44 and 49 percent (Moser 2012, pp. 62-67).
These results suggest that scientific breakthroughs, such as the publication of the periodic table
in the 19th century or the decoding of the human genome today may not only affect the speed of
innovation but also increase inventors’ dependency on patents.

Patent Laws and the Diffusion of Innovation

This science-driven shift towards patenting makes it possible to explore whether patent
rights encourage the geographic diffusion of innovative activity, which in turn has important
consequences for cumulative innovation and economic growth. Analyses of patent laws typically
focus on incentive effects and have largely ignored diffusion, even though disclosure and
teaching a new set firms about the “mysteries” of more advanced technologies was an important
goal of early patent systems (David 1994). In fact patents are often considered as a mechanism to
prevent rather than encourage the diffusion of patented ideas
…there is a need to balance the potential private rewards of innovation, which are the
incentive for private investment, against the social interest in spreading knowledge and
encouraging its widespread and rapid commercial application. The first element calls for
protecting the private investor in an exclusive right to exploit the new knowledge he has
gained. The second calls for limiting that exclusive privilege to permit diffusion and to
support the competitive investments of rivals (Abramovitz 1989, pp. 39-40).
Lamoreaux and Sokoloff (1999), however, link the increase in U.S. patenting in the late
th

19 century with the emergence of professional patent agents, whose role was to facilitate the
trade in patented ideas. The case of Mège Mouriès (the unfortunate inventor of margarine)

11	  

suggests that inventors may be more willing to disclose technical information to competitors if
they feel protected by a patent. In another example from early 19th-century England, the U.K.
iron founder Robert Ransome began to advertise his plough-shares to all ironmongers in
Norwich and 50 outlets in East Anglia after he received a patent in 1803 (MacLeod 1988, p. 100).
By contrast, inventors have fiercely guarded knowledge from spreading to people outside their
social network in the absence of intellectual property. For example, silk weavers in seventeenthcentury Bologna hanged Ugolino Menzani for sharing the knowledge of a new silk twisting
machine with Venetian weavers (Belfanti 2004, p. 581), and mechanics in the nineteenth-century
Pennsylvania cotton industry relied on family relations to exchange technical knowledge
(Wallace 1986, pp. 211–46).
Moser (2011) exploits the shift towards patenting in the 19th-century chemicals industry
to explore whether patenting may, in fact encourage the diffusion of innovative activity: By
creating intellectual property rights in ideas, patents may encourage inventors to disseminate
knowledge of patented inventions, which in turn facilitates cumulative innovation and learning
by doing.5 A geographic analysis of exhibition data confirms that the shift towards patenting in
chemicals was followed by a significant weakening in the geographic localization of inventive
activity in chemicals. This decline in geographic concentration cannot be explained by changes
in the localization of production: Data from decennial census records for 1840 to 1920 indicate
that the localization of chemical production remained relatively stable after 1876. Measuring
changes in the diffusion of innovations by a geographic Herfindahl-Hirschmann index and using
1876 as a baseline, geographic concentration decreased by more than 70 percent for chemicals
after 1876, compared with roughly 25 percent for manufacturing machinery. Difference-indifferences regressions, which compare changes after 1876 in the geographic concentration of
innovations in chemicals and manufacturing machinery, indicate that a 1 percent increase in the
share of patented innovations was associated with a 1.3 percent decrease in localization.
Thus, the sum of the historical evidence from exhibition data, plant patents, and other
sources indicates that patent laws may influence the direction of technological change and help
to encourage the diffusion of knowledge, even though patent laws do not appear to be a
necessary or sufficient condition for higher rates of innovation.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
5

See Scotchmer (1991) for a survey of the literature on cumulative innovation.

12	  

Mechanisms to Modify Patent Laws: Patent Pools

How can economic policy modify existing patent systems to make them more effective?
A major problem with any patent system lies in the difficulty of defining the boundaries of the
technology space that is covered by a patent. As a result, patent examiners may issue patents that
cover overlapping areas of the technology space, such that two or more firms own blocking
patents for the same technology. This in turn leads to infringement litigation, which impedes the
production of new technologies and may discourage innovation.
Patent pools, which allow a group of firms to combine their patents, have emerged as a
prominent mechanism to resolve blocking patents and prevent or resolve patent wars. In the
1990s, four pools formed in the information technology industry: the MPEG-2 pool, the 3G
platform and two DVD pools (Merges 1999). More recently, Google launched an open-source
video format pool to counter MPEG LA’s pool for the H.264 video coding standard, and MPEG
LA has announced plans for a pool to cover kits for diagnostic genetic testing.
Although patent pools may weaken the intensity of competition, as they allow a group of
firms to combine their individually held patents, regulators and courts have allowed pools
arguing that “In a case involving blocking patents, such an arrangement is the only reasonable
method for making the invention available to the public” (International Mfg. Co. v. Landon, 336
F.2d 723, 729 [9th Cir. 1964]). Another argument in favor of pools is that, at least in theory,
pools that combine complementary patents may reduce license fees for outside firms as they
eliminate “n-marginalization,” which occurs when firms that own patents for part of a product
charge license fees that are too high compared with the profit-maximizing fee for the complete
product (Lerner and Tirole 2004; Shapiro 2001, p.134).
This positive view of patent pools is consistent with the early history of a pool that
formed in the US aircraft industry to encourage the production of planes during World War I. In
1917, patent litigation between the Orville and Wilbur Wright Company and their competitor,
the Curtiss Company had brought the US production of planes to a halt. A committee under
Franklin Roosevelt, then Assistant Secretary of the Navy, recommended that Wright and Curtiss
form a patent pool. After the pool had formed, US output of aircraft increased from 83 in 1916 to

13	  

11,950 in 1918 (Bittlingmayer 1988; Stubbs 2002). The aircraft pool remained in effect until
1975, when the US Department of Justice decided to dissolve the pool, arguing that it had
“lessened competition in research and development” (Federal Register 40(142), July 23, 1975, p.
30848). This decision exemplifies the tension between the potential benefits and costs of patent
pools.
In theoretical models, the predicted effects of patent pools on innovation are ambiguous.
The prospect of a pool may motivate firms to enter a race to patent the technologies that will
form the pool; this race could be productive, or it may be socially wasteful if it encourages
duplicative research and strategic patenting (Dequiedt and Versaevel 2012). The creation of a
pool may also encourage investments in research and development by reducing litigation risks
for members and thereby increasing expected profits from research and development (Shapiro
2001), but it may also lead pool members to cut their own investments in research and
development because they hope to be able to free-ride on the investments of other members
(Vaughn 1956, p. 67). Incentives to free-ride are particularly strong for pools that include “grantback provisions,” which require members to offer all new patents to the pool, and innovative
members may abandon the pool to protect their patents (Aoki and Nagaoka 2004). Grant-back
provisions may, however, also encourage innovation by reducing the potential for hold-up
(Lerner, Strojwas, and Tirole 2007).
Empirical evidence on the effects of modern pools on innovation is limited so far.
Qualitative evidence indicates that innovation increased in response to a pool for CDs, but
declined in response to a pool for disk drives (Flamm 2012). In the open source software
industry, the creation of a pool was followed by a modest increase in the number of new open
source software products per year for technology fields in which IBM contributed patents to the
pool (Ceccagnoli, Forman, and Wen 2012).6
Economic history offers opportunities to investigate pools across a broad range of
industries and regulatory settings (Gilbert 2004) starting with the first pool in US history, the
Sewing Machine Combination (1856–1877). This pool shared key characteristics of pools that
are predicted to encourage innovation today: It combined nine complementary patents, which
were necessary to build a commercially viable sewing machine, and it resolved the sewing
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
6

Earlier empirical analyses have focused on the determinants of pool participation (Layne-Farrar and Lerner 2010)
and on rules that govern interactions between pool members (Lerner, Strojwas, and Tirole 2007).

14	  

machine patent war between Elias Howe, the Singer Company, and two other manufacturers,
which had delayed commercialization. Litigation data confirm that the creation of a pool
lowered litigation risks for members (Lampe and Moser 2010, p. 900). The pool also reduced
license fees from $25 for Howe’s patent to $5 for the bundle of patents for members and $15 for
outside firms, confirming theoretical predictions.
Patenting, however, declined after the pool formed and only increased again after the
pool dissolved in 1877 (Lampe and Moser 2010, p. 913). A comparison with the British sewing
machine industry, which had no patent pool, suggests that this decline in innovation was a purely
American phenomenon (Figure 2). In Britain, sewing machine patents continued to increase
gradually as a share of all British patents until the early 1874 and experienced no increase after
1877.
To investigate whether this decline in patenting reflected a decline in innovation, we
collected additional data on objective improvements in the performance of sewing machines.
Articles on sewing machines in 19th-century magazines, such as the Scientific American and the
Lady’s Home Journal suggest that the key characteristics that consumers valued in a sewing
machine were low weight, little noise, and most importantly, a high speed of sewing, measured
as the number of stitches per minute that a machine could perform. Data on improvements in
sewing speed, which we collected from company records and trade journals in the Smithsonian
Institution Library, indicate that improvements slowed soon after the pool had been established
and did not recover until it had dissolved (Figure 3 and Lampe and Moser 2010, pp. 916–17).
Whether these results are generalizable to other industries and modern pools is an open
question. The unambiguous decline in innovation for sewing machines, however, highlights the
need for additional empirical—and theoretical—analyses to guide antitrust policy towards pools.
Theoretical models of effects on price are well developed (Shapiro 2001; Lerner and Tirole
2004), but effects on innovation are equally important and less well understood. Existing
theoretical models also focus almost exclusively on member firms, but ignore effects on outside
firms. Patent data, however, indicate that outside firms produced the large majority of patents
across industries (Lampe and Moser 2012a), suggesting that their response to the creation of a
pool is essential to understanding the welfare effects of pools.
A better understanding of the mechanism by which pools influence the rate and direction
of innovation is particularly important as the use of pools expands to innovative research fields

15	  

with high social value, such as biochemistry, medicines, or energy. The case of the sewing
machine industry suggests that the creation of a pool may soften the intensity of competition for
member firms, which tend to be larger and more established, at the expense of outside firms,
which tend to be smaller and younger than pool members. For example, the sewing machine pool
appears to have exacerbated litigation risks for outside firms, even as it reduced such risks for
members (Lampe and Moser 2010, p. 907). The pool also created differential license fees that
favored pool members, even though it reduced license fees (as theory predicts). Current antitrust
guidelines allow pools to charge differential license fees, unless they have been shown to have
direct anti-competitive effects. The experience of the sewing machine pool, however, indicates
that differential license fees, which make it harder for outside firms to offer the pool technology
at a competitive price, diverted the research investments of outside firms towards technologically
inferior substitutes for the pool technologies (Lampe and Moser 2012b), suggesting that – in the
absence of effective regulation – patent pools may influence not only levels, but also the
direction of technical change.

Compulsory Licensing

An alternative mechanism to modify patent systems is compulsory licensing, which
weakens the monopoly power of patents by licensing them to competing firms without the
consent of patent owners. This policy has moved to the forefront of international trade debates,
as international treaties, such as the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights (TRIPS) have strengthened foreign-owned patents in developing countries, reducing
access to life-saving drugs, and other essential innovations (Deardorff 1992; Grossman and Lai
2004; Chaudhuri, Goldberg, and Jia 2006). To address this issue, Article 31 of TRIPS allows
national governments to issue compulsory licenses of foreign-owned patents in cases of national
emergencies. The World Trade Organization Doha Declaration of 2001 (WT/MIN(01)/DEC/1,
Art. 5.b) further specifies that national governments have “the freedom to determine the grounds
upon which such licenses are granted.” Thailand and Brazil, for example, have used compulsory
licensing to procure antiretroviral drugs for millions of patients with HIV/AIDS, and India has

16	  

used the threat of compulsory licensing to procure vaccines for swine flu (Kremer 2002; Galvão
2002; Gostin 2006; Steinbrook 2007).
Immediate access to foreign-owned inventions may, however, come at the cost of
discouraging domestic invention in the licensing country if it displaces domestic research and
development. But compulsory licensing may also encourage domestic research and development
that is complementary to foreign-owned inventions, and the ability to produce foreign-owned
inventions may create opportunities for cumulative innovation (Scotchmer 1991 and learning by
doing (Arrow 1962). As a result, the effects of compulsory licensing on domestic invention are
theoretically ambiguous. Empirical analyses are complicated by the fact that governments are
more likely to use compulsory licensing if demand for foreign-owned inventions is high and if
domestic production capacities are advanced enough to produce them; both factors may increase
domestic invention irrespective of compulsory licensing.
An episode of compulsory licensing under the US Trading with the Enemy Act (TWEA)
as a result of World War I creates a unique opportunity to identify the effects of compulsory
licensing on invention. Passed on November 17, 1917, the TWEA was intended to “dislodge the
hostile Hun within our gates” and to place all enemy property “beyond the control or influence of
its former owners, where it cannot eventually yield aid or comfort to the enemy” (Alien Property
Custodian 1919, p. 13 and 17). In March 28, 1918, the TWEA was amended to grant the Alien
Property Custodian, Mitchell Palmer, the power to sell enemy property, including all enemyowned patents “as though he were the owner thereof” (Alien Property Custodian 1919, p. 22).
By February 22, 1919, Palmer announced that “practically all known enemy property in the
United States has been taken over by me” (Alien Property Custodian 1919, p.7). In 1919, the US
Chemical Foundation began to issue nonexclusive licenses of enemy-owned patents to US firms.
Moser and Voena (2012) exploit this event to examine the effects of compulsory
licensing on the patenting activity of US inventors in organic chemistry. Baseline estimates
compare changes after 1918 in patent issues per year for 336 technologies with compulsory
licensing, with changes for a control group of 7,248 technologies without licensing.
Methodologically, the analysis takes advantage of the USPTO’s detailed classification system to
distinguish narrowly-defined technologies (measured at the level of USPTO subclasses) that
were differentially affected by compulsory licensing. Technology fixed effects (at the level of
USPTO subclasses) and year fixed effects, as well as technology-specific trends make it possible

17	  

to control for variation in the inventors’ use of patents across technologies and over time. The
difference-in-differences analyses of comparing narrowly defined technologies (at a unit of
analysis much below the industry level) allows us to control for unobservable factors, such as
improvements in education, the creation of protectionist tariffs, or the temporary absence of
German competitors during the war, which may have encouraged US invention across all types
of chemical technologies regardless of compulsory licensing.
Baseline estimates indicate a 20 percent increase in domestic patenting in response to
compulsory licensing (Moser and Voena 2012, p. 404). Estimates of time-varying effects
indicate that this increase set in with a lag of eight to nine years and remained large and
statistically significant throughout the 1930s (Moser and Voena 2012, p. 409).
These results suggest that compulsory licensing may help to increase innovation in the
licensing countries, even though this increase occurs with some delay if the licensing country
lags behind the technology frontier. At the time of the TWEA, the United States lagged behind
Germany in the field of organic chemistry and needed “time to learn” (Arora and Rosenberg
1998, p.79), even though other branches of U.S. chemical invention were well-developed. For
example, the hopes of duplicating German dyes seemed slim for U.S. firms in 1919. Du Pont’s
initial runs of indigo (which had been developed and patented by the German chemical firm
BASF) turned out green (Hounshell and Smith 1988, p. 90). Similarly, countries such as Brazil
and India, which are technologically advanced in many fields, seek to license foreign
technologies in fields where domestic invention is weak, and may require some time to catch up
to the frontier in these fields.
Learning from patent documents is particularly difficult if information in patent
documents is incomplete or obscure. The German BASF, for example, had “effectively
bulwarked its discovery [of the Haber-Bosch process of nitrogen fixation] with strong, broad
patents which detailed meticulously the apparatus, temperatures and pressures, but cleverly
avoided particulars as to the catalysts employed or their preparation” (Haynes 1945, pp. 86–87).
“A prolonged learning experience was necessary [for US firms] to understand the two sides of
catalysis, the chemical side and the engineering and design side” (Mowery and Rosenberg 1998,
p. 75).
In the case of compulsory licensing, these problems are exacerbated because licensees
typically cannot access the un-codified knowledge that is embodied in skilled workers and

18	  

scientists who developed the original improvement. Thus, the US Winthrop Chemical Company,
which had acquired all of the German company Bayer’s production machinery in addition to its
patents “could not figure out how to make the sixty-three drugs that were supposed to be [its]
stock-in-trade…The former German supervisors having been jailed or deported, nobody knew
how to run the machines; …the patents, which were supposed to specify manufacturing
processes, were marvels of obfuscation” (Mann and Plummer 1991, pp. 52–53).
Domestically, regulators have used compulsory licensing as a remedy to restore
competition in industries that have become dominated by a small group of firms. For example,
Scherer (1977, pp. 47–48) estimates that the US Federal Trade Commission and the US
Department of Justice had made thousands of patents available by 1977, in industries ranging
from glassware (in the 1946 breakup of the Hartford Empire pool) to copy-machines (in the 1975
decision against Xerox). As a mechanism to address anticompetitive patenting behavior in
domestic markets, compulsory licensing is expected to increase overall welfare by encouraging
competition (Tandon 1982; Gilbert and Shapiro 1990). Survey results and case studies suggest
that compulsory licensing may not provoke dramatic changes in rates of patenting and
innovation (for example, Scherer 1977, Chien 2003), but more systematic empirical analyses are
needed.

Conclusions

Critics of the current patent system argue that a shift towards the strategic use of patents
as a “sword” to hold up competitors and extract license fees threatens the effectiveness of patents
as a means to encourage innovation.7 The underlying problems with this system, however, may
be much broader and understanding them is critical to the design of patent policies. As early as
the 1850s, patentees who did not produce anything were able to hold up entire industries because
they had been issued broad patents, which had been affirmed in court.
Historical evidence suggests that in countries with patent laws the majority of innovations
occur outside of the patent system. Countries without patent laws have produced as many
innovations as countries with patent laws during some time periods, and their innovations have
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
7

See, for example, “The Patent, Used as a Sword,” New York Times October 7, 2012, p. A1.

19	  

been of comparable quality. Even in countries with relatively modern patent laws, such as the
mid-19th century United States, most inventors avoided patents and relied on alternative
mechanisms when these were feasible. Secrecy emerged as a key mechanism to protect
intellectual property; its effectiveness relative to patents varies with the technological
characteristics of innovations across industries and over time. In industries where secrecy was
effective, inventors were less likely to use patents. Advances in scientific analysis, which
lowered the effectiveness of secrecy, increased inventors’ dependency on patents.
Incorporating these basic facts changes the predicted effects of patent laws on innovation.
If a substantial share of innovations occurs outside of the patent system, policies that implement
even the most drastic shifts towards stronger patents may fail to encourage innovation. If
inventors’ dependence on patent protection varies across industries, implementing stronger
patent rights may alter the direction of technical change. If property rights in ideas encourage
inventors to publicize technical information, a shift towards patenting may encourage the
diffusion of knowledge.
History also offers a laboratory in which researchers can explore the effectiveness of
alternative remedies to problems with the current patent system. For example, patent pools,
which allow competing firms to combine their patents, have been proposed as a mechanism to
resolve litigation risks as a result of overlapping patent grants, when more than one firm owns
patents for the same technology. Historical evidence, however, indicates that pools may
discourage and divert R&D by outside firms, if they create differential litigation risks and
licensing schemes that favor their members. Another prominent mechanism is compulsory
licensing, which allows competitors to produce patented inventions without the consent of the
patent-owners. Historical evidence suggests that this policy may encourage innovation by
allowing a new set of firms to produce a patented technology, and possibly by increasing
competition to improve the technology.
Overall, the weight of the existing historical evidence suggests that patent policies, which
grant strong intellectual property rights to early generations of inventors, may discourage
innovation. On the contrary, policies, which encourage the diffusion of ideas, and modify patent
laws to facilitate entry and encourage competition, may be an effective mechanism to encourage
innovation. Carefully executed historical analyses can help to shed further light on these
pressing issues of patent policy.

20	  

REFERENCES

Abramovitz, Moses, 1989. “Thinking about Growth: And Other Essays on Economic Growth
and Welfare,” Cambridge University Press, Apr 28, 1989.
Agnew, Ficher W. 1874. The Law and Practice relating to Letters Patent for Inventions:
Together with Notices of the Patent Laws in Force in the Principal Foreign States and in the
Colonies. London:Wildy and Sons.
Allen, Robert C. 1983. “Collective Invention.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization
4(1): 1–24
Allen, Robert C. 2009. The British Industrial Revolution in Global Perspective (New
approaches to Economic and Social History). The University of Chicago Press
Anton, James J., and Dennis A. Yao. 2004. "Little Patents and Big Secrets: Managing
Intellectual Property." RAND Journal of Economics, 35(1): 1–22.
Aoki, Reiko, and Sadao Nagaoka. 2004. “The Consortium Standard and Patent Pools.” Hi-Stat
Discussion Paper 32.
Arora, A., and N. Rosenberg. 1998. "Chemicals: A US success story." In Chemicals and LongTerm Economic Growth, edited by A. Arora, R. Landau, and N. Rosenberg, 71-102. New York:
Wiley.
Arrow, Kenneth J. 1962. “The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing.” Review of
Economic Studies 29(3): 155–73.
Belfanti, Carlo. 2004. “Guilds, Patents, and the Circulation of Technical Knowledge: Northern
Italy during the Early Modern Age.” Technology and Culture 45(3): 569–89.
Berichterstattungs-Kommission der Deutschen Zollvereins-Regierungen. 1853. Amtlicher
Bericht über die Industrie-Austellung aller Völker zu London im Jahre 1851, Volumes I-III.
Berlin, Prussia: Verlag der Deckerschen Geheimen Ober-Hofbuchdruckerei.
Bessen, James, and Michael J. Meurer. 2008. Patent Failure: How Judges, Bureaucrats, and
Lawyers Put Innovators at Risk. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Bilir, L. Kamran and Petra Moser. 2012. “Do Patent Treaties Encourage Inventors to Patent
Abroad? – Evidence from the Paris Convention” http://ssrn.com/abstract=1893052.
Bissell, Don. 1999. The First Conglomerate: 145 Years of the Singer Sewing Machine Company.
Brunswick, ME: Audenreed Press.	  
	  

21	  

Bittlingmayer, George. 1988. “Property Rights, Progress, and the Aircraft Patent Agreement.”
Journal of Law & Economics 31(1): 227–48.
Boldrin, Michele and David K. Levine. 2008. Against Intellectual Monopoly. Cambridge
University Press.
Boult, Alfred J. 1895. Digest of British and Foreign Patent Laws. Second Edition. London:
Boult, Wade & Kilburn.
Ceccagnoli, Marco, Christopher Forman, and Wen Wen. 2012. “Patent Pools, Thickets, and
the Open Source Software Entry by Start-up Firms.” Georgia Institute of Technology working
paper. http://conference.nber.org/confer/2012/IPKE/forman.pdf
Chaudhuri, Shubham, Pinelopi K. Goldberg, and Panle Gia. 2006. “Estimating the Effects of
Global Patent Protection in Pharmaceuticals: A Case Study of Quinolones in India.” American
Economic Review 96(5): 1477–1514.
Chien, Colleen. 2003. “Cheap Drugs at What Price to Innovation: Does the Compulsory
Licensing of Pharmaceuticals Hurt Innovation.” Berkeley Techonolgy Law Journal 18(3):853.
Clark, Gregory. 2006. A Farewell to Alms: a Brief Economic History of the World. Princeton.
Princeton University Press.
Cohen, Wesley M., Richard R. Nelson, and John P. Walsh. 2000. “Protecting Their
Intellectual Assets: Appropriability Conditions and Why U.S. Manufacturing Firms Patent (or
Not).” NBER Working Paper 7552.
David, Paul A. 1994. “The Evolution of Intellectual Property Institutions," in Economics in a
Changing World, vol. 1: System Transformation: Eastern and Western Assessments, A.
Aganbegyan, O. Bogomolov and M. Kaser, eds., London: MacMillan.
Department of Justice and Federal Trade Commission. 1995. “Antitrust Guidelines for the
Licensing of Intellectual Property.”
Department of Justice and Federal Trade Commission. 2007. Antitrust Enforcement and
Intellectual Property Rights: Promoting Innovation and Competition.
Dequiedt, Vianney, and Bruno Versaevel. 2012. “Patent Pools and Dynamic R&D Incentives.”
Documents De Travail No. 07-03. http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=988303
Dutton, Harold I. 1984. The Patent System and Inventive Activity during the Industrial
Revolution, 1750–1852. Manchester, UK: Manchester University Press.
Flamm, Kenneth. 2012. “A Tale of Two Standards: Patent Pools and Innovation in the Optical
Disk Drive Industry.” University of Texas at Austin working paper.
http://conference.nber.org/confer/2012/IPKE/flamm.pdf

22	  

Galvão, Jane. 2002. “Access to Antiretroviral Drugs in Brazil.” Lancet 360(9348): 1862–65.
Gilbert, Richard J. 2004. “Antitrust for Patent Pool: A Century of Policy Evolution.” Stanford
Technology Law Review, April 28. http://stlr.stanford.edu/2004/04/antitrust-for-patent-pools/.	  
Gilbert, Richard J. and Carl Shapiro. 1990. “Optimal Patent Length and Breadth.” RAND
Journal of Economics 21(1): 106–112.
Gostin, Lawrence O. 2006. “Medical Countermeasures for Pandemic Influenza: Ethics and the
Law." JAMA 295(5): 554–56.
Grossman, Gene M., and Edwin L.-C Lai. 2004. “International Protection of Intellectual
Property.” American Economic Review 94(5): 1635–53.
Habakkuk, H. J. 1962. American and British Technology in the Nineteenth Century: The
Search for Labour-Saving Inventions. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Haber, Ludwig Fritz. 1958. The Chemical Industry during the Nineteenth Century: A Study of
the Economic Aspect of Applied Chemistry in Europe and North America. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam B. Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg. 2001. “The NBER Patent
Citation Data File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools.” NBER Working Paper 8498.
Hall, Browyn H., and Rosemarie Ham Ziedonis. 2001. “The Patent Paradox Revisited: An
Empirical Study of Patenting in the US Semiconductor Industry, 1979–1995.” RAND Journal of
Economics 32(1):101–128
Harhoff, Dietmar, and Karin Hoisl. 2006. “Institutionalized Incentives for Ingenuity—Patent
Value and the German Employees' Inventions Act.” Research Policy 36(8): 1143–62.
Haynes, Williams. 1945. American Chemical Industry—The World War I period 1912–1922.
New York: D. Van Nostrand Company.
Horstmann, Ignatius J., Glenn MacDonald, and Alan Slivinski. 1985. “Patents as
Information Transfer Mechanisms: To Patent or (Maybe) Not to Patent.” Journal of Political
Economy 93(5): 837–58.
Hounshell, David. 1985. From the American System to Mass Production, 1800–1932: The
Development of Manufacturing Technology in the United States. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Hounshell, David A., and John Kenly Smith. 1988. Science and Corporate Strategy: Du Pont
R&D, 1902–1980. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

23	  

Jaquet, Eugène and Chapuis, Alfred. La Montre Suisse. Bale and Olten: Editions Urs Graf,
1945.
Khan, B. Zorina, and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 1993. “Schemes of Practical Utility:
Entrepreneurship and Innovation among 'Great Inventors' in the United States, 17901865.”Journal of Economic History 53(2): 289–307.
Khan, B. Zorina, and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 1998. “Patent Institutions, Industrial Organization
and Early Technological Change: Britain and the United States, 1790-1850.’’ In Technological
Revolutions in Europe, edited by M. Bergand K. Bruland, Cheltenham, 292–313. UK:
Edward Elgar.
Khan, B. Zorina, and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 2001. “History Lessons: The Early Development
of Intellectual Property Institutions in the United States.” Journal of Economic Perspectives
15(3): 233–46
Khan, B. Zorina. 2005. The Democratization of Invention: Patents and Copyrights in American
Economic Development, 1790–1920. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Kremer, Michael. 2002. “Pharmaceuticals and the Developing World.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 16(4): 67–90.
Kretschmer, Winfried. 1999. Geschichte der Weltausstellungen. Frankfurt: Campus Verlag.
Kroker, Evelyn. 1975. Die Weltausstellungen im 19. Jahrhundert: Industrieller
Leistungsnachweis, Konkurrenzverhalten und Kommunikationsfunktion unter Berücksichtigung
der Montanindustrie des Ruhrgebietes zwischen 1851 und 1880. Göttingen, Germany:
Vandhoeck Ruprecht.
Lamoreaux, Naomi R., and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 1999. “Inventors, Firms, and the Market for
Technology in the Late Nineteenth and Early Twentieth Centuries,” in Naomi R. Lamoreaux,
Daniel M.G. Raff, and Peter Temin P. (eds.), Learning by Doing in Markets, Firms and
Countries, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lampe, Ryan, and Petra Moser. 2010. “Do Patent Pools Encourage Innovation? Evidence
from the 19th-Century Sewing Machine Industry.” Journal of Economic History 70(4): 898-920.
Lampe, Ryan, and Petra Moser. 2012a. “Patent Pools and Innovation in Substitutes –
Evidence from the 19th Century Sewing Machine Industry.” Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1468062.
Lampe, Ryan, and Petra Moser. 2012b. “Patent Pools and the Direction of Innovation.”
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1468062.
Landes, David, 1969. Prometheus Unbound. Technological Change and Industrial Development
in Western Europe from 1750 to the Present. Cambridge University Press.

24	  

Layne-Farrar, Anne, and Josh Lerner. 2010. “To Join or Not to Join: Examining Patent Pool
Participation and Rent Sharing Rules.” International Journal of Industrial Organization 29(2):
294-303.
Lerner, Josh. “150 Years of Patent Protection.” National Bureau of Economics Research
(Cambridge, MA) Working Paper No. 7478, January 2000.
Lerner, Josh, and Jean Tirole. 2004. “Efficient Patent Pools.” American Economic Review
944(3): 691-711.
Lerner, Josh, Marcin Strojwas, and Jean Tirole. 2007. “The Design of Patent Pools: The
Determinants of Licensing Rules.” Rand Journal of Economics 38(3): 610-625.
Levin, Richard C., Alvin K. Klevorick, Richard R. Nelson, and Sidney G. Winter. 1987.
“Appropriating the Returns from Industrial Research and Development.” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 18(3): 783-832.
Li, Xing, Megan MacGarvie and Petra Moser. 2012. “Dead Poets' Property - The Copyright
Act of 1814 and the Price of Books in the Romantic Period” http://ssrn.com/abstract=2170447.
MacLeod, Christine. 1988. Inventing the Industrial Revolution: The English Patent System,
1660-1800. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Machlup, Fritz and Edith Penrose. 1950. “The Patent Controversy in the Nineteenth Century”,
Journal of Economic History, 10(1): 1-29.
Mann, Charles C. and Plummer, Mark L. 1991. The aspirin wars: Money, medicine, and 100
years of rampant competition. New York: Knopf.
Merges, Robert. 1999. “Institutions for Intellectual Property Transactions: The Case of Patent
Pools.” Working Paper, University of California at Berkeley, CA
Mokyr, Joel. 1990. The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Mokyr, Joel. 2009. The Enlightened Economy: An Economic History of Britain, 1700–1850.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2009.
Moser, Petra. 2005. “How do Patent Laws Influence Innovation? Evidence from 19th-century
World’s Fairs.” American Economic Review 95(4): 1215-12
Moser, Petra. 2011. “Do Patents Weaken the Localization of Innovations? Evidence from
World's Fairs, 1851-1915.” Journal of Economic History 71(2): 363-382.
Moser, Petra. 2012. “Innovation without Patents.” Journal of Law and Economics.

25	  

Moser, Petra, and Alessandra Voena. 2012. “Compulsory Licensing: Evidence from the
Trading-with-the-Enemy-Act.” American Economic Review 102(1): 396–427.
Moser, Petra, Voena, Alessandra and Waldinger, Fabian, “German-Jewish Émigrés and U.S.
Invention”: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1910247.
Moser, Petra and Tom Nicholas. 2012. “Publicity is Prize-Less. Non-monetary Awards as a
Mechanism to Encourage Patenting.” http://ssrn.com/abstract=1910220
Moser, Petra, and Paul W. Rhode. 2012. “Did Plant Patents Create the American Rose?” In
The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity Revisited, edited by Joshua Lerner and Scott Stern.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Moser, Petra and Assaf Zimring. 2012. Patent Laws, Market Size and Innovation.“ Available
at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2010136
Mowery, David C. and Nathan Rosenberg. 1998. Paths of Innovation. Technological Change
in 20th-century America. Cambridge: University Press.
Nordhaus, William D. 1969. “An Economic Theory of Technological Change.” The American
Economic Review 59(2): 18-28.
North, Douglass C., and Robert P. Thomas. 1973. The Rise of the Western World: A New
Economic History, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nuvolari, Alessandro, 2004. ”Collective Invention during the British Industrial Revolution: the
Case of the Cornish Pumping Engine.” Cambridge Journal of Economics 28: 347-363.
Officer, Lawrence and Sam Williamson. 2011. “Measures of Worth.” MeasuringWorth, 2011.
URL: www.measuringworth.com/worthmeasures.php.
Parton, James. 1867. “History of the Sewing Machine.” Atlantic Monthly, May 1867.
Penrose, Edith Tilton. 1951. The Economics of the International Patent System. Baltimore:
John Hopkins University Press.
Robb, Harry C., Jr. “Plant Patents,” in Encyclopaedia of Patent Practice and Invention
Management (Reinhold 1964), pp. 641-55.
	  
Rosenberg, Nathan. 1963. “Technological Change in the Machine Tool Industry, 1840-1910.”
The Journal of Economic History 23, no. 4: 414-443.
Rosenberg, Nathan. 1969. The American System of Manufactures. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press.

26	  

Rosenberg, Nathan. 1972. Technology and American Economic Growth. New York: Harper.
Rothbarth, Edwin. 1946. "Causes of the Superior Efficiency of U.S.A. Industry Compared
with British Industry." The Economic Journal, 56:383-90
Scherer, Frederic. M. 1977. The Economic Effects of Compulsory Licensing. New York,
Center for the Study of Financial Institutions.
Schiff, Eric. 1971. Industrialization without National Patents. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Schmookler, Jacob. 1962. “Economic Sources of Inventive Activity.” Journal of Economic
History, 22(1): 1-20.
Schmookler, Jacob. 1966. Invention and Economic Growth. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Scotchmer, Suzanne. 1991. “Standing on the Shoulders of Giants: Cumulative Research and the
Patent Law.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 5(1): 29-41.
Shapiro, Carl. 2001. “Navigating the Patent Thicket: Cross Licenses, Patent Pools, and
Standard Setting.” In A. Jaffe, J. Lerner, and S. Stern, eds., Innovation Policy and the Economy.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sokoloff, Kenneth. 1988. “Inventive Activity in Early Industrial America: Evidence from
Patent Records, 1790-1846.” Journal of Economic History, 48(4), pp. 813-850.
Steinbrook, Robert. 2007. "Thailand and the compulsory licensing of efavirenz." New England
Journal of Medicine 356(6): 544-546.
	  
Stewart, Amy. 2007. Flower Confidential: The Good, the Bad, and the Beautiful in the Business
of Flowers. Chapel Hill, NC: Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill.
	  
Stubbs, Kevin. 2002. Race to the Front: The Material Foundation of Coalition Strategy in the
Great War. Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing Group.
Tandon, Pankaj. 1982. “Optimal Patents with Compulsory Licensing.” Journal of Political
Economy 90(3): 470-486.
Thomson, Ross. 2009. Structures of Change in the Mechanical Age: Technological Innovation
in the United States, 1790-1865, John Hopkins University Press.
US Office of Alien Property Custodian. 1919. "Alien Custodian Report: A Detailed Report by
the Alien Property Custodian of All Proceedings Had by Him under the Trading with the Enemy
Act during the Calendar Year 1918 and to the Close of Business on February 15, 1919."
Washington: Government Printing Office, 1919.
27	  

Vaughan, Floyd. The United States patent system: legal and economic conflicts in American
patent history. Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1956.
Wallace, Anthony F.C. 1986.	  Rockdale:	  The Growth of an American Village in the Early
Industrial Revolution. New York: Knopf.

28	  

FIGURE	  1	  –	  A	  CAGE	  THAT	  STARK	  BROTHERS	  BUILT	  AROUND	  ITS	  GOLDEN	  DELICIOUS	  APPLE	  

	  
Notes:	  The	  cage	  was	  built	  around	  the	  Stark	  Brother’s	  Golden	  Delicious	  tree	  to	  prevent	  competitors	  from	  
stealing	  shoots	  of	  the	  tree;	  it	  was	  equipped	  with	  an	  alarm.	  	  Image	  from	  Rossman	  1930,	  p.	  395,	  reproduced	  in	  
Moser	  and	  Rhode	  (2012,	  p.	  415)	  

	  
	  

29	  

FIGURE	  2	  –	  SHARE	  OF	  SEWING-­‐MACHINE	  PATENTS	  IN	  ALL	  PATENTS:	  	  
UNITED	  STATES	  VERSUS	  BRITAIN	  	  

	  

Notes:	  U.S.	  patents	  granted	  in	  USPTO	  main	  class	  112	  (“sewing”)	  and	  British	  patents	  from	  A	  Cradle	  of	  
Inventions:	  British	  Patents	  from	  1617	  to	  1894.	  	  Series	  excludes	  patents	  for	  attachments,	  tables	  and	  stands.	  

	  

30	  

FIGURE	  3-­‐	  STITCHES	  PER	  MINUTE	  
	  

	  

Notes:	  	  Data	  from	  the	  Scientific	  American	  (1846-­‐1869),	  exhibition	  catalogues,	  such	  as	  the	  “United	  States	  
Commissioners	  Report	  to	  the	  Universal	  Exposition	  in	  Paris,”	  “The	  Report	  of	  the	  Twenty-­‐seventh	  Exhibition	  of	  
American	  Manufactures,	  Held	  in	  the	  City	  of	  Philadelphia,”	  ads	  in	  contemporary	  trade	  publications,	  including	  
“The	  Textile	  American;”	  and	  historical	  industry	  analysis,	  such	  as	  Uniting	  the	  Tailors:	  Trade	  Unionism	  amongst	  
the	  Tailoring	  Workers	  of	  London	  and	  Leeds,	  1870-­‐1939.	  	  The	  solid	  line	  plots	  a	  fourth-­‐order	  polynomial	  trend.	  
	  

	  
	  

	  

31	  

