NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A GIFT OF TIME
Daiji Kawaguchi
Jungmin Lee
Daniel S. Hamermesh
Working Paper 18643
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18643

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012

We thank Manuel Bagües, Sandy Black, Leah Boustan, Mark Hoekstra, William Johnson, Steve Trejo,
and participants in seminars at numerous institutions for their comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Daiji Kawaguchi, Jungmin Lee, and Daniel S. Hamermesh. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Gift of Time
Daiji Kawaguchi, Jungmin Lee, and Daniel S. Hamermesh
NBER Working Paper No. 18643
December 2012
JEL No. D13,E21,J22,J23
ABSTRACT
How would people spend time if confronted by permanent declines in market work? We identify preferences
off exogenous cuts in legislated standard hours that raised employers’ overtime costs in Japan around
1990 and Korea in the early 2000s. We estimate the probability that an individual was affected by
the reform and relate it to changes in time use based on time diaries. Reduced-form estimates show
that the direct effect on a newly-constrained worker was a substantial reduction in market time, with
the freed-up time in Japan reallocated to leisure, but in Korea also showing some impact on household
production. Simulations using GMM estimates of a Stone-Geary utility function defined over time
use suggest no effect on household production in either country. Estimation of a household model
shows only slight evidence that spouses shared the time gift, nor that one spouse’s allocation of non-market
time changed when the other spouse’s market work was permanently and exogenously reduced.

Daiji Kawaguchi
Hitotsubashi University
kawaguch@econ.hit-u.ac.jp
Jungmin Lee
Sogang University
Seoul, Korea
junglee@sogang.ac.kr

Daniel S. Hamermesh
Department of Economics
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712-1173
and NBER
hamermes@eco.utexas.edu

I. Introduction
Time spent in market work is the second most important human activity in rich countries (see
e.g., Burda et al, 2013) after sleep. Nonetheless, it did diminish in the U.S. between 1900 and 1940
(Kniesner, 1976) and dropped sharply from 1950 through 1980 in most of Western Europe (Huberman
and Minns, 2007). Given this secular decrease and continuing pressures for further reductions, both to
“spread work” (Nickell, 2008) and to move society away from a rat-race equilibrium (Akerlof, 1976;
Landers et al, 1996), asking what people would do with their extra time if they were confronted with a
large decline in market hours remains an important question. It is important for understanding how people
will keep busy if they do little work for pay (Keynes, 1930), and for inferring whether more “free time”
will, for examples, lead to more investment in the human capital of children, to more leisure or to the
substitution of household for market production.
The difficulty in answering this question is that changes in individuals’ time allocations arise
from the interaction of changes in the technology of the production of Beckerian commodities with
consumers’ preferences for those commodities. That makes it impossible to identify how workers would
respond to a permanent cut in market work, or to infer the general equilibrium effects of that cut on time
allocation in an entire population, by looking at historical changes. Over time the technologies do change
and can explain some of the changing time allocation (Greenwood et al, 2005). Those changes might in
turn explain the apparent increase in leisure in the U.S. in the last half century that did not accompany any
decline in market work (Aguiar and Hurst, 2007), a change that was mirrored in some European countries
(Gimenez-Nadal and Sevilla-Sanz, 2013). But the changing technologies prevent one from inferring
preferences for different kinds of non-market activities.
Various authors have considered how time allocations respond to temporary changes in the time
available for non-market and market activities. Thus Hamermesh (2002) demonstrated that even an
abrupt, fully-anticipated and temporary increase in available time (resulting from a switch off summer
time) is non-neutral, with a disproportionate fraction of the increase consumed as additional personal

maintenance activities, mostly sleep.

Burda and Hamermesh (2010) showed that a temporary, but

presumably unexpected decrease in market work (resulting from cyclical changes in employment) is
disproportionately taken up by increased household production.
In related work (Lee et al, 2012) we considered how aggregate patterns of time use changed after
shocks to market work time were imposed legislatively; but no study has examined how individual
workers’ time allocations respond to an exogenous permanent decline in market work, nor has any looked
at the effects of such a decline on patterns of time use across household members.1 None could—there
have been very few permanent exogenous shocks to market work; and, in any event, the continuing timediary information required to analyze the impact of these shocks on the distribution of non-market time
has rarely been available.

A few countries have indirectly imposed changes in hours of work by

introducing legislated changes in laws regulating the standard workweek (e.g., France, see Crépon and
Kramarz, 2002) or giving union-management negotiators incentives to alter standard hours (e.g.,
Germany, see Hunt, 1999); but these changes have been small and have, in any case, not always been
permanent.
In an effort to reduce work hours, between 1988 and 1997 Japan shortened the standard work
week, resulting in a substantial reduction in market work (Kawaguchi et al, 2008).

Quinquennial

Japanese time-diary data are available from 1976, allowing us to examine the impacts of this shock and to
account for possible trends in time use that may have been occurring simultaneously. Korea made a
similar change in the early 2000s, and Korean time diaries from 1999 and 2009 enable us to examine time
allocation before the legislative change was proposed and after its effects had time to be realized.
The exogeneity of the shocks to labor demand allows us to examine changes in time use in
relation to the propensity of an individual to have been affected by the policy change. We use time-diary
surveys to measure how someone whose market time became constrained reallocated the time freed up
1

Goux et al (2011) examine the impact of the French change in the standard workweek on the labor supply of
spouses of workers who were affected by the legislated change. The focus was only on the spouse’s hours of market
work. Stancanelli and van Soest (2011) study the impact on time allocation of the discrete jump in incentives to
retire in France after one’s 60th birthday, an incentive that is permanent and well-known to workers while planning
the time paths of their allocations of time.

2

from the reduction in paid work, thus measuring the average effect of the legal change on someone who
was directly affected. We specify a utility function that allows using the relationships between the
propensity to be affected by the law and changes in time allocations to infer the nature of individuals’
preferences for different uses of time. Those estimates in turn allow checking whether the reduced form
yields results consistent with the underlying structure.
Because the time-diary surveys were administered to all adults in a household on the same day,
we can use them to analyze how the shocks to one spouse’s market work time spill over to affect the time
allocation of the other spouse. This allows us to examine household decision-making in a way that has
not previously been possible, since we are able to separate changes resulting from changing opportunities
from those arising from changes in household technology and household formation.
II. The Shocks and the Data
A. Legislated Changes in Work Hours
Statutory working hours in Japan had historically been set at 48 per week and 8 per day. In
December 1985 a study group organized by the Ministry of Labor published a report suggesting 45 hours
per week and 8 hours per day as new statutory working hours.2 Following this report the Central Labor
Standards Commission, consisting of public, employer and employee representatives, recommended
temporarily setting standard hours at 46 per week, followed by 44, and eventually dropping to 40. The
Commission also requested a temporary exemption for small- and medium-sized firms. In accordance
with its recommendation, the law was revised in 1987 and implemented from April 1, 1988.
This revision in the law immediately set standard hours at 46 per week. An additional revision in
December 1990 further reduced standard hours to 44 from April 1, 1991. The Labor Standards Act was
2

The Labor Standards Act (LSA) in Japan prohibits employers from employing workers exceeding daily and weekly
statutory working hours, currently set at 40 hours per week and 8 hours per day (LSA Section 32). Employers can
set hours worked to exceed these legal limits only under an agreement with a workers' group that represents the
majority of employees (LSA Section 36). Overtime under this agreement must be compensated by at least a 25percent wage premium (LSA Section 37). See Sugeno (2002, Chapter 3, Section 5) for an overview of the Japanese
legal system on standard hours. Hamaguchi (2004, Chapter 12, Section 2) describes the legal process of reducing the
standard hours between 1987 and 1997. Umezaki (2008) also describes the process of the LSA revision based on
interviews with two government officials who played central roles in it.

3

further revised in 1993 to implement 40 hours per week beginning in April 1994. In this reduction
process, particular exemptions were given to industries with long work hours and smaller establishment
sizes. These exemptions ended by March 1997, by which time the standard had become 40 hours per
week uniformly across industries and establishment sizes, with only a few exceptions (which required
agreement between management and the union representing its workers).3
Standard hours in Korea had become 44 per week for all workplaces (Kim and Kim, 2004) by
1991. After the Asian economic crisis in November 1997, reducing statutory weekly working hours from
44 to 40 began to be discussed by the Korean Economic and Social Development Commission. In
October 2000 the Commission announced the “Basic Agreement on Work Hour Reduction,” which
included: 1) A reduction in work hours to 40 hours per week and 2000 hours per year; and 2) Gradual
adoption depending on industry and firm size. In July 2002 the five-day workweek was first officially
adopted in the banking and finance sector. In August 2003 the law indicating the schedule for the
adoption of the five-day workweek passed Congress.
The law mandated introducing a five-day workweek on a phased schedule, with workplaces of
more than 1000 employees becoming covered in July 2004, phasing into workplaces with between 20 and
49 employees by July 2008 (and with smaller workplaces still not covered today). The government
provided some financial incentives for firms to adopt the five-day workweek before it became mandatory
on them, and overtime regulations were also altered to encourage adoption. A fair conclusion from all
this is that the movement toward reduced workweeks in Korea was very widespread, perhaps nearly
universal by 2009.
In both countries there is a penalty applied to hours beyond the statutory standard. In Japan this
penalty is 25 percent, with no maximum of but extra penalties for work on legal holidays and at
nighthours of overtime per week. In Korea the penalty was 50 percent with a maximum of 12 overtime
hours per week before the legislated changes. After the new law became fully effective the penalty on the
3

Exceptions apply to employees in commerce and service industries in establishments that usually employ fewer
than ten workers.

4

first 4 hours decreased to 25 percent, with the 50 percent penalty applying on the remainder up to a
maximum of 16 overtime hours per week.
B. Time-Diary Data in Japan and Korea
The Japanese Time Use Survey (JTUS, Shakai Seikatsu Kihon Chosa) is conducted by the Bureau
of Statistics every five years, with the first survey conducted in 1976. The survey initially targeted the
entire population age 15 or older, but the JTUS expanded its coverage to individuals age 10 or older from
1996. Each respondent fills out time diaries for two consecutive days, reporting their activities in tenminute (1976) or fifteen-minute (1986-2006) intervals. The number of pre-coded categories of activity
was 17 in 1976, 19 in 1986, and 20 in 1991 and after. The sample is nationally representative with
individual survey weights, but it has decreased in scope from about 190,000 persons in 1976 to about
175,000 in 2006. The 1976 surveys were conducted over seven consecutive days in October. The 1986
and subsequent surveys were fielded over nine-day periods including two weekends in October.
The Korean Time Use Survey (KTUS) is conducted by the National Statistical Office every five
years, with the first survey conducted in 1999. The survey targets the entire population aged 10 or older
and has a remarkably high response rate (for time-diary surveys), above 90 percent. Each respondent fills
out time diaries for two consecutive days, reporting activities in ten-minute intervals. The number of
possible activities was 125 in 1999 and 144 in 2009. The sample is nationally representative with
individual survey weights, but it decreased from over 40,000 observations in 1999 to barely 20,000 in
2009. The 1999 KTUS was conducted over ten consecutive days early in September. The 2009 survey
was also fielded over ten-day periods, but, because of concerns about potential seasonality in time use, it
was conducted in both March and September.
The JTUS for 1986 clearly precedes the shock to hours, while the 1996 survey is nearly entirely
post-shock. The timing of the surveys does not perfectly bracket the timing of the legislated changes, but
it is fairly close. By chance the timing of the KTUS is almost perfect for the purposes of this study: The
first survey precedes any possible effects of the cut in demand for market work, and the third takes place
after the changes had almost entirely been realized.

5

The time-diary surveys from Japan and Korea allow respondents to list far too many different
activities for purposes of analyzing the impacts of the legislated changes. We need to combine the basic
activities into tractable aggregates. We take the fourfold breakdown: Market work (M); household
production (H); personal activities (P) and leisure (L), and classify each basic activity in each country into
one of these. Market work includes paid employment or self-employment, unpaid employment, job
search, commuting and schooling/studying. Household production consists of those activities for which
one could find market substitutes (as initially proposed by Reid, 1934). Personal activities are those
personal maintenance activities, including sleep and eating, that people must typically do at least some of
on most days; and leisure activities are those that do not pay, that could not be contracted out and that are
not biologically required. For both countries a very few activities were not classifiable, and we prorate
the few minutes included in these across the four aggregates in proportion to the time spent in each
aggregate. 4 The classifications of the 20 (9) primary sub-aggregates in Japan (Korea) are shown in
Appendix Table A.
III. Inferring the Direct Impact of the Imposed Decrease in Market Work
The cut in the standard workweek in Japan and Korea is an imposed shock, the results of which
trace out a locus of equilibrium time allocations that depend upon workers’ preferences.

This

understanding underlies our treatment in this Section, in which we first measure the direct effect—on the
market work of an individual who was certain to have been affected by the policy—and then infer the
structure of the representative affected individual’s preferences for allocating time across the other three
aggregates of time to infer the response to a negative shock to M.5
A. Reduced-Form Estimates of the Effect
Absent longitudinal time-use data covering the periods before and after the demand-induced
declines in M, we generate a pair of cross-sections, with the cells based on the demographic
4

In Korea 19 minutes were prorated in both 1999 and 2009. In Japan the total minutes prorated were 34 in 1986 and
48 in 1996.
5

Trying to infer a particular effect using both reduced-form and formal structural estimation is unusual, but it is not
unheard of in the literature on the supply of hours to the market (e.g., Crawford and Meng, 2011).

6

characteristics of the time-diary respondents. We use a matching procedure to link observations across
cells in the time-use data before the change B (1986 in Japan, 1999 in Korea) to observations after the
change A (1996 in Japan, 2009 in Korea). In the Japanese data we use the two sexes, individual years of
age and three education categories (junior high school or less, high school, junior college or more). We
treat the Korean data identically except that we use the twelve available categories of educational
attainment. There is a substantial number of empty cells (e.g., in Korea, no young people have zero
education); in general, however, the immense size of the underlying samples allows the creation of a
larger set of aggregate scores than is usual in studies using this method.
For each country in Year B we estimate the propensity score for individual i to be affected by the
legal change as:
Prob 43

MS

48 |

for Japan; Prob 40

MS

44 |

for Korea,

where X is a vector of covariates, and MS is the wage-and salary worker’s usual weekly hours (reported
in a CPS-like survey accompanying the time diaries).6 The policy has monotonic effects on these workers.
Workers who worked 40 hours or less before the change are not directly affected. Those wage and salary
workers who worked longer than the old standard hours are affected by the law in a complex way, as the
legal change may have increased or decreased their hours, depending on the sizes of the substitution
effect on hours per worker and the scale effect due to the increased marginal cost of labor (see, e.g., Hart,
2004). We derive the average probability that an individual with characteristics X in Year B was
constrained, and assign that value to the age-sex-education cell in Year A. The identifying assumption
here is that the individual with characteristics X would have been constrained with the same probability in
Year A as in Year B if the law had not changed.
Tables 1J and 1K (a notation we use throughout to denote the results for Japan and Korea) show
the averages of the propensity scores across the cells, their standard deviations and a few order statistics.
The cell sizes differ slightly across the days of the week because of slight differences in the number of
6

For Japan, weekly working hours MS are reported in the accompanying survey data only in intervals: <15 hours,
15-34, 35-42, 43-48, 49-59, and 60 or longer. Therefore the best propensity would be Prob 43 M 48 | X).

7

non-empty cells on each day. The main point to note on these statistics is that, although the average
probability that an individual is constrained by the legal change is not large, the variation in the average
propensity across the cells is huge, allowing the possibility of inferring that tightening constraints on
hours had substantial effects.
Taking the average propensity scores for each age-sex-education cell using sampling weights, and
using the weighted average of changes in time use in the four categories for each cell, we estimate a
reduced form relating the change in time use (post- minus pre-shock) to the propensity to be affected.
Considerations of the fixed costs of working and of operating an establishment on a given day suggest
that employers have incentives to concentrate their reductions in hours demanded on one or two days
rather than across the week.7 We thus estimate this bivariate equation separately for weekdays, Saturdays
and Sundays. Acquaintance with the labor markets in Japan and Korea leads us to expect that differences
in the propensity to be affected by the legislated changes in the standard workweek will have their biggest
effects on time use on Saturdays, with smaller effects on Sundays and still smaller effects on weekdays.
As expected, the effects of the policy shock on minutes worked are largest, and the regression
coefficients most significant, for the estimates for Saturdays. In one case (weekdays in Japan) the impact
of a higher propensity to be affected by the change in standard weekly hours on ΔM is actually positive,
although statistically insignificant. Except in that case, however, in those cells in which the propensity to
be affected by the legislated change was higher the decline in M was significantly larger.8
In Japan (Korea) a ten-percentage-point increase in the probability of being constrained was
accompanied by a 37- (60-) minute decrease in minutes of work on Saturdays, and a 28- (150-) minute
decrease over an entire week. In Japan this decrease was accompanied by significant increases in all three
other aggregates of time use, with the majority of the change represented by additional leisure and only
7

There is little research directly measuring fixed daily costs of labor, although a number of studies base the empirical
work on this concept (e.g., Cogan, 1981; Hamermesh, 1998).
8

If we look at extreme centiles of the distributions of the propensity scores, e.g., the 10th and 90th, the results are
even stronger. In the former ΔM is close to 0, and there are nearly random changes in the other time-use aggregates.
At the 90th percentile ΔM is very large, with its decline being offset entirely by changes in P and L.

8

ten percent accounted for by extra home production. On Sundays the only significant increase (or even
change) in Japan in response to the 5-minute decline in market work induced by a ten-percentage-point
increase in the probability of being constrained was in L. On weekdays H decreased significantly while L
rose. In Korea the significant and large declines in M (16 minutes, 60 minutes and 17 minutes in
response to a ten-percentage-point increase in the propensity to be affected by the legislated drop in
standard hours) were accompanied by significant increases in H throughout the week, and by significant
increases in L on weekends.9
The crucial inference from the estimates in these tables is that the legislated declines in the
standard workweek led to cuts in hours of market work that were especially large among workers who
would have been affected by the reduction of standard hours. The effect on a hypothetically treated
worker is estimated to be huge—if a worker were certain to be constrained, essentially all the hours made
subject to the overtime penalty would be eliminated. In Japan the estimates suggest that such a worker
used nearly all of the freed-up time to add hours of leisure or personal care; in Korea much of it also was
reallocated to household production.
One might be concerned that we have merely shown that the changes in M continued trends in
time use in particular demographic groups from before 1986 (1999 in Korea) and preceded trends that
continued thereafter. While the absence of earlier data and a subsequent time period in Korea prevents us
from examining this question there, we can conduct a placebo test for the validity of this instrument by
examining the relationships between the changes in time use in Japan from 1976 to 1986, and from 1996
to 2006, across age-sex-education cells with different propensity scores (in 1976 and 1996 respectively).
If the idea behind the construction of the instrument is valid, there should be no relationship between the
changes in market work time over these earlier and later periods and the propensity to be affected by the
legislated changes of the late 1980s and early 1990s.

9

Friday may have elided into a pseudo-weekend day as a result of the legislation. To examine this possibility we reestimated Tables 1 for weekdays excluding Fridays, with only tiny changes from the results shown in the tables.

9

Table 2J presents the estimated impacts of the propensity scores for 1986 on ΔM from 1976 to
1986 and from 1996 to 2006, and then calculates what are essentially double-differences from the
estimates reported for ΔM in Table 1J. During the decade before the law changed there is actually a
positive, but statistically insignificant relationship between ΔM and the propensity score. Moreover,
underlying our conclusion that the main impact of the law was on market work time on Saturdays, the
double-difference in the parameter estimates is very large and highly significant—what had been a
positive relationship between the change in market work and the propensity score in the previous decade
became negative during the “experimental” period among those people most likely to have been in the
“experimental” group. During the decade after the “experiment” the changes in M in relation to the
differences in the probability of being constrained were tiny on weekdays, Saturdays and Sundays. The
relationship between ΔM and the probability of being constrained by the law held neither in the decade
before 1986 nor in the decade after 1996.10
Another potential difficulty with the instrument may be that workers entering the labor force after
1986, recognizing that the law had changed the returns to long working hours, altered their educational
choices, which would make our classifications of workers into cells endogenous to the legislated changes.
To examine this possibility we re-estimated Tables 1, restricting the sample to individuals ages 32 or over,
almost all of whose education was completed before the laws were changed. The results look almost
identical to those shown in the tables—this possible source of contamination is not important.
B. A Structural Model
The results in the previous sub-section justify using the changes in time allocations around the
time of the legislated cuts to estimate the utility functions describing affected workers’ preferences for
different uses of time, and to employ the estimated preferences to simulate how the gift of time generated
by the exogenous decline in market work of a given size might be reallocated across alternative uses. We
assume that an agent allocates time according to the following Stone-Geary utility function:
10

Yet another potential concern is that the Japanese housing bubble of the 1980s-1990s may have affected
consumers’ choices about allocating time. The time-diary data show, however, that there was no relation across cells
between changes in commuting time over this period and the propensity scores.

10

Max α log H
where H

P

L

H

β log P

P

γ log L

L

δlog C

C ,

(1)

M ≡ 1440, total minutes in the day. We use this formulation to allow for the

possibility of non-homothetic preferences and thus disproportionate responses to the income effect of the
extra non-work time.11 Consider the case with M exogenous and fixed at the legal limit M. Consumption
C is determined by labor income, and we assume for now that C did not change in either country due to
the policy change. With that assumption we assume, absent any other information, that the relative
demands for H, P and L were unaffected by changes in incomes with which they are combined in
household production. Hence we focus on the allocation of time across H, T, and L in response to the
policy changes that reduced M.
The interior solutions are:
H∗

1440

P

L

H

M

H

P∗

1440

P

L

H

M

P

L∗

1440

P

L

H

M

L

α/ α

The effect of an exogenous unit change in M on H is α

β

(2)

γ , with β and γ respectively

defined analogously. Since we can observe H*, P* and L*, and we know the change in M, we can
recover the subsistence levels, assuming that one of the three is identically zero.12 We assume that H
0—nobody must perform household production. Solving and rearranging yields:
P
L

β
β
γ
1 γ
Suppose that we estimate the following equations:
1

∆P ∗

β ∆M ∗

∆L∗

γ ∆M ∗

c
c

u

P∗

β 1440

M

∗

γ 1440

M

L
,

(3)

(4)

u ,

11

Prowse (2009) estimates a Stone-Geary function over several uses of time with British time-use data. Assuming an
expanded Cobb-Douglas function would impose proportionality in the responses to ΔM, but there are specifications
other than the Stone-Geary that would also have allowed non-proportionality.

12

Unlike in the estimation of Stone-Geary utility functions over goods, where all the parameters are identifiable
because of different prices for each good, with the price of unit of time being the individual’s wage rate we must fix
one parameter.

11

where c and c are constants.13 Then equation (4) allows us to infer the β and γ (and therefore α ) and
the subsistence levels. We estimate the model in (4) for the two countries using the cell-based averages of
the changes in time use in the four aggregates. Because the change in the constraint bound differently on
different days of the week, as the estimates in Tables 1 showed, we estimate the parameters separately for
weekdays, Saturdays and Sundays. 14 The first, third and fifth columns in Tables 3J and 3K present
weighted least-squares estimates using the means of sampling weights from before and after the policy
change. In addition to the standard errors of the estimates, the implied subsistence levels and their
changes are shown, along with bootstrapped confidence intervals around them.
The estimates are fairly satisfactory for Japan.15 One should note that, although a few of the
implied subsistence levels on weekdays and Sundays in Table 3J do not make much sense, the data and
estimates for Saturdays for Japan generally imply a constant set of preferences, with the subsistence levels
being remarkably unchanged from before the demand shock to afterwards.

The least-squares results

suggest that it is reasonable to use the Japanese estimates to simulate how people would reallocate their
time in response to an exogenous decline in work time.
The results for Korea, shown in Table 3K, are somewhat less satisfying. Although the parameter
estimates are statistically significant for both Saturdays and Sundays (remember, the shock to work-hours
on Sundays was larger in Korea than in Japan), they imply that the subsistence levels P and L changed
across the years. Since our crucial identifying assumption is that there is an exogenous shock which
changes outcomes in the presence of unchanging preferences, the changes in the subsistence levels are
disturbing.

13

The assumption of unchanging preferences implies that the constant terms should be zero.

14

Implicitly we are assuming that the agent’s utility function is separable across the days of the week. Some indirect
evidence for other countries (Ichino and Sanz de Galdeano, 2005) suggests that this may be incorrect. Given the
complexities of the estimation presented here, we leave the estimation of an intertemporal aggregator function for
future work.

15

We evaluate the estimates at the sample averages of P* and L* (P ∗ and L∗ ) in 1996 for Japan and 2009 for Korea.
We set M at 480 minutes for weekdays and at 0 for Saturdays and Sundays.

12

Why might the estimates for Korea imply changing subsistence levels? One possibility is that the
underlying utility functions for the three types of day are not separable, and that our treatment of them is
leading to biased estimates of the sub-utility functions for each type of day. Another possibility arises
from the fact that we have treated goods and time as separable, ignoring the underlying household
production functions. If changes in the relative prices of goods are differently complementary with H, P
and L and thus are not absorbed into the constant terms, estimation limited to time-use data could
mistakenly indicate that underlying preferences have changed even when no change has occurred. For
example, perhaps the expansion of child-care facilities, a substitute for the household production of child
care, may have altered the constant term in the equations describing H and caused the implied exogenous
decrease in H. Without a complete set of goods prices that we believe are uniquely assignable to the
time-use aggregates, we cannot solve this problem.16 One may also argue that ∆M ∗ is endogenous, since
the actual decline in M may depend, for example, on ΔH. Thus exogenous shifts in fertility might alter
time devoted to household production (e.g., fewer children means less time in household education and
childcare), leading to a rise in hours of market work.
To address some of these concerns, we first use the propensity score as an instrumental variable.
The propensity score is, as we showed in Tables 1, significantly and negatively correlated with ∆M ∗ . The
necessary assumption is that the propensity score is uncorrelated with the error term, which will be
satisfied because variation in it is identified from the distribution of hours before the policy change. We
then use the instrumental variable to estimate the equations jointly by GMM. The GMM estimates are
shown in the second, fourth and sixth columns of each table. While a number of the least-squares
parameter estimates seemed inconsistent with the underlying theory, the inconsistencies are fewer with

16

With narrower time-use categories it might be possible to make a link between specific expenditures on goods and
time, as in Gronau and Hamermesh (2006), although even there some of the links are arbitrary. With the more
highly aggregated time-use categories used here the exercise would be even less credible.

13

these estimates.

This improvement underscores the importance of accounting for the potential

endogeneity between other uses of time and market work.17
The purpose of this formal estimation was to obtain estimates of structural parameters to simulate
the impacts of an imposed shock to market hours on the distribution of affected workers’ time use. The
size of the shock is arbitrary; but for convenience we base the simulation results on the average changes
in M in the two countries on the particular day. Because we saw that the biggest shocks were on Saturday,
and because the small shocks on weekdays were not so closely related to the propensity scores, our
simulations concentrate on presenting changes in time allocation on Saturdays.
Table 4 shows the effects of the shocks to M on the other three time-use aggregates on Saturdays
for both countries. For each of ΔH, ΔP and ΔL we list the change in minutes arising from the change in
behavior with the existing utility function, and then that arising from changes in subsistence levels (which
seems inconsistent with an unchanging set of preferences). For Japan the estimates do imply the required
constant preferences—almost none of the simulated changes arise because underlying subsistence levels
change. This is particularly true with the GMM estimates—again showing the need to account for
endogeneity. Nearly two-thirds of the decline in M results in an increase in L, with most of the rest of the
decline leading to an increase in P. Almost none of the decline in M causes an increase in H. In Korea the
results are less encouraging—much of the decline in M is simulated to have occurred through changes in
preferences. Nonetheless, the simulations do show that two-thirds of the time freed up by the drop in M is
used in increased personal time, with most of the rest spent as increased leisure (and almost none in extra
household production).
C. Accounting for Consumption
The estimates of the reduced-form model in Sub-section A ignored the possibility, particularly
important in the case of household production (as suggested by Aguiar and Hurst, 2005), that an induced
reduction in working time may have caused a change in spending patterns. Also, the theoretical model in

17

The remaining negative subsistence levels merely indicate that the particular use of time is a luxury activity.
Given the relatively high level of market work time before the reforms, this result is not surprising.

14

Sub-section B included consumption spending along with the time uses H, P and L in a system
representing the production of commodities in the household. Because the time-use surveys did not
contain information on spending, in estimating that model we implicitly assumed that choices about the
use of time were separable from goods spending. This is not likely to be the case; but whether neglecting
goods spending matters for purposes of evaluating the impact of the time gift on non-market time use is
an empirical issue.
To examine these issues further we obtained data from consumer expenditure surveys conducted
at or near the times when the relevant time-use surveys were conducted. For Japan we use the National
Survey of Family Income and Expenditure (Zenkoku Shouhi Jittai Chosa) for 1984 and 1994, presenting
data on monthly household expenditures calculated from account books kept from September to
November. The sample includes only two- or more-person households. For Korea we use the Household
Income and Expenditure Survey (Gagye Donghyang Chosa) of 1999 and 2009, showing monthly
household expenditure.18
Using each data set we estimate adult-equivalent spending in total, and on household durables,
based upon the OECD equivalence scales (www.oecd.org/dataoecd/61/52/35411111.pdf). We impute
these spending flows to each adult in the household to measure each person’s household durables
spending and C. For Korea we use each adult’s age, sex and educational attainment and the estimates of
the equations describing the probability of being constrained that we obtained in Sub-section A to
estimate these consumption flows in each cell for 1999 and then 2009 (with C measured in thousands of
1999 Korean won). We then match changes in these flows of consumption spending to the changes in the
time-use categories in each cell across the two years.
The Japanese consumer expenditure surveys do not contain information on the respondents’
educational attainment. We therefore use age, sex and location (prefecture) to re-estimate the propensity
18

We recognize that, unlike for Korea, for Japan the match of years in the Family Income and Expenditure Surveys
to those in the JTUS is not perfect. We cannot do anything about this difficulty other than to note that the survey
dates differ by only two years and that we hope that spending patterns by age-sex-prefecture did not change greatly
between the dates of the expenditure and time-use surveys.

15

scores for Japan from the JTUS and use the same variables to estimate average household durables
consumption and total C per adult equivalent (measured in yen at 2010 prices).19 For each age-sexlocation cell we match these flows in 1984 to the averages of M, H, P and L for 1986, and similarly for C
in 1994 and time use in 1996. We then can relate changes in spending flows to the propensity scores and
the time-use categories across the two sets of years.
There may have been no change in household production technology over the decades in question
in Japan and Korea. We do not, however, need to make that restrictive assumption. Instead, the
inferences from the reduced-form model would be correct so long as any such technical changes were
independent of the demographic characteristics (age, education and gender) that we have used to form the
propensity scores.
We can examine this less restrictive assumption and thus test for specification errors in the
equations relating ΔH to the treatment propensity score, by regressing the change in household durables
spending per adult equivalent to the propensity score. The propensity score has no significant impacts on
durables spending—t-statistics below one in both countries—suggesting that the impacts estimated in
Sub-section A are not biased by the failure of the time diaries measure goods spending
To examine the more general issue described by the model in Sub-section B, as a first step we
estimate the reduced-form relationships between ΔC and the propensity score across the cells to examine
whether and by how much spending changed differentially depending upon the likelihood that the
constraint on hours affected the individual. For Japan the estimated impact on C of a one standarddeviation increase in the propensity score is -¥5,088; the analogous parameter estimate for Korea is
+₩45,952.
While the changes in C coincident with the natural experiment on work hours are not small, the
crucial question is the extent to which the impacts on consumption can be treated independently from the
impacts on non-market time, and thus whether expanding the structural model to include C alters our
19

For Japan we define consumer durables as microwaves, refrigerators, vacuum cleaners, washers and dryers, futon
dryers and sewing machines; for Korea, as cooking stoves, microwaves, dishwashers, vacuum cleaners, washers and
dryers, and electric irons.

16

inferences about the underlying utility parameters or their implications for the impacts of the change in M.
We thus estimate expanded Stone-Geary models for both countries to examine whether the absence of
expenditure information might have biased the inferences in Sub-section B.
Appendix Tables BJ and BK contain the estimates of these expanded models. The estimated
response parameters on C are statistically significant in the GMM estimates; but while both the estimated
subsistence levels and response parameters on H, P and L change, these changes are not qualitatively
important. Even accounting for (imputed) goods spending, the inference from the structural model
remains that in both countries the time freed up from market work is reallocated toward personal time or
leisure, and not toward increased household production. Our results are robust to the inclusion of goods
expenditures.
IV. Family Effects
Throughout we have treated each person as an individual, ignoring any of the ways in which the
legislated change might affect others in the family of a newly-constrained worker. Such an effect might
occur, for example, if the time gift to the worker allows him (her) to substitute for his (her) spouse’s time
in household production, so that both spouses share the extra leisure that is made possible. As another
example, the reduction in the market time of the constrained spouse may be fully offset by an increase in
market work by the other spouse.
Examining the impact of an exogenous shock to work hours allows us to study household
bargaining in ways that have previously not been possible. There are large theoretical and empirical
literatures on the underlying structure of preferences and power that determine the allocation of a couple’s
time (e.g., Becker, 1991; McElroy and Horney, 1981). There is also substantial empirical research on
how spouses' bargaining power and resources, usually as measured by their wage rates, affect the
distribution of time in the household (e.g., Friedberg and Webb, 2006; Kimmel and Connelly, 2007). All
of the empirical research, however, has had to rely on cross-section differences in proxies for bargaining
power to infer the nature of intra-household decision-making about time allocation. Responses to the
exogenous shock to one spouse’s market time that is provided by the legislated changes in Japan and

17

Korea allow us to identify how a change in the resources of one spouse is propagated through the
household’s decisions about both spouses’ time use, and thus to infer the nature of decision-making
within the household more carefully than has heretofore been possible.
We follow the approach in Section III, but now focus on married couples that were
observationally identical at times B and A.20 Even with the large samples in the time-use surveys we
cannot use single years of age, as we did before. Instead, we define cells as consisting of a husband (h) in
five-year age ranges (20-24, …, 60-64) and one of 3 levels of educational attainment in Japan (less than
high school, high school, at least some college) and seven levels in Korea (ranging from fewer than eight
years, to an advanced degree) and a wife (w) in another one of these 27 (63) demographic categories in
Japan (Korea). These aggregations yield the possibility of 729 (3969) cells, although very many of these
are empty. As in the previous section cells are weighted by size to account for substantial differences in
their populations. Estimating regressions for each husband and wife, as in Section III, we obtain the
average probabilities, ph and pw, that the demand for the hours of the average husband (wife) in each cell
would have been constrained by the legislation. For each cell we then calculate the vectors (Mh Hh Ph Lh)
and (Mw Hw Pw Lw) for each of Years B and A, which form the bases for the rest of the analyses in this
section.
Unsurprisingly, because of positive assortative mating along age and education dimensions and
the relation of these characteristics to labor-force participation, we find fairly high positive correlations of
ph and pw across individuals in Japan and Korea, 0.43 and 0.57, and across cells, 0.31 and 0.55 (based on
the samples from Saturdays). These correlations make it harder to identify the separate effects of the
constraints on each spouse on their own and their spouse’s time use. Nonetheless, as a first step we
estimate the reduced forms analogous to those for which Tables 1 present results, except here the
dependent variable is each spouse’s ΔM, and the shocking variables are both ph and pw.

20

We ignore cohabiting couples, since we have no information and them, and, in any event, other evidence suggests
that they represent only about one percent of all couples in Japan (see Atoh, 2001) and Korea (Lee, 2008).

18

Table 5 presents these reduced-form estimates for both countries, separately for weekdays,
Saturdays and Sundays. For Japan all of the own-probability effects are statistically significant, but those
for husbands are incorrectly signed on weekdays and Sunday.

Since we showed before that the

legislation had little effect in Japan except on Saturdays, these results are either statistical anomalies or
show that married Japanese reacted differently from unmarried people. For both husbands and wives on
Saturdays in Japan the effects are negative and statistically significantly different from zero. If one
extrapolates far outside the support of ph and pw, the estimates are larger than the 480-minute decline that
would be consistent with the elimination of Saturday work. In Korea the own-probability effects on
Saturdays mirror those in Japan, are statistically significantly non-zero but are not different from the 240
minute-decline that was implied by the legislated change. On other days they are not statistically
significant. Overall, and unsurprisingly, these results generally mirror those in Tables 1.
The main purpose of this section is to examine spousal interactions in the allocation of nonmarket time. Before doing that, we first consider how the greater likelihood of a constraint on one
spouse’s market work affects the market work time of the other; thus we examine the cross-effects of, e.g.,
a constraint on the husband’s M on the wife’s M in Table 5.21 First, note that in the Japanese samples on
weekdays and Sundays we reject the hypothesis that one spouse’s market work is independent of
constraints on the other’s; and in Korea on Sundays this hypothesis is also rejected. In Japan the estimated
cross-effects are as likely to have an unexpected negative effect as not. In Korea, none of the crosseffects is significant, but all but one are positive and have t-statistics greater than one. Overall, these
results provide some weak evidence suggesting that constraints on one spouse’s market work time alter
that of the other spouse.
The finding that spouses’ work times may not be independent of each other in these data justifies
going further to examine how a change in one spouse’s market time that results from a changing demand-

21

Consistent with an added-worker effect of temporary constraints on one spouse’s work time (see, e.g., Lundberg,
1985) we expect these cross-effects to be positive.

19

side constraint affects the other spouse’s non-market time. To do so we estimate equations like those
representing the structural model in Section III:
∆H ∗

α ∆M ∗

∆P ∗

β ∆M ∗

∆L∗

γ ∆M ∗

α ∆M ∗

v

β ∆M ∗

v

γ ∆M ∗

v

;
;

(5)

,

where j = h (husband) or w (wife), and a subscript i represents a family. These are not fully structural
estimates—we do not specify a family utility model, as that would require specifying both a general
utility function for the typical household and some household production function. Rather, this system
allows us to estimate for each spouse the impact of his/her own and his/her spouse’s exogenous change in
market work on the distribution of non-market time across the three aggregates.
α

β

γ

1, and α

β

γ

By construction

0 for each spouse j’s non-market time. Thus while as in

Section III only two of the three equations in each triad are independent, for convenience of exposition we
present estimates of all three of these equations.
As in Section III there may be issues of endogeneity of the ΔM* in these systems. Accordingly,
we estimate them by GMM, using as instruments for the ΔM* the two propensity scores for each
husband-wife cell. We present the estimates in Tables 6. The own-effects mirror those estimated (over
larger underlying samples) in the previous section. In Japan, where, as before, the only statistical
significance is on Saturdays, the largest effect of a tighter constraint on market hours among men is on
leisure time, among women on household production; in Korea, where the own-effects are statistically
significant only on Saturdays, as in the previous section these reduced-form estimates show some
evidence that an exogenous decrease in market time increases the directly affected spouse’s time devoted
to home production.
The major focus of these estimates is on the cross-effects. While we found some evidence that an
exogenous change in one spouse’s market work altered the other’s market work time, here we examine
whether there is any evidence that such changes occurred differentially across the three aggregates of

20

non-market time.

The results make it quite clear that there is only weak evidence for this: Except on

Saturdays, for which we expect the biggest effect, in neither country is any of the three hypotheses that
both cross-effects equal zero rejected. The only consistent result across the two economies on Saturdays
is that an increase in husband’s work time decreases the wife’s personal time and increases her leisure
time. Neither of these effects is very large, however. Implicitly, when confronted with a decline in one’s
spouse’s market work time, one’s non-market time allocation does not change much.
Within the range of the impacts of the legislated changes that we examine here, spouses’ nonmarket time use appears to be independent—a gift of time to one spouse does not alter the other spouse’s
allocation of time among household production, personal maintenance and leisure. This result seems
quite inconsistent with the myriad studies that reject pooling of income in households and in favor of a
collective model.22 Why might this be? We offer two explanations, and, no doubt, there are others. First,
even with a household utility function that assigns weights (measures of power) to each spouse’s utility, if
household production is Cobb-Douglas one spouse’s non-market time use will be independent of the
other’s. Thus if we do not assume that spouses’ time spent in household production is perfectly
substitutable, the results here are reasonable. A second possibility is that the transactions costs of sharing
an exogenous change in one spouse’s time exceed those of sharing an exogenous change in one spouse’s
income. If that is true, then it might not pay a couple to renegotiate their allocations of time. That would
be especially likely if the costs were lumpy and the changes implied here are too small to overcome this
non-convexity.
V. Conclusions and Implications
It is impossible to use historical information on time allocation to infer how people would react to
freedom from work: Any long-term change in time-use patterns is determined endogenously through the
changing incentives produced by changing household technology and changing returns to market work.
To circumvent this simultaneity we have relied upon the sudden and sharp changes in labor demand
generated by discrete and permanent legislated cuts in the standard workweek that gave employers a
22

Lee (2007) provides evidence for the rejection of the hypothesis that Korean couples pool income.

21

strong incentive to shorten hours per worker. Using time-diary data for Japan and Korea from before and
after the legislation, we first show that time spent in market work by those likely to have been directly
affected by the legislation diminished sharply immediately following the legislation’s effective date. In
Japan those likely to have been affected by the legislation used the extra time to increase leisure activities,
while similarly affected Koreans may have used it partly to increase household production. A structural
utility model yields parameter estimates that we use in simulations to infer how a shock to market work
would be spent. For Japan the results of these simulations match those of the non-structural approach,
suggesting further that we have identified the behavior of individuals choosing (under a demand
constraint) how to allocate their time. The match of the two approaches in Korea is less satisfactory, with
simulations of the structural method yielding the same results as in Japan.
By affecting the market work of one spouse (typically the husband) more than the other, the
legislated changes enable us to infer how an exogenous shock to one spouse’s bargaining ability affects
how both spouses allocate time, and thus what preferences look like within a couple. We find some
evidence that an exogenous reduction in one spouse’s market work time leads the other spouse to increase
his/her market work time. We also find, however, that the mix of a spouse’s allocation of time among
alternative uses of non-market time is independent of exogenous changes in the other spouse’s market
work. While this suggests that, unlike monetary resources, couples may not pool time resources, we
stress that this is the first bit of evidence to go beyond the market-non-market distinction in examining the
impact of exogenous shocks to household bargaining in a general population, and as such must be viewed
as inherently quite preliminary.
Assuming that technical change in the intermediate future will reduce the demand for time inputs
into household production, as it has over the past century, our results suggest that it is unlikely that people
will spend more time in those activities. They suggest instead that at current margins additional personal
time and leisure yield greater utility than additional time spent in household production, so that those

22

changes in technology would instead probably result in expansions along those margins.23 This seems
especially likely given that the two natural experiments that we have studied began in environments in
which market work time exceeded the typical amount observed in rich Western economies that
presumably have already moved down the marginal productivity curve for such activities.
The results shed light on a number of related issues that have been studied by labor and other
economists. For example, a large literature (beginning with Ruhm, 2000) has considered whether health
improves in recessions, with the argument being that work is stressful and that time away from work
allows people to invest in health. Our results suggest that an enforced long-run reduction in market work
does not lead to substitutes that may be equally stressful, but instead to activities that might be stressreducing and perhaps health-improving.
The conjunction of exogenous demand-induced declines in market work time and the time-diary
surveys provided a nearly perfect opportunity to measure how individuals and households’ allocations
across different types of non-market time would react to a permanent and exogenous decline in market
time. There are and will be increasing numbers of other such opportunities, especially with the worldwide
growth in the availability of time-diary surveys and the increasing attention to using exogenously
imposed changes to identify behavioral responses on one side of a market. We have identified these
responses in two economies; but these changes should allow not only the measurement of these effects in
other economies with different institutions, but also the development of models that allow a closer focus
on the technology of household production, something inherently impossible with the data available here.

23

This observation is not necessarily inconsistent with the hypothesis that international differences in time spent in
market work are offset because of differences in service prices by full substitution toward home production
(Freeman and Schettkat, 2005).

23

REFERENCES
Mark Aguiar and Erik Hurst, “Consumption versus Expenditure,” Journal of Political Economy, 113
(Oct. 2005): 919-48.
------------------------------------, “Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Allocation of Time over Five
Decades,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122 (Aug. 2007): 969-1006.
George Akerlof, “The Economics of Caste and of the Rat Race and Other Woeful Tales,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 90 (November 1976): 599-617.
Makoto Atoh, “Why Are Cohabitation and Extra-Marital Births So Few in Japan?” Unpublished paper,
National Institute of Population and Social Security Research, Tokyo, 2001.
Gary Becker, A Treatise on the Family (2nd edition). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1991.
Michael Burda and Daniel Hamermesh, “Unemployment, Market Work and Household Production,”
Economics Letters, 107 (Jan. 2010): 131—33.
Michael Burda, Daniel Hamermesh and Philippe Weil, “Total Work and Gender: Facts and Possible
Explanations,” Journal of Population Economics, 2013, forthcoming.
John Cogan, “Fixed Costs and Labor Supply,” Econometrica, 49 (July 1981): 945-63.
Vincent Crawford and Juanjuan Meng, “New York City Cab Drivers’ Labor Supply Revisited,” American
Economic Review, 101 (August 2011): 1912-32.
Bruno Crépon and Francis Kramarz, “Employed 40 Hours or Not Employed 39: Lessons from the 1982
Mandatory Reduction of the Workweek,” Journal of Political Economy, 110 (Dec. 2002): 135589.
Richard Freeman and Ronald Schettkat, “Jobs and Home Work: Time-Use Evidence,” Economic Policy
(Jan. 2005): 5-50.
Leora Friedberg and Anthony Webb, “Determinants and Consequences of Bargaining Power within
Households,” NBER Working Paper No. 12367, 2006.
José Gimenez-Nadal and Almudena Sevilla-Sanz, “Trends in Time Allocation: A Cross-Country
Analysis,” European Economic Review, forthcoming, 2013.
Dominique Goux, Eric Maurin and Barbara Petrongolo, “Worktime Regulations and Spousal Labour
Supply,” IZA Discussion Paper No. 5639, 2011.
Jeremy Greenwood, Ananth Seshadri and Mehmet Yorukoglu, “Engines of Liberation,” Review of
Economic Studies, 72 (Jan. 2005): 109-33.
Reuben Gronau and Daniel Hamermesh, “Time vs. Goods: The Value of Measuring Household
Technologies,” Review of Income and Wealth, 52 (March 2006): 1-16.

24

Keiichiro Hamaguchi, Rodo Ho Seisaku (Policies on Labor Acts). Kyoto: Mineruva Shobo, 2004 (in
Japanese).
Daniel Hamermesh, “When We Work,” American Economic Association, Papers and Proceedings, 88
(May 1998): 321-5.
-----------------------, “Timing, Togetherness and Time Windfalls,” Journal of Population Economics, 15
(Nov. 2002): 601-23.
Robert Hart, The Economics of Overtime Working. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press,
2004.
Michael Huberman and Chris Minns, “The Times They Are Not Changin’: Days and Hours of Work in
Old and New Worlds, 1870-2000,” Explorations in Economic History, 44 (Oct. 2007): 538-67.
Jennifer Hunt, “Has Work-Sharing Worked in Germany?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114 (Feb.
1999): 117-48.
Andrea Ichino and Anna Sanz de Galdeano, “Reconciling Motherhood and Work: Evidence from Time
Use Data in Three Countries,” in D. Hamermesh and G. Pfann, eds., The Economics of Time Use.
Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2005, pp. 263-88.
Daiji Kawaguchi, Hisahiro Naito and Izumi Yokoyama, “Labor Market Responses to Legal Work Hour
Reduction: Evidence from Japan,” ESRI Discussion Paper No. 202, Tokyo, Cabinet Office, ESRI,
December 2008.
John Maynard Keynes, “Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren,” in Essays in Persuasion, 1930.
New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 1963 edition.
Sung-teak Kim and Wonshik Kim, Workhour Reduction and Policy Issues, Seoul: Korea Labor Institute,
2004.
Jean Kimmel and Rachel Connelly, “Mothers’ Time Choices: Caregiving, Leisure, Home Production, and
Paid Work,” Journal of Human Resources, 42 (Summer 2007): 643-81.
Thomas Kniesner, “The Full-Time Workweek in the United States, 1900-1970,” Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, 30 (Oct. 1976): 3-15.
Sachiko Kuroda, “Do Japanese Work Shorter Hours than Before? Measuring Trends in Market Work and
Leisure Using the 1976–2006 Japanese Time-use Survey,” Journal of the Japanese and
International Economies, 24 (Dec. 2010): 481-502.
Renée Landers, James Rebitzer and Lowell Taylor, “Rat Race Redux: Adverse Selection in the
Determination of Work Hours in Law Firms,” American Economic Review, 86 (June 1996): 32948.
Jungmin Lee, “Marriage, the Sharing Rule, and Pocket Money: The Case of South Korea,” Economic
Development and Cultural Change, 55 (April 2007): 557-81.

25

----------------, Daiji Kawaguchi and Daniel Hamermesh, “Aggregate Impacts of a Gift of Time,”
American Economic Association, Papers and Proceedings, 102 (May 2012): 612-616.
Yean-Ju Lee, “Implications of Cohabitation for the Korean Family: Cohabiters’ Characteristics Based on
National Survey Data,” Korean Journal of Population Studies, 31 (August 2008): 77-100.
Shelly Lundberg, “The Added-Worker Effect,” Journal of Labor Economics, 3 (Jan. 1985): 11-37.
Marjorie McElroy and Mary J. Horney, “Nash-Bargained Household Decisions: Toward a Generalization
of the Theory of Demand,” International Economic Review, 22 (June 1981): 333-49.
Stephen Nickell, “Is the U.S. Labor Market Really That Exceptional?” Journal of Economic Literature,
46 (June 2008): 384-95.
Victoria Prowse, “Estimating Labour Supply Elasticities Under Rationing: A Structural Model of Time
Allocation Behaviour,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 42 (Feb. 2009): 90-112.
Margaret Reid, Economics of Household Production. London: Chapman and Hall, 1934.
Christopher Ruhm, “Are Recessions Good for Your Health?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115 (May
2000): 617-50.
Elena Stancanelli and Arthur van Soest, “Retirement and Home Production: A Regression Discontinuity
Approach,” IZA Discussion Paper No. 6229, 2011.
Kazuo Sugeno, Japanese Employment and Labor Law. Durham, NC: Carolina Academic Press, 2002.
Osamu Umezaki, “Rodokijunho No 1987 Nen Kaisei Wo Meguru Seisaku Katei” (“The Policy Process in
the 1987 Revision of the Labour Standards Law: An Attempt to Analyze by the Oral History
Method”), Japanese Journal of Labour Studies, 579 (Oct. 2008): 66-76, (in Japanese).

26

Table 1J. Reduced-form Estimates of Changes in Time Use on
the Treatment Propensity Score, Japan, 1986-96*
Saturdays

Weekdays
∆M

R2

(N=481)

R2

(N=484)

R2

30.06

0.006

-366.34

0.334

-47.19

0.021

(18.62)

∆H

-50.59

(23.64)

0.022

(15.45)

∆P

-14.35

Mean propensity
SD propensity
[10th, 90th]

34.87

34.88

(14.64)

0.011

(15.34)

0.004

(11.16)

∆L

Sundays

(N=447)

82.76
248.70

0.004

(15.76)

0.088

(12.18)

0.009

-21.79
20.14

0.006

(11.43)

0.280

(16.82)

(18.22)

0.113
(0.089)
[0.004, 0.242]

0.112
(0.089)
[0.003, 0.239]

48.84

0.018

(16.28)

0.111
(0.090)
[0.003, 0.239]

*Notes: Estimated by weighted least squares, with weights equal to the average population sizes of the cells
across the two years, here and in Table 1K. Standard errors in (parentheses) under parameter estimates here and
in subsequent tables.

27

Table 1K. Reduced-form Estimates of Changes in Time Use on
the Treatment Propensity Score, Korea, 1999-2009
Saturdays

Weekdays
∆M

R2

(N=783)

R2

(N=756)

R2

-157.06

0.013

-593.39

0.134

-172.89

0.014

(42.74)

∆H

156.68

(53.98)

0.040

(24.23)

∆P

5.89
-5.52

<0.001

0.084

93.08

<0.001

0.062
(0.080)
[0.002, 0.170]

240.88

161.84

0.041

(28.03)

0.017

(25.66)

(32.98)

Mean propensity
SD propensity
[10th, 90th]

259.43

(53.58)

(30.59)

(17.41)

∆L

Sundays

(N=994)

70.49

0.007

(30.00)

0.033

(46.83)

0.069
(0.086)
[0.003, 0.185]

-59.44

0.002

(47.66)

0.071
(0.086)
[0.003, 0.196]

28

Table 2J. Placebo Test Results, Japan, 1986-1976 and 2006-1996 Compared to 1996-1986*
∆ Minutes Worked:
Years:
1986-1976

Difference from 1996-1986

2006-1996

Difference from 1996-1986

*

Weekdays

Saturday

Sunday

164.23

126.15

67.96

(13.02)

(15.09)

(16.16)

-134.17

-492.48

-115.14

[-165.56, -101.22]

[-546.17, -440.12]

[-161.88, -75.17]

23.45

-49.54

12.47

(21.28)

(20.41)

(17.54)

6.60

-316.80

-59.66

[-30.43, 48.95]

[-377.15, -254.33]

[-96.31, -22.63]

Notes: 90 percent confidence intervals based on a bootstrap with 500 repetitions in brackets.

29

Table 3J. Structural Estimates of Equation (4), Japan*

α'
β'
γ'
H∗
P∗
L∗

Weekdays
OLS
GMM
0.382
1.683

Saturday
OLS
GMM
0.194
0.095

OLS
0.287

GMM
-0.462

(0.034)

(0.023)

(0.041)

(0.365)

(0.869)

0.122

0.477

0.216

0.226

0.178

0.427

(0.026)

(0.376)

(0.018)

(0.029)

(0.031)

(0.242)

0.497

-1.160

0.591

0.679

0.535

1.035

(0.035)

(1.059)

(0.020)

(0.038)

(0.040)

(0.316)

132

148

154

(0.800)

(0.722)

(0.742)

641

662

701

(0.827)

(0.649)

(0.734)

301

396

466

(0.998)

P
L
∆Subsistence level P
∆Subsistence level L

(0.042)

Sunday

(1.118)

(1.122)

656

603

324

310

-421

844

[369, 1727]

[567, 636]

[225, 409]

[53, 426]

[-1814, 101]

[757, 1340]

3232

278

-382

-427

-2428

930

[1838, 8549]

[232, 322]

[-599, -165]

[-1152, -88]

[-5973, -1250]

[757, 1340]

2

2

13

8

9

6

[1, 3]

[0, 3]

[10, 15]

[-2, 13]

[7, 11]

[3, 8]

10

5

38

21

18

12

[8, 12]

[3, 7]

[33, 43]

[-1, 33]

[15, 23]

[6, 15]

*Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Bootstrapped 90-percent confidence intervals in brackets, based on 500
re-samplings here and in Table 3K.

30

Table 3K. Structural Estimates of Equation (4), Korea

α'
β'
γ'
H∗
P∗
L∗

Weekdays
OLS
GMM
0.306
0.998

Saturday
OLS
GMM
0.259
0.437

OLS
0.144

GMM
0.936

(0.015)

(0.017)

(0.019)

(0.323)

(0.223)

0.126

0.038

0.121

0.157

0.223

0.408

(0.012)

(0.104)

(0.015)

(0.047)

(0.019)

(0.164)

0.568

-0.035

0.619

0.406

0.633

-0.344

(0.016)

(0.202)

(0.019)

(0.061)

(0.022)

(0.390)

130

151

152

(1.362)

(2.261)

(2.211)

652

694

725

(0.853)

(1.669)

(1.642)

287

374

432

(1.610)

P
L
∆Subsistence level P
∆Subsistence level L

(0.049)

Sunday

(2.830)

(2.812)

57

124

-127

-62

-717

-93

[35, 65]

[98, 147]

[-285, -121]

[-154, 50]

[-864, -456]

[-310, 97]

322

658

-725

142

-1743

932

[263, 337]

[614, 695]

[-1053, -578]

[-54, 334]

[-2215, -1158]

[604, 1152]

45

38

70

70

46

51

[43, 48]

[35, 41]

[67, 75]

[67, 74]

[40, 54]

[47, 56]

11

-22

17

14

-36

-15

[7, 20]

[-27, -17]

[5, 31]

[6, 22]

[-54, -18]

[-22, -9]

31

Table 4. Decomposition of the Change in Market Work on Saturdays
(minutes and percentage distributions)
Japan
Observed ∆M (minutes)
∆H via α' (H1)
∆H via change in subsistence level (H2)
∆P via β' (P1)
∆P via change in subsistence level (P2)
∆L via γ' (L1)
∆L via change in subsistence level (L2)
H1+H2
Fraction of total ∆M
P1+P2
Fraction of total ∆M
L1+L2
Fraction of total ∆M

Korea

OLS

GMM

OLS

GMM

-87
17
-10
19
2
51
8
7
0.08
21
0.24
59
0.68

-87
8
-3
20
1
59
1
6
0.06
21
0.24
60
0.69

-104
27
-23
13
59
64
-37
4
0.04
72
0.69
28
0.26

-104
45
-37
16
57
42
-20
9
0.08
73
0.70
22
0.21

32

Table 5. Reduced-form Estimates of Couples’ Market Time on Propensity Scores,
Japan, 1986-96, Korea 1999-2009*
ΔMh

ΔMw

ΔMh

ΔMw

Weekdays
Japan (N=322)
ph

pw

R2
Independence
χ 2

ph

pw

R2
Independence
χ 2

Korea (N=391)

256.01

238.02

-122.68

119.88

(138.86)

(140.14)

(84.20)

(98.76)

-950.57

-688.34

237.71

64.36

(227.17)

(229.27)

(237.48)

(278.55)

0.053

0.027

0.005

0.008

19.66

2.81

Saturdays
Japan (N=380)
-843.31
-56.95

Korea (N=281)
-364.18
124.81

(95.33)

(75.17)

(122.98)

(118.53)

88.36

-704.82

-70.06

-683.76

(175.58)

(138.44)

(359.28)

(346.28)

0.214

0.102

0.058

0.014

0.79

1.11
Sundays

Japan (N=385)
ph

pw

R2
Independence
χ 2

Korea (N=275)

371.83

318.37

137.14

171.56

(81.036)

(58.54)

(141.88)

(94.25)

-463.12

-610.86

513.61

116.17

(149.76)

(108.20)

(408.01)

(271.15)

0.053

0.094

0.024

0.027

35.38

*Notes: The 10% significance level for

5.97

2 is 4.60.

33

Table 6J. GMM Estimates of Couples’ Non-Market Time Allocations, Japan, 1986-96*
ΔHw

ΔPw

ΔLh

ΔLw

0.149

Weekdays (N = 322)
-1.639
-0.264

0.880

-0.885

0.758

(0.497)

(4.203)

(0.773)

(2.289)

(0.954)

(2.125)

-0.130

1.595

0.024

-1.144

0.106

-1.451

(0.691)

(5.618)

(1.068)

(3.034)

(1.308)

(2.890)

ΔHh
ΔMh

ΔMw

Cross effects = 0

ΔMh

ΔMw

0.16

ΔMw

Cross effects = 0

0.15

0.13

-0.191

Saturdays (N =380)
0.014
-0.183

-0.102

-0.625

0.089

(0.031)

(0.091)

(0.050)

(0.072)

(0.059)

(0.063)

0.012

-0.828

-0.175

0.197

0.163

-0.369

(0.071)

(0.164)

(0.102)

(0.138)

(0.134)

(0.129)

Cross effects = 0

ΔMh

ΔPh

0.05

4.75

3.62

-0.268

Sundays (N =385)
0.897
-0.148

-0.822

-0.585

-0.074

(0.344)

(0.661)

(0.346)

(0.530)

(0.376)

(0.547)

0.473

-0.894

-0.261

0.383

-0.212

-0.488

(0.374)

(0.671)

(0.363)

(0.550)

(0.407)

(0.576)

3.02

2.63

0.42

*Notes: The test for cross effects jointly equaling zero is distributed X2(2) (with a 10% significance level of
4.60). The propensity score for the probability of being affected by the reduction of standard hours is used as an
instrument here and in Table 6K.

34

Table 6K. GMM Estimates of Couples’ Non-Market Time Allocations, Korea 1999-2009

ΔHh
ΔMh

ΔMw

ΔPw

ΔLh

ΔLw

-0.026

Weekdays (N=391)
0.666
-0.131

-0.096

-0.843

-0.570

(0.633)

(1.713)

(0.360)

(0.554)

(0.541)

(1.335)

0.553

0.895

-0.186

-0.317

-0.368

-1.578

(0.437)

(1.227)

(0.263)

(0.401)

(0.379)

(0.963)

Cross effects = 0

ΔMh

ΔMw

ΔMw

Cross effects = 0

ΔPh

1.86

0.53

0.94

-0.674

Saturdays (N =281)
-0.417
-0.159

-0.130

-0.168

0.547

(0.172)

(0.260)

(0.140)

(0.136)

(0.228)

(0.231)

0.372

-0.993

0.365

0.265

-0.737

-0.272

(0.438)

(0.486)

(0.336)

(0.264)

(0.634)

(0.466)

Cross effects = 0

ΔMh

ΔHw

3.12

1.90

6.92

-0.186

Sundays (N =275)
0.306
-0.506

-0.741

-0.307

0.435

(0.695)

(0.644)

(0.669)

(0.934)

(1.131)

(0.968)

1.029

-0.288

0.566

1.049

-1.595

-1.761

(0.998)

(0.879)

(0.965)

(1.369)

(1.630)

(1.354)

1.41

0.64

1.09

35

APPENDIX Table A. Classification of Sub-aggregates into M, H, P and L
Japan*

Korea**

Work
Schoolwork
Commuting to/from school or work
Studying and Researching

Working and Work-Related
Activities
Educational Activities
Non-school Educational Activities

Housework
Child Care
Child care
Shopping

Household Services
Caring for Household Members

Sleep
Personal Care
Meals
Medical Examination or Treatment

Personal Care (includes Sleep)

Leisure
L

TV, Radio, Reading
Rest and Relaxation
Hobbies and Amusements
Sports
Volunteer and Social Activities
Social Life

Volunteer Activities
Socializing and Leisure

Prorated

Travel Other than Commuting
Caring and Nursing
Other Activities

Other Activities

*Caring and Nursing was first included
in 1991. Non-commuting travel is
prorated across H, L and medical
treatment. The rest is prorated across all
aggregates.

**Travel for each activity is added to
the appropriate aggregate.

Market
Work
M

Household
Production
H

Personal
Activities
P

36

APPENDIX BJ. Structural Estimates with Consumption on Saturdays, Japan*.

α'

OLS
0.167

GMM
0.176

(0.06)

(0.029)

β'

0.205

0.203

(0.008)

(0.038)

γ'

0.629

0.621

(0.009)

(0.043)

δ'

13.159

109.353

(5.441)

(29.723)

H∗

148
(0.722)

P∗

662
(0.649)

L∗

396
(1.118)

P
L
∆Subsistence level P
∆Subsistence level L

497

490

[363, 662]

[384, 551]

130

106

[-107, 612]

[-95, 273]

-8

-6

[-16, -7]

[-21, 2]

-4

0

[-28, -4]

[-27, 21]

*Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Bootstrapped 90-percent confidence intervals in brackets, based on 500 re-samplings
here and in Table BK.

37

APPENDIX BK. Structural Estimates with Consumption on Saturdays, Korea

α'
β'
γ'
δ'
H∗

OLS
0.184

GMM
0.426

(0.020)

(0.066)

0.179

0.126

(0.022)

(0.068)

0.637

0.448

(0.023)

(0.083)

-0.023

-0.601

(0.083)

(0.286)

84
(2.548)

P∗

691
(2.870)

L∗

380
(4.943)

P
L
∆Subsistence level P
∆Subsistence level L

-563

-113

[-799, -419]

[-308, 61]

-1613

-8

[-2132, -1252]

[-434, 338]

50

66

[37, 58]

[55, 74]

-63

4

[-94, -46]

[-22, 11]

38

