                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE RAND HEALTH INSURANCE EXPERIMENT, THREE DECADES LATER

                                         Aviva Aron-Dine
                                           Liran Einav
                                         Amy Finkelstein

                                       Working Paper 18642
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18642


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2012




Aviva Aron-Dine contributed to this paper while she was a graduate student in Economics at MIT.
She received her Ph.D. in June 2012. She is currently employed as a Special Assistant to the President
for Economic Policy at the National Economic Council. The views in this paper do not represent those
of the National Economic Council or the White House. We are grateful to the JEP editors (David Autor,
John List, and the indefatigable Tim Taylor), as well as to Ran Abramitzky, Tim Bresnahan, Dan Fetter,
Emmett Keeler, Will Manning, Joe Newhouse, Matt Notowidigdo, Sarah Taubman, and Heidi Williams
for helpful comments, and to the National Institute of Aging (Grant No. R01 AG032449) for financial
support; Aron-Dine also acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation Graduate Research
Fellowship program. We thank the original RAND investigators for making their data so easily available
and accessible. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Aviva Aron-Dine, Liran Einav, and Amy Finkelstein. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The RAND Health Insurance Experiment, Three Decades Later
Aviva Aron-Dine, Liran Einav, and Amy Finkelstein
NBER Working Paper No. 18642
December 2012
JEL No. I13

                                           ABSTRACT

We re-present and re-examine the analysis from the famous RAND Health Insurance Experiment from
the 1970s on the impact of consumer cost sharing in health insurance on medical spending. We begin
by summarizing the experiment and its core findings in a manner that would be standard in the current
age. We then examine potential threats to the validity of a causal interpretation of the experimental
treatment effects stemming from different study participation and differential reporting of outcomes
across treatment arms. Finally, we re-consider the famous RAND estimate that the elasticity of medical
spending with respect to its out-of-pocket price is -0.2, emphasizing the challenges associated with
summarizing the experimental treatment effects from non-linear health insurance contracts using a
single price elasticity.


Aviva Aron-Dine                                   Amy Finkelstein
WK6WUHHW1:$SW                     Department of Economics
:DVKLQJWRQ'&                              MIT E52-383B
aviva.arondine@gmail.com                          50 Memorial Drive
                                                  Cambridge, MA 02142
Liran Einav                                       and NBER
Stanford University                               afink@mit.edu
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
leinav@stanford.edu
The RAND Health Insurance Experiment, Three Decades Later*
Aviva Aron-Dine, Liran Einav, and Amy Finkelstein ^


Abstract: We re-present and re-examine the analysis from the famous RAND Health Insurance
Experiment from the 1970s on the impact of consumer cost sharing in health insurance on medical
spending. We begin by summarizing the experiment and its core findings in a manner that would be
standard in the current age. We then examine potential threats to the validity of a causal interpretation of
the experimental treatment effects stemming from different study participation and differential reporting
of outcomes across treatment arms. Finally, we re-consider the famous RAND estimate that the elasticity
of medical spending with respect to its out-of-pocket price is -0.2, emphasizing the challenges associated
with summarizing the experimental treatment effects from non-linear health insurance contracts using a
single price elasticity.


     In the voluminous academic literature and public policy discourse on how health insurance affects

medical spending, the famous RAND Health Insurance Experiment stands apart. Between 1974 and 1981,

the RAND experiment provided health insurance to more than 5,800 individuals from about 2,000

households in six different locations across the United States, a sample which was designed to be

representative of families with adults under the age of 62. The experiment randomly assigned the families

to health insurance plans with different levels of cost sharing, ranging from full coverage (“free care”) to

plans that provided almost no coverage for the first approximately $4,000 (in 2011 dollars) that were

incurred during the year. The RAND investigators were pioneers in what was then relatively novel

territory for the social sciences, both in the conduct and analysis of randomized experiments and in the

economic analysis of moral hazard in the context of health insurance.

*
  Aviva Aron-Dine contributed to this paper while she was a graduate student in Economics at MIT. She received
her Ph.D. in June 2012. She is currently employed as a Special Assistant to the President for Economic Policy at the
National Economic Council. The views in this paper do not represent those of the National Economic Council or the
White House. We are grateful to the JEP editors (David Autor, John List, and the indefatigable Tim Taylor), as well
as to Ran Abramitzky, Tim Bresnahan, Dan Fetter, Emmett Keeler, Will Manning, Joe Newhouse, Matt
Notowidigdo, Sarah Taubman, and Heidi Williams for helpful comments, and to the National Institute of Aging
(Grant No. R01 AG032449) for financial support; Aron-Dine also acknowledges support from the National Science
Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship program. We thank the original RAND investigators for making their
data so easily available and accessible.
^
  Aviva Aron-Dine received her Ph.D. in economics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in June 2012.
Liran Einav is Professor of Economics, Stanford University, Stanford, California. Amy Finkelstein is Ford Professor
of Economics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Einav and Finkelstein are also
Research Associates, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Their email addresses are
<aviva.arondine@gmail.com>, <leinav@stanford.edu>, and <afink@mit.edu>.


                                                         1
     More than three decades later, the RAND results are still widely held to be the “gold standard” of

evidence for predicting the likely impact of health insurance reforms on medical spending, as well as for

designing actual insurance policies. In light of the rapid growth of health spending, and the pressure this

places on public sector budgets, such estimates have enormous influence as federal and state policy-

makers consider potential policy interventions to reduce public spending on health care. On cost grounds

alone, we are unlikely to see something like the RAND experiment again: the overall cost of the

experiment—funded by the U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (now the Department of

Health and Human Services)—was roughly $295 million in 2011 dollars (Greenberg and Shroder 2004).1

     In this essay, we re-examine the core findings of the RAND health insurance experiment in light of

the subsequent three decades of work on the analysis of randomized experiments and the economics of

moral hazard. For our ability to do so, we owe a heavy debt of gratitude to the original RAND

investigators for putting their data in the public domain and carefully documenting the design and conduct

of the experiment. To our knowledge, there has not been any systematic re-examination of the original

data and core findings from the RAND experiment.2

     We have three main goals. First, we re-present the main findings of the RAND experiment in a

manner that is more similar to the way they would be presented today, with the aim of making the core

experimental results more accessible to current readers. Second, we re-examine the validity of the

experimental treatment effects. All real-world experiments must address the potential issues of

differential study participation and differential reporting of outcomes across experimental treatments: for


1
  Indeed, since the RAND Health Insurance Experiment, there have been, to our knowledge, only two other
randomized health insurance experiments in the United States, both using randomized variations in eligibility to
examine the effect of providing public health insurance to uninsured populations: the Finkelstein et al. (2012)
analysis of Oregon’s recent use of a lottery to expand Medicaid access to 10,000 additional low-income adults, and
the Michalopoulos et al. (2011) study funded by the Social Security Administration to see the impact of providing
health insurance to new recipients of disability insurance during the two year waiting period before they were
eligible for Medicare.
2
  For many other early and influential social science experiments, researchers have gone back and re-examined the
original data from the experiments in light of subsequent advances. For example, researchers have re-examined the
Negative Income Tax Experiments (Greenberg and Hasley 1983; Ashenfelter and Plant 1990), the Perry pre-school
and other early childhood interventions experiments (Anderson 2008; Heckman et al. 2010, 2011), the Hawthorne
effect (Levitt and List 2011), Project STAR on class size (Krueger 1999; Krueger and Whitmore 2001), and the
welfare-to-work experiments (Bitler, Gelbach, and Hoynes 2008).


                                                        2
example, if those who expected to be sicker were more likely to participate in the experiment when the

insurance offered more generous coverage, this could bias the estimated impact of more generous

coverage. Finally, we re-consider the famous RAND estimate that the elasticity of medical spending with

respect to its out-of-pocket price is -0.2. We draw a contrast between how this elasticity was originally

estimated and how it has been subsequently applied, and more generally we caution against trying to

summarize the experimental treatment effects from non-linear health insurance contracts using a single

price elasticity.



The Key Economic Object of Interest

         Throughout the discussion, we focus on one of RAND’s two enduring legacies—its estimates of

the impact of different health insurance contracts on medical spending—and do not examine its influential

findings regarding the health impacts of greater insurance coverage. We made this choice in part because

the publicly available health data are not complete (and therefore do not permit replication of the original

RAND results), and in part because the original health impact estimates were already less precise than

those for health spending, and our exercises below examining potential threats to validity would only add

additional uncertainty.

         Figure 1 illustrates the key object of interest. Health care utilization is summarized on the

horizontal axis by the total dollar amount spent on health care services (regardless of whether it is paid by

the insurer or out of pocket). The amount of insurance coverage is represented by how this total amount

translates to out-of-pocket spending on the vertical axis. The figure presents two different budget sets

arising from two different hypothetical insurance contracts: the solid line represents the individual’s

budget set if he has an insurance contract in which the individual pays 20 cents for any dollar of health

care utilization—that is a plan with a constant 20 percent coinsurance rate—while the dashed line

represents the budget set under a more generous insurance plan in which the individuals pays only 10

cents for any dollar of health care spending—that is, a 10 percent coinsurance.




                                                       3
        Our focus in this essay is on the effect of the health insurance coverage on health care utilization.

If individuals’ utility increases in health care utilization and in income net of out-of-pocket medical

spending, their optimal spending can be represented by the tangency point between their indifference

curve and the budget set, as shown in Figure 1. The way the figure is drawn, individuals would increase

their total health care spending from $3,000 to $5,000 in response to a 50 percent reduction in the out-of-

pocket price; that is, an elasticity of -1.33. A focus of the RAND experiment was to obtain estimates of

this elasticity from an experiment that randomized which budget set consumers faced. This elasticity is

generally known as the “moral hazard” effect of health insurance. This term was (to our knowledge) first

introduced into the modern academic literature by Arrow (1963) who defined moral hazard in health

insurance as the notion that “medical insurance increases the demand for medical care”; it has since come

to be used more specifically to refer to the price sensitivity of demand for health care, conditional on

underlying health status (Pauly 1968; Cutler and Zeckhauser 2000).

        Figure 1 abstracts, of course, from many important aspects of actual health insurance contracts

and health care consumption choices that are faced in the real world and in the RAND Health Insurance

Experiment. First, summarizing health care utilization by its overall dollar cost does not take into account

the heterogeneity in health care needs. One common distinction is often drawn between inpatient and

outpatient spending. The former is associated with hospitalizations, while the latter is associated with

visits to the doctor’s office, lab tests, or procedures that do not require an over-night stay. It seems

plausible that the rate at which individuals trade off health care spending and residual income could differ

across such very different types of utilization and, therefore, that these different types of spending would

respond very differently to a price reduction through insurance.

        A second simplification is that Figure 1 considers two linear contracts, for which the concept of

price, and price elasticity, is clearly defined. However, most health insurance contracts in the world, as

well as those offered by the RAND experiment, are non-linear, and annual health care utilization consists

of many small and uncertain episodes that accumulate. The concept of a single elasticity, or even of a




                                                       4
single price, is therefore not as straightforward as may be suggested by Figure 1. We return to this point

later in this essay.



A Brief Summary of the RAND Health Insurance Experiment

         In the RAND experiment, families were assigned to plans with one of six consumer coinsurance

rates (that is, the share of medical expenditures paid by the enrollee), and were covered by the assigned

plan for three to five years. Four of the six plans simply set different overall coinsurance rates of 95, 50,

25, or 0 percent (the last known as “free care”). A fifth plan had a “mixed coinsurance rate” of 25 percent

for most services but 50 percent for dental and outpatient mental health services, and a sixth plan had a

coinsurance rate of 95 percent for outpatient services but zero percent for inpatient services (following the

RAND investigators, we refer to this last plan as the “individual deductible plan”). The most common

plan assignment was free care (32 percent of families), followed by the individual deductible plan (22

percent), the 95 percent coinsurance rate (19 percent), and the 25 percent coinsurance rate (11 percent).

The first three columns of Table 1 show the six plans, the number of individuals and families in each, and

the average share of medical expenses that they paid out-of-pocket. Newhouse et al. (1993, Chapter 2 and

Appendix B) provide considerably more detail on this and all aspects of the experiment. 3

         In order to limit participants’ financial exposure, families were also randomly assigned – within

each of the six plans – to different out-of-pocket maximums, referred to as the “Maximum Dollar

Expenditure.” The possible Maximum Dollar Expenditure limits were 5, 10, or 15 percent of family

income, up to a maximum of $750 or $1,000 (roughly $3,000 or $4,000 in 2011 dollars). On average,

about one-third of the individuals who were subject to a Maximum Dollar Expenditure hit it during the

year, although this of course was more likely for plans with high coinsurance rate.




3
  Our analysis omits 400 additional families (1,200 individuals) who participated in the experiment but were
assigned to coverage by a health maintenance organization. Due to the very different nature of this plan, it is
typically excluded from analyses of the impact of cost sharing on medical spending using the RAND data (Keeler
and Rolph 1988; Manning et al. 1987; Newhouse et al. 1993).


                                                      5
        Families were not assigned to plans by simple random assignment. Instead, within a site and

enrollment month, the RAND investigators selected their sample and assigned families to plans using the

“finite selection model” (Morris, 1979; Newhouse et al., 1993, Appendix B), which seeks to a) maximize

the sample variation in baseline covariates while satisfying the experiments’ budget constraint; and b) use

a form of stratified random assignment to achieve better balance across a set of baseline characteristics

than would likely be achieved (given the finite sample) by chance alone.

        The data come from several sources. Prior to plan assignment, a screening questionnaire collected

basic demographic information and some information on health, insurance status, and past health care

utilization from all potential enrollees. During the three-to-five year duration of the experiment,

participants signed over all payments from their previous insurance policy (if any) to the RAND

experiment and filed claims with the experiment as if it was their insurer; to be reimbursed for incurred

expenditures, participants had to file claims with the experimenters. These claim filings, which provide

detailed data on health expenditures incurred during the experiment, make up the data on health care

spending and utilization outcomes. The RAND investigators have very helpfully made all these data and

detailed documentation available online, allowing us to (almost) perfectly replicate their results (see Table

A1 of the online Appendix) and to conduct our own analysis of the data. 4



Experimental Analysis

        As in all modern presentations of randomized experiments, we begin by reporting estimates of

experimental treatment effects. We then continue by investigating potential threats to the validity of

interpreting these treatment effects as causal estimates.



Empirical Framework


4
 We accessed the RAND data via the Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research; the data can be
downloaded at http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/studies/6439?q=Rand+Health+Insurance+Experiment.
Code for reproducing our results can be found at http://e-jep.org.


                                                       6
        In our analysis, we follow the RAND investigators and use the individual-year as the primary unit

of analysis. We denote an individual by i, the plan the individual’s family was assigned to by p, the

calendar year by t, and the location and start month by l and m, respectively.

        The baseline regression takes the form of

                                              y i ,t = λ p + τ t + α l , m + ε i ,t

where an outcome yi,t (for example, medical expenditure) is used as the dependent variable, and the

explanatory variables are plan, year, and location-by-start-month fixed effects. The key coefficients of

interest are the six plan fixed effects, λp. Because, as described earlier, there was an additional

randomization of Maximum Dollar Expenditure limits, the estimated coefficients represent the average

effect of each plan, averaging over the different limits that families were assigned to within the plan.

Because plan assignment was only random conditional on location and start (i.e. enrollment) month, we

include a full set of location by start month interactions, αl,m. We also include year fixed effects, τt, to

account for any underlying time trend in the cost of medical care. Because plans were assigned at the

family, rather than individual level, all regression results cluster the standard errors on the family.



Treatment Effects

        Table 2 reports the treatment effects of the different plans based on estimating the basic

regression for various measures of health care utilization. The reported coefficients (i.e. the λp’s from the

above regression) indicate the impact of the various plans on that measure of utilization relative to the

free care plan (whose mean is given by the constant term). Column 1 reports results for a linear

probability model in which the dependent variable takes the value of one when spending is positive and

zero otherwise. In column 2 the dependent variable is the amount of annual medical spending (in 2011

dollars).

        The point estimates of both specifications indicate a consistent pattern of lower spending in

higher cost-sharing plans. For example, comparing the highest cost-sharing plan (the 95 percent




                                                          7
coinsurance plan) with the free care plan, the results indicate a 17 percentage point (18 percent) decline in

the fraction of individuals with zero annual medical spending and a $845 (39 percent) decline in average

annual medical spending. As the last row shows, we can reject the null hypothesis that spending in the

positive cost-sharing plans is equal to that in the free care plan.

        The other columns of Table 2 break out results separately for inpatient spending, which

accounted for 42 percent of total spending, and outpatient spending, which accounted for the other 58

percent. Once again the patterns suggest less spending in plans with higher cost-sharing. We are able to

reject the null of no differences in spending across plans for “any inpatient” and for both measures of

outpatient spending. The effect of cost sharing on the level of inpatient spending is consistently small and

generally insignificant, suggesting that more serious medical episodes may be less price-sensitive, which

seems plausible.

        Another way to approach the data is to look at the extent to which the effect of cost-sharing might

vary for those with higher levels of medical spending. To explore this, we use quantile regressions to

estimate the above equation, and then assess the way by which the estimated plan effects vary across the

quantiles of medical spending. Detailed results for these specifications are available in Table A2 of the

online Appendix available with this article at http://e-jep.org. The results are consistent with a lower

percentage treatment effect for higher-spending individuals. This pattern is likely to arise from a

combination of two effects. First, consistent with the results for inpatient spending, more serious and

costly medical episodes may be less responsive to price. Second, individuals with high utilization

typically hit the Maximum Dollar Expenditure limit early in the coverage year, and so for much of their

coverage period they face a coinsurance rate of zero percent regardless of plan assignment.



Threats to Validity

        The great strength of a randomized experimental approach, of course, is that a straight

comparison of those receiving the treatment and those not receiving the treatment, like the regression




                                                       8
coefficients reported in Table 2, can plausibly be interpreted as a causal effect of the treatment. However,

this interpretation requires that no systematic differences exist across individuals who participate in the

different plans that could be correlated with measured utilization. In this section, we consider three

possible sources of systematic differences that need to be considered in any real-world experimental

context: 1) non-random assignment to plans, 2) differential participation in the experiment across

treatment arms, and 3) differential reporting (in this case, of medical care utilization) across treatment

arms. We consider these in turn.

First, as described earlier, plans were assigned by a form of stratified random assignment. To investigate

whether random assignment across plans was successfully implemented, we estimated a version of the

earlier equation but, instead of using health care spending as the dependent variable, we used as outcomes

various personal characteristics, such as age or education, of people assigned to different plans. In effect,

such regressions show whether there is a statistically significant correlation between any particular

characteristic of a person and the plan to which that person was assigned—which would be a warning

sign for concern about the randomization process. We first focused on characteristics used by the

investigators in the finite selection model that determined the randomization, including, for example,

variables for size of family, age categories, education level, income, self-reported health status, and use of

medical care in the year prior to the start of the experiment. Unsurprisingly, given that the assignment

algorithm was explicitly designed to achieve balances across plan assignment on these characteristics, our

statistical tests are unable to reject the null that the characteristics used in stratification are balanced

across plans. (More specifically, we used joint F-test, as reported in panel A of Table A3 of the online

Appendix available with this paper at http://e-jep.org.)

        We next estimated these same types of regressions, but now using as the dependent variable

individual characteristics not used by the original researchers in plan assignment. These include, for

example, the kind of insurance (if any) the person had prior to the experiment, whether family members

grew up in a city, suburb, or town, or spending on medical care and dental care prior to the experiment.

Using these statistics, people’s characteristics did not appear to be randomly distributed across the plans


                                                      9
(as shown by the joint F-test results in Panel B of Table A3 of the online Appendix). However, as we

looked more closely, this result appeared to be driven only by assignment in the 50 percent coinsurance

plan, which has relatively few people assigned to it. While these imbalances may have been due to

sampling variation, there may also have been some problem with the assignment of families to the 50

percent plan; indeed, midway through the assignment process the RAND investigators stopped assigning

families to this plan. With this (small) plan deleted, our statistical tests are unable to reject the null

hypothesis that covariates that were not used in stratification are also balanced across plans. We proceed

below on the assumption that the initial randomization was in fact valid—at least for all plans except for

the 50 percent coinsurance plan. However, we also assess the sensitivity of the results to the inclusion of

baseline covariates as controls.

        To examine the second threat to validity—the concern that differential participation across plans

might affect the findings—we begin with the observation that individuals assigned to more

comprehensive insurance will have greater incentive to participate in the experiment. Indeed, the RAND

investigators anticipated this issue, and attempted to offset these differential incentives by offering a

higher lump sum payment for those randomized into less comprehensive plans. While this differential

payment may make participation incentives more similar across plans, it can do so only on average.

Unless the participation incentive varies with a family’s pre-experiment expectation of medical spending

(and it did not), the incremental benefit from more comprehensive coverage remains greater for

individuals who anticipate greater medical spending.

        Thus, differential participation (or attrition) could bias the estimates of the spending response to

coverage. For example, if individuals incur a fixed cost of participating in the experiment, high expected

spending individuals might participate regardless of plan assignment, but lower expected spending

individuals might be inclined to drop out if not randomized into a comprehensive plan, which could bias

downward the estimated effect of insurance coverage on medical utilization. Alternatively, if high

expected spending and low expected spending families were about equally likely to participate in the

experiment when assigned to the free care plan, but high expected spending families were less likely than


                                                    10
low expected spending families to participate when assigned to less comprehensive plans, this differential

selection would bias upward the estimated effect of insurance coverage on medical utilization.

        Columns 4-6 of Table 1 presented earlier suggest scope for bias from differential participation

across plans. Overall, 76 percent of the individuals offered enrollment ended up completing the

experiment. Completion rates were substantially and systematically higher in more comprehensive

insurance plans, ranging from 88 percent in the (most comprehensive) free care plan to 63 percent in the

(least comprehensive) 95 percent coinsurance plan. Most of the difference in completion rates across

plans was due to differences in initial enrollment rates—that is, the share of families refusing coverage

from the experiment—although subsequent attrition from the experiment also plays a non-trivial role. As

shown in the bottom rows of Table 1, neither the initial refusal nor the subsequent attrition differentials

can be attributed to sampling variation alone.

        The differential participation by plan assignment was noted and investigated by the original

RAND investigators (Newhouse et al. 1993, Chapter 2). The RAND investigators primarily investigated

attrition (rather than refusal), and focused on testing particular mechanisms by which bias might have

arisen. We took a more agnostic view and implemented an omnibus test for differences in available

observable pre-randomization characteristics among those completing the experiment in the different

plans—and we reach somewhat different conclusions. First, we divided up all the pre-randomization

measures into two groups: those that directly measure prior health care utilization—which are closely

related to the primary post-randomization outcomes—and all other baseline demographic information.

For either set of covariates (or for both combined) we are able to reject at the 1 percent level that these

pre-randomization covariates are balanced across plans for those completing the experiment (using a joint

F-test; see Table A4 in the on-line Appendix for additional details). These differentials mostly reflect

imbalances that arise after assignment. 5 Of particular note, by the end of the experiment, there are



5
 This can be seen by comparing the balance at completion rates in Table A4 to the balance at assignment results in
Table A3; both tables are in the on-line Appendix.



                                                       11
imbalances across plans in participants’ average number of doctors’ visits in the year before the

experiment and in the share of participants who had a medical exam in the year before the experiment.

        The potential bias from differential non-response or attrition across experimental treatments is

now a well-known concern for analysis of randomized social experiments. For example, Ashenfelter and

Plant (1990) document the contamination to estimates arising from non-random attrition in the Negative

Income Tax experiments from the 1970s, which were implemented around the same time. We discuss

below possible ways of trying to account for this potential bias.

        Finally, the third potential threat to validity is the extent to which participants in more

comprehensive plans had differential incentives to report their medical spending. Data on medical

utilization and expenditures from experimental participants were obtained from Medical Expense Report

(“claims”) forms which required a provider’s signature and which the participant (or the health care

provider) had to file with the experiment in order to be reimbursed for the expenditure. The incentive for

filing claims was to get reimbursed, and so the filing incentive was weaker for participants enrolled in

higher coinsurance rate plans (or their providers) than for those enrolled in lower coinsurance rate plans

or the free care plan. For example, a participant assigned to the 95 percent coinsurance plan, who had yet

to satisfy the Maximum Dollar Expenditure, would have had little to gain from filing a claim toward the

end of the coverage year. This differential reporting would therefore be expected to bias the estimates in

the direction of over-stating the spending response to coverage. 6

        Again, the original RAND investigators anticipated this potential problem and conducted a

contemporaneous survey to try to determine the extent of the reporting bias (Rogers and Newhouse 1985).

In this study of roughly one-third of all enrollees, the investigators contacted the providers for whom

claims were filed by the participant or his family members, as well as a random subset of providers

mentioned by other participants. From these providers, they requested all outpatient billing records for the

participants and family members. For the 57 percent of providers who responded, the investigators

6
  Once again, this issue of differential reporting incentives by experimental assignment also plagued the Negative
Income Tax experiments in the 1970s (Greenberg and Hasley 1983).



                                                       12
matched the outpatient billing records to the experiments’ outpatient claims data and computed the

amounts corresponding to matched and unmatched billing records. The results indicate that, on average,

participants in the free care plan failed to file claims for 4 percent of their total outpatient spending, while

those in the 95 percent coinsurance plan failed to file claims for 12 percent of their total outpatient

spending. Under-reporting by participants in the other plans fell in between these two extremes (Rogers

and Newhouse, 1985, Table 7.3). Once again, in what follows we will attempt to adjust the estimates to

address the bias that may arise from this greater under-reporting of expenditures in the higher cost sharing

plans.



Robustness of Treatment Effects

         The potential for bias in the RAND experiment has been a source of some recent controversy: for

example, Nyman (2007, 2008) raises concerns about bias stemming from differential participation across

plans, and in Newhouse et al. (2008) the RAND investigators offer a rebuttal. To our knowledge,

however, there has been no attempt to quantify the potential magnitude of the bias. Nor, to our

knowledge, has there been a formal attempt to quantify the potential bias arising from the differential

reporting documented by Rogers and Newhouse (1985).

         Table 3 reports the results from such attempts. The different columns report results for different

measures of spending, while the different panels show results for different pairwise plan combinations:

free care vs. 95 percent coinsurance; free care vs. 25 percent coinsurance; and 25 percent vs. 95 percent

coinsurance. For each, we report results from four different specifications. Row 1 of each panel replicates

the baseline results from Table 2, where here we also add estimates from log specifications due to the

extreme sensitivity of the levels estimates to some of our adjustments.

         We begin in row 2, by trying to adjust the estimates for the differential filing of claims by plan

detected by Rogers and Newhouse (1985). Specifically, we proportionally scale up outpatient spending

for participants in each plan based on the plan-specific under-reporting percentages they report (Rogers




                                                      13
and Newhouse, 1985, Table 7.3). 7 We do not make any adjustment to inpatient spending, because there is

no study on under-reporting of inpatient spending and because we think inpatient spending is less likely

to be subject to reporting bias. Most inpatient episodes were costly enough that even participants in the 95

percent coinsurance plan should have had strong incentives to file claims because doing so would put

them close to or over their Maximum Dollar Expenditure limit. Moreover, claims for inpatient episodes

were generally filed by hospitals, which had large billing departments and systematic billing procedures

and so were presumably less likely than individuals to fail to file claims. As shown in row 2, the

adjustment reduces the estimated effects, but not by much.

        The remaining rows try to assess the impact of differential-participation across plans on the

estimates from row 2 that account for differential filing. We first consider the potential impact of

observable differences across those who choose to participate in different plans. Row 3 quantifies the

impact of the observable differences in participant characteristics across plans, by re-estimating the

regression from row 2, but now controlling for the full set of pre-randomization covariates. These controls

reduce further the estimated plan treatment effects, but again not by much. Of course, this is only

reassuring in so far as we believe we have a very rich set of observables that capture much of the potential

differences across participants in the different plans.

        A trickier issue is how to account for potential unobservable differences across individuals who

select into participation in different experimental arms. There are, broadly speaking, three main

approaches to this problem. Probably the most direct way to address potential bias stemming from

differential non-participation across plans would be to collect data on outcomes (in this case, health care

utilization) for all individuals, including those who failed to complete the experiment. Such data would

allow comparison of outcomes for individuals based on initial plan assignment, regardless of

participation, and then could be used for unbiased two-stage least squares estimates of the effects of cost-


7
  Rogers and Newhouse (1985) have no estimates of under-reporting for those individuals with zero claims. In the
regressions with binary outcomes (“any spending”) we somewhat arbitrarily scale up the shares of individuals by the
same percent as we scaled up spending among those who have positive spending amounts. When we analyze
spending continuously, however, those who report no spending remain at zero.


                                                        14
sharing on utilization. Unfortunately, we know of no potential source of such data – individual-level

hospital discharge records do not, to our knowledge, exist from this time period, and even if the records

existed, there is no legal permission to match RAND participants (or non-participants) to administrative

data.

        A second approach is to make assumptions about the likely economic model of selection and use

these to adjust the point estimates accordingly. Angrist et al. (2006) formalize one such approach in a

very different experimental setting. Depending on the economic model, one might conclude in our context

that the existing point estimates are under- or over-estimates of the true experimental treatment effects.

        A final approach, which is the one we take here, is to remain agnostic about the underlying

economic mechanism generating the differential selection and instead perform a statistical exercise

designed to find a lower bound for the treatment effect. In other words, this approach is designed to ask

the statistical question of how bad the bias from differential participation could be. Specifically, in row 4,

we follow Lee’s (2009) bounding procedure by dropping the top group of spenders in the lower cost

sharing plan. The fraction of people dropped is chosen so that with these individuals dropped,

participation rates are equalized between the lower cost sharing plan and the higher cost sharing plan to

which it is being compared. As derived by Lee (2009), these results provide worst case lower bounds for

the treatment effect under the assumption that any participant who refused participation in a given plan

would also have refused participation in any plan with a higher coinsurance rate. For example, since 88

percent of those assigned to the free care plan completed the experiment compared to only 63 percent of

those assigned to the 95 percent coinsurance (Table 1, column 6), for this comparison we drop the highest

28% (= (88-63)/88) of spenders in the original free care sample, thus obtaining equal participation rates

across the two samples.

        Our primary conclusion from Table 3 is that after trying to adjust for differential selection and

differential reporting by plan, the RAND data still reject the null hypothesis of no utilization response to




                                                      15
cost sharing. 8 In particular, when the outcome is total spending, our ability to reject the null that

utilization does not respond to consumer cost sharing survives all of our adjustments in two of the three

specifications, any spending and log spending. 9

         The sensitivity analysis does, however, reveal considerable uncertainty about the magnitude of

the response to cost-sharing. The combination of adjusting for differential reporting and the Lee (2009)

bounding exercise in row 4 opens up scope for the possibility that the treatment effects could be

substantially lower than what is implied by the unadjusted point estimates. For example, focusing on

column 3, our point estimate in row 1 indicates that spending under the 95 percent coinsurance plan is 75

percent lower than under the free care plan, but the adjusted lower bound estimate in row 4 suggests that

spending may only be 49 percent lower. 10

         Table 3 also shows that we can continue to reject the null of no response of outpatient spending

(for either the “any spending” specification or in the log specification), but are no longer able to reject the

null of no response of inpatient utilization to higher cost sharing. The large and highly statistically

significant response of inpatient spending to cost sharing was (to us) one of the more surprising results of

the RAND experiment. The bounding exercise indicates that the response of inpatient spending is not

robust to plausible adjustments for non-participation bias, and thus the RAND data do not necessarily

reject (although they also do not confirm) the hypothesis of no price responsiveness of inpatient spending.

         Finally, it is worth re-emphasizing that the results in row 4 of Table 3 represent lower bounds,

rather than alternative point estimates. We interpret the exercise as indicating that the unadjusted point



8
  Perhaps not surprisingly, there are statistical assumptions under which one cannot still reject this null. For
example, we show in Table A5 of the on-line Appendix what we believe are (too) extreme worst case bounds under
which we can no longer reject the null. Specifically, following Manski (1990), for each year in which an individual
should have been but was not present in the experiment (due to refusal or attrition), we impute the values that would
minimize the treatment effect, and then further adjust the data for differential claim filing by plan, as before.
9
  In all cases, the statistically significant decline in the mean level of spending (column 2) is not robust to any of the
bounding exercise in row 4. We think that this result is driven by the skewness of medical spending, which makes
the results extremely sensitive to dropping the top 10-30 percent of spenders. In addition, we note that in some
cases, the lower bounds appear to be statistically significant but with the “wrong” sign. Given strong a priori
reasons to think that higher cost sharing will not raise medical utilization, we interpret these results as simply
showing that we cannot reject the null.
10
   We translate the coefficients in column 3 into percentages by exponentiating and subtracting from 1.


                                                           16
estimates could substantially overstate the causal effect of cost sharing on health care utilization, rather

than providing alternative point estimates for this causal effect.



Estimating the Effect of Cost-Sharing on Medical Spending

           The most enduring legacy of the RAND experiment is not merely the rejection of the null

hypothesis that price does not affect medical utilization, but rather the use of the RAND results to forecast

the spending effects of other health insurance contracts. In extrapolating the RAND results out of sample,

analysts have generally relied on the RAND estimate of a price elasticity of demand for medical spending

of -0.2 (for which Manning et al. 1987 is widely cited, but Keeler and Rolph 1988 is the underlying

source).

           This -0.2 elasticity estimate is usually treated as if it emerged directly from the randomized

experiment, and often ascribed the kind of reverence that might be more appropriately reserved for

universal constants like π. Despite this treatment, the famous elasticity estimate is in fact derived from a

combination of experimental data and additional modeling and statistical assumptions, as any out-of-

sample extrapolation of experimental treatment effects must be. And, as with any estimate, using the

estimate out of sample must confront a number of statistical as well as economic issues.



Some Simple Attempts to Arrive at Estimates of the Price Elasticity

           A major challenge for any researcher attempting to transform the findings from experimental

treatment effects of health insurance contracts into an estimate of the price elasticity of demand for

medical care is that health insurance contracts—both in the real world and in the RAND experiment—are

highly-non linear, with the price faced by the consumer typically falling as total medical spending

cumulates during the year. The RAND contracts, for example, required some initial positive cost-sharing,

which falls to zero when the Maximum Dollar Expenditure is reached. More generally, pricing under a

typical health insurance contract might begin with a consumer facing an out-of-pocket price of 100



                                                      17
percent of his medical expenditure until a deductible is reached, at which point the marginal price falls

sharply to the coinsurance rate that is typically around 10-20 percent, and then falls to zero once an out-

of-pocket limit has reached.

        Due to the non-linear form of the health insurance contracts, any researcher who attempts to

summarize the experiment with a single price elasticity must make several decisions. One question is how

to analyze medical expenditures that occur at different times, and therefore under potentially different

cost sharing rules, but which stem from the same underlying health event. Another issue is that the

researcher has to make an assumption as to which price individuals respond to in making their medical

spending decision. It is not obvious what single price to use. One might use the current “spot” price of

care paid at the time health care services are received (on the assumption that individuals are fully

myopic), the excepted end-of-year price (based on the assumption that individuals are fully forward

looking and with an explicit model of expectation formation), the realized end-of-year price (on the

assumption that changes in health care consumption happen at that margin), or perhaps some weighted-

average of the prices paid over a year. These types of modeling challenges – which were thoroughly

studied and thought through by the original RAND investigators (Keeler, Newhouse, and Phelps 1977) –

are inherent to the problem of extrapolating from estimates of the spending impact of particular health

insurance plans, and in this sense are not unique to the RAND experiment.

        To get some sense of the challenges involved in translating the experimental treatment effects

into an estimate of the price elasticity of demand, Table 4 reports a series of elasticity estimates that can

be obtained from different, relatively simple and transparent ad-hoc manipulations of the basic

experimental treatment effects. In Panel A of Table 4 we convert—separately for each pair of plans—the

experimental treatment effects from column 2 of Table 2 to arc elasticities with respect to the coinsurance

rate. (These pairwise-arc elasticities are calculated as the change in total spending as a percentage of the

average spending, divided by the change in price as a percentage of the average price; in panel A we




                                                     18
define the price as the coinsurance rate of the plan).11 We obtain pairwise elasticities that are for the most

part negative, ranging from about -0.1 to -0.5; the few positive estimates are associated with coinsurance

rates that are similar and plans that are small.

         We use Panel B of Table 4 to report weighted averages of pairwise estimates under alternative

assumptions regarding 1) the definition of the price, and 2) the definition of the elasticity. In terms of the

definition of the price, in computing the elasticities in Panel A we used the plan’s coinsurance rate as the

price, and ignored the fact that once the Maximum Dollar Expenditure is reached the price drops to zero

in all plans. In Panel B we consider both this elasticity with respect to the plan’s coinsurance rate, but also

report the elasticity with respect to the average, plan-specific (but not individual-specific) out-of-pocket

price. The plan’s average out of pocket price (reported in Table 1, column 3) will be lower than the plan’s

coinsurance rate since it is a weighted average of the coinsurance rate and zero, which would be the

“spot” price after the Maximum Dollar Expenditure is reached. For each price definition, we also consider

two definitions of the elasticity; specifically, we calculate both arc-elasticities as in Panel A and more

standard elasticities that are based on regression estimates of the logarithm of spending on the logarithm

of price. 12 We also report results excluding the individual deductible plan, which has a different

coinsurance rate for inpatient and outpatient care. Across these various simple manipulations of the

experimental treatment effects in Panel B, we find price elasticities that range between -0.04 and -0.6.

(This exercise does not consider the additional adjustments for differential participation and reporting

discussed in Table 3).

The RAND Elasticity: A Brief Review of Where It Came From

11
   The arc elasticity of x with respect to y is defined as the ratio of the percent change in x to the percent change in y,
where the percent change is computed relative to the average, namely (x2-x1)/( (x2+x1)/2). As x2 and x1 gets closer to
each other, the arc elasticity converges to the standard elasticity. Although not commonly used elsewhere, it was
heavily used by the RAND researchers because the largest plan in RAND was the free care plan. Starting with a
price of zero a percent change is not well defined, so arc elasticities are easier to work with.
12
   The latter require that we exclude the free care plan, with a price of zero; as mentioned in an earlier footnote, this
is the primary reason that the RAND investigators worked with arc elasticities. Because the arc elasticity estimates
are based on treatment effects estimated in levels, and because we estimated smaller treatment effects (in percentage
terms) for high-spending individuals (see Table A2), the arc elasticities are generally smaller than the more standard
elasticities.)



                                                           19
        We now review the particular assumptions made by the original RAND investigators that allowed

them to arrive at their famous estimate of a price elasticity of demand for medical care of -0.2; Keeler and

Rolph (1988) provide considerably more detail.

        To transform the experimental treatment effects into a single estimate of the single price elasticity

of demand for health care, the RAND investigators grouped individual claims into “episodes.” Each

episode – once occurring – is thought of as an unbreakable and perfectly forecastable “bundle” of

individual claims. The precise grouping relies on detailed clinical input, and depends on the specific

diagnosis. For example, each hospitalization constitutes a separate single episode. Routine spending on

diabetes care over the entire year is considered a single episode and is fully anticipated at the start of the

year, while “flare-ups” are not. Each cold or accident is a separate episode, but these could run

concurrently. Once claims are grouped into episodes, the RAND investigators regress average costs per

episode on plan fixed effects (and various controls) and find that plan assignment has virtually no effect

on costs per episode. From this they conclude that spending on the intensive margin—that is, spending

conditional on an episode occurring—does not respond to price, and focus their analysis on the price

responsiveness of the extensive margin only—that is, on the occurrence rate of episodes.

        To investigate the price to which individuals respond, the RAND investigators looked at whether

the occurrence rate of episodes differs between individuals who face similar current prices for medical

care but different future prices. Specifically, they look at whether spending is higher within a plan for

individuals who are closer to hitting their Maximum Dollar Expenditures, and whether it is higher among

people in cost-sharing plans who have exceeded their Maximum Dollar Expenditures compared to people

in the free care plan. Of course, a concern with this comparison is that families with higher underlying

propensities to spend are more likely to come close to hitting their Maximum Dollar Expenditures; the

RAND investigators address this via various modeling assumptions. Finding no evidence in support of

higher episode rates among individuals who are closer to hitting their Maximum Dollar Expenditure

limits, the RAND investigators conclude that participants’ extensive margin decisions about care

utilization appear to be based entirely on the current, “spot” price of care.


                                                      20
        Given these findings, in the final step of the analysis the RAND investigators limit the sample to

individuals in periods of the year when they are sufficiently far from hitting the Maximum Dollar

Expenditure (by at least $400 in current dollars) so that they can assume that the coinsurance rate (or

“spot” price) is the only relevant price. They then compute the elasticity of medical spending with respect

to the experimentally assigned coinsurance rate. Specifically, for each category of medical spending—

hospital, acute outpatient, and so on—they compute arc-elasticities of spending in a particular category in

the free care vs. 25 percent coinsurance plan and in the free care vs. 95 percent coinsurance plan. To

compute these arc-elasticities, they estimate spending changes for these individuals across contracts by

combining their estimates of the responsiveness of the episode rate to the coinsurance rate with data on

average costs per episode (which is assumed to be unresponsive to the coinsurance rate). The enduring

elasticity estimate of -0.2 comes from noting that most of these arc-elasticities—summarized in Keeler

and Rolph (1988, Table 11) —are close to -0.2.



Using The RAND Elasticity: The Need to Summarize Plans with a Single Price

        Application of the -0.2 estimate in a manner that is fully consistent with the way the estimate was

generated is a non-trivial task. The RAND elasticity was estimated based on the assumption that in

deciding whether to consume medical care, individuals fully anticipate spending within an “episode of

care” but make their decision myopically—that is, only with regard to the current “spot” price of medical

care--with respect to the potential for spending during the year on other episodes. Therefore a researcher

who wanted to apply this estimate to forecasting the impact of an out of sample change in cost sharing

would need to obtain micro data on medical claims, group these claims into “episodes” as described

earlier, and calculate the “spot” price that each individual would face in each episode. Although there

exist notable exceptions that do precisely this (Buchanan et al. 1991; and Keeler et al. 1996), this has not

been standard practice for using the RAND estimates. Rather, many subsequent researchers have applied

the RAND estimates in a much simpler fashion. In doing so, arguably the key decision a researcher faces




                                                    21
is how to summarize the non-linear coverage with a single price. This is because the RAND elasticity is a

single elasticity estimate, so it has to be applied to a single price.

        Researchers have taken a variety of different approaches to summarizing the price of medical care

under a non-linear insurance contract by a single number. For example, in predicting how medical

spending will respond to high deductible health savings accounts, Cogan, Hubbard, and Kessler (2005)

applied the -0.2 elasticity estimate to the change in the average price that was paid out of pocket, where

the average was taken over claims that were made at different parts of the non-linear coverage. In

extrapolating from the RAND experiment to the impact of the spread of insurance on the growth of

medical spending, researchers have also used an “average price approach,” summarizing the changes in

the price of medical care by changes in the overall ratio between out-of-pocket medical spending and total

spending (Newhouse 1992; Cutler 1995; Finkelstein 2007). Other work on the price elasticity of demand

for medical care has summarized the price associated with a non-linear coverage using the actual, realized

price paid by each individual for his last claim in the coverage year (Eichner 1998; Kowalski 2010) or the

expected end-of-year price (Eichner 1997).

        These different methods for summarizing a non-linear coverage with a single price can have an

important impact on the estimated spending effects of alternative contracts. To illustrate this point,

consider three “budget neutral” alternative coverage designs, depicted in Figure 2: a “high deductible”

plan with a $3,250 per-family deductible and full insurance above the deductible, a “low deductible” plan

with a $1,000 per-family deductible and a 20 percent coinsurance rate above the deductible, and a “no

deductible” plan with a constant coinsurance rate of 28 percent. In describing these plans as “budget

neutral,” we mean that we picked them so that they would all have the same predicted cost (for the

insurer) when we ignore potential behavioral responses to the different contracts and apply to each of

them the same distribution of annual medical expenditures from the RAND’s free care plan (in 2011

dollars). The “no deductible” plan always has the same single price: that is, the buyer always pays 28

percent of the cost of health services. However, in the two non-linear plans, the price paid by the




                                                        22
individual will change from 100 percent of health care cost before the deductible is reached, to the

coinsurance rate above that level.

        As we described, in summarizing such a plan by a single number, one might look at a variety of

“price” definitions, including the “spot” price paid at the time health care services are received, the

realized end-of-year price, the expected end-of-year price, or at some weighted-average of the prices paid

over a year. The concern is that when evaluating how changing from one insurance contract to another (or

from no insurance to having insurance) would affect health care utilization, the method that is used to boil

down the insurance contract into a single price (to which the -0.2 elasticity estimate is then applied) can

yield very different conclusions about how the change in insurance contracts would increase the amount

of health care consumed.

        To illustrate the potential magnitudes at stake, consider a simple exercise in which we try to

forecast the effect of reducing coverage from RAND’s 25 percent coinsurance plan to a plan with a

constant coinsurance rate of 28 percent, which is one of the options depicted in Figure 2. Because the new

coverage has a constant coinsurance rate, the price of medical care under this coverage is clear and well

defined: it is 28 cents for every dollar of health care spending. But in order to apply the RAND estimate

of -0.2, we also need to summarize RAND’s 25 percent coinsurance with a single price. Recall that the

RAND plan had a Maximum Dollar Expenditure limit, so the price starts at 25 cents for every dollar, but

then becomes zero once the limit is reached, so summarizing the RAND plan with a single price

essentially means a choice of weights in the construction of an average price. We use three different ways

to summarize the RAND 25 percent coinsurance plan with a single price: a dollar-weighted average price,

a person-weighted average price, and a person-weighted average end-of-year price. Applying the

distribution of spending under the free care plan, these result in three different summary prices, of 10, 17,

and 13 cents for every dollar of medical spending, respectively. Applying the -0.2 estimate to changing

from each of these prices to 28 cents, which is the constant price in the alternative coverage, we obtain a

reduction in health care spending of 18, 9, and 14 percent, respectively. That is, in this example, the




                                                     23
decision of how to define the price leads to differences in the predicted reduction of spending that vary by

a factor of 2.



The Dangers of Summarizing Non-Linear Coverage by a Single Price

        The preceding exercise illustrated how the manner by which a non-linear coverage is summarized

by a single price could be important. In general, there is no “right” way to summarize a non-linear budget

set with a single price. The differing implications of alternative – reasonable, yet ad hoc – “fixes” to this

problem should give us pause when considering many of the subsequent applications of the RAND

experimental results. It also suggests that, going forward, attempts to estimate the impact of health

insurance contracts on health care spending would benefit from more attention to how the non-linearities

in the health insurance contracts may impact the spending response.

        Fortunately, just as there has been intellectual progress in the design and analysis of experimental

treatment effects in the decades since RAND, there has similarly been progress on the analysis of the

behavioral response to non-linear budget sets (for example, Hausman 1985). Much of the initial work in

this area focused on analyzing the labor supply response to progressive taxation. Recently, however,

researchers have begun to apply the techniques of non-linear budget set estimation to the analysis of the

impact of (non-linear) health insurance contracts (Marsh 2011; Kowalski 2012), and further work in this

area could be of great value.

        Of course, even equipped with these techniques, current researchers must grapple with many of

the same issues that the original RAND investigators faced. In particular, they must model the distribution

of medical shocks throughout the year in the population under analysis, as well as the evolution of

individuals’ beliefs about these shocks. Another key issue is whether individuals take into account the

entire non-linear budget set induced by the health insurance contract in making their spending decision, or

whether they respond only to the current “spot” price, or to something in between. Although fully forward

looking rational individuals should only respond to the expected end-of-year price, if individuals are

myopic, liquidity constrained, or unsure of the details of their contract, they might also respond, at least to


                                                      24
some extent, to the “spot” price. In recent empirical work (Aron-Dine et al. 2012) we investigate this

question using data on medical spending by people covered by employer-provided health insurance. We

concluded that, in our specific setting, individuals do appear to take into account the non-linear budget set

in making medical spending decisions, but that they are not fully forward looking, as they also take

account of the spot price. In our calibration results, the predicted spending change associated with

introducing a non-linear health insurance contract can vary greatly depending on what one assumes about

the degree of forward looking behavior, suggesting that more evidence on this question would be useful.

        More generally, any transformation of the experimental treatment effects into estimates that can

be used out-of-sample will require more assumptions than required to obtain those treatment effects in the

first place. More than three decades after the RAND experiment, the development and use of new

approaches to doing such out-of-sample extrapolation remains an active, and interesting, area for

research.



Concluding Remarks

        At the time of the RAND Health Insurance Experiment, it was vigorously argued that medical

care was determined by “needs,” and therefore was not sensitive to price. As Cutler and Zeckhauser

(2000) wrote, the RAND experiment was instrumental in rejecting this view: “Sound methodology,

supported by generous funding, carried the day. The demand elasticities in the Rand Experiment have

become the standard in the literature, and essentially all economists accept that traditional health

insurance leads to moderate moral hazard in demand.”

        But as this core lesson of the RAND experiment has become solidified in the minds of a

generation of health economics and policymakers, there has been a concomitant fading from memory of

the original experimental design and analytical framework. While this may be a natural progression in the

life-cycle of transformative research, it seems useful to remind a younger generation of economics of the

details, and limitations, of the original work.




                                                     25
        In this essay, we re-presented and re-examined the findings of the RAND experiment from the

perspective of three subsequent decades of progress in empirical work on the design and analysis of

randomized experiments, as well as on the analysis of moral hazard effects of health insurance—much of

it inspired, no doubt, to a large degree by the enduring influence of the RAND results. This landmark and

pioneering study was uniquely ambitious, remarkably sophisticated for its time, and entrepreneurial in the

design and implementation of the then-new science of randomized experiments in the social sciences.

        Our re-examination concludes that despite the potential for substantial bias in the original

estimates stemming from systematically differential participation and reporting across experimental arms,

one of the central contributions of the RAND experiment is robust: the rejection of the null hypothesis

that health spending does not respond to the out-of-pocket price. Naturally, however, these potential

biases introduce uncertainty about the magnitude of the impact of the different insurance plans on medical

spending. Moreover, the translation of these experimental estimates into economic objects of interest –

such as a price elasticity of demand for medical care – requires further assumptions and machinery, which

go beyond the “raw” experimental results. While economic analysis has made progress in the intervening

decades in developing techniques that may offer new approaches to the economic analysis of moral

hazard effects of health insurance, it will always be the case that, like the famous -0.2 price elasticity of

demand estimate produced by the original RAND investigators, any attempt by researchers to apply the

experimental estimates out of sample will involve more assumptions – and hence scope for uncertainty –

than the direct experimental estimates themselves. This point, while (we’d think) simple and

uncontroversial, may have been somewhat lost in the intervening decades of use of the RAND estimates.

Our hope is that this essay may help put both the famous experiment and its results back in context.




                                                     26
References

        Angrist, Joshua, Eric Bettinger, and Michael Kremer, 2006. “Long-Term Consequences of

Secondary School Vouchers: Evidence from Administrative Records in Columbia.” American Economic

Review 96(3), 847-862.

        Aron-Dine, Aviva, Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Mark Cullen, 2012. “Moral Hazard in

Health Insurance: How Important is Forward Looking Behavior?” NBER Working Paper No. 17802.

        Arrow, Kenneth, 1963. ”Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care.” American

Economic Review 53(5), 941-973.

        Ashenfelter, Orley, and Mark Plant, 1990. “Non-Parametric Estimates of the Labor Supply

Effects of Negative Income Tax Programs.” Journal of Labor Economics 8(1), S397-S415.

        Bitler, Marianne, Jonah Gelbach, and Hilary Hoynes, 2006. “What Mean Impacts Miss:

Distributional Effects of Welfare Reform Experiments.” American Economic Review 96(4), 988-1012.

        Buchanan, Joan, Emmett Keeler, John Rolph, and Martin Holmer, 1991. “Simulating Health

Expenditures under Alternative Insurance Plans.” Management Science 37(9), 1067-1090.

        Cogan, John, Glenn Hubbard, and Daniel Kessler, 2005. Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: 5 Steps to a

Better Healthcare System. 1st edition, Washington, D.C.: AEI Press.

        Cutler, David, 1995. “Technology, Health Costs, and the NIH.” Paper prepared for the National

Institutes       of         Health        Economics           Roundtable        on        Biomedical

Research. http://www.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/cutler/files/Technology,%20Health%20Costs%20a

nd%20the%20NIH.pdf.

        Cutler, David M., and Richard J. Zeckhauser, 2000. “The Anatomy of Health Insurance.” In

Handbook of Health Economics, A. J. Culyer and J. P. Newhouse, eds., Volume 1, 563–643. Amsterdam:

Elsevier.

        Eichner, Matthew J., 1997. “Medical Expenditures and Major Risk Health Insurance.” MIT,

Ph.D. Dissertation, Chapter 1.




                                                  27
        Eichner, Matthew J., 1998. “The Demand for Medical Care: What People Pay Does Matter.”

American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 88(2), 117-121.

        Finkelstein, Amy N., 2007. “The Aggregate Effects of Health Insurance: Evidence from the

Introduction of Medicare.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(3), 1-37.

        Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joe Newhouse,

Heidi Allen, Katherine Baicker, and the Oregon Health Study Group, 2012. “The Oregon Health

Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the first year.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127 (3): 1057-

1106.

        Greenberg, David H., and Harlan Halsey, 1983. “Systematic Misreporting and Effects of Income

Maintenance Experiments on Work Effort: Evidence from the SIME-DIME.” Journal of Labor

Economics 1(4), 380-407.

        Greenberg, David H., and Mark Shroder, 2004. The Digest of Social Experiments. Third Edition.

Washington, DC: Urban Institute Press.

        Hausman, Jerry, 1985. “The Econometrics of Nonlinear Budget Sets.” Econometrica 53, 1255-

1282.

        Heckman, James J., S. H. Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, P. A. Savelyev, and Adam Q. Yavitz, 2010.

“Analyzing Social Experiments as Implemented: A reexamination of the Evidence from the HighScope

Perry Preschool Program.” Quantitative Economics 1, 1-46.

        Heckman, James J., Rodrigo Pinto, Azeem Shaikh, and Adam Q. Yavitz, 2011. “Inference with

Imperfect Randomization: The Case of the Perry Preschool Program.” Mimeo, University of Chicago.

http://home.uchicago.edu/~amshaikh/webfiles/perry.pdf.

        Keeler, Emmett B., Joseph P. Newhouse, and Charles E. Phelps, 1977. “Deductibles and the

Demand for Medical Care Services: The Theory of a Consumer Facing a Variable Price Schedule under

Uncertainty.” Econometrica 45(3), 641-656.

        Keeler, Emmett B., and John E. Rolph, 1988. “The Demand for Episodes of Treatment in the

Health Insurance Experiment.” Journal of Health Economics 7, 337-367.


                                                 28
       Keeler, Emmett B., Jesse D. Malkin, Dana P. Goldman, and Joan L. Buchanan, 1996. “Can

Medical Savings Accounts Reduce Health Care Costs for Non-Elderly Employed Americans?” Journal of

the American Medical Association 275(21), 1666-1671.

       Kowalski, Amanda, 2010. “Censored Quantile Instrumental Variable Estimates of the Price

Elasticity of Expenditure on Medical Care.” NBER Working Paper No. 15085.

       Kowalski, Amanda, 2012. “Estimating the Tradeoff between Risk Protection and Moral Hazard

with a Nonlinear Budget Set Model of Health Insurance.” NBER Working Paper No. 18108.

       Krueger, Alan, 1999. “Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions.” Quarterly

Journal of Economics 114(2), 497-532.

       Krueger, Alan, and Diane Whitmore, 2001. “The Effect of Attending a Small Class in the Early

Grades on College-Test Taking and Middle School Test Results: Evidence from Project STAR.”

Economic Journal 111(468), 1-28.

       Lee, David S., 2009. “Training, Wages, and Sample Selection: Estimating Sharp Bounds on

Treatment Effects.” Review of Economic Studies 76(3), 1071-1102.

       Levitt, Steven, and John List, 2011. “Was there really a Hawthorne Effect at the Hawthorne

Plant? An Analysis of the Original Illumination Experiments.” American Economic Journal: Applied

Economics 3(1), 224-239.

       Manning, Willard, Joseph P. Newhouse, Naihua Duan, Emmett Keeler, Arleen Leibowitz, and

Susan Marquis, 1987. “Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care: Evidence from a Randomized

Experiment.” American Economic Review 77(3), 251-277.

       Manski, Charles F., 1990. “Nonparametric Bounds on Treatment Effects.” American Economic

Review Papers and Proceedings 80, 319-323.

       Marsh, Christina, 2011. “Estimating Health Expenditure Elasticities using Nonlinear

Reimbursement.” Mimeo, University of Georgia.

       Michalopoulos, Charles, David Wittenburg, Dina Israel, Jennifer Schore, Anne Warren, Aparajita

Zutshi, Stephen Freedman, and Lisa Schwartz, 2011. “The Accelerated Benefits Demonstration and


                                                 29
Evaluation Project: Impacts on Health and Employment at 12 months.” New York: MDRC.

http://www.mdrc.org/publications/597/full.pdf.

        Morris, Carl, 1979. “A Finite Selection Model for Experimental Design of the Health Insurance

Study.” Journal of Econometrics 11(1), 43-61.

        Newhouse, Joseph P., 1992. “Medical Care Costs: How Much Welfare Loss?” Journal of

Economic Perspectives 6(3), 3-21.

        Newhouse, Joseph P., and the Insurance Experiment Group, 1993. Free for All. Cambridge:

Harvard University Press.

        Newhouse, Joseph P., Robert H. Brook, Naihua Duan, Emmett B. Keeler, Arleen Leibowitz,

Willard G. Manning, M. Susan Marquis, Carl N. Morris, Charles E. Phelps, and John E. Rolph, 2008.

“Attrition in the RAND Health Insurance Experiment: A Response to Nyman.” Journal of Health

Politics, Policy and Law 33(2), 295-308.

        Nyman, John A., 2007. “American Health Policy: Cracks in the Foundation.” Journal of Health

Politics, Policy and Law 32(5), 759-783.

        Nyman, John A., 2008. “Health Plan Switching and Attrition Bias in the RAND Health Insurance

Experiment.” Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law 33(2), 309-17.

        Pauly, Mark, 1968. “The Economics of Moral Hazard: Comment.” American Economic Review

58(3), 531-537.

        Rogers, William H., and Joseph P. Newhouse, 1985. “Measuring Unfiled Claims in the Health

Insurance Experiment.” In Collecting Evaluation Data: Problems and Solutions, eds. Leigh Burstein,

Howard E. Freeman and Peter H. Rossi, Beverly Hills: Sage, 1985, 121-133.




                                                  30
Table 1
Plan Summary Statistics and Refusal and Attrition Rates

                                    Individuals       Avg. out‐of‐        Share Refusing                        Share Refusing
              Plan                                                                           Share Attriting
                                     (Families)      pocket sharec          Enrollment                            or Attriting
               (1)                      (2)               (3)                   (4)                (5)                (6)

Free Care                          1,894 (626)             0%                    6%                 5%                12%
25% Coinsurance                      647 (224)            23%                   20%                 6%                26%
Mixed Coinsurancea                   490 (172)            28%                   19%                 9%                26%
50% Coinsurance                      383 (130)            44%                   17%                 4%                21%
Individual Deductible b            1,276 (451)            59%                   18%                13%                28%
95% Coinsurance                    1,121 (382)            76%                   24%                17%                37%

All Plans                         5,811 (1,985)           34%                   16%                10%                24%

p‐value, all plans equal                                                      < 0.0001          < 0.0001           < 0.0001
p‐value, Free Care vs. 95%                                                    < 0.0001          < 0.0001           < 0.0001
p‐value, Free Care vs. 25%                                                     0.0001            0.5590             0.0001
p‐value, 25% vs. 95%                                                           0.4100            0.0003             0.0136

Table Notes: "Coinsurance rate" refers to the share of the cost that is paid by the individual. In the 25%, mixed, 50%, and 95%
coinsurance rate plans, families were assigned out‐of‐pocket maximums of 5%, 10%, or 15% of family income, up to a limit of
$750 or $1,000. In the individual deductible plan, the out‐of‐pocket maximum was $150 per‐person up to a maximum of
$450 per family. The sample counts for the 95% coinsurance rate plans include 371 individuals who faced a 100%
coinsurance rate in the first year of the experiment. Refusal and attrition rates are regression‐adjusted for site and contact
month fixed effects and interactions, because plan assignment was random only conditional on site and month of enrollment
(see Newhouse et al. 1993, Appendix B). "Contact month" refers to the month in which the family was first contacted by the
experiment and is used in lieu of month of enrollment because month of enrollment is available only for individuals who
agreed to enroll. Refusal and attrition rates exclude the experiment's Dayton site (which accounted for 1,137 enrollees)
because data on Dayton refusers were lost. An individual is categorized as having attrited if he leaves the experiment at any
time prior to completion.
a
  The "Mixed Coinsurance" plan had a coinsurance rate of 50% for dental and outpatient mental health services, and a
coinsurance rate of 25% for all other services.
b
    The "Individual Deductible" plan had a coinsurance rate of 95% for outpatient services and 0% for inpatient services.

c
 To compute the average out‐of‐pocket share we compute the ratio of out‐of‐pocket expenses to total medical expenditure
for each enrollee, and report the average ratio for each plan.
Table 2
Effects on Utilization

                                                        Total Spendinga           Inpatient Spending           Outpatient Spending
                                                    Share with                  Share with                   Share with
                                                                 OLS (levels)                OLS (levels)                OLS (levels)
                                                       Any                         Any                          Any
                                                       (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)          (6)

Constant (Free Care Plan, N = 6,840)                   0.931        2170           0.103         827            0.930        1343
                                                      (0.006)       (78)          (0.004)        (60)          (0.006)       (35)
25% Coins (N = 2,361)                                 ‐0.079        ‐648          ‐0.022         ‐229          ‐0.078        ‐420
                                                      (0.015)       (152)         (0.009)        (116)         (0.015)       (62)
Mixed Coins (N = 1,702)                               ‐0.053        ‐377          ‐0.018           21          ‐0.053        ‐398
                                                      (0.015)       (178)         (0.009)        (141)         (0.016)       (70)
50% Coins (N = 1,401)                                 ‐0.100        ‐535          ‐0.031           4           ‐0.100        ‐539
                                                      (0.019)       (283)         (0.009)        (265)         (0.019)       (77)
Individual Deductible (N = 4,175)                     ‐0.124        ‐473          ‐0.006         ‐67           ‐0.125        ‐406
                                                      (0.012)       (121)         (0.007)        (98)          (0.012)       (52)
95% Coins (N = 3,724)                                 ‐0.170        ‐845          ‐0.024         ‐217          ‐0.171        ‐629
                                                      (0.015)       (119)         (0.007)        (91)          (0.016)       (50)
p‐value: all differences from Free Care = 0          < 0.0001     < 0.0001        0.0008        0.1540        < 0.0001     < 0.0001

Table Notes: Table reports coefficients on plan dummies; the ommitted category is the free care plan (whose mean is given by the
constant term that we report in the first row). The dependent variable is given in the column headings. Standard errors, clustered on
family, are in parentheses below the coefficients. Because assignment to plans was random only conditional on site and start month
(Newhouse et al., 1993), all regressions include site by start month dummy variables, as well as year fixed effects. All spending
variables are inflation adjusted to 2011 dollars (adjusted using the CPI‐U). Site by start month and year dummy variables are
demeaned so that the coefficients reflect estimates for the "average" site‐month‐year mix.
a
 Total spending is the sum of inpatient and outpatient spending (where outpatient spending includes dental and outpatient mental
health spending).
Table 3
Sensitivity of Results to Additional Covariates and Bounding Exercises

                                                           Total Spending                      Inpatient Spending                    Outpatient Spending
                                                Share with                     OLS           Share with                      Share with                   OLS
                                                   Any      OLS (Levels)      (Logs)            Any      OLS (Levels)           Any     OLS (Levels)     (Logs)
                                                   (1)           (2)            (3)              (4)         (5)                (6)          (7)           (8)

Panel A: 95% coinsurance plan vs. free care (N = 10,564)
                                                ‐0.170          ‐845         ‐1.381            ‐0.024         ‐217             ‐0.171         ‐629        ‐1.361
 (1) Baseline specification (from Table 2)
                                                (0.015)         (119)        (0.096)           (0.007)        (91)             (0.016)        (50)        (0.093)
                                                  ‐0.100        ‐786         ‐1.313            ‐0.024         ‐217             ‐0.102         ‐582        ‐1.299
(2) Adjustment for underreporting
                                                  (0.017)       (123)        (0.097)           (0.007)        (91)             (0.018)        (55)        (0.095)
      Adjustment for underreporting +             ‐0.095        ‐728         ‐1.276            ‐0.023         ‐183             ‐0.096         ‐558        ‐1.261
(3)
      adding pre‐randomization                    (0.016)       (111)        (0.087)           (0.007)        (85)             (0.016)        (50)        (0.084)
      Lee bounds + adjustment for                 ‐0.080         745         ‐0.672             0.079         592.1            ‐0.081         151         ‐0.751
(4)
      underreporting                              (0.018)        (96)        (0.098)           (0.005)       (70.59)           (0.018)        (38)        (0.095)

Panel B: 25% coinsurance plan vs. free care (N = 9,201)
                                                 ‐0.079         ‐648         ‐0.747            ‐0.022         ‐229             ‐0.078         ‐420        ‐0.719
 (1) Baseline specification (from Table 2)
                                                (0.015)         (152)        (0.095)           (0.009)        (116)            (0.015)        (62)        (0.093)
                                                  ‐0.065        ‐645         ‐0.734            ‐0.022         ‐229             ‐0.065         ‐418        ‐0.706
(2) Adjustment for underreporting
                                                  (0.016)       (155)        (0.096)           (0.009)        (116)            (0.016)        (65)        (0.094)
      Adjustment for underreporting +             ‐0.069        ‐585         ‐0.748            ‐0.022         ‐181             ‐0.068         ‐405        ‐0.718
(3)
      adding pre‐randomization                    (0.014)       (137)        (0.084)           (0.008)        (107)            (0.014)        (59)        (0.082)
      Lee bounds + adjustment for                 ‐0.055         639         ‐0.335             0.081          581             ‐0.054         205         ‐0.369
(4)
      underreporting                              (0.016)       (133)        (0.096)           (0.008)         (99)            (0.016)        (52)        (0.093)
Panel C: 95% coinsurance plan vs. 25% coinsurance plan (N = 6,085)
                                              ‐0.091         ‐197            ‐0.633            ‐0.002          12              ‐0.093         ‐209        ‐0.641
 (1) Baseline specification (from Table 2)
                                              (0.020)       (160)            (0.120)           (0.009)        (122)            (0.020)        (61)        (0.117)
                                                  ‐0.035        ‐141         ‐0.579            ‐0.002          12              ‐0.037         ‐164        ‐0.592
(2) Adjustment for underreporting
                                                  (0.022)       (164)        (0.122)           (0.009)        (122)            (0.022)        (66)        (0.118)
      Adjustment for underreporting +             ‐0.026        ‐143         ‐0.529            ‐0.001           ‐2             ‐0.028         ‐153        ‐0.543
(3)
      adding pre‐randomization                    (0.019)       (141)        (0.106)           (0.009)        (108)            (0.019)        (60)        (0.103)
      Lee bounds + adjustment for                 ‐0.020         764         ‐0.248             0.078          657             ‐0.021         185         ‐0.313
(4)
      underreporting                              (0.022)       (105)        (0.120)           (0.006)         (78)            (0.023)        (42)        (0.117)

Table Notes: Table reports coefficients on plan dummies; the ommitted category is the free care plan. Sample sizes given in parentheses are the number of
people enrolled in the plans being compared. The dependent variable is given in the column headings. Standard errors are in parentheses below the
coefficients. Standard errors are clustered on familiy. Because assignment to plans was random only conditional on site and start month (Newhouse et al.,
1993), all regressions include site by start month dummy variables, as well as year fixed effects to adjust for inflation; level regressions use inflation‐adjusted
spending variables (in 2011 dollars, adjusted using the CPI‐U). Log variables are defined as log(var + 1) to accomodate zero values. The regressions adding pre‐
randomization covariates as controls (row 3) include the full set of covariates shown in Table A4 of the on‐line Appendix. Adjustment for underreporting and
bounding procedures are explained in the main text
Table 4
Sensitivity of Elasticity Estimates to Choice of Plan Comparisons and Price Measures

                                                                                               a
Panel A: Arc Elasticities of Total Spending w.r.t Coinsurance Rate, for Different Plan Pairs
                                                                                                            Individual
                                                        25% Coins        Mixed Coinsc     50% Coins                       c   95% Coins
                                                                                                           Deductible
Free Care                                                  ‐0.180           ‐0.091           ‐0.149           ‐0.119            ‐0.234
                                                          (0.044)          (0.051)          (0.080)          (0.031)           (0.039)
25% Coins                                                                   0.749            0.097            0.159             ‐0.097
                                                                           (0.533)          (0.281)          (0.128)           (0.101)
Mixed Coins                                                                                  ‐0.266           ‐0.101            ‐0.295
                                                                                            (0.422)          (0.195)           (0.126)
50% Coins                                                                                                     0.429             ‐0.286
                                                                                                             (1.176)           (0.280)
Individual Deductible                                                                                                          ‐0.487
                                                                                                                               0.187

Panel B: Elasticities of Total Spending w.r.t Various Price Measures

                                                             Coinsurance Rate             Average Out‐of‐Pocket Price

                                                       Arc Elasticitya    Elasticityb    Arc Elasticitya    Elasticityb
All Plans                                                  ‐0.094            NA              ‐0.144            NA
                                                          (0.066)                           (0.051)
All Plans Except Free Care                                 ‐0.039           ‐0.523           ‐0.133           ‐0.524
                                                          (0.131)          (0.082)          (0.097)          (0.085)
All Plans Except Free Care and Ind. Deductible             ‐0.039           ‐0.537           ‐0.038           ‐0.600
                                                          (0.108)          (0.084)          (0.108)          (0.094)

Table Notes: Panel A reports the pairwise arc‐elasticities caluclated based on Table 2, column 2. Panel B reports the sample‐size
weighted average of various pairwise elasticities, calculated as detailed in the column‐specific notes. Standard errors are in
parentheses below the coefficient values. Standard errors are clustered on family. Arc‐elasticity standard errors are bootstrapped
standard errors based on 500 replications, clustered on family.
a
 Pairwise arc‐elasticities are calculated as the change in total spending as a percentage of the average, divided by the change in price
as a percentage of the average price, where the price is either the coinsurance rate of the plan (in Panel A) or (in panel B) either
(depending on the column) the coinsurance rate of the the average out‐of‐pocket price paid by people assigned to that plan (the
average out‐of‐pocket price of each plan is shown in Table 1).
b
 Elasticities are calculated based on pairwise regressions of log(total spending + 1) on log(price), where price is either the coinsurance
rate of the plan or the average out‐of‐pocket price paid by people assigned to that plan.
c
 For the mixed coinsurance plan and the individual deductible plan, we take the initial price to be the average of the two coinsurance
rates, weighted by the shares of initial claims that fall into each category. For the mixed coinsurance rate plans, this gives an initial
price of 32 percent. For the individual deductible plan, it gives an initial price of 58 percent.
                     2,000
                                    Figure 1: The Price Elasticity of Health Care Utilization
                     1,800


                     1,600


                     1,400
Out‐of‐pocket Cost




                     1,200


                     1,000


                      800


                      600


                      400


                      200


                        0
                             0   1,000   2,000   3,000   4,000    5,000     6,000    7,000   8,000   9,000   10,000
                                                         Total Medical Expenditure
                                  7,000
                                                       Figure 2: Non‐Linear Health Insurance Coverage

                                  6,000



                                  5,000
Out‐of‐pocket Expenditure ($US)




                                                      High Deductible Plan

                                  4,000
                                                                                                            Low Deductible Plan


                                  3,000



                                  2,000



                                  1,000

                                                                             Constant Coinsurance Plan

                                     0
                                          0   2,500      5,000    7,500     10,000 12,500 15,000 17,500      20,000   22,500      25,000
                                                                          Total Medical Expenditure ($US)
Table A1
Replicating the Core RAND Results
                               Share with Any Medical Expenditures            Share with Hospital Admissions              Medical Spending (Share of FC Plan)
                                RAND Results         Replication             RAND Results         Replication             RAND Results         Replication
                                     (1)                 (2)                     (3)                  (4)                      (5)                  (6)

Free Care                          86.8%                 86.9%                   10.3%                10.2%                    100%                100%
25% Coinsurance                    78.7%                 78.9%                   8.4%                 8.4%                     85%                 84%
50% Coinsurance                    77.2%                 77.3%                   7.2%                 7.1%                     90%                 89%
95% Coinsurance                    67.7%                 67.6%                   7.9%                 7.9%                     69%                 69%
Individual Deductible              72.3%                 72.5%                   9.6%                 9.6%                     81%                 80%

p‐value: all coefficients
                                  < 0.0001             < 0.0001                 < 0.0001            < 0.0001                  0.0030               0.0012
equal
p‐value: free care vs. 95%
                                  < 0.0001             < 0.0001                 < 0.0001            < 0.0001                 < 0.0001             < 0.0001
coinsurance


                               Inpatient Spending (Share of FC Plan)       Outpatient Spending (Share of FC Plan)          N (Individual‐Year Observations)
                                RAND Results          Replication           RAND Results          Replication             RAND Results          Replication
                                      (7)                 (8)                     (9)                 (10)                     (11)                (12)

Free Care                           100%                 100%                    100%                 100%                    6,822                6,840
25% Coinsurance                      91%                  91%                    76%                  77%                     4,065                4,063
50% Coinsurance                     110%                 108%                    66%                  65%                     1,401                1,401
95% Coinsurance                     77%                  77%                     60%                  60%                     3,727                3,724
Individual Deductible               91%                  91%                     69%                  69%                     4,175                4,175

p‐value: all coefficients
                                   0.3926               0.3720                  < 0.0001            < 0.0001                    ‐‐                   ‐‐
equal
p‐value: free care vs. 95%
                                   0.0270               0.0458                  < 0.0001            < 0.0001                    ‐‐                   ‐‐
coinsurance

Table Notes: The columns labeled "RAND Results" report results from Table 3.2 of Newhouse et al. 1993. The medical, inpatient, and outpatient spending means
adjust for inflation using the CPI‐U; these means are reported as shares of the free care plan mean because we were unable to determine the exact CPI‐U
adjustment used in Newhouse et al. The hypothesis tests cluster standard errors by family. In order to match the Newhouse et al. figures, the 25% coinsurance
rate sample here includes 480 individuals who faced a coinsurance rate of 50% for dental and mental health services and 25% for all other services. For the
purposes of the replication exercise here, we follow the the original RAND approach and exlcude dental and outpatient mental health spending for medical
spending; therefore the results here differ from the total spending results in Table 2 which include these categories.
Table A2
Quantile Regressions (Total Spending)


                                           10th pctile 20th pctile 30th pctile 40th pctile 50th pctile 60th pctile 70th pctile 80th pctile 90th pctile


Panel A: Quantile Regression Results ‐ Total Spending
Constant (Free Care Plan, N = 6,840)           79          230         366         523         731         1013        1490        2577        5478
                                               (9)        (12)         (13)        (17)        (22)        (31)        (55)        (124)       (217)
25% Coins (N = 2,361)                          ‐65        ‐145         ‐167        ‐220        ‐301        ‐407        ‐559        ‐919        ‐1859
                                              (10)        (20)         (20)        (29)        (33)        (47)        (87)        (173)       (371)
Mixed Coins (N = 1,702)                        ‐65        ‐116         ‐152        ‐206        ‐288        ‐389        ‐570        ‐1041       ‐1645
                                              (11)        (20)         (20)        (26)        (36)        (50)        (90)        (192)       (447)
50% Coins (N = 1,401)                          ‐65        ‐160         ‐203        ‐257        ‐339        ‐461        ‐692        ‐1215       ‐2488
                                              (10)        (17)         (23)        (33)        (37)        (53)        (88)        (169)       (416)
Individual Deductible (N = 4,175)              ‐65        ‐160         ‐238        ‐285        ‐350        ‐403        ‐499        ‐697        ‐1164
                                              (10)        (14)         (16)        (23)        (32)        (43)        (75)        (176)       (324)
95% Coins (N = 3,724)                          ‐65        ‐160         ‐256        ‐351        ‐465        ‐604        ‐832        ‐1410       ‐2415
                                              (10)        (14)         (16)        (21)        (27)        (39)        (70)        (153)       (321)

Panel B: Estimated Effects as Share of Free Care Plan Spending
25% Coins (N = 2,361)                         ‐83%        ‐63%        ‐46%        ‐42%        ‐41%         ‐40%        ‐38%        ‐36%        ‐34%
Mixed Coins (N = 1,702)                       ‐83%        ‐50%        ‐42%        ‐39%        ‐39%         ‐38%        ‐38%        ‐40%        ‐30%
50% Coins (N = 1,401)                         ‐83%        ‐70%        ‐56%        ‐49%        ‐46%         ‐46%        ‐46%        ‐47%        ‐45%
Individual Deductible (N = 4,175)             ‐83%        ‐70%        ‐65%        ‐55%        ‐48%         ‐40%        ‐33%        ‐27%        ‐21%
95% Coins (N = 3,724)                         ‐83%        ‐70%        ‐70%        ‐67%        ‐64%         ‐60%        ‐56%        ‐55%        ‐44%

Table Notes: The omitted category is the free care plan. Standard errors are in parentheses below the coefficients. Standard errors are calculated
based on 500 bootstraps clustered on family. Because assignment to plans was random only conditional on site and start month (Newhouse et al.,
1993), all regressions include site by start month dummy variables, as well as year fixed effects; spending variables are in 2011 dollars, adjusted for
inflation using the CPI‐U. Site by start month and year dummy variables are demeaned so that the coefficients reflect estimates for the "average" site‐
month‐year mix.
Table A3
Covariate Balance at Assignment

                                                                                                                                  Individual                                             p‐values
                                                                             Free Care    25% Coins Mixed Coins 50% Coins                       95% Coins
                                                                                                                                  Deductible                    FC vs. 95%     FC vs. 25%     25% vs. 95%     all equal

Panel A: Covariates Included in Finite Selection Model
log family size                                                                0.88          0.85         0.82          0.87         0.87          0.89            0.84           0.55              0.47        0.83
share (of family) female                                                       0.51          0.55         0.53          0.55         0.53          0.55            0.11           0.25              0.98        0.65
share (of family) age 0 to 5                                                   0.10          0.11         0.08          0.08         0.10          0.09            0.72           0.42              0.31        0.68
share (of family) age 6 to 17                                                  0.19          0.18         0.19          0.20         0.18          0.19            0.70           0.69              0.52        0.96
share (of family) age 18 to 44                                                 0.48          0.46         0.51          0.49         0.49          0.50            0.38           0.55              0.23        0.79
age data missing                                                               0.00          0.00         0.00          0.00         0.00          0.00            0.95           0.58              0.61        0.96
all family members white                                                       0.83          0.81         0.82          0.84         0.84          0.82            0.59           0.65              0.96        0.95
race data missing                                                              0.02          0.01         0.01          0.01         0.02          0.02            0.90           0.31              0.30        0.49
male family head is a high school graduate                                     0.33          0.35         0.39          0.54         0.40          0.40            0.06           0.62              0.37        0.04
male family head beyond high school                                            0.35          0.39         0.32          0.24         0.34          0.32            0.40           0.41              0.17        0.39
male family head education data missing                                        0.25          0.27         0.31          0.33         0.27          0.28            0.36           0.54              0.93        0.54
female family head is a high school graduate                                   0.40          0.43         0.43          0.40         0.43          0.40            0.99           0.51              0.54        0.92
female family head beyond high school                                          0.30          0.29         0.27          0.26         0.28          0.30            0.97           0.94              0.92        0.98
female family head education data missing                                      0.16          0.14         0.15          0.11         0.16          0.13            0.20           0.56              0.72        0.67
log family income (adjusted for family size)                                   9.31          9.36         9.29          9.35         9.31          9.30            0.87           0.33              0.29        0.90
family income missing                                                          0.06          0.09         0.06          0.03         0.07          0.08            0.53           0.26              0.52        0.47
anyone in family working                                                       0.83          0.85         0.82          0.92         0.84          0.85            0.51           0.58              0.97        0.30
work data missing                                                              0.02          0.02         0.01          0.02         0.02          0.03            0.34           0.59              0.59        0.43
maximum hourly wage of family members                                          5.07          5.18         4.96          5.01         5.42          5.16            0.67           0.71              0.95        0.86
hourly wage data missing                                                       0.20          0.21         0.22          0.12         0.20          0.18            0.48           0.82              0.48        0.21
family had preexisting coverage                                                0.85          0.84         0.84          0.89         0.86          0.89            0.06           0.84              0.13        0.37
preexisting coverage data missing                                              0.06          0.05         0.03          0.04         0.05          0.06            0.82           0.44              0.57        0.07
share of family members reporting excellent health                             0.45          0.52         0.44          0.55         0.47          0.49            0.14           0.06              0.45        0.12
share of family members reporting very good health                             0.41          0.36         0.44          0.32         0.40          0.39            0.49           0.17              0.43        0.22
share of family members reporting fair/poor health                             0.00          0.00         0.00          0.01         0.00          0.00            0.45           0.29              0.32        0.69
share of family members reporting frequent pain                                0.19          0.16         0.20          0.18         0.20          0.18            0.66           0.12              0.28        0.60
pain data missing                                                              0.00          0.01         0.00          0.01         0.00          0.00            0.34           0.43              0.34        0.44
share of family members worried about health                                   0.25          0.20         0.26          0.22         0.26          0.23            0.24           0.10              0.46        0.23
worry data missing                                                             0.00          0.00         0.00          0.01         0.00          0.00            0.45           0.29              0.32        0.69
share of family members hospitalized last year                                 0.10          0.07         0.12          0.09         0.12          0.12            0.10           0.05              0.00        0.02
hospitalization data missing                                                   0.01          0.01         0.01          0.00         0.01          0.02            0.09           0.49              0.65        0.27
average number of med visits last year for adults                              5.29          4.41         5.32          4.37         5.53          5.23            0.89           0.06              0.08        0.14
med visits for adults data missing                                             0.39          0.36         0.34          0.38         0.37          0.37            0.32           0.40              0.95        0.53
average number of med visits last year for kids                                3.52          3.12         3.28          3.30         3.88          3.35            0.61           0.24              0.52        0.44
med vists for kids data missing                                                0.78          0.79         0.78          0.78         0.78          0.79            0.89           0.83              0.92        1.00
Joint F‐test                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.24

Panel B: Variances Not Included in the Finite Selection Model
had private (non‐work) insurance                                               0.25          0.23         0.19          0.22         0.25          0.26            0.65           0.69              0.47        0.44
private insurance data missing                                                 0.07          0.06         0.06          0.06         0.06          0.09            0.25           0.40              0.08        0.22
had employer‐provided insurance                                                0.73          0.75         0.75          0.79         0.76          0.79            0.04           0.53              0.36        0.43
employer‐provided insurance data missing                                       0.08          0.06         0.05          0.07         0.06          0.09            0.43           0.29              0.11        0.09
had public insurance                                                           0.08          0.10         0.09          0.07         0.10          0.09            0.77           0.51              0.67        0.93
public insurance data missing                                                  0.06          0.05         0.03          0.04         0.04          0.06            0.94           0.21              0.26        0.08
share of family members that grew up in a city                                 0.26          0.28         0.27          0.19         0.27          0.23            0.18           0.59              0.15        0.09
share of family members that grew up in a suburb                               0.09          0.06         0.09          0.06         0.09          0.09            0.76           0.09              0.17        0.44
share of family members that grew up in a town                                 0.42          0.41         0.40          0.55         0.39          0.45            0.32           0.79              0.33        0.03
background info missing                                                        0.01          0.01         0.00          0.00         0.02          0.02            0.02           0.54              0.13        0.04
share of family members with a regular doctor                                  0.96          0.95         0.95          0.99         0.94          0.98            0.36           0.63              0.30        0.33
doctor data missing                                                            0.32          0.32         0.32          0.29         0.31          0.32            0.88           0.80              0.88        0.01
share of family members that had a medical exam in previous year               0.51          0.53         0.50          0.61         0.49          0.53            0.58           0.72              0.95        0.19
medical exam data missing                                                      0.01          0.03         0.02          0.00         0.01          0.02            0.10           0.15              0.52        0.12
log prior year medical expenditures                                            4.13          3.89         4.24          4.23         4.10          4.24            0.39           0.17              0.06        0.47
medical expenditures data missing                                              0.20          0.22         0.18          0.12         0.22          0.21            0.69           0.56              0.79        0.24
share of family members with any routine dental care last year                 0.73          0.68         0.69          0.81         0.74          0.70            0.31           0.27              0.76        0.19
routine dental care data missing                                               0.15          0.16         0.16          0.19         0.21          0.15            0.96           0.86              0.83        0.21
share of family members wth any special dental care last year                  0.61          0.55         0.63          0.68         0.57          0.61            0.87           0.19              0.17        0.27
special dental care data missing                                               0.15          0.16         0.16          0.19         0.21          0.15            0.96           0.86              0.83        0.21
Joint F‐test                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.02
N (families assigned)                                                           564          170           209           77           495          372

Table Notes: The dependent variable is given in the left hand column. Regressions are run at the family level and include site by contact month fixed effects (see Table 1 for definition and discussion of "contact
month"). Coefficients are plan averages adjusted for the site by contact month fixed effects (i.e. coefficients on plan dummies from regressions without a constant). Site by contact month dummy variables are
demeaned so that the coefficients reflect estimates for the "average" site‐month mix. Data on refusals at the Dayton site were lost, so regressions exclude Dayton observations (1,137 (20%) of all enrollees).
Variables are parameterized as in the Finite Selection Model; for details, see Newhouse et al. (1993, Appendix B).
Table A4
Covariate Balance at Completion

                                                                                                                       Individual                                                 p‐values
                                                            Free Care      25% Coins Mixed Coins 50% Coins                            95% Coins
                                                                                                                       Deductible                      FC vs. 95%       FC vs. 25%     25% vs. 95%       all equal

Panel A: Pre‐Experiment Utilization Variables
hospitalized in year before expt                               0.11           0.10           0.10           0.08          0.11           0.09              0.42            0.73              0.73           0.73
hospitalization data missing                                   0.03           0.02           0.01           0.02          0.02           0.02              0.08            0.03              0.56           0.15
had a regular doctor                                           0.92           0.93           0.92           0.93          0.91           0.91              0.61            0.83              0.55           0.92
doctor data missing                                            0.22           0.22           0.23           0.21          0.22           0.21              0.13            0.90              0.43           0.00
had a medical exam in year before expt                         0.50           0.53           0.45           0.53          0.43           0.49              0.54            0.38              0.20           0.02
medical exam data missing                                      0.04           0.02           0.04           0.02          0.03           0.04              0.94            0.22              0.36           0.57
num doc visits in year before expt                             4.98           4.35           4.82           3.96          5.15           4.45              0.09            0.10              0.77           0.03
doc visits data missing                                        0.19           0.17           0.16           0.16          0.19           0.19              0.91            0.31              0.39           0.59
log medcl expenditures in year before expt                     3.45           3.47           3.41           3.34          3.46           3.32              0.24            0.88              0.26           0.73
medical expenditures data missing                              0.38           0.39           0.33           0.32          0.38           0.39              0.48            0.76              0.81           0.17
any routine dental visits in year before expt                  0.73           0.70           0.71           0.78          0.71           0.71              0.71            0.53              0.76           0.72
routine dental visits data missing                             0.39           0.33           0.38           0.37          0.41           0.36              0.33            0.10              0.41           0.26
any nonroutine dental visits in year before expt               0.54           0.50           0.58           0.59          0.53           0.54              1.00            0.29              0.33           0.49
nonroutine dental visits data missing                          0.39           0.33           0.38           0.37          0.41           0.36              0.33            0.10              0.41           0.26
Joint F‐test                                                                                                                                                                                              < 0.0001

Panel B: Non‐Utilization‐Related Baseline Covariates
female                                                         0.51          0.51           0.53           0.52           0.54           0.52              0.49            1.00              0.58           0.58
age 6 to 17                                                    0.29          0.27           0.33           0.28           0.25           0.30              0.72            0.51              0.38           0.04
age 18 to 44                                                   0.42          0.45           0.44           0.44           0.46           0.43              0.39            0.07              0.33           0.13
age 45 +                                                       0.17          0.13           0.12           0.15           0.16           0.15              0.42            0.09              0.35           0.21
white                                                          0.85          0.82           0.85           0.87           0.85           0.81              0.05            0.29              0.57           0.24
race data missing                                              0.47          0.45           0.46           0.45           0.42           0.46              0.55            0.24              0.56           0.08
hs graduate                                                    0.21          0.23           0.24           0.22           0.25           0.21              0.82            0.40              0.56           0.13
education beyond hs                                            0.18          0.22           0.18           0.19           0.20           0.20              0.54            0.16              0.40           0.74
education data missing                                         0.01          0.01           0.00           0.01           0.01           0.01              0.63            0.46              0.31           0.08
grew up in a city                                              0.27          0.26           0.28           0.20           0.28           0.27              0.84            0.80              0.94           0.25
grew up in a suburb                                            0.11          0.10           0.10           0.12           0.11           0.11              0.79            0.52              0.69           0.93
grew up in a town                                              0.38          0.38           0.37           0.47           0.37           0.37              0.58            0.90              0.76           0.10
background data missing                                        0.40          0.40           0.42           0.39           0.37           0.41              0.78            0.97              0.85           0.37
log baseline family income                                     8.98          9.13           8.99           9.16           9.05           9.02              0.70            0.07              0.22           0.25
log baseline family income squared                             82.48         84.36          82.36          84.37          83.26          82.63             0.90            0.09              0.17           0.42
family income data missing                                     0.05          0.07           0.03           0.03           0.06           0.07              0.54            0.65              1.00           0.42
anyone in family working at baseline                           0.89          0.91           0.84           0.92           0.88           0.88              0.81            0.33              0.30           0.32
work data missing                                              0.01          0.01           0.01           0.00           0.01           0.00              0.02            0.29              0.77           0.05
insured at baseline                                            0.86          0.88           0.86           0.89           0.89           0.89              0.42            0.49              0.99           0.90
insurance data missing                                         0.06          0.03           0.03           0.03           0.04           0.05              0.34            0.02              0.14           0.05
employer‐provided insurance                                    0.59          0.58           0.58           0.64           0.62           0.59              0.92            0.72              0.79           0.90
employer‐provided insurance data missing                       0.27          0.24           0.24           0.25           0.25           0.27              0.92            0.01              0.03           0.09
private insurance                                              0.14          0.14           0.16           0.09           0.15           0.16              0.44            0.92              0.66           0.70
private insurance data missing                                 0.27          0.24           0.24           0.24           0.26           0.27              0.86            0.01              0.04           0.02
public insurance                                               0.09          0.08           0.07           0.08           0.07           0.07              0.46            0.59              0.88           0.93
public insurance data missing                                  0.05          0.03           0.03           0.03           0.04           0.05              0.43            0.02              0.13           0.08
excellent health at baseline                                   0.51          0.53           0.50           0.54           0.50           0.50              0.85            0.58              0.51           0.95
good health at baseline                                        0.38          0.37           0.42           0.35           0.40           0.40              0.53            0.66              0.38           0.66
health status data missing                                     0.05          0.03           0.03           0.04           0.04           0.05              0.42            0.04              0.19           0.17
experienced pain at baseline                                   0.16          0.16           0.17           0.15           0.16           0.17              0.78            0.67              0.53           0.95
pain data missing                                              0.05          0.04           0.03           0.04           0.04           0.05              0.41            0.17              0.46           0.36
worried about health at baseline                               0.21          0.19           0.23           0.18           0.21           0.19              0.31            0.52              0.87           0.56
worry data missing                                             0.05          0.03           0.03           0.04           0.04           0.05              0.41            0.04              0.19           0.16
Joint F‐test                                                                                                                                                                                              < 0.0001
Joint F‐test (both panels)                                                                                                                                                                                < 0.0001
N (number of individuals completing)                           1,799          596            450            350           1,119           958


Table Notes: The dependent variable is given in the left hand column. Regressions include all individuals who enrolled in the experiment and did not attrit. Coefficients are plan averages adjusted for the site by
start month fixed effects (i.e. coefficients on plan dummies from regressions without a constant).Covariates are measured at baseline. Because assignment to plans was random only conditional on site and start
month (Newhouse et al., 1993), all regressions include site by start month dummy variables. Site by start month dummy variables are demeaned so that the coefficients reflect estimates for the "average" site‐
month mix. Education measures are available only for individuals age 18 or older. Log income and log medical expenditures are defined as log(variable + 1) to accommodate values of zero.
Table A5
Sensitivity of Results to Extreme Worst‐Case Bounds

                                                          Total Spending                     Inpatient Spending                   Outpatient Spending
                                               Share with                    OLS           Share with                     Share with                  OLS
                                                  Any      OLS (Levels)     (Logs)            Any      OLS (Levels)          Any     OLS (Levels)    (Logs)
                                                  (1)           (2)           (3)              (4)         (5)               (6)          (7)          (8)

Panel A: 95% coinsurance plan vs. free care (N = 10,564)
                                                ‐0.170          ‐845         ‐1.381           ‐0.024        ‐217             ‐0.171        ‐629         ‐1.361
 (1) Baseline specification (from Table 2)
                                               (0.015)         (119)        (0.096)          (0.007)        (91)            (0.016)        (50)        (0.093)
      Extreme bounds + adjustment for             0.022         939          0.084                                           0.021         372          ‐0.020
(2)                                                                                            NA            NA
      underreporting                             (0.018)       (159)        (0.129)                                         (0.018)        (81)        (0.121)
Panel B: 25% coinsurance plan vs. free care (N = 9,201)
                                                 ‐0.079         ‐648         ‐0.747           ‐0.022         ‐229            ‐0.078        ‐420         ‐0.719
 (1) Baseline specification (from Table 2)
                                                (0.015)        (152)        (0.095)          (0.009)        (116)           (0.015)        (62)        (0.093)
      Extreme bounds + adjustment for              0.03         524           0.20                                            0.03         219           0.14
(2)                                                                                            NA            NA
      underreporting                             (0.017)       (177)        (0.117)                                          (0.02)        (83)         (0.11)
Panel C: 95% coinsurance plan vs. 25% coinsurance plan (N = 6,085)
                                              ‐0.091        ‐197             ‐0.633           ‐0.002          12             ‐0.093        ‐209         ‐0.641
 (1) Baseline specification (from Table 2)
                                             (0.020)       (160)            (0.120)          (0.009)        (122)           (0.020)         (1)        (0.117)
      Extreme bounds + adjustment for             0.167        1745          1.217                                           0.165         893          1.073
(2)                                                                                            NA            NA
      underreporting                             (0.026)       (186)        (0.168)                                         (0.027)        (91)        (0.159)

Table Notes: Table reports coefficients on plan dummies; the ommitted category is the free care plan. The dependent variable is given in the column
headings. Standard errors are in parentheses below the coefficients. Standard errors are clustered on familiy. Because assignment to plans was random only
conditional on site and start month (Newhouse et al., 1993), all regressions include site by start month dummy variables, as well as year fixed effects to adjust
for inflation. Log variables are defined as log(var + 1) to accomodate zero values. Level variables are adjusted for inflation using the CPI‐U (and are reported
in 2011 dollars). "Extreme bounds" are calculated following Manski (1990). Specifically, for each year in which an individual should have been but was not
present in the experiment (due to refusal or attrition), we impute the values that would minimize the treatment effect. For binary outcomes (measures of
whether the individual has any spending), we impute zeros for individuals absent from the lower cost sharing plans and ones for individuals absent from the
higher cost sharing plans. For continuous outcomes (e.g., total spending), we impute zeros for individuals absent from the lower cost sharing plans and the
95th percentile of the sample distribution for individuals not participating in the higher cost sharing plans. While it is theoretically possible that non‐
participants in the higher cost‐sharing plans could have had even higher (average) spending than the 95th percentile, it seems extremely unlikely, and so we
view this approach as providing worst case bounds for the continuous as well as the binary outcomes. Adjustment for under‐reporting is described in text.
