NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CATCHING UP AND FALLING BEHIND
Nancy L. Stokey
Working Paper 18654
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18654

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012

I am grateful to Emilio Espino, Peter Klenow, Robert Lucas, Juan Pablo Nicolini, Chris Phelan, Robert
Tamura, and Alwyn Young for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Nancy L. Stokey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Catching Up and Falling Behind
Nancy L. Stokey
NBER Working Paper No. 18654
December 2012
JEL No. O38,O40
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the interaction between technology, a publicly available input that flows in from
abroad, and human capital, a private input that is accumulated domestically, as the twin engines of
growth in a developing economy. The model displays two types of long run behavior, depending on
policies and initial conditions. One is sustained growth, where the economy keeps pace with the technology
frontier. The other is stagnation, where the economy converges to a minimal technology level that
is independent of the world frontier.
In a calibrated version of the model, transition paths after a policy change can display rapid growth,
as in modern growth 'miracles.' In these economies policies that promote technology inflows are much
more effective than subsidies to human capital accumulation in accelerating growth. A policy reversal
produces a 'lost decade,' a period of slow growth that permanently reduces the level of income and
consumption.

Nancy L. Stokey
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
nstokey@uchicago.edu

This paper develops a model of growth that can accommodate the enormous
diﬀerences in observed outcomes across countries and over time: periods of rapid
growth as less developed countries catch up to the income levels of those at the
frontier, long periods of sustained growth in developed countries, and substantial
periods of decline in countries that at one time seemed to be catching up. The
sources of growth are technology, which flows in from abroad, and human capital,
which is accumulated domestically. The key feature of the model is the interaction
between these two forces.
Human capital is modeled here as a private input into production, accumulated
using the agent’s own time (current human capital) and the local technology as inputs. Thus, improvements in the local technology aﬀect human capital accumulation
directly, by increasing the productivity of time spent in that activity. Improvements
in the local technology also raise the local wage, increasing both the benefits and
costs of time spent accumulating human capital. If the former outweigh the latter,
human capital accumulation is stimulated through this channel as well.
In the reverse direction, human capital aﬀects the inflow rate of technology, a
public input into production. This channel represents many specific mechanisms. For
example, better educated entrepreneurs and managers are better able to identify new
products and processes that are suitable for the local market. In addition, a better
educated workforce makes a wider range of new products and processes viable for local
production, an important consideration for both domestic entrepreneurs interested in
producing locally and foreign multinationals seeking attractive destinations for direct
investment. Because local human capital has this positive external eﬀect, public
subsidies to its accumulation are warranted, and here they can aﬀect the qualitative
behavior of the economy in the long run.
The framework here shares several features with the one in Parente and Prescott
(1994), including a world technology frontier that grows at a constant rate and “bar2

riers” that impede the inflow of new technologies into particular countries. The local
technology is modeled here as a pure public good, with the rate of technology inflow
governed by three factors: (i) the domestic technology gap, relative to a world frontier,
(ii) the domestic human capital stock, also relative to the world frontier technology,
and (iii) the domestic barrier. The growth rate of the local technology is an increasing function of the technology gap, reflecting the fact that a larger pool of untapped
ideas oﬀers more opportunities for the adopting country. As noted above, it is also
increasing in local human capital, reflecting the role of education in enhancing the
ability to absorb new ideas. Finally, the barrier reflects tariﬀs, internal taxes, capital
controls, currency controls, or any other policy measures that retard the inflow of
ideas and technologies.
For fixed parameter values, the model displays two types of long run behavior,
depending on the policies in place and the initial conditions. If the barrier to technology inflows is low, the subsidy to human capital accumulation is high, and the initial
levels for the local technology and local human capital are not too far below the frontier, the economy displays sustained growth in the long run. In this region of policy
space, and for suitable initial conditions, higher barriers and lower subsidies do not
aﬀect the long-run growth rate, which is equal to growth rate of the frontier technology. They do, however, imply slower convergence to the economy’s balanced growth
path (BGP), wider long-run gaps between the local technology and the frontier, and
lower levels for capital stocks, output and consumption along the BGP.
Thus, the model predicts that high- and middle-income countries can, over long
periods, grow at the same rate as the world frontier. In these countries the relative
gap between the local technology and the world frontier is constant in the long run,
and not too large.
Alternatively, if the technology barrier is suﬃciently high, the subsidy to human
capital accumulation is suﬃciently low, or some combination, balanced growth is not
3

possible. Instead, the economy stagnates in the long run. An economy with policies in
this region converges to a minimal technology level that is independent of the world
frontier, and a human capital level that depends on the local technology and the local
subsidy. For suﬃciently low initial levels of the local technology and human capital,
the economy converges to the stagnation steady state, even for policy parameters that
permit balanced growth for more favorable initial conditions.
Thus, low-income countries–those with large technology gaps–cannot display
modest, sustained growth, as middle- and high-income countries can. They can adopt
policies that trigger a transition to a BGP, or they can stagnate, falling ever farther
behind the frontier. Moreover, economies that enjoyed technology inflows in the past
can experience technological regress if they raise their barriers: local TFP and per
capita income decline during the transition to a stagnation steady state.
In the model here two policy parameters aﬀect the economy’s performance, the
barrier to technology inflows and the subsidy to human capital accumulation. Although both can be used to speed up transitional growth, simulations suggest that
stimulating technology inflows is a more powerful tool. The reasons for this are
twofold. First, human capital accumulation takes resources away from production,
reducing output in the short run. In addition, for reasonable model parameters,
human capital accumulation is necessarily slow. Thus, while subsides to its accumulation eventually lead to faster technology inflows and higher productivity, the process
is prolonged. Policies that enhance technology inflows increase output immediately.
They also increase the returns to human (and physical) capital, thus stimulating
further investment and growth in the long run.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 discusses evidence on the
importance of technology inflows as a source of growth. It also documents the fact
that many countries are not enjoying these inflows, instead falling ever further behind
the world frontier. In section 2 the model is described, in section 3 the BGPs and
4

stagnation steady states are characterized, and in section 4 their stability is discussed.
Sections 5 and 6 describe the baseline calibration and computational results. Section 7
provides sensitivity analysis for parameters about which there is little direct evidence,
and section 8 concludes.
1. EVIDENCE ON THE SOURCES OF GROWTH
Five types of evidence point to the conclusion that diﬀerences in technology are
critical for explaining diﬀerences in income levels over time and across economies.
Collectively, they make a strong case that developed economies share a common,
growing ‘frontier’ technology, and that less developed economies grow rapidly by
tapping into that world technology.1
First, most growth accounting exercises for individual developed countries, starting with those in Solow (1957) and Denison (1974), attribute a large share of the
increase in output per worker to an increase in total factor productivity (TFP). Although measured TFP in these exercises, the Solow residual, surely includes the
influence of other (omitted) variables, the search for those missing factors has been
extensive, covering a multitude of potential explanatory variables, many countries,
many time periods, and many years of eﬀort. It is diﬃcult to avoid the conclusion that technical change is a major ingredient. Similarly, Klenow (1998) find that
cross-industry data for U.S. manufacturing supports the view that nonrival ideas–
technologies–are important compared with (rival) human capital. Studies like Jorgenson, Gollop and Fraumeni (1987), Bowlus and Robinson (2012), and others that
succeed in substantially reducing the Solow residual do so by introducing quality
adjustments to physical capital or human capital or both. Arguably these quality
adjustments represent technical change, albeit in a diﬀerent form.
1

See Prescott (1997) and Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare (2005) for further evidence supporting

this conclusion.

5

Second, development accounting exercises using cross-country data arrive at a
similar conclusion, finding that diﬀerences in physical and human capital explain only
a modest portion of the diﬀerences in income levels across countries. For example,
Hall and Jones (1999) find that of the 35-fold diﬀerence in GDP per worker between
the richest and poorest countries, measured inputs–physical and human capital per
worker–account for 4.5-fold, while diﬀerences in TFP–the residual–accounts for
7.7-fold. Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare (1997b) arrive at a similar conclusion.
To be sure, the cross-country studies have a number of limitations. Few countries have data on hours, so output is measured per worker rather than per manhour.
Human capital is measured as average years of education in the population, with at
best a rough adjustment for educational quality.2 No adjustment is made for diﬀerences in educational attainment in the workforce and in the population as a whole,
diﬀerences which are probably greater in countries with lower average attainment.
Nor is any adjustment made for other aspects of human capital, such as health. And
as in growth accounting exercises, the figure for TFP is a residual, so it is surely
biased upward. Nevertheless, the role allocated to technology is large enough to absorb a substantial amount of downward revision and survive as a key determinant of
cross-country diﬀerences.
A third piece of evidence is Baumol’s (1986) study of the OECD countries. Although criticized on methodological grounds (see DeLong, 1988, and Baumol and
Wolﬀ, 1988), the data nevertheless convey an important message: the OECD countries (and a few more) seem to share common technologies. It is hard to explain in
any other way the harmony over many decades in both their income levels and growth
rates. Moreover, as Prescott (2002, 2004) and Ragan (2006) have shown, much of the
2

Even if included, diﬀerences in educational quality might have a modest impact, however. Hen-

dricks (2002) reports that many studies find that immigrants’ earnings are within 25% of earnings
of native-born workers with the same age, sex, and educational attainment.

6

persistent diﬀerences in income levels can be explained by diﬀerences in fiscal policy
that aﬀect work incentives.
A fourth piece of evidence for the importance of technology comes from data on
“late bloomers.” As first noted by Gerschenkron (1962), economies that develop later
have an advantage over the early starters exactly because they can adopt technologies,
methods of organization, and so on developed by the leaders. Followers can learn from
the successes of their predecessors and avoid their mistakes. Parente and Prescott’s
(1994, 2000) evidence on doubling times makes this point systematically. Figure 1
reproduces their scatter plot, updated to include data through 2008. Each point in
this figure represents one of the 61 countries that had reached a per capita GDP of
$4000 by 2008. On the horizontal axis is the year that the country first reached $2000,
and on the vertical axis is the number of years required to first reach $4000.
As Figure 1 shows, there is a strong downward trend: countries that arrived at
the $2000 figure later doubled their incomes more quickly. The later developers seem
to have enjoyed the advantage of fishing from a richer pool of ideas, ideas provided
by advances in world technology.3 Lucas (2009), Ramondo (2009), Hahn (2010) and
many others find an important role for international trade in stimulating such inflows.4
A fifth and final piece of evidence supporting the importance of technology is the
occurrence, infrequently, of “growth miracles.” The term is far from precise, and a
stringent criterion should be used in classifying countries as such, since growth rates
3

The data used here are from Maddison (2010), with oil producers and countries with population

under one million in 1960 omitted. Figure 1 has two biases, which should be noted. First, there are
eight countries for which the first observation is in 1950, and it exceeds $2000. Some of these points
should be shifted to the left, which would strengthen the downward trend. Second, among countries
that reached the $2000 figure by the year 2000, the slow growers have not yet reached $4000. The
dotted line indicates a region that by construction is empty. Ignoring the pool of countries that in
the future will occupy this space biases the impression in favor of the ‘backwardness’ hypothesis.
4

See Acemoglu and Zilibotti (2001) for a contrarian view.

7

in developing countries show little persistence from one decade to the next. Indeed,
mean reversion in income levels following a financial crisis or similar event implies
that an especially bad decade in terms of growth rates is likely to be followed by a
good one. But recovery from a disaster is not a miracle.
Nevertheless, over the period 1950-2006 twelve countries (i) enjoyed at least one
20-year episode where average per capita GDP growth exceeded 5%, and (ii) in 2006
had GDP per capita that was at least 45% of the U.S. This group has five members
in Europe (Germany, Italy, Greece, Portugal, and Spain), five in east Asia (Japan,
Taiwan, Hong Kong, Singapore, and Korea), and two others (Israel and Puerto Rico).
The jury is still out on several others candidates: China, Thailand, Malaysia, and
Botswana have met criterion (i) but not (yet) accomplished (ii).5
Although each of these five sources of evidence has individual weaknesses, taken
together they make a strong case for the importance of international technology
spillovers in keeping income levels loosely tied together in the developed countries,
and occasionally allowing a less developed country to enjoy a growth spurt during
which it catches up to the more developed group.
Not all countries succeed in tapping into the global technology pool, however.
Figure 2 shows the world pattern of catching up and falling behind, with the U.S.
taken as the benchmark for growth. It plots per capita GDP relative to the U.S. in
2008, against per capita GDP relative to the U.S. in 1960, for 104 countries. Countries
that are above the 45o line have gained ground over that 48-year period, and those
below it have lost ground. It is striking how few have gained. The geographic pattern
of gains and losses is striking as well. The countries that are catching up are almost
exclusively European (plus Israel) and East Asian. With only a few exceptions,
5

It is sobering to see how many countries enjoyed 20-year miracles, yet gave up all their (relative)

gains or even lost ground over the longer period. Among countries in this groups are Bulgaria,
Yugoslavia, Jamaica, North Korea, Iran, Gabon, Libya, and Swaziland.

8

countries in Latin America, Africa, and South Asia have fallen behind.
Figure 3 shows 69 of the poorest countries, those in Asia and Africa, in more
detail. The six Asian miracles (Israel, Japan, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Singapore, and
Korea) are omitted, since they significantly alter the scale. Here the plot shows per
capita GDP in 2008 against per capita GDP in 1960, both in levels. The rays from
the origin correspond to various average growth rates. Keeping pace with the U.S.
over this period requires a growth rate of 2%. The number of countries that have
gained ground relative to the U.S. (points above the 2% growth line) is modest, while
the number that have fallen behind (points below the line) is much larger. A shocking
number, mostly in Africa, have suﬀered negative growth over the whole period.
The model developed below focuses on technology inflows as the only source of
sustained growth. Other factors are neglected, although some are clearly important.
For example, it is well documented that in most developing economies, TFP in
agriculture is substantially lower than it is in the non-agricultural sector.6 Thus, an
important component of growth in almost every fast-growing economy has been the
shift of labor out of agriculture and into other occupations. The eﬀect of this shift
on aggregate TFP, which is significant, cannot be captured in a one-sector model.
More recently, detailed data for manufacturing has allowed similar estimates for
the gains from re-allocation across firms within that single sector. Such misallocation
can result from financial market frictions, from frictions that impede labor mobility,
or from taxes (or other policies) that distort factor prices. For China, Hsieh and
Klenow (2009) find that improvements in allocative eﬃciency contributed about 1/3
of the 6.2% TFP growth in manufacturing over the period 1993-2004.
Although this gain in Chinese manufacturing is substantial, it is a modest part of
overall TFP growth in China–in all sectors–over that period. In addition, evidence
6

See Caselli (2005) for recent evidence that TFP diﬀerences across countries are much greater in

agriculture than they are in the non-agricultural sector.

9

from other countries gives reallocation a smaller role. Indeed, Hsieh and Klenow find
that in India allocative eﬃciency declined over the same period, although per capita
income grew. Similarly, Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta (2008) find that
in the two countries–Slovenia and Hungary–for which they have time series, most
of the (substantial) TFP gains those countries enjoyed during the 1990s came from
other sources: improvements in allocative eﬃciency played a minor role. And most
importantly, TFP gains from resource reallocation are one-time gains, not a recipe
for sustained growth.7
The model here is silent about the source of advances in the technology frontier,
which are taken as exogenous. Thus, it is complementary to the large body of work
looking at investments in R&D, learning-by-doing, and other factors that aﬀect the
pace of innovation at the frontier. Nor does it say anything about the societal factors
that lead countries to develop institutions or adopt policies that stimulate growth, by
stimulating technology inflows, encouraging factor accumulation, and so on. Thus,
it is also complementary to the work of Acemoglu, Johnson, and Simon (2001, 2002,
2005) and others, that looks at the country characteristics associated with economic
success, without specifying the more proximate mechanism.
7

In addition, it is not clear what the standard for allocative eﬃciency should be in a fast-growing

economy. Restuccia and Rogerson (2008) develop a model with entry, exit, and fixed costs that
produces a non-degenerate distribution of productivity across firms, even in steady state. Their
model has the property that the stationary distribution across firms is sensitive to the fixed cost of
staying in business and the distribution of productivity draws for potential entrants. There is no
direct evidence for either of these important components, although they can be calibrated to any
observed distribution. Thus, it is not clear if diﬀerences across countries reflect distortions that aﬀect
the allocation of factors, or if they represent diﬀerences in fundamentals, especially in the ‘pool’ of
technologies that new entrants are drawing from. In particular, the distribution of productivities for
new entrants might be quite diﬀerent in a young, fast-growing economy like China and a mature,
slow-growing economy like the U.S.

10

2. THE MODEL
The representative household has preferences over intertemporal consumption
streams. It allocates its time between work and human capital accumulation, and its
income between consumption and savings, taking as given the paths for wages, interest
rates, and the local technology, as well as the subsidy to human capital accumulation.
The representative firm operates a constant-returns-to-scale (CRS) technology, taking
as given the path for local TFP. It hires capital and labor, paying them their marginal
products. The government makes one-time choices about two policy parameters, the
barrier to technology inflows and the subsidy to human capital accumulation. It
finances the subsidy with a lump sum tax, maintaining budget balance at all times.
Technology inflows depend on the average human capital level, as well as the barrier.
In this section we will first describe the technology inflows in more detail, and then
turn to the household’s and firm’s decisions.
A. The local technology
The model of technology is a variant of the diﬀusion model first put forward
in Nelson and Phelps (1966) and subsequently developed elsewhere in many specific
forms.8 There is a frontier (world) technology  () that grows at a constant, exogenously given rate,
̇ () =  ()

(1)

where   0 In addition, each country  has a local technology  () Growth in  ()
is described by
̇
= 0

8

if  =




and

0  
 

µ
¶


1−
  


(2)

See Benhabib and Spiegel (2005) for an excellent discussion of the long-run dynamics of various

versions.

11

0  
̇
=

 

µ
¶

1−
−  


otherwise,

where 
 is a lower bound on the local technology,  is a policy parameter,   is
average human capital, and   0 is the depreciation rate for technology.
The technology floor 
 allows the economy to have a ‘stagnation’ steady state
with a constant technology. Above that floor, technology growth is proportional to
the ratio    of local human capital to the frontier technology, and to the gap
(1 −   ) between the local technology and the frontier. The former measures the
capacity of the economy to absorb technologies near the frontier, while the latter
measures the pool of technologies that have not yet been adopted. A higher value for
the frontier technology  thus has two eﬀects. It widens the technology gap, which
tends to speed up growth, but also reduces the absorption capacity, which tends to
retard growth. The first eﬀect dominates if the ratio   is high and the second if
  is low, resulting in a logistic form.9
As in Parente and Prescott (1994), the barrier  ≥ 1 can be interpreted as an
amalgam of policies that impede access to or adoption of new ideas, or reduce the
profitability of adoption. For example, it might represent impediments to international trade that reduce contact with new technologies, taxes on capital equipment
that is needed to implement new technologies, poor infrastructure for electric power
or transportation, or civil conflict that impedes the cross-border flow of people and
ideas. Notice that because of depreciation, technological regress is possible. Thus, an
increase in the barrier can lead to the abandonment of once-used technologies.
9

Benhabib and Spiegel (2005, Table 2) find that cross-country evidence on the rate of TFP

growth supports the logistic form: countries with very low TFP also have slower TFP growth. Their
evidence also seems to support the inclusion of a depreciation term.

12

B. Households and firms
Next consider the decisions of households and firms. Households accumulate
physical capital, which they rent to firms, and in addition each household is endowed
with one unit of time (a flow), which it allocates between human capital accumulation
and goods production. Investment in human capital uses the household’s own time
and human capital  as inputs, as well as the local technology. Economy-wide
average human capital,   , may also play a role. In particular,
̇ () = 0 [ () ()]  ()   ()1−− −   ()

(3)

where  is time allocated to human capital accumulation,   0 is the depreciation
rate for human capital, and    0  +  ≤ 1. This technology has constant
¡
¢
returns to scale jointly in the stocks        which permits sustained growth.
The restriction   0 rules out sustained growth in the absence of technology diﬀusion,

and the restriction   1 implies an Inada condition as  → 0, so the time allocated
to human capital accumulation is always strictly positive. Average human capital  
plays a role if  +   1, but this channel may be absent.
The technology for producing eﬀective labor has a similar form. Specifically, the
household’s eﬀective labor supply is
 () = [1 −  ()]  ()  ()   ()1−− 

(4)

where (1 −  ) is time allocated to goods production, and    0  +  ≤ 1. Here
the time input enters linearly, but an Inada condition on utility insures that time
allocated to production is always strictly positive. Here, too, average human capital
  may play a role, as in Lucas (1988).
The technology for goods production is Cobb-Douglas, with physical capital 
and eﬀective labor  as inputs,

 =  1−

13

so factor returns are
µ


 () = 


¶−1

̂ () ≡ (1 − )

µ


¶




(5)


where ̂ is the return to a unit of eﬀective labor. Hence the wage for a worker with
human capital  is
1−−

 (  ) = ̂    



(6)

Average human capital has a positive external eﬀect through its impact on technology inflows and, possibly, on human capital accumulation and goods production as
well. Hence there is a case for public subsidies to its accumulation. To limit the policy to one parameter, the subsidy is assumed to have the following form. Time spent
investing in human capital is subsidized at the rate   (   ), where  ∈ [0 1) is the
policy variable and   is average human capital in the economy. Thus, the subsidy
is a fraction of the current average wage, a form that permits balanced growth. The
subsidy is financed with a lump sum tax   and the government’s budget is balanced
at all dates, so
 () =     (   )

 ≥ 0

(7)

where  is the average time allocated to human capital accumulation.
Thus, the household’s budget constraint is
̇ () = (1 −  )  (  ) +    (   ) + ( −  )  −  −  

(8)

where  is consumption,  is the capital stock, and   0 is the depreciation rate
for physical capital. Households have constant elasticity preferences, with parameters
   0 Hence the household’s problem is
Z ∞
 1− ()

s.t. (3) and (8),
− 
max ∞
{ () ()}=0 0
1−
©
ª
given   (0  0 )  and  ()   ()  ()  (· )  ()  ≥ 0 
14

(9)

C. Competitive equilibrium
A competitive equilibrium requires utility maximization by households, profit
maximization by firms, and budget balance for the government. In addition, the law
of motion for the local technology must hold.
Definition: Given the policy parameters  and  and initial values for the state
©
variables 0  0  0  and 0 , a competitive equilibrium consists of  ()  ()   ()
 ()  ()  ()  ()  (· )  ()  ≥ 0} with the property that:
©
ª
i. {       } solves (9), given   (0  0 )  and           ;
ii. {   } satisfies (5) and (6), and { } satisfies (7);
©
ª
iii. { } satisfies (2) and   () =  ()  ≥ 0 

The system of equations characterizing the equilibrium is in the Appendix.
Two types of behavior are possible in the long run. If the barrier  is low enough
and/or the subsidy  is high enough, balanced growth is possible. Specifically, if the
policy parameters (   ) lie inside a certain set, the economy has two balanced
growth paths (BGPs), on which the time allocation  is constant and the variables
(       ) all grow at the rate  On BGPs, the ratios     and so on
depend on  and  .
Balanced growth is not the only possibility, however. For any policy parameters
(   ) the economy has a unique stagnation steady state (SS) with no growth. In




a SS, the local technology is 
  and the variables (       ) are constant.

Their levels depend on the subsidy   but not on the barrier   The next section
describes the BGPs and stagnation SS in more detail. Before proceeding, however,
it is useful to see how growth accounting and development accounting work in this
setup.

15

D. Growth and development accounting
Consider a world with many economies,  = 1 2  . In each economy  output
per capita at any date  is
©
ª1−

 () =  () [1 −  ()]  ()1−  ()

Assume that at each date, any individual is engaged in only one activity, and hours
per worker are the same over time and across countries. Then all diﬀerences in –in
the allocation of time between production and human capital accumulation–take the
form of diﬀerences in labor force participation. Let
̂ () ≡

 ()
1 −  ()

and

̂ () ≡

 ()
1 −  ()

denote output and capital per worker, and note that human capital  is already so
measured. Then output per worker can be written three ways,
£
¤1−

̂ () = ̂ ()  ()1−  ()
!(1−)
Ã
̂ ()
 ()1−  () 
̂ () =
̂ ()
!(1−) Ã
!(1−)
Ã
 ()
̂ ()
 ()
̂ () =
̂ ()
̂ ()

(10)

Suppose that  and  are known, and that  is observable, as well as ̂ and
̂  The first equation in (10) is the standard basis for a growth accounting exercise,
as in Solow (1957); the second is the version used for the development accounting
exercises in Hall and Jones (1999), Hendricks (2002), and elsewhere; and the third is
a variation suitable for the model here. In each case the technology level  is treated
as a residual.
First consider a single economy. A growth accounting exercise based on the first
line in (10) in general attributes growth in output per worker to growth in all three
16

inputs, ̂   and   and along a BGP–where all four variables grow at a common,
constant rate–the shares are  (1 − ) (1 − )  and  (1 − ) 
An accounting exercise based on the second line attributes some growth to physical capital only if the ratio ̂ ̂ is growing. The rationale for using the ratio is that
growth in  or  induces growth in ̂ , by raising its return. Here the accounting
exercise attributes to growth in capital only increases in excess of those prompted by
growth in eﬀective labor. Along a BGP ̂ ̂ is constant, and the exercise attributes
all growth to  and   with shares (1 − ) and 
The third line applies the same logic to human capital, since growth in  induces
growth in  as well as   Since  ̂ is also constant along a BGP, here the
accounting exercise attributes all growth on a BGP to the residual  
The same logic applies in a development accounting exercise involving many
countries. Diﬀerences across countries in capital taxes, public support to education,
and other policies lead to diﬀerences in the ratios ̂ ̂ and  ̂  so a development
accounting exercise using any of the three versions attributes some diﬀerences in
labor productivity to diﬀerences in physical and human capital. But the second line
attributes to physical capital–and the third to both types of capital–only diﬀerences
in excess of those induced by changes in the supplies of the complementary factor(s),
 and  in the second line and  in the third.
3. BALANCED GROWTH PATHS AND STEADY STATES
In this section the BGPs for growing economies and the SS for an economy that
stagnates are characterized. It is convenient to analyze BGPs in terms of variables
that are normalized by the world technology,     and so on, while it is
convenient to analyze the SS in terms of the levels     and so on. It will be
important to keep this in mind in the next section, where transitions are discussed.

17

A. BGPs for economies that grow
For convenience drop the country subscript. It is easy to show that along a BGP
the variables    , and  grow at the same rate  as the frontier technology,
the time allocation   0 is constant, the factor returns  and ̂ are constant, the
average wage per manhour () grows at the rate  and the costate variables Λ
and Λ for the household’s problem grow at the rate −
Thus, to study growing economies it is convenient to define the normalized variables
()

 ()
()
() ≡

 ()

()

 ()
()

() ≡
 ()

Λ ()
 − ()
Λ ()
 () ≡ − 
 ()

() ≡

() ≡

 () ≡

(11)
all 

Using the fact that in equilibrium  =  the equilibrium conditions can then be
written as
 0  −1 = (1 − )  ̂

³  ´−




(12)

− =  
¶
³ ´ µ
 1−
̇
 

1+
=  +  +  − 0 


1− 
̇

̇

̇

̇


=  +  +  − 
= 0  

³  ´


= −1 −
=

−  − 


−  − 


0
 (1 − ) −  − 


where
 ≡  =  (1 − )  1− 
 = −1 

̂ = (1 − )  
18

(13)

The transversality conditions hold if and only if   (1 − )  which insures that the
discounted value of lifetime utility is finite.
Let     and so on denote the constant values for the normalized variables
along the BGP. As usual, the interest rate is
 ≡  −  =  + 
so the transversality condition implies that the interest rate exceeds the growth rate,
   Also as usual, the input ratio  is determined by the rate of return condition
¡ ¢−1
 
=  =  +  

The return to eﬀective labor ̂ then depends on   Thus, all economies on BGPs
have the same growth rate  and interest rate   which do not depend on the policy
parameters ( ) 
The time allocated to human capital accumulation on a BGP is determined by
combining the third and fifth equations in (12) to get
µ
∙
¶¸−1
1 −   + 

 = 1+
−


 + 

(14)

Since    and   1 the second term in brackets is positive and   ∈ (0 1) 

Notice that   is increasing in the subsidy  with  → 1 as  → 1 It is also

increasing in  and  the elasticities for human capital in the two technologies. A
higher value for  increases the sensitivity of the wage rate () to private human
capital, increasing the incentives to invest, while a higher value for  reduces the force
of diminishing returns in time allocated to human capital accumulation. Finally, 
is increasing  and  since along a BGP investment must oﬀset depreciation and 
must keep pace with 
The ratio of technology to human capital is then determined by the fifth equation
in (12),





≡  =


µ

 + 
0 (  )

19

¶1



(15)

Hence this ratio is decreasing in the subsidy  Note that  and   do not depend
on the barrier 
The last equation in (12) then implies that a BGP level for the relative technology
 , if any exists, satisfies the quadratic
¡
¢

 1 −  = ( +  )   
0

(16)

and the following result is immediate.
Proposition 1: If

( +  )

4 
1
 
0


(17)

(16) has two solutions. These solutions are symmetric around the value 1/2, and there
is a BGP corresponding to each. If (17) holds with equality, (16) has one solution,
and the unique BGP has  = 12 If the inequality in (17) is reversed, no BGP
exists.
Thus, a necessary and suﬃcient for the existence of BGPs is that 1 which
measures “openness,” exceed a threshold that depends–through   –on . The
threshold for 1 increases as  falls, as shown in Figure 4a, creating two regions
in the space of policy parameters. Above the threshold–for high values of 1 and
–the economy has two BGPs, and below the threshold there is no BGP.

If (17) holds, call the solutions 
 and   with

0  
 

1
 
  1
2

Figure 4b displays the solutions to (16) as functions of 1 for three values of the
subsidy  and fixed values for the model parameters. For fixed , an increase in 1
moves both solutions away from the value 1/2 For fixed 1 an increase in  has
the same eﬀect. For (1 ) below the threshold in Figure 4a, no BGP exists.
Notice that the higher solution 
 has the expected comparative statics–it
increases with openness 1 and with the subsidy –while the lower solution 

20


has the opposite pattern. As we will see below, 
 is stable and  is not. Therefore,

since 
 ∈ [12 1]  this model produces BGP productivity (and income) ratios of no
more than two across growing economies. Poor economies cannot grow along BGPs,
in parallel with richer ones.10
In addition, since  and   do not vary with , and only the higher solutions
to (16) are stable, looking across economies with similar education policies  and all
on BGPs, those with higher barriers  lag farther behind the frontier, but in all other
respects are similar. Stated a little diﬀerently, an economy with a higher barrier looks
like its neighbor with a lower one, but with a time lag.
B. Steady states for economies that stagnate
While BGPs exist only for policy parameters ( ) where (17) holds, every
economy has a stagnation SS. At this SS, the technology level, capital stocks, factor
returns, consumption, and time allocation are constant. Let         and so on
denote these levels.
Since consumption is constant, the SS interest rate is equal to the rate of time
preference,
 =  −  = 
The input ratio  and the return to eﬀective labor ̂ are then determined as before.
The steady state time allocation and input ratio, the analogs to (14) and (15), are




 
10

µ
∙
¶¸−1
1 −   + 
= 1+
−



¶1
µ


≡
=

 
0 ( )

(18)
(19)

Other factors, like taxes on labor income (which reduce labor supply) can also increase the spread

in incomes across growing economies. See Prescott (2002, 2004) and Ragan (2006) for models of this
type.

21

so they are like those on a BGP except that the interest rate is  and there is no
growth.
Notice that for two economies with the same education subsidy , more time is
allocated to human capital accumulation in the growing economy,      if and
only if
 + 
 + 


 + 

or
( − 1)   
If  is suﬃciently large, the low willingness to substitute intertemporally discourages
investment in the growing economy. For  = 2 and  =  as will be assumed in
the simulations here, the steady state time allocations are the same,   =   In this
case the growing economy has a higher ratio of technology to human capital,
¶1
µ
 + 
 
=
 1
 

4. TRANSITIONAL DYNAMICS
With three state variables,   and  and two costates, Λ and Λ (or
their normalized counterparts), the transitional dynamics are complicated. The more
interesting interactions involve technology and human capital, with physical capital
playing a less important role. Thus, for simplicity we will drop physical capital to
study transitions. Then  = 0 ̂ = 1 and  = 0 and  − takes the place of Λ 
Recall from Figure 4a that if the policy (1 ) lies above the threshold, condition (17) holds, and the economy has two BGPs and one SS. As we will see below, in
this case the SS and one of the BGPs are stable, while the other BGP, which separates
them, is unstable. In this case the economy converges to the stable BGP if the initial
conditions (0  0 ) lie above a certain threshold in the state space, and converges to
the SS if the initial conditions lie below the threshold. If the policy (1 ) lies
22

below the threshold in Figure 4a, the economy has no BGP, and it converges to the
SS for all initial conditions.
A. Catching up: transitions to a BGP
Suppose that (1 ) lies above the threshold in Figure 4a, and consider the
local stability of the two BGPs. Since  =  and all output is consumed,
 = (1 − )  1− 
Using − for   the first equation in (12) implies that the time allocation on either
BGP satisfies
 −1 (1 − ) =

1 −  ∆ −(∆+) −1
 
 
0

(20)

where ∆ ≡  (1 − ) −  The transitional dynamics are then described by the three
equations in (12), for ̇   ̇ and ̇
Recall that the normalized variables are constant along either BGP. This system
of three equations can be linearized around the each of the steady states for the
normalized variables, and the characteristic roots determine the local stability of each.
In all of the simulations reported here, all of the roots are real, exactly two roots are

negative at 
  and exactly one root is negative root at   Moreover, extensive

computations suggest that this configuration for the roots holds for all reasonable
parameter values.11
With this pattern for the roots, the higher steady state, 
 is locally stable: for
´
³

any pair of initial conditions (0  0 ) in the neighborhood of 



 , there exists a

unique initial condition 0 for the costate with the property that the system converges

asymptotically. The lower steady state, 
  is unstable in the sense that there is
only a one-dimensional manifold of initial conditions (0  0 ) in the neighborhood of
11

The Appendix contains a further analysis of the characteristic equation, and provides an example

with complex roots.

23

³
´


for which the system converges. This manifold is the boundary of the basin




³
´


of attraction for    . Above it the economy converges to the stable BGP, and
below it the economy converges to the stagnation SS. Since the boundary between the
two regions involves the normalized variables, it depends on  as well as ( ) 12
b. Falling behind: transitions to the SS
Our interest here is in transitions to the stagnation SS from above. A transition of
this sort would be observed in a country that had enjoyed growth above the stagnation
level, by reducing its barrier or increasing subsidy to human capital accumulation,
and then reversed those policies. This is not merely a theoretical possibility. As
shown in Figure 3, a number of African countries had negative growth in per capita
GDP over the period 1960-2008, and even more had shorter episodes–one or two
decades–of negative growth.
The time allocation during the transition to the SS satisfies the analog to (20),
 −1 (1 − ) =

1 −  ∆ −(∆+) −1
 
Λ 
0

where ∆ is as before, and the law of motion for the costate is
¶
µ ¶ µ

 1−
Λ̇


1+
=  +  − 0 
Λ

1− 

(21)

(22)

The transitional dynamics are described by these two equations and the laws of motion
for    in (1)-(3).
A procedure for calculating transition paths is described in the Appendix. Note
that an economy converging to the SS stagnates in the long run, but it may grow–
12

³
´

The boundary between the two regions is computed by perturbing around the point 





using the eigenvector associated with the single negative root, and running the ODEs backward.
³
´

Transitional dynamics to the stable BGP are computed by perturbing around the point 





and running the ODEs backward. The perturbation can use any linear combination of the eigenvectors associated with the two negative roots, giving a two-dimensional set of allowable perturbations.

24

slowly–for a while. Its rate of technology adoption eventually falls short of  however, and after that the decay phase begins.
5. CALIBRATION
The model parameters are the long run growth rate ; the preference parameters
( ); and the technology parameters (  0   ) for human capital accumulation,
( ) for eﬀective labor, and (0   ) for technology diﬀusion. Baseline values for
these parameters are described below. Experiments with alternative values are also
conducted, to assess the sensitivity of the results.
The growth rate is  = 0019 which is the rate of growth of per capita GDP in
the U.S. over the period 1870-2003.
The preference parameters are  = 003 and  = 2 which are within the range
that is standard in the macro literature.
The depreciation rate for human capital is  = 003 which is close to the value
( = 0037) estimated in Heckman (1976), and the same rate is used for technology,
 = 003 For these parameters the time allocation is the same along the BGP and
in the stagnation steady state,   =   for economies with the same subsidy 
For human capital accumulation, the elasticity  with respect to own human
capital input  is  = 050 which is close to the value ( = 052) estimated in
Heckman (1976). The division of the remaining weight 1 −  between  and  aﬀects
the speed of convergence, with more weight on  producing faster transitions. The
baseline simulations use  = 1 −  = 050 so average human capital plays no role.
The eﬀect of a positive elasticity with respect to  is studied as part of the sensitivity
analysis.
For goods production, the elasticity  can calibrated by using information from
a Mincer regression. Consider families (dynasties) that invest more or less than the
economy-wide average in human capital accumulation. If family  allocates the share
25

of time  instead of   along the BGP, then its human capital at any date  is
³  ´1−


 =   


From (6), the wage rates in a cross-section of such families at  then satisfy
ln  =


ln  + constant .
1−

(23)

We can follow the procedure in Hall and Jones (1999) to obtain an empirical counterpart. Those authors use information from wage regressions in Psacharopoulos (1994)
to construct
ln () = Φ()
where Φ() is concave and piecewise linear, with breaks at  = 4 and  = 8 and slopes
13.4%, 10.1%, and 6.8%. Suppose that an individual ’s time in market activities
(education plus work) is about 60 years. Then  = 60 is the fraction of the working
lifetime that is devoted to education. In this case the function Φ() calculated by
Hall and Jones is well approximated by the function in (23) with  (1 − ) = 055,
and  = 050 implies  = 055
Here, as before, the division of 1 −  between  and  aﬀects the speed of convergence. The baseline simulations use  = 1 −  = 045 so average human capital
plays no role. The eﬀect of a positive elasticity with respect to  is studied as part
of the sensitivity analysis.
The constants 0  0 involve units for  and , so one can be fixed arbitrarily.
Here 0 is chosen as follows. Define a “frontier” economy as one with no barrier,
 = 1 and with an education subsidy  =  set so that the time allocation  on
the BGP coincides with the one that solves a social planner’s (welfare maximization)


problem. The parameter 0 is chosen so that 
  =  = 1 in this frontier

economy. From (15), this requires
³ ´−

0 = ( +  ) 
26

(24)

The constant 0 aﬀects both the speed of convergence and the maximum diﬀerence in income levels along BGPs. In particular, recall from (16) that the relative
technology on a stable BGP is bounded above and below, 12  
  1 Let   1
denote the relative technology for the frontier economy. Then the maximum income
ratio for economies on BGPs is 2 . Figure 2 shows a number of countries near the
45o line with incomes only slightly above half of the U.S. level, suggesting  is not
far below unity. Here we set  = 094 which implies that the subsidy and time
allocation in the frontier economy are  = 0066 and  = 0164 Experiments with
higher and lower values are included in the sensitivity analysis.
To summarize, the benchmark parameters are
 = 0019

 = 20

 = 003

 = 050

 = 050

 = 003

 = 1

 = 055

 = 045

 = 003

 = 094

which implies
0 = 0121

0 = 0869

6. BASELINE SIMULATIONS
In these simulations the baseline model parameters are used and the subsidy to
human capital is fixed at its level in the frontier economy,  = 0066
A. Basins of attraction, phase diagrams
Figure 5 shows the eﬀects of varying the barrier . Figure 5a shows the (nor´
³


malized) BGPs,  =      =    = 1 2 3 and basins of attraction for
three barriers, 1  2  3  Since the subsidy  is the same for all three economies,


the input ratios 
  on the BGP are also the same, and the normalized steady

states lie on a ray from the origin. The normalization for 0 used here implies that
27

ray is the 45o line. Since  =  and 1 = 1 the point 1 represents the frontier
economy, 
1 =  . For    ≈ 443 the system does not have a BGP.
For each  , Figure 5a also displays the threshold that separates the state space
into two regions. For initial conditions above the threshold an economy with barrier
 converges to the (stable) BGP described by   and for initial conditions below
the threshold it converges to its stagnation SS. For initial conditions exactly on the
threshold it converges to the (unstable) BGP described by  
As in Figure 4, increasing  shifts the threshold upward, 1  2  3 
shrinking the set of initial conditions that produce balanced growth. Increasing 
also shifts the normalized levels for the stable BGP downward, 1  2  3 
Thus, comparing across economies on BGPs for diﬀerent barriers, those with higher
barriers lag farther behind the frontier economy.
The barrier  is also important for the speed of convergence to the stable BGP.
Figure 5b displays the values for the two negative roots, which govern that speed, as
functions of 1 Call the roots “fast” and “slow,” with −  −  0. Greater
openness–a higher value for 1–increases both roots, speeding up transitions. The
fast root is approximately linear in 1 implying that a low barrier will be needed
to construct a growth miracle. The slow root is a concave function of 1 converging
to zero as 1 declines to the threshold where a BGP ceases to exist.
Figure 6 shows the phase diagram for  = 1. The solid lines are transition paths
to the stable BGP, the broken line near the origin is the threshold from Figure 5a,
and the dashed lines are the eigenvectors,  and   associated with the negative
roots. (The latter are linear in the log space.) The transition paths from the left are
rather flat, indicating that the technology level  adjusts more rapidly than human
capital  Increasing  makes these paths steeper, as Figure 5b suggests. Roughly
speaking,  governs the adjustment of  and  the adjustment of  and–over
most of the range–changing the barrier has a relatively larger impact on the former.
28

B. Transition paths: fast growth and miracles
First consider an economy that is on a BGP with a high barrier and lowers that
barrier. In particular, consider the transition for an economy that lowers its barrier
from 3 to 1  so its initial and final conditions are 3 and 1 in Figures 5 and 6.
The ratio   =   is the same on both BGPs, and both state variables start at
about 059094 ≈ 62% of their final levels.
The transition path in  −space is one of the trajectories displayed in Figure 6.
Over the first decade of the transition the normalized technology  grows rapidly while
the normalized human capital stock  grows very slowly. The economy’s position after
10 years is as indicated in the figure. Thereafter the relative technology keeps pace
with the frontier, and relative human capital slowly catches up over the next decades.
Figure 7 displays time plots for the first 50 years after the policy change. Figure
7a shows the share of time  allocated to human capital accumulation, which falls
sharply immediately after the policy change. Two factors are at work. First, consumption smoothing provides a direct incentive to shift the time allocation toward
goods production. In addition, since the local technology is an important input into
human capital accumulation, there is an incentive to delay the investment of time
in that activity until after the complementary input has increased. In a model with
endogenous leisure, the total time allocated to market activities–work and human
capital accumulation–presumably would rise, mitigating or even eliminating the fall
in  This in turn would imply more rapid human capital growth during the early
years of the transition.
Figure 7b shows the wage rate  and output  = (1 − )  relative to the frontier
economy, and Figure 7c shows their growth rates. Both display rapid growth in the
early years of the transition, but the growth rates taper oﬀ rather quickly, falling
back toward the steady state level of 1.9%. Output jumps on impact, as time spent

29

working jumps. Because of this initial jump, output growth in the early years of the
transition is slower than wage growth. After the first decade they are about equal,
and both fall back toward the BGP level.
Although the economy in Figure 7 enjoys a short period of rapid growth, it is
not a miracle by the criterion in section 1, which required an average growth rate of
at least 5% over 20 years. By that criterion, income must increase by at least a factor
of (05)(20) = 257 over 20 years. But the initial condition for an economy on a BGP
is at least half of income in the frontier economy, so its income cannot double. Thus,
growth miracles must have initial conditions below those possible on any BGP. What
sort of initial conditions do the data suggest?
The miracles in Germany and Italy are probably explained in large part as recovery in the physical capital stock after the destruction in World War II, a quite
diﬀerent mechanism from the one proposed here. For the others, initial per capita
incomes were 10% (Taiwan and S. Korea) and roughly 23% (Japan, Hong Kong, Singapore, Greece, Portugal, Spain, Puerto Rico, Israel) of the U.S. level when their
periods of rapid growth began. For the benchmark model parameters and the policy
parameters  = 1 and  =   all would lie inside the trapping region for balanced
growth.13
Here we will look at the transition for an economy whose initial income is 20%
of the level in the frontier economy. The initial technology level and human capital
stock are chosen to be consistent with the description of a stagnation SS, (0  0 ) =
(011 029)  with 0 0 =    This transition path is also shown in Figure 6, where
it is the path starting at a small diamond.14
13

Nevertheless, since growth is very slow near this boundary, the model has diﬃculty fitting Taiwan

and S. Korea. China’s per capita income was about 6.5% of the U.S. level when its period of rapid
growth began, which puts slightly outside the trapping region in Figure 6.
14
The human capital subsidy is assumed to be  throughout, but using  = 0 in the initial
condition does not change the results much.

30

During the first phase of the transition, which lasts for about twenty years, the
local technology relative to the world frontier,  =  grows rapidly, rising from
011 to 067. Local human capital  =  declines slightly and then recovers
to almost exactly its original level, 029 implying that human capital has grown at
about 1.9% per year over those two decades. The economy’s position after 20 years
is as indicated in Figure 6.
Figure 8 shows time plots for the first 100 years of the transition.15 The patterns
are qualitatively similar to those in Figure 7. The initial swing in the time allocated
to human capital accumulation, displayed in Figure 8a, is more pronounced here. It is
this swing that produces the initial decline in relative human capital. The wage and
output and their growth rates are shown in Figures 8b and 8c. Wage growth exceeds
5% over the first two decades, so this economy qualifies as a “miracle” if wage growth
is used as the measure. Output growth is a little lower, because of the shift in
the time allocation away from production and back to human capital accumulation
after its initial jump. As noted above, making leisure endogenous would presumably
increase output growth during this initial phase of the transition. The growth rates
for both the wage and output remain above 3% for two more decades, and then decline
gradually back toward the BGP level of 1.9%.
C. Policies and starting points
Both the policy in place and the initial conditions aﬀect the speed of the transition, as the next two experiments illustrate.
Figure 9 displays the transitions for two diﬀerent policies for economies with
the same initial conditions. The initial condition for both is the BGP position for a
modest barrier,  = 135 and no subsidy to human capital accumulation,  = 0
15

The first 42 years are computed exactly, and the remainder with a log-linear approximation.

31

Policy D (solid line) lowers the barrier to  = 1, with no change in the subsidy,
while Policy E (broken line) increases the subsidy to the level in the frontier economy,
 = 0066 with no change in the barrier. The two policies are constructed so that
output (consumption) on the BGP is the same under both.
The sources of income growth are very diﬀerent, however. Policy D exploits
technology inflows, a costless and rapidly acquired input, while Policy E relies on
investment in local human capital, a slow and costly process. Thus, the economy
adopting Policy D enjoys a much more rapid transition to the new BGP. Figure 9a
shows the two transitions in the state space. Under Policy D, the local technology
increases very quickly, and after five years it has grown to almost its final relative
position. Under Policy E, the state variables show little change after five years.
Figure 9b shows the time allocation. Under Policy D the BGP time allocation
is unaltered, since the subsidy is unchanged. As in the previous experiments, the
incentive to smooth consumption leads to an initial swing, although here the swing
is small. Consequently human capital grows mainly because of improvements in the
local technology. This part of the adjustment is slow, requiring several decades. Under
Policy E, the increase in the subsidy induces an immediate jump in the time allocated
to human capital accumulation, which overshoots its new (higher) BGP level.
Figures 9c - 9f show output, the wage, and their growth rates. Under Policy
D the technology inflow produces an initial phase of very rapid growth. Output
jumps slightly on impact, because of the jump in the time allocation, and as a result
subsequent output growth is slightly lower than wage growth. Under Policy E output
declines on impact because of the shift in time allocation, attaining its previous
(relative) position only after about two decades. The growth rates for both output
and the wage increase only slightly, from 1.9% to 2.0%, during the initial years of the
transition.
By construction the two policies lead to the same BGP level for  as shown in
32

Figure 9c. The BGP wage rate, in Figure 9e, is somewhat higher under Policy E, but
less time is allocated to work. Clearly welfare during the transition is higher under
Policy D, since output is higher throughout.
Next consider the role of initial conditions. Figure 10 shows the transitions for
two economies with diﬀerent initial values for ( ) but the same initial output level.
Economy D (the solid line) is on the BGP for  = 1  = 0 while Economy E
(the dashed line) is on the BGP for the policy  = 135  = 0066 both from
Figure 9. Economy D increases its subsidy to  = 0066 while Economy E reduces
its barrier to  = 1, so both are converging to the BGP of a frontier economy.
The transitions mirror those in the previous example. Here Economy E, which
lowers its barrier, enjoys a rapid inflow of technology, shown in Figure 10a. Its time
allocation makes a modest swing, as in earlier examples where a barrier is lowered,
but in the long run returns to its initial value. Output jumps up slightly on impact,
and both output and the wage grow rapidly during the initial couple of years of the
transition.
Economy D enjoys only sluggish growth. Its long-run share of time allocated
to human capital accumulation increases because of the increase in the subsidy, as
shown in Figure 10b. The initial jump here is large, overshooting the ultimate level.
Hence output suﬀers an initial fall, as shown in Figure 10c. The output and wage lie
for Economy D lie below those for Economy E during the whole transition.
D. Transitions: lost decades and disasters
Next consider economies that raise their barriers to technology inflows. Figure 11
displays the transition for an economy that raises its barrier from 1 = 1 to 2 = 325
The result is a “lost decade” of growth, even though the economy is on a BGP before
and after the transition. Figure 11a shows the transition in the state space, with the
positions after 10 and 50 years indicated. Here, again, the local technology adjusts
33

more rapidly than local human capital. A key reason, as before, is the eﬀect of the
policy change on time allocation, shown in Figure 11b. It is roughly a mirror image of
the previous ones, and the logic is as before. Human capital accumulation is the only
vehicle for smoothing consumption, and it uses the local technology as an input. Here,
both forces lead the household to shift its time allocation toward accumulation just
after the policy change. Figure 11c shows the transition paths for the wage rate and
output relative to their new BGP levels. Output jumps down on impact, because of
the shift in time allocation, and both decline steadily during the transition, adjusting
by about 24% in the long run. Figure 11d displays the growth rates of the wage and
output, which fall from 1.9% to 0.6% and 1.1% respectively. Both gradually return
to the BGP level, but the lost decade is never recovered: output on the new BGP is
about 24% below what it would have been on the old one.
Figure 12 shows a “growth disaster.” The initial values   and  for this
economy (all in levels) are above their stagnation values, and Figure 12 shows the
transition to the stagnation SS. This is the scenario for an economy that had lowered
its barrier to technology inflows and enjoyed a period of growth, and then raises the
barrier. Here the new barrier is set very high, so there are essentially no technology
inflows and the local technology decays at the rate  
The transition in the state space, shown in Figure 12a, is qualitatively similar
to the previous one, with the local technology initially adjusting more rapidly than
human capital. After 20 years the local technology has reached its lower bound,  
and thereafter only human capital adjusts. Here, as before, the household saves for
its (dim) future the only way it can, by preserving its human capital. As shown in
Figure 12b, substantial time is allocated to human capital accumulation just after
the policy change, reflecting the same two motives as before: consumption smoothing
and utilizing the local technology before it decays further. The wage and output,
shown in Figure 12c, decline over the entire transition, although the rate of decline
34

slows after the local technology hits its lower bound, as shown in Figure 12d.
7. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
In this section we will study the sensitivity of the results to changes in the
elasticities (   ) in the production functions and the level parameter 0 in the
law of motion for technology inflows. The experiments assume no barrier ( = 1)
and the subsidy to human capital accumulation is kept at the socially eﬃcient level
throughout ( =  ) Thus, all of the experiments involve transitions to the “frontier”
BGP. In each case the economy starts on a BGP where output is 65% of the frontier
level, so the transitions are the analogs of the one in Figure 7.
The first set of experiments looks at changes in the elasticities   and 1− −
in the technology for goods production. The main message from these experiments is
that changes in  the share for the local technology, have a large eﬀect on the early
years of the transition. But with the subsidy at its eﬃcient level,  =  , it doesn’t
matter whether the change in  is oﬀset by a change in  or in 1 −  − 
To see this most clearly, first consider changes in  With  fixed, a reduction
in  shifts weight from private human capital to the external eﬀect, increasing the
eﬃcient level for the subsidy  . But with the actual subsidy  =  adjusted to
stay at the eﬃcient level, the change in  has no further eﬀects: the time allocation,
output and the wage are unaltered.
Changes in  do have eﬀects, however. For a reduction in  with an oﬀsetting
increase in  the private incentives to invest in human capital increase, shifting the
time allocation toward accumulation. With an oﬀsetting change in 1 −  −  the
external eﬀect increases and the eﬃcient subsidy  rises, producing the same shift
in the time allocation. In either case the growth rates for the wage and output fall
rather sharply in the first few years of the transition. The reasoning here is clear:
reducing  means that the technology inflows induced by a reduction in  have a
35

smaller immediate impact on goods production.
The second set of experiments looks at changes in the elasticities  , and 1 −
 −  in the technology for human capital accumulation. Overall, changes in these
parameters produce very modest changes in the transition paths for output and the
wage. This is not surprising: human capital accumulation aﬀects output and the
wage slowly and gradually.
A reduction in  with  fixed shifts weight from private human capital to the
external eﬀect, and also reduces the elasticity in the time allocation term    The first
channel produces an increase in the eﬃcient subsidy   but the second reduces the
incentive to allocate time to accumulation, even when the subsidy is increased to the
eﬃcient level. The net eﬀects on the transition paths and growth rates for the wage
and output are very small, however.
A reduction in  with  fixed also shifts weight to the external eﬀect. As in the
previous experiment the eﬃcient subsidy increases, but here there is no eﬀect through
  and the time allocation shifts toward accumulation. The eﬀect on the wage and
output and their growth rates is quite small in the early years of the transition, since
changes in human capital accumulation show up slowly. A lower weight on technology
slows the transition in the later years, however.
Next, consider a change in  with an oﬀsetting change in  Since the external
eﬀect remains shut down, 1 −  −  = 0 the eﬃcient subsidy  changes very little.
Nevertheless, increasing  increases the incentive to allocate time to accumulation.
The transition paths for output and the wage change very little in the early years,
but the transition is a little slower in the later years.
Finally, consider changes in   which aﬀect the coeﬃcient 0 in the law of
motion for technology inflows. Changing  has a dramatic eﬀect on the speed of
adjustment. Recall that the maximum income ratio between countries on BGP is
2  so a large value for  is needed if this range is to be substantial. But the
36

level parameter 0 is proportional to 1 (1 −  )  so it is very sensitive to  when
 is large. Increasing  from 0.94 to 0.96 increases 0 by about 47%, and raises
the growth rates of output and the wage 2.0 percentage points in the early years of
the transition. In addition, increasing  reduces the eﬃcient subsidy and the time
allocated to accumulation. Reducing  from 0.94 to 0.91 produces similar eﬀects in
the opposite direction. Thus,  must be close to its benchmark value–or even a
little higher–if the model is to produce growth episodes like those seen in the east
Asian miracles.
8. CONCLUSIONS
The model developed here studies the interaction between technology, which
flows in from abroad, and human capital, which is accumulated domestically, as an
explanation of cross-country diﬀerences in income levels and growth rates. As argued
in section 1, several diﬀerent types of evidence, from many countries and over long
time periods, point to the importance of technology inflows. But technology, by itself,
does not seem to be a suﬃcient explanation. In the model here local human capital is
critical in letting countries eﬀectively exploit technologies imported from abroad and
in allowing that inflow to continue.
The model developed here has a number of empirical implications. First, as
shown in Proposition 1, economies with suﬃciently unfavorable policies–a combination of high barriers to technology inflows and low subsidies to human capital
accumulation–have no BGP. Thus, the model implies that only middle and upper
income economies can grow like the technology frontier over long periods. Low income
economies can grow faster (if they have reduced their barriers) or slower (if they have
raised them) or stagnate. This prediction is consistent with the empirical evidence:
higher income countries grow at similar rates over long periods, while low income
countries show more heterogeneity (in cross section) and variability (over time).
37

Second, unfavorable policies reduce the level of income and consumption on the
BGP, and shrink the set of initial conditions for which an economy converges to that
path. Thus, the model predicts that middle-income countries that grow with the
frontier should have displayed slower growth during their transitional phases.
Third, growth miracles feature a modest period of very rapid TFP growth, accompanied by rapid growth in income and consumption. This initial phase is followed
by a (longer) period during which human (and physical) capital are accumulated. Income growth declines toward the rate of frontier growth as the income level approaches
the frontier level. Thus, the model has predictions for some features of the transition
paths of growth ‘miracles.’
Fourth, low income countries with higher human capital are better candidates to
become growth miracles, since TFP and income grow more rapidly in such economies.
Fifth, the model suggests that policies stimulating technology transfer are far
more eﬀective in accelerating growth than policies stimulating human capital accumulation. Investments in human and physical capital respond to returns, and those
returns are high when technology is growing rapidly. Thus, the empirical association
between high investment rates and rapid growth is not causal: technology drives both.
The model studied here oﬀers a view of how world technology aﬀects the possibilities for less developed economies. The evidence discussed in section 1, especially
data on late bloomers and miracles, leaves little doubt that its eﬀect is large, and
the numerical exercises reported in section 6 are consistent with that evidence. The
model oﬀers no explanation for the ultimate sources of technological innovation and,
consequently, the paper has little to say about the determinants of the growth rate in
developed economies. The sources of growth diﬀer across countries according to their
level of development relative to the world they are situated in, and quite diﬀerent
models are needed to study growth in advanced economies.

38

APPENDIX
A. Equilibrium conditions
The Hamiltonian for the household’s problem in (9) is
H =

h
i
 1−
1−−
+ Λ 0 ()  
−  
1 − h




+Λ (1 − ) ̂  

1−−



+  ̂ 

1−

i

+ ( −  )  −  −  

where to simplify the notation the subscript ’s have been dropped. Taking the
first order conditions for a maximum, using the equilibrium conditions  =  and
 =  ̂  1−  and simplifying gives
Λ 0 

−1

 −
Λ̇
Λ
Λ̇
Λ
̇


= Λ (1 − ) ̂
= Λ 

µ




¶−



µ




=  +  − 0 



¶ µ
1+

(25)

 1−
1− 

¶



=  +  − 
µ ¶


= 0 
−  

µ ¶−1


̇
=
−  
−




where  = (1 − )   1−  and ̇ is in (2). The transversality conditions are
lim − Λ ()() = 0

→∞

and

lim − Λ ()() = 0

→∞

(26)

Equations (1), (2), (25) and (26) characterize the competitive equilibrium, given the
policy parameters ( ) and initial values for the state variables (   ).
The law of motion for  requires  and  to be constant along a BGP,
so  and  must also grow at the rate  Since the production functions for eﬀective
39

labor in (4) and for output have constant returns to scale, the factor inputs  and 
also grow at the rate  as do output  and consumption  Hence the factor returns
 and ̂ are constant on a BGP, and the costate variable Λ grows at the rate −
The costate Λ grows at the same rate as Λ 
The normalized conditions in (12) follow directly from (2) and (25).
B. Linear approximations and stability
Define the constants
 + 
Π ≡

 + 


≡

1−


 
+  (1 −  )
 
−
 +  (1  − 1)
 + Π − 
−

Π

−1−

1 − 1

 0
−1−
Π − 

Γ2 ≡  −
=
=
1
≡
Γ3
=

∆ ≡  (1 − ) − 

 

and recall that
1
1
− 1 = (Π − )  0



In addition define the log deviations
¡
¢
1 ≡ ln  

¡
¢
2 ≡ ln  

´
³

3 ≡ ln  


Take a first-order approximation to (20) to get
 −  
= Γ3 [∆1 − (∆ + ) 2 − 3 ] 
 

40

Then linearize the laws of motion for   and  in (12) to find that
#
"

̇1 ≈ ( +  ) −   1 + 2 
1 − 
¸
∙
 − 
̇2 ≈ ( +  )  (1 − 2 ) +  

= ( +  ) { (1 − 2 ) + Γ3 [∆ (1 − 2 ) − 2 − 3 ]} 
¸
∙
¡ 
¢
 −  
̇3 ≈ −  +   (1 − 2 ) + Γ2 

¡ 
¢
= −  +  { (1 − 2 ) + Γ2 Γ3 [∆ (1 − 2 ) − 2 − 3 ]} 
Hence

where

⎛

̇1

⎞

⎛

−1

⎜
⎟ ⎜
⎜
⎟ ⎜
⎜ ̇2 ⎟ ≈ ⎜
3
⎝
⎠ ⎝
̇3
−6

2
−3 − 4
6 + 5

0

⎞⎛

1

⎞

⎟⎜
⎟
⎟⎜
⎟
−4 ⎟ ⎜ 2 ⎟ 
⎠⎝
⎠
5
3

´
³

1 = ( +  ) 


1
−



2 =  +  

3 = ( +  ) ( + Γ3 ∆) 
4 = ( +  ) Γ3 
¡
¢
5 =  +  Γ2 Γ3 
¡
¢
6 =  +  ( + Γ2 Γ3 ∆) 

The local stability of each steady state depends on the roots of the associated
characteristic equation,
⎛
⎜
⎜
0 = det ⎜
⎝

− − 1

2

3

− − (3 + 4 )

−6

6 + 5

41

0

⎞

⎟
⎟
−4 ⎟
⎠
− + 5

⎛

⎜
⎜
= det ⎜
⎝

− ( + 1 )

2

3

− ( + 3 )

−6

6 + 

0

⎞

⎟
⎟
−4 ⎟
⎠
− + 5

= − ( + 1 ) [( + 3 ) ( − 5 ) + 4 (6 + )]
−2 (−3 + 3 5 − 4 6 )
£
¤
= − ( + 1 ) 2 − 1 − 2 + 2 (3 − 2 )

= −3 + (1 − 1 ) 2 + (2 + 1 1 + 2 3 )  + 2 (1 − 2 ) 
where
1 ≡ 5 − 3 − 4 
2 ≡ 3 5 − 4 6
¡
¢
= ( +  )  +  Γ3  (Γ2 − )  0

and the last line uses the fact that Γ3  0 and Γ2 −   0
Write the cubic as
0 = Ψ () ≡ −3 + 2 2 + 1  + 0 

 =  

where
2 ≡ 1 − 1 
1 ≡ 2 + 1 1 + 2 3 
0 ≡ 2 (1 − 2 ) 

 =  


Since 
  12    it follows that 1  2  1  Hence

Ψ (0) = 0  0

Ψ (0) = 0  0

so Ψ has at least one positive real root, and Ψ has at least one negative real root.
42

The other roots of Ψ are real and both are negative if and only if Ψ has
real inflection points, the smaller one is negative–call it   0, and Ψ ( )  0.
Similarly, the other roots of Ψ are real and both are positive, if and only if Ψ has
real inflection points, the larger one is positive–call it   0, and Ψ ( )  0 The
inflection points are solutions of the quadratic Ψ0 () = 0 so they are real if and only
if Ψ0 (0) = 1  0 Write this condition as
0  2 + (1 + 3 ) 2 + 1 (1 − 2 ) 

(27)

To construct examples where Ψ has complex roots, consider cases where the
inequality in (27) fails. As noted above, 2  0 The term (1 − 2 ) is small in

absolute value if 
 is close to 1/2. As shown in Figure 4b, this occurs if 1 is close

to the lowest value for which a BGP exists. For the middle term note that 2  0 and
1 + 3 = 5 − 4
= ( +  ) Γ3 (Π Γ2 − )
= − ( +  ) Γ3 [ − Π  +  + Π − ]
¶
∙ µ
¸

+ Π (1 − ) 
= − ( +  ) Γ3   − 1 +
1−
Since Γ3  0 this term has the sign of the expression in square brackets. The term
Π (1 − ) is positive, but for  close to one it is small. The term  (1 − ) is also
positive, but for  close to zero it is also small. The term  − 1 is negative if  is close
to zero. Thus, complex roots can occur if  is large,  is close to unity, and   are
close to zero.
For example, for with the preference and technology parameters
 = 010

 = 095

 = 005

 = 005

 = 045

and the others at the baseline values, and the policy parameters
 = 09026
43

 = 10

 = 09179


the steady states are 
 = 06832 and  = 03168 and the system has complex

roots–with negative real parts–at both steady states. For nearby policy parameters,
the complex roots can have positive real parts at the low steady state, and the roots at
the high steady state can be real while those at the low steady state remain complex.
Notice that  close to zero implies that an individual’s wage depends very little on
his own human capital, while 1 −  −  = 050 implies that average human capital
is quite important for productivity. Hence the optimal steady state subsidy is quite
high–here it is  = 09163 and the example uses a subsidy almost that high. In
addition notice that  close to zero implies a very high elasticity of intertemporal
substitution. For both reasons, these parameter values are rather implausible.
C. Computing transition paths to the SS
The following two-step procedure is used to compute transition to the stagnation
SS. For the first step, let 0 =  and conjecture that ̇ = 0 Then the transition is
described by the equations for ̇ Λ̇  which do not involve  Linearize (3) and (22)
around (   Λ ), using (21) for . The resulting pair of equations has roots that
are real and of opposite sign. Hence for any 0 suﬃciently close to    there exists
a unique Λ0 near Λ
 with the property that for the initial conditions (0  Λ0 )
and 0 =   the linearized system converges to the steady state. This solution
constitutes a competitive equilibrium provided that ̇ = 0 when (2) is used. That
holds provided that 0 0 is small enough. For the second step, choose any pair
( Λ ) generated by the first step, and a (large) value  Run the system of ODEs
in (1) - (3) and (22) backward from the ‘initial’ condition (    Λ ) 

44

REFERENCES
[1] Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001. The colonial origins
of comparative development: an empirical investigation, Am. Ec. Rev., 91: 13691401.
[2]

2002. Reversal of fortune: geography and institutions in the making of the modern
world income distribution, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117: 1231-1294.

[3]

2005. The rise of Europe: Atlantic trade, institutional change, and economic
growth. American Economic Review, 95: 546-579.

[4] Acemoglu, Daron, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2001. Productivity diﬀerences, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 116(2): 563-606.
[5] Bartelsman, Eric, John Haltiwanger, and Stefano Scarpetta. 2008. Cross country
diﬀerences in productivity: the role of allocative eﬃciency, working paper, University of Maryland.
[6] Baumol, William J. 1986. Productivity growth, convergence, and welfare: what the
long-run data show, American Economic Review, 76(5): 1072-85.
[7] Baumol, William J and Edward N. Wolﬀ. 1988. Productivity growth, convergence,
and welfare: reply, American Economic Review, 78(5): 1155-59.
[8] Benhabib, Jess and Mark M. Spiegel. 2005. Human capital and technology diﬀusion,
Handbook of Economic Growth, Ch. 13, Vol. 1A. P. Aghion and S. Durlauf, eds.,
North Holland.
[9] Bowlus, Audra J. and Chris Robinson. 2012. Human capital prices, productivity, and
growth, American Economic Review, 102(7): 3483-3515.

45

[10] Caselli, Francesco. 2005. Accounting for income diﬀerences across countries. Handbook
of Economic Growth, Ch. 9, Vol. 1A. P. Aghion and S. Durlauf, eds., North
Holland.
[11] De Long, J Bradford. 1988. Productivity growth, convergence, and welfare: comment,
American Economic Review, 78(5): 1138-54.
[12] Denison, Edward F. 1974. Accounting for United States economic growth, 1929-1969.
Washington, DC. Brookings Institution..
[13] Gerschenkron, Alexander. 1965. Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective: A
Book of Essays, Books on Demand, 1965.
[14] Hahn, Chin-Hee. 2010. Learning by exporting. Working paper, Korea Development
Institute.
[15] Hall, Robert E., and Charles I. Jones. 1999. Why do some countries produce so much
more output per worker than others? Quarterly Journal of Economics 114: 83116.
[16] Heckman, James J. 1976. A life-cycle model of earnings, learning, and consumption.
J. of Political Economy 84(4, Part2):S11-S44.
[17] Hendricks, Lutz. 2002. How important is human capital for development? Evidence
from immigrant earnings, American Economic Review 92: 198-219.
[18] Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J. Klenow. 2009. Misallocation and manufacturing TFP
in China and India, working paper.
[19] Jorgenson, Dale, Frank Gollop, and Barbara Fraumeni. 1987. Productivity and U.S.
Economic Growth, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

46

[20] Klenow, Peter J. 1998. Ideas vs. rival human capital: industry evidence on growth
models, Journal of Monetary Economics 42: 3-24.
[21] Klenow, Peter J. and Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare. 1997b. The neoclassical revival in
growth economics: has it gone too far? NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, B.
Bernanke and J. Rotemberg ed., Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 73-102.
[22] Klenow, Peter J. and Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare. 2005. Externalities and growth, Handbook of Economic Growth, Ch. 11, Vol. 1A. P. Aghion and S. Durlauf, eds., North
Holland.
[23] Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1988. On the mechanics of economic development, Journal of
Monetary Economics 22:3-42.
[24] Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 2009. Trade and the diﬀusion of the industrial revolution, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1(1): 1-25.
[25] Maddison, Angus. 2010. Historical Statistics of the World Economy: 1-2008 AD.
http://www.ggdc.net/MADDISON/oriindex.htm.
[26] Nelson, Richard R. and Edmund S. Phelps. 1966. Investment in humans, technological
diﬀusion, and economic growth, American Economic Review 56(1/2), 69-75.
[27] Parente, Stephen L. and Edward C. Prescott. 1994. Barriers to technology adoption
and development, Journal of Political Economy 102: 298-321.
[28] Parente, Stephen L. and Edward C. Prescott. 2000. Barriers to Riches. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
[29] Prescott, Edward C. 1997. Needed: a theory of total factor productivity, International
Economic Review 39(3): 525-551.

47

[30] Prescott, Edward C. 2002. Prosperity and depression, AER Papers and Proceedings,
92: 1-15.
[31] Prescott, Edward C. 2004. Why do Americans work so much more than Europeans?
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 28(1), July.
[32] Psacharopoulos, George, 1994. Returns to investment in education: a global update,
World Development, Elsevier, vol. 22(9): 1325-1343.
[33] Ragan Kelly S. 2006. Taxes, transfers and time use: fiscal policy in a household
production model. Ph.D. Thesis, University of Chicago.
[34] Ramondo, Natalia. 2009. Foreign plants and industry productivity: evidence from
Chile, Scandanavian J. of Economics 111(4): 789-809.
[35] Restuccia, Diego, and Richard Rogerson. 2008. Policy distortions and aggregate productivity with heterogeneous establishments, Review of Economic Dynamics 11:
707-720.
[36] Solow, Robert M. 1957. Technical change and the aggregate production function.
Review of Economics and Statistics 39: 312-320.

48

Figure 1: doubling times for per capita GDP, 61 countries
90
80

Years to reach $4000

70

theoretical limit
for 2008

60
50
40
W. Offshoots
30

W. Europe
E. Europe

20

Latin America
E. & S. Asia

10

W. Asia
Africa

0
1800

1820

1840

1860

1880 1900 1920
Year reached $2000

1940

1960

1980

2000

Figure 2: catching up and falling behind, 1960-2008

1

2008 relative to U.S.

0.8

0.6

W. Offshoots
0.4

W. Europe
E. Europe
Latin America
E. & S. Asia

0.2

W. Asia
Africa
0
0

0.2

0.4
0.6
1960 relative to U.S.

0.8

1

Figure 3: Asia and Africa, excluding 6 successes
Malaysia

10000
9000

4% growth

2% growth

Thailand
Turkey

2008 per capita GDP

8000
7000

3% growth

Iran

China
Tunisia

6000

1% growth

5000

S. Africa
Botswana

Namibia

0% growth

4000

Gabon
3000

India
E. & S. Asia

2000
Iraq

1000
0
0

500

1000

1500

2000
2500
3000
1960 per capita GDP

W. Asia
Africa
3500

4000

4500

Figure 4a: policies for balanced growth

subsidy rate, 

0.5

0.4

two BGPs

0.3

0.2

no BGP

0.1

0
0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

openness, 1/B

Figure 4b: relative technology on BGP, 0 < 1 < 2
1

2

abg
H

0.9

1

0.8
0.7

0

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

abg
L

0.1
0
0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

openness, 1/B

0.8

0.9

1

Figure 5a: basins of attraction for BGPs
1

B =1

0.9
0.8

B = 3.25
2

0.7

s

3

s

0.5

H3

s

crit

0.4

s

L3

0.3
0.2

sL2

0.1
0

H2

B = 4.3

0.6

h

sH1

1

sL1
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

a

Figure 5b: "fast" and "slow" roots
0.8

0.04
0.035

0.6

0.03
0.025

0.4

0.02
0.015

-Rs (left scale)
0.2

0.01

-R (right scale)
f

0.005
0
0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

1/B

0.7

0.8

0.9

0.0

1

Figure 6: phase diagram, B = 1
sH1

1

Es

0.9

sH2

0.8

0.7

10

sH3
0.6

h

scrit
0.5

sL3
0.4

20

sL2

0.3

0.2

sL1

0.1

Ef
0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

a

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Figure 7a: time allocation for catch-up growth
0.18
0.17
0.16

v

0.15

transition path

0.14
0.13

Balanced Growth Path

0.12
0.11

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

45

50

45

50

time

Figure 7b: wage and output, relative to new BGP
1
0.95
0.9
0.85
0.8

w/wbg

0.75
0.7

y/ybg

0.65
0.6

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

time

Figure 7c: wage and output growth rates
0.08
0.07

B1 = 1,

0.06

 = 0.066

0.05

B3 = 4.3

0.04
0.03
0.02
0

5

10

15

20

25

time

30

35

40

Figure 8a: time allocation for a growth miracle
0.2

v

0.18
0.16
0.14

transition path

0.12
0.1
0.08

Balanced Growth Path

0.06
0.04
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

90

100

time

Figure 8b: wage and output, relative to new BGP
1
0.8
0.6
0.4

w/wbg

0.2

y/ybg

0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

time

Figure 8c: growth rates of wage and output
0.08
0.07
0.06

g = 0.05

0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02

B = 1,

0.01
0

0

10

20

30

40

 = 0.066
50

time

60

70

80

90

100

Figure 9a: Two policies

Figure 9b: time allocation

0.94

0.17

ssE

0.92

Policy D
0.165

Policy E
0.9

h

ssD

0.16

v

0.88

5

5

0.86

0.155

ssC

0.84
0.91

0.92

0.15

0.93

0

10

20

a

30

40

50

time

Figure 9c: output

Figure 9d: output growth

0.77

0.023

0.765
0.022

BD = 1,

0.021

C = D = 0,

0.76
0.755

y

0.75

BC = BE = 1.35
E = 0.066

0.02

0.745
0.019
0.74
0.735

0

10

20

30

40

50

0.018

10

20

30

40

time

Figure 9e: wage rate

Figure 9f: wage growth

0.92

0.025

0.915

0.024

0.91

50

0.023

0.905

0.022

0.9

w

0.021

0.895

0.02

0.89

0.019

0.885
0.88

0

time

0

10

20

30

time

40

50

0.018

0

10

20

30

time

40

50

Figure 10a: Two economies
0.96

0.166

Economy D

0.95
0.94

ssF

Economy E

0.93

h

Figure 10b: time allocation
0.164
0.162

5

0.92

0.16

ssE

0.91

v

0.158

0.9

0.88
0.915

0.156

ssD5

0.89
0.92

0.925

0.93

0.935

0.94

0.154

0

10

20

a

30

40

50

time

Figure 10d: output growth

Figure 10c: output
0.023

0.79
0.785
0.78
0.775

0.022

BD = BF = 1,

0.021

D = 0,

y

0.77

BE = 1.35

E = F 0.066

0.02

0.765
0.76

0.019

0.755
0.75

0

10

20

30

40

50

0.018

0

10

20

30

40

50

time

time

Figure 10e: wage rate

Figure 10f: wage growth
0.025
0.024

0.94
0.023
0.93

0.022
0.021

w

0.92

0.02
0.91
0.019
0.9

0

10

20

30

time

40

50

0.018

0

10

20

30

time

40

50

Figure 11b: time allocation

Figure 11a: a lost decade
0.95

0.18

10

sH1

h

0.9

0.175

transition path

0.85

0.17

50

Balanced Growth Path

0.8

0.165

v

sH2

0.75
0.75

0.8

0.85

0.9

0.95

0.16

0

20

40

60

80

100

time

a
Figure 11c: wage and output, relative to new BGP
1.25

Figure 11d: wage and output growth
0.02

1.2

w/wbg
1.15

0.015

y/ybg
B1 = 1,

1.1
0.01

B2 = 3.25

1.05

1

0

20

40

60

time

80

100

0.005

 = 0.066

0

20

40

60

time

80

100

Figure 12a: a growth disaster

Figure 12b: time allocation

0.45

0.28

10
s0

0.4

20

0.24

Stagnation Steady State

40

0.22

H

0.35

transition path

0.26

0.2
0.3

0.18

ssst

v

0.16

0.25
0.14
0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0

10

20

30

40

time

A
Figure 12c: wage and output, relative to SS
1.8

Figure 12d: wage and output growth
0

1.7

W/Wst

1.6

-0.005

Y/Yst

1.5

-0.01

1.4
1.3

-0.015

1.2
1.1

B = 100,

-0.02

=0

1
0.9

0

10

20

time

30

40

-0.025

0

10

20

time

30

40

