                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                YOUTH DEPRESSION AND FUTURE CRIMINAL BEHAVIOR

                                         D. Mark Anderson
                                            Resul Cesur
                                            Erdal Tekin

                                        Working Paper 18656
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18656


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2012




The authors thank seminar participants at the University of Connecticut and Lafayette College. This
research uses data from Add Health, a program project directed by Kathleen Mullan Harris and designed
by J. Richard Udry, Peter S. Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris at the University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill, and funded by grant P01-HD31921 from Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute
of Child Health and Human Development, with cooperative funding from 23 other federal agencies
and foundations. Special acknowledgement is due to Ronald R. Rindfuss and Barbara Entwisle for
assistance in the original design. Information on how to obtain the Add Health data files is available
on the Add Health website (http://www.cpc.unc.edu/addhealth). No direct support was received from
grant P01-HD31921 for this analysis. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by D. Mark Anderson, Resul Cesur, and Erdal Tekin. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Youth Depression and Future Criminal Behavior
D. Mark Anderson, Resul Cesur, and Erdal Tekin
NBER Working Paper No. 18656
December 2012
JEL No. I10,K42

                                              ABSTRACT

While the contemporaneous association between mental health problems and criminal behavior has
been explored in the literature, the long-term consequences of such problems, depression in particular,
have received much less attention. Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent
Health, we examine the effect of depression during adolescence on the probability of engaging in a
number of criminal behaviors later in life. In our analysis, we control for a rich set of individual, family,
and neighborhood level factors to account for conditions that may be correlated with both childhood
depression and adult criminality. One novelty in our approach is the estimation of school and sibling
fixed effects models to account for unobserved heterogeneity at the neighborhood and family levels.
 Furthermore, we exploit the longitudinal nature of our data set to account for baseline differences
in criminal behavior. We find little evidence that adolescent depression predicts the likelihood of
engaging in violent crime or the selling of illicit drugs. However, our empirical estimates show that
adolescents who suffer from depression face an increased probability of engaging in property crime.
 Our estimates imply that the lower-bound economic cost of property crime associated with adolescent
depression is about 219 million dollars annually.


D. Mark Anderson                                                   Erdal Tekin
Department of Agricultural Economics and Economics                 Department of Economics
Montana State University                                           Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
P.O. Box Box 173700                                                Georgia State University
Bozeman, MT 59717-3700                                             P.O. Box 3992
dwight.anderson@montana.edu                                        Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
                                                                   and NBER
Resul Cesur                                                        tekin@gsu.edu
Finance Department
University of Connecticut
2100 Hillside Road Unit 1041
Storrs, CT 06269-1041
and University of Connecticut
cesur@business.uconn.edu
I. Introduction

            Major depression is a serious public health problem both in the United States and around

the world. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), depression is the leading cause

of disability and the fourth leading contributor to the global burden of disease.1 The incidence of

mental health problems also runs high among children and adolescents. For example, 8.1

percent of 2 million adolescents aged 12-17 experienced at least one major depressive episode in

2009 (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2010). Furthermore, about

15 million children meet the criteria to be diagnosed with a mental health disorder (American

Psychological Association, 2008).

            These problems constitute a major source of concern because the consequences of

depression are wide-ranging and long-lasting. For example, the literature covers a broad

spectrum of outcomes influenced by depression including educational attainment (Fletcher,

2008; Fletcher, 2010; Wilcox-Gök et al., 2004), labor market productivity (Fletcher 2012,

Chatterji et al., 2011; Marcotte and Wilcox-Gök, 2003; Ruhm, 1992), substance use (Greenfield

et al., 1998; Rao et al., 2000; Swendsen and Merikangas, 2000), and risky sexual behavior

(Ramrakha et al., 2000; Shrier et al., 2001; Stiffman et al., 1992).                            Moreover, the economic

burden of mental health disorders in general runs high. It has been estimated that treatment and

disability payments are roughly $83.1 billion per year, while the indirect costs associated with

productivity loss are approximately $51.5 billion per year (Greenberg et al., 2003; Ettner et al.,

1997). Because of the substantial economic and social costs that depression and other mental

illnesses impose on society, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has identified

improving mental health as a vital objective. Accordingly, the goal is set by the government to



1
    By 2020, the WHO predicts that depression will be the second leading contributor to the global burden of disease (WHO, 2001).

                                                                 2
achieve a 10 percent reduction in the proportion of adolescents who experience a major

depressive episode by the year 2020.2

            Not surprisingly, the association between mental health and criminal activity has received

considerable attention in the literature. Several studies have identified negative emotions, such

as depression, as a motivating factor for delinquent behavior (e.g., Broidy and Agnew, 1997;

Piquero and Selock, 2004). Others have shown that individuals with mental health disorders face

higher arrest rates, have records of past violence, and are more likely to be victims of crime

themselves (e.g., Choe et al., 2008; Elbogen and Johnson, 2009; Teplin et al., 2005; White et al.,

2006). It has also been documented that adult prisoners and incarcerated adolescents suffer from

mental illnesses at much higher rates than the general population (e.g., Marcotte and Markowitz,

2011).3        Even those with less severe mental health problems perform poorly in terms of

behavioral outcomes. For example, persons with low self-esteem are more likely to display

aggressive, delinquent, and criminal behaviors (e.g., Donnellan et al., 2005; Trzesniewski et al.,

2006).        On the other hand, several studies have argued that some mental illnesses, including

depression, may decrease delinquent behavior because they reduce an individual’s energy and

desire to act (Agnew, 1992, Broidy, 2001; Mazerolle and Piquero, 1997).

            While an association between mental health and delinquent behavior has been considered

in the literature, the existing studies contain a number of limitations. First, much of the previous

work has been descriptive in nature.4 These studies are usually motivated by the observation that

mental health problems are more common among incarcerated groups (e.g., Teplin, 1990; Silver

2
 The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services outlines their objectives in Healthy People 2020. Available at:
http://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/default.aspx.
3
 In particular, more than 20 percent of all prisoners have a history of serious mental health problems (Marcotte and Markowitz,
2011) and between 50 to 75 percent of incarcerated adolescents have diagnosable mental illnesses (Coalition for Juvenile Justice,
2012).
4
    See Marcotte and Markowitz (2011) for a detailed summary of the literature on the relationship between depression and crime.

                                                                 3
et al., 2008; Wallace et al., 1998) or that criminal behavior is higher among individuals with

mental health disorders (e.g., Hodgins, 1992; Swanson et al., 2002). Second, most previous

studies use cross-sectional data to study the relationship between mental health and crime.

Exceptions include several cohort studies that follow individuals over time to illustrate that those

suffering from mental health disorders are more likely to exhibit criminality or become

incarcerated (e.g., Arsenault et al., 2000; Brennan et al., 2000). However, these cohort studies

generally use data from outside the United States and rely on a limited number of controls to

account for differences across individual characteristics that could be correlated with both mental

health and criminal behavior. Therefore, it is not straightforward to move from a correlation

between mental health and crime to a statement about causality due to a multitude of omitted

factors, such as financial stress and poor parenting. While these factors are likely to have an

independent effect on criminal behavior, they may also influence crime through affecting mental

health. In addition, the direction of causality may go from crime to mental health. For example,

poor mental health may be a consequence of incarceration (Marcotte and Markowitz, 2011;

Vermeiren et al., 2000).     Cross-sectional or observational studies cannot account for this

problem. Furthermore, the crime and mental health variables often used in these studies are

based on arrest or incarceration records and official reports of clinical diagnoses. Consequently,

many individuals engaging in criminal acts and/or suffering from mental illnesses go unnoticed

and are left untreated. Finally, much of the previous research has used data drawn from non-

representative populations (e.g. prison populations). While these studies suggest that a link

between mental health and future criminality exists, the generalizability of their results is

questionable.




                                                 4
       This paper makes two valuable contributions to the literature on mental health and crime.

First, we study the relationship between adolescent depression and adult criminal behavior using

data from a longitudinal survey. Specifically, the National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent

Health (Add Health) spans a period that covers both adolescence and adulthood. Previous

studies that have relied on cross-sectional data are only able to examine the contemporaneous

relationship between depression and crime (either at adolescence or adulthood).           However,

studying the long-term consequences of depression is important because it has been shown that

childhood depression has substantial continuity into adulthood (Greden, 2001; Weissman et al.,

1999). Similarly, early onset of criminal behavior greatly increases criminal tendencies later in

life, and it becomes harder for individuals with a criminal background to invest in legal human

capital that could allow them to make a transition from the illegal to the legal labor market. The

use of longitudinal data also allows us to account for the effect of criminal behavior in

adolescence on the propensity to engage in subsequent crime. Finally, focusing on the long-term

consequences of depression on crime minimizes concerns associated with reverse causality.

       Second, we improve upon the existing literature by employing a series of fixed effects

estimators to control for unobserved heterogeneity at the neighborhood and family levels. For

example, by including school fixed effects, we account for the possibility that adolescents who

grow up in disadvantaged neighborhoods may be simultaneously more likely to have poor

mental health and engage in criminal behaviors. In addition, by including family fixed effects,

we control for characteristics such as household poverty, parenting style, and home environment

that are typically shared by all siblings in a household. As a result, our estimates are likely to be

purged of sources of unobserved heterogeneity that have plagued previous studies.




                                                 5
            The findings in this paper have important implications for understanding the potential

implications for policies to improve outcomes for children and their families. The cost of crime

imposed on society is substantial across social, economic, and health dimensions. According to

the U.S. Department of Justice, law enforcement agencies recently made a total of 13.7 million

arrests, of which 1.9 million were juveniles.5                           Designing sensible policies to reduce these

numbers requires a full assessment of the factors that cause these behaviors with an

understanding of both the short-term and long-term dynamics. Our findings indicate that

adolescents who suffer from depression face a substantially increased probability of engaging in

property crime. We find little evidence that adolescent depression influences the likelihood of

engaging in violent crime or the selling of illicit drugs. Our estimates imply that the lower-

bound economic cost of property crime associated with adolescent depression is about 219

million dollars per year.

             The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. In Section II, we describe our data. In

Section III, we present the conceptual framework and describe the estimation strategy. The

results are summarized in Section IV, while conclusions and suggestions for future research are

discussed in Section V.



II. Data

            The data used in this paper come from the restricted version of the National Longitudinal

Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health). The Add Health is a nationally representative sample

of United States youths who were in grades 7 through 12 during the 1994-1995 academic year.6

Adolescents were surveyed from 132 schools that were selected to ensure representation with

5
    See http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/content/pub/pdf/aus8009.pdf.
6
    See Udry (2003) for a full description of the Add Health data.

                                                                     6
respect to region of country, urbanicity, school size and type, and ethnicity. High schools that

participated in the study were asked to identify feeder schools that included a 7th grade and sent

at least five graduates to that high school. The feeder schools were chosen with probability

proportional to the number of students sent to the high school.

       In Wave I, data were collected from adolescents, their parents, siblings, friends,

relationship partners, fellow students, and school administrators. The Add Health cohort has

been followed with three subsequent in-home surveys in 1996, 2000-2001, and 2007-2008. The

data contain information on respondents' social, economic, psychological, and health status. In

addition to individual-level information, the Add Health data include information on family,

neighborhood, school, and peer network characteristics. The Add Health data also contain

information on a genetic oversample of siblings. We take advantage of the sibling sample to

better control for unobserved heterogeneity in the relationship between depression and crime.

The primary analyses in this paper use data from the Wave I and Wave IV in-home surveys of

the Add Health. These data are useful for investigating the relationship between adolescent

depressive symptoms and adult criminality because they span a period of roughly 13 years. The

original Add Health respondents were between ages 25 and 32 in Wave IV.

       Add Health is particularly ideal for the purposes of this study for a number of reasons.

First, it was specifically designed to provide rich information on adolescents' health and risk

behaviors and is considered to be the largest and most comprehensive survey of adolescents ever

undertaken (Mocan and Tekin, 2006).        Aside from containing a diagnostic instrument for

depression, a detailed set of questions on delinquent behaviors were asked to respondents in each

wave. Second, the longitudinal nature of the Add Health allows us to examine the long-term

relationship between depression and criminal behavior. Third, since we have information on



                                                7
criminal behavior in all waves, we can account for baseline differences in these behaviors.

Finally, the neighborhood and family identifiers allow us to account for many of the confounding

factors that may bias the estimated relationship between depression and crime.

Measures of Depression

          Our empirical analyses consider a measure of depression that is based on the Center for

Epidemiologic Studies Depression (CES-D) Scale. The CES-D Scale, originally developed by

Radoff (1977), is a widely used and reliable depressive symptomatology metric (e.g., Cornwell,

2003; Fletcher, 2010; Rees and Sabia, 2011; Tekin and Markowitz, 2008; Tekin et al., 2009).

The Add Health survey includes 18 of the 20 questions that constitute the CES-D Scale.7

Respondents were asked such questions as how often they felt “lonely”, “depressed”, or “too

tired to do things.”8 The possible responses were “never or rarely” (=0); “sometimes” (=1); “a

lot of the time” (=2); and “most of the time or all of the time” (=3). Following previous research,

we sum the coded responses to generate a score between 0 and 54.9 Then, we rescale the score

to be out of 60 so that it would correspond with the original 20-item CES-D Scale (see, e.g.,

Duncan and Rees, 2005; Rees et al., 2009; Sabia and Rees, 2008). Finally, a binary indicator of

depression is created based on the cut-off points of 22 for males and 24 for females in the CES-D

distribution (Roberts et al., 1991).                  Dichotomous measures constructed in this fashion are

7
  There is a 19th question that asked respondents if they felt whether “life was not worth living.” While we do not use
information from this question because it is not asked in the standard CES-D scale, it has been used by other researchers in
constructing measures of depression (see, e.g., Fletcher 2010). However, it must be noted that our results are similar when we
redefined our depression measure by utilizing information from this question.
8
  It should be noted that the measures of depression used in our study do not come without limitations. Most importantly, these
variables indicate depressive symptoms and do not represent medical diagnoses. In addition, as with any other survey,
respondents may have answered questions dishonestly or with error. However, survey administrators took a number of steps to
ensure data security and to minimize the potential for interviewer or parental influence. For example, respondents were not
provided with printed questionnaires. Instead, all responses were recorded on laptop computers. Furthermore, for sensitive
topics such as criminal behavior, respondents listened to pre-recorded questions through earphones and entered their own
responses.
9
  Four items assessed positive symptoms and, therefore, are reversed before calculating the scores. These positive symptoms
include how often the respondents (i) felt “happy”, (ii) felt “that you were just as good as other people”, (iii) felt “hopeful about
the future”, and (iv) “enjoyed life.”

                                                                  8
frequently used by social scientists, psychologists, and medical researchers (see, e.g., Fletcher,

2010; Goodman and Capitman, 2000; Hallfors et al., 2005; Sabia and Rees, 2008) and focus

attention on the right-hand tail of the distribution; the portion of the distribution where clinical

diagnoses of major depression are made (Sabia and Rees, 2008; Cesur et al., 2013).

Measures of Criminal Behavior

          The Add Health contains a large number of questions related to delinquent and criminal

activities. These questions are similar to those available in most other surveys and to the official

definitions of “crime” used by government sources such as the Bureau of Justice Statistics. 10

We focus on self-reports of property crime, violent crime, the selling of illicit drugs, and a

measure that encompasses any type of non-drug related criminal behavior.11 Specifically, we

construct a binary indicator, Property, to indicate involvement in property crime using answers

to the following three questionnaire items: In the past 12 months,(i) how often did you

deliberately damage property that didn’t belong you?; (ii) how often did you steal something

worth more than $50?; and (iii) how often did you go into a house or building to steal

something? The possible answers are “never”, “1 or 2 times”, “3 or 4 times”, and “5 or more

times.” We coded the indicator Property as one if the respondent committed one of these three

acts at least once in the past 12 months, and zero otherwise. Similarly, a binary indicator,

Violent, is constructed using answers to the following two questionnaire items: In the past 12

months, (i) how often did you use or threaten to use a weapon to get something from someone?;

and (ii) how often did you hurt someone badly enough in a physical fight that he or she needed

10
   Mocan and Tekin (2005, 2006) show that the rates of criminal activities reported in the Add Health, e.g. crime and illicit drug
use, are comparable to those in other national data sources, while Mocan and Rees (2005) demonstrate that the extent of juvenile
crime calculated from Add Health data is similar to those obtained from other sources.
11
   Evaluating specific types of crimes is of interest because previous research suggests mental health problems are more strongly
associated with certain offenses. For example, Ritakallio et al. (2006) find that vandalism was the most typical offense
committed among depressed delinquent girls, while Silver et al. (2008) illustrate that a history of mental health treatment is more
strongly associated with assaultive violence and sexual offenses than with other types of crimes.

                                                                 9
care from a doctor or nurse? Again, we coded the variable Violent as one if the respondent

committed one of these two acts at least once in the past 12 months, and zero otherwise. The

binary variable, Selling Drugs, is constructed in a similar fashion using answers to the

questionnaire item: In the past 12 months, how often did you sell marijuana or other drugs?

Finally, the variable Non-drug takes on the value of one if the respondent reports committing

either a property or a violent crime in the past 12 months, and zero otherwise. Note that these

criminal acts comprise the majority of the illegal activities committed by the Add Health

respondents.

       Table 1 shows the prevalence of criminal behaviors by depression status across Waves I

and IV of the Add Health. The descriptive statistics are displayed separately for the full sample

and the sibling subsample. Consistent with declining criminal tendencies between adolescence

and adulthood, the proportion of our samples who report committing illegal acts goes down

substantially between Waves I and IV. As shown in column (1), over 29.4 percent and 21

percent of respondents reported committing property and violent crimes in Wave I, respectively,

but these propensities decrease to 7.5 percent and 13.3 percent in Wave IV. Similarly, the act of

selling illicit drugs decreases from 7.5 percent to 4.2 percent during the same period.

       Columns (2) and (3) in Table 1 present the fraction of Add Health respondents reporting

various forms of criminal acts by depression status. As expected, the prevalence of criminal

behaviors is much higher among the depressed group compared to the non-depressed group in

Wave I. But somewhat surprisingly, the difference in crime between the two groups becomes

much narrower in Wave IV. Column (4) shows that the fraction of siblings who report criminal

behaviors is similar to that reported by the full sample. Moreover, as shown in columns (5) and

(6), the differences in criminal behaviors between the depressed and non-depressed sibling



                                                10
subsample are much larger in Wave I than in Wave IV, again a pattern similar to that exhibited

by the full sample. In fact, the differences are statistically significant only for property and non-

drug crimes between depressed and non-depressed siblings in Wave IV.

Explanatory Variables

          The relationship between adolescent depression and adult crime may be influenced by a

host of factors, and failing to control for these factors will bias the estimated effect of depression

on crime. One particular advantage of the Add Health data set is that it allows us to account for

a rich set of individual and family background characteristics that may be correlated with both

depression and criminal behavior. In addition to the standard demographic characteristics, such

as binary indicators for age, gender, race, and ethnicity, we consider individual-level controls for

religiosity, birth weight, whether the respondent was born in the United States, and whether the

respondent was an only child.12

          At the household-level, we control for parental marital status and presence of the

biological father.          These two variables are important because parental divorce and father

involvement have been linked to adolescent mental health, youth behavior, and long-term young

adult outcomes (Carlson, 2006; Cherlin et al., 1998; Cobb-Clark and Tekin, 2011; Finley and

Schwartz, 2007).            We also control for mother’s education and household income because

socioeconomic status is a well-known determinant of child development, with effects persisting

well into adulthood (e.g., Bradley and Corwyn, 2002; Goodman et al., 2003). Lastly, we include

in our models an indicator for whether the respondent’s biological father has ever spent time in

jail. Children with fathers who have been incarcerated are not only more likely to suffer from

depressive symptoms but are themselves more likely to commit crime when older (e.g.,


12
  In the models that include sibling fixed effects, we also control for birth order. Argys et al. (2006) illustrated that children with
older siblings are more likely to engage in risky behavior than their firstborn counterparts.

                                                                  11
Hjalmarsson and Lindquist, 2011; Wilbur et al., 2007). The household-level characteristics that

we consider are drawn from Wave I, the same period adolescent depression was measured. To

retain sample size, we construct binary indicators to represent information on missing data. The

list of explanatory variables is shown in Appendix Table 1 for the full sample as well as

separately by Wave I depression status. The descriptive statistics presented in Appendix Table 1

clearly indicate the importance of controlling for differences between children and their parents.

For example, we see that children who fall into the depressed category in Wave I are more likely

to have a father who had spent time in jail and more likely to have divorced parents. Overall,

children with poorer parents in Wave I have a higher prevalence of depression than those from

higher income households.



III. Empirical Strategy

       A relationship between depression during adolescence and adult criminal behavior can be

analyzed within the framework developed by Becker (1968) and Ehrlich (1973), which posits

that individuals engage in crime based on a comparison of the expected utility from criminal

activity to the utility associated with legal options.      Depression during adolescence may

influence this relationship in a number of ways. For example, depressed individuals may face a

productivity penalty in the labor market, which may in turn increase relative rewards from

engaging in illegal activities. Depression may also affect an individual’s evaluation of arrest and

conviction probabilities or depressed individuals may believe that they may face softer penalties

due to their mental health status (Fletcher and Wolfe, 2009).

       While a path from depression to crime is easy to elaborate, establishing an empirical link

presents a number of difficult challenges. The primary difficulty in estimating the effects of



                                                12
adolescent depression on adult criminal behavior is due to the potential for unobserved

heterogeneity that could confound the relationship. One can imagine a host of personal, family,

school, and community factors that are likely associated with both depression and crime. To

address this empirical challenge, we employ four separate estimation strategies. First, we begin

by considering the following equation:



          Crimei4 = α + β1Depressioni1 + Xi4β2 + Xi1β3 + εi4,                                                            (1)



where i indexes the individual respondent and the numeric subscript indicates the wave during

which the variables were measured. Specifically, Crimei4 represents a particular criminal

behavior measured during Wave IV. The variable Depressioni1 is a binary indicator that is equal

to one if the respondent scored above the CES-D scale threshold in Wave I, and equal to zero

otherwise. The vectors Xi4 and Xi1 contain the personal and family characteristics described

above that may influence an individual’s propensity to engage in criminal behavior and are

measured at Wave IV and Wave I, respectively. Finally, εi4 is a random error term and α, β1, β2,

and β3 are the parameters to be estimated. Equation (1) is estimated with OLS for ease of

interpretation.13 Because the Add Health is a school-based survey, the standard errors are

corrected for clustering at the school level.14

          We consider several channels through which adolescent depression may impact adult

criminal behavior and assess the extent to which the relationship between depression and crime


13
  OLS estimates in linear probability models are consistent estimates of average probability derivatives, but the standard error
estimates are biased due to heteroskedasticity. Therefore, we report standard errors corrected for heteroskedasticity. Probit and
logit models yielded similar results.
14
 We present results from unweighted regressions. Results are similar when we use the sample weights provided by the Add
Health. This is not surprising given the large number of variables that we control for in our regressions. The results from the
weighted regressions are available from the authors upon request.

                                                                13
is influenced by these channels. First, in accordance with previous research, we recognize that

mental illness can impede human capital accumulation and have a negative effect on earnings

and employment (e.g., Ettner et al. 1997; Fletcher 2008, 2009; Fletcher 2010; Marcotte and

Wilcox-Gök 2003; Wilcox-Gök et al. 2004). If individuals suffering from depression face a

wage penalty in the labor market, then we also expect them to face a decreased opportunity cost

of crime. Second, we consider that adolescent depression may impact adult crime through adult

depression. More specifically, if those who suffer from depression as children are more likely to

be depressed as adults, then it may not be adolescent depression per se that is influencing

criminal behavior. For example, Pine et al. (1999) illustrate that symptoms of major depression

in adolescence strongly predict adult episodes of major depression. Third, there is evidence to

suggest that depressive symptoms are related to a child’s level of future expectations and

impulsive behavior (e.g., d’Acremont and Van der Linden 2007; Wyman et al. 1993). To the

extent these characteristics persist over time, one concern is that they not only predict youth

depression but also adult criminality.

       Another possible channel through which depression may lead to criminal behavior is by

affecting individuals’ ability to evaluate the true costs and benefits associated with risk taking.

Individuals’ decisions to engage in crime are assumed to be a function of the anticipated costs

and benefits of their actions (Becker, 1968). However, these expected costs and benefits may be

influenced by depression experienced during adolescence. For example, depressed individuals

may view the future as uncertain or unpredictable and this may affect assessment of their own

life expectancy. Therefore, these individuals may discount the future consequences of their

behavior and see little reason to delay activities that may generate immediate rewards. Such

present orientation has been shown to be associated with increased propensities to engage in



                                                14
risky behaviors, including crime (e.g., Brezina et al., 2010; Hill et al., 1997; Wilson and Daly,

1997).      To address the role of these potential pathways, we estimate equation (1) while

controlling for education, employment status, a detailed set of occupational indicators, and two

variables that proxy for an individual’s expectations of the future:15



          Crimei4 = α + β1Depressioni1 + Xi4β2 + Xi1β3 + Miβ4 + εi4,                                                       (2)



where Mi is the vector of mechanisms described above.

          If adolescent depression was exogenous after accounting for observable individual and

family characteristics, then OLS estimations of equations (1) and (2) would yield consistent

estimates of the impact of depression on adult crime.                               However, exogeneity is likely an

unrealistic assumption due to the reasons mentioned above, even after controlling for a large

number of covariates.              One particular concern is neighborhood-level unobservables.                                   For

instance, adolescents in economically disadvantaged neighborhoods may experience higher rates

of emotional and mental health problems (e.g., Leventhal and Brooks-Gunn, 2000; Caspi et al.,

2000). These individuals are also likely to face poor labor market prospects, which may raise

their propensities to commit crime.                      Similarly, young people attending schools in these

neighborhoods may acquire poorer human capital, which may, again, lead to future criminal

activities by reducing the opportunity costs of such acts. Finally, persistent differences in

income and resources across school districts and neighborhoods may be associated with

15
   The questions pertaining to anticipation of future survival include: (i) when making decisions, do you usually go with your
“gut feeling” without thinking too much about the future consequences of each alternative?; and (ii) what do you think are the
chances that you will live to age 35? The set of occupational indicators includes management, business and financial operations,
computer and mathematical occupations, architecture and engineering, life, physical, and social science occupations, community
and social service occupations, legal occupations, education, training, and library occupations, arts, design, entertainment, sports,
and media occupations, healthcare practitioners, support, and technical occupations, protective service occupations, food
preparation and serving related occupations, building and grounds cleaning and maintenance occupations, personal care and
service occupations, sales, office and administrative occupations, farming, fishing, and forestry, construction, maintenance and
repair occupations, production occupations, and transportation and moving occupations.

                                                                 15
differences in both rates of depression and crime in these localities and failing to account for

these differences may generate biased estimates.           Because of these concerns, we augment

equation (1) with school fixed effects:



         Crimei4 = α + β1Depressioni1 + Xi4β2 + Xi1β3 + Miβ4 + λs + εi4,                        (3)



where λs is a vector of school fixed effects. Note that identification in equation (3) comes from

differences in depression status between individuals who attend the same school.

         While school fixed effects capture many unobserved factors across neighborhoods that

may be correlated with both depression and crime, the richness of our data set provides a further

opportunity to account for unobserved heterogeneity. Specifically, we take advantage of the

longitudinal nature of the Add Health data and control for the criminal propensity of the

respondent measured at Wave I:



         Crimei4 = α + β1Depressioni1 + Xi4β2 + Xi1β3 + Miβ4 + λs + Crimei1 + εi4,              (4)



where Crimei1 is the dependent variable measured during Wave I. The inclusion of a lagged

dependent variable is a useful way to account for any remaining unobserved heterogeneity that

may be simultaneously correlated with adolescent depression and subsequent criminal behavior

(e.g., Cesur et al., 2013; Cobb-Clark and Tekin, 2011; Herbst and Tekin, 2012; Rees and Sabia,

2011).

         While equation (4) is likely to control for important sources of bias, it is still possible that

unobserved factors at the family level that are correlated with both depression and subsequent



                                                   16
criminal behavior exist. For example, a poor home environment might simultaneously increase

the likelihood a child is depressed and commits crime later in life. Estimates of the impact of

adolescent depression on crime that omit these types of factors would be biased upward. To

control for unobserved characteristics at the family and neighborhood levels, we estimate family

fixed effects models of the following form:



          Crimei4 = α + β1Depressioni1 + Ki4β2 + Ki1β3 + νf + εi4,                                                        (5)



where i indexes the individual in family f. In this specification, νf represents a vector of unique

identifiers for each family and Ki4 and Ki1 represent a parsimonious set of individual controls

that vary between siblings (i.e. age at Wave IV, gender, birthweight, birth order, height, and

weight). Consequently, equation (5) accounts for unobserved characteristics that are shared by

siblings. Note that identification in equation (5) comes from discordant reports in depression

status among siblings within a family.16 We also estimate alternative versions of equation (5)

that include a vector of potential mechanisms and a lagged dependent variable. A comparison of

the results from Equations (1) through (5) provide insights into the degree to which our estimates

may be biased due to omitted factors at the neighborhood and family levels (e.g., Currie and

Stabile 2006; Fletcher, 2010; Fletcher and Wolfe 2008).17


16
   One concern with the sibling fixed effects strategy is that the estimates may reflect differences in parental investment rather
than depression per se. To address this issue, we used information from the following Add Health question, “Think of all the
things your parents do for you and your sibling. Do you think that you or your sibling receives more attention and love from
your parents? Would you say that your sibling receives [a lot more, a little more, the same amount, a little less, a lot less]?”
Specifically, we estimated the sibling fixed effects models for only the sample of siblings who both reported equal parental
treatment. Under this alternative specification, our estimates were qualitatively similar to those reported below. These results are
available from the authors upon request.
17
   It should be noted that if depressive symptoms are measured with error, then sibling fixed effects may aggravate the bias
associated with the measurement error. Also those in the sibling sample who were not surveyed during Wave IV are slightly less
likely to be depressed at Wave I but share similar Wave I criminal propensities with those individuals who remained in the
sample.


                                                                17
IV. Results

          Table 2 presents results from the estimation of equations (1) – (4). Panel A presents the

baseline OLS estimates for the relationship between adolescent depression and subsequent

criminal behavior for each of the four crime outcomes.18 As shown, depression during

adolescence is a statistically significant predictor of all four types of crime. The estimates

indicate that those who suffer from depression during adolescence face a 4.7 percentage-point

higher probability of committing a property crime, a 2.0 percentage-point higher probability of

committing a violent crime, a 1.3 percentage-point higher probability of selling illicit drugs, and

a 4.5 percentage-point higher probability of committing a non-drug crime during the past 12

month period in Wave IV. In addition to being statistically significant, these estimates are also

substantial in size, corresponding to effect sizes of approximately 66 percent for property crime,

15 percent for violent crime, 32 percent for the selling of drugs, and 23 percent for non-drug

crime.

          Panel B shows estimates from models that control for educational attainment,

employment status, log earnings, a vector of occupational indicators, and proxies for risk

perceptions as specified in equation (2). These variables are included because they represent

potential channels through which adolescent depression may influence subsequent criminality.

Upon including these measures, we see that the coefficient estimates in the violent crime and the

selling of drugs models decrease in magnitude such that they are no longer statistically

significant at conventional levels. It is interesting, however, that the inclusion of these additional

controls has little effect on the estimated depression coefficient in the models for property and

18
  In the interest of space, we only present the coefficient estimates for the depression variable. The results for the other controls
are consistent with previous studies on the determinants of crime (e.g., Currie and Tekin, 2012; Mocan and Tekin, 2006, 2010)
and are presented in the Appendix Table 2 for the most comprehensive specifications.

                                                                 18
non-drug crime. In other words, depression during adolescence continues to have long-lasting

effects on these crimes that cannot be accounted for by lower educational attainment, poor labor

market performance, or changes in risk perceptions.

            Panel C presents the estimates for models that include school fixed effects. The estimates

with school fixed effects are nearly identical to those in Panel B, implying that neighborhood-

and community-level characteristics are orthogonal to the relationship between depression and

crime after controlling for family and individual characteristics.19

            Finally, we present the estimates from the specifications that also control for criminal

behavior during Wave I. Not surprisingly, adolescents who engaged in criminal behavior in

Wave I are much more likely to do so again in Wave IV. This strong persistence in criminality is

reflected by the highly significant and large estimates reported in Panel D of Table 2. In

particular, the degree of persistence in crime over time is 5.5 percentage points for property

crime, 2.8 percentage points for violent crime, 8.2 percentage points for the selling of drugs, and

5.2 percentage points for any non-drug crime. Remarkably, even after controlling for criminal

behavior in Wave I, the impacts of adolescent depression on subsequent property and non-drug

crimes remain sizeable and statistically significant.                          In particular, adolescent depression is

associated with a 3.5 percentage-point increase in the propensity to commit a property crime and

a 2.9 percentage-point increase in the propensity to commit a non-drug crime.20

            While the results presented in Table 2, especially those in panel D, are suggestive of a

causal relationship between adolescent depression and future criminal behavior, they may still

suffer from bias due to unobserved heterogeneity. To further guard against potential bias, we


19
  However, these neighborhood- and community-level characteristics may have independent and direct impacts on criminal
behavior.

20
     Full results from the specification in Panel D are presented in Appendix Table 2.

                                                                  19
consider models that employ the sibling subsample available in the Add Health. In Table 3, we

show results from the sibling analyses in steps similar to those presented in Table 2. The OLS

estimates using the sibling sample are shown in Panel A. Despite the substantial reduction in

sample size, the relationship between adolescent depression and future crime remains statistically

significant for the property and non-drug crimes. It is useful to compare these estimates to those

of Table 2 in order to assess how changing samples affects the estimates. Panel A of Table 3

indicates that the OLS estimates are uniformly larger in the sibling subsample than in the full

sample; however, we cannot reject that the coefficients are the same given the larger standard

errors in the sibling models. 21 As shown in Panel B, the estimates for the relationship between

adolescent depression and future criminality change little when we add the potential mediators.

            The models that control for family fixed effects are shown in Panels C and D of Table 3.

In Panel C, we present fixed effects estimates from specifications with potential mediators and

basic controls that differ between siblings.22 In panel D, we include the right-hand-side variables

from Panel C and add a lagged dependent variable. These estimates show that adolescent

depression is still a statistically significant predictor of adult property crime. The estimate size in

Panel D represents a 5.6 percentage-point increase in the propensity to commit a property crime

and is statistically significant at the 5 percent level.23, 24 The estimate on the non-drug crime


21
     The full set of results from the specification in Panel D is presented in Appendix Table 3.
22
  We also estimated the family fixed effects specification with limited controls (gender, birthweight, birth order, height, and
weight). Results from these models are very similar to those presented in Panel C of Table 3 and are available from the authors
upon request.

23
   One possible explanation for the more sizeable estimates in the sibling subsample may be due to non-linearity in the
relationship between depression and future crime among siblings. If, for example, siblings are more vulnerable to the effects of
depression, then depression could have a larger effect on crime. Waldinger et al. (2007) show that sibling rivalries predict
occurrences of major depression, while Nelson and Martin (1985) report increased child abuse in families with twins.
24
  Note that the mean incidence of property crime is 0.062 in the not-depressed and 0.125 in the depressed sibling samples,
respectively. The effect size estimated in this paper is not out of line with other determinants of crime studied by using data from
the Add Health. For example, Currie and Tekin (2012) find that child maltreatment roughly doubles the probability an individual
engages in several types of crimes. Mocan and Tekin (2006) show that having access to a gun at home increases the probability

                                                                   20
coefficient is less precisely estimated and loses statistical significance upon controlling for

family fixed effects. Also note that adding the lagged dependent variable in Panel D of Table 3

has little impact on the estimated effect of adolescent depression on future crime. To the extent

that the family fixed effects account for unobserved family-level factors that affect both the

likelihood of depression during childhood and future criminality, there may be little relevant

variation left in the data. The fact that the estimate on property crime remains robust and

sizeable after using the sibling sample and controlling for education, employment, risk

perceptions, and lagged criminality is a strong indication that a causal relationship exists between

adolescent depression and the decision to engage in property crime later in life.

          Studies have shown that there are gender differences in both offending (Daly and

Chesney-Lind, 1988; Steffensmeier and Allan, 1995) and the experience of depression (Compas

and Hammen, 1994; Culbertson, 1997; Gjerde, et al., 1988). For example, studies examining

personality characteristics of adolescents with depressive symptoms have found that depression

usually manifests itself in internalizing patterns of behavior among girls such as passivity, while

it is more likely to be manifested in externalizing patterns of behavior among males, such as

aggression and conduct disorder. Therefore, we include an interaction between gender and

depression status to our most comprehensive specifications (i.e. models with family fixed

effects).25 As illustrated in Table 4, the estimate on the interaction term is never statistically

significant and is zero for all practical purposes for property crime. Looking at non-drug crime

in column (4), we see that the interaction term is sizeable, but is still statistically

indistinguishable from zero. Taken together, we interpret these results as no clear evidence of a


an individual engages in a variety of crimes by roughly 30 percent. Fletcher and Wolff (2009) document that childhood ADHD
increases the probability an individual engages in crime as an adult by roughly 40 to 70 percent.
25
   It would be natural to estimate the family fixed effects models separately for males and females. However, doing this
substantially reduces the variation in our sample to the extent that the depression coefficients are imprecisely estimated. Instead,
we report models in which we control for an interaction term between gender and depression status.

                                                                21
gender specific relationship between adolescent depression and adult criminal behavior,

especially for property crime.

             Finally, we conduct analyses controlling for co-morbid conditions and substance use. To

do so, we include dummy variables to indicate the following individual-level characteristics:

prior diagnosis of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (measured at Wave IV), prior diagnosis

of anxiety (measured at Wave IV), prior marijuana use (measured at Wave I), prior alcohol use

(measured at Wave I), and prior use of any drug (measured at Wave IV). 26 Research has shown

a link between attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and criminal behavior (e.g., Fletcher and

Wolfe, 2009; Manuzza et al., 2004, 2008; Sourander et al., 2007) and between substance use and

criminal behavior (Carpenter 2007; Markowitz 2005). These variables are included in the most

comprehensive specifications from Tables 2 and 3 and the results are illustrated in Table 5. As

shown in both panels, the estimates are nearly identical to the corresponding estimates from

Tables 2 and 3. These findings suggest that the association between adolescent depression and

adult criminal behavior is unlikely to operate through these other conditions.27



V. Conclusions

             Understanding the type of mental health problems that precede future criminal behavior

is critical to developing effective intervention programs targeted at young people who suffer

from these disorders. The results in this paper provide strong support for a positive and causal

relationship between depression during adolescence and the probability of committing property

crime during adulthood. Our results are robust across multiple specifications that control for a

rich set of individual, family, and neighborhood characteristics. It is also remarkable that this

26
     Descriptive statistics for these variables are illustrated in Appendix Table 1.
27
     An potential caveat to these results is that the substance use indicators may potentially endogenously determined.

                                                                    22
relationship persists even after accounting for the several channels through which the

relationship is expected to manifest itself. This suggests that there is an independent effect of

childhood depression on future property crime that cannot be accounted for by these

mechanisms. Moreover, our findings persist even when we compare individuals who attend the

same schools or individuals who are siblings.                          Thus, we find no evidence to suggest that

confounders at the school, neighborhood, or family level account for the relationship between

depression and crime.

            Crime is a problem that imposes substantial costs on society. These findings imply that

policies designed to reduce depression at young ages may have real downstream benefits on

criminal behavior.             To put the magnitudes of our estimates into perspective, we consider the

following back-of-the-envelope calculations. According to statistics from the National Crime

Victimization Survey, the total economic loss to victims of property crime is 16.1 billion dollars

for a total of 17.5 million crimes.                       These numbers translate into a per victim cost of

approximately 917 dollars per property crime.28 An estimate for the annual per victim cost of

depression associated with property crime can be obtained by multiplying this dollar amount by

the estimate of 0.056 from our preferred specification (Panel D of Table 3) and then multiplying

the resulting figure by the incidence of adolescent depression in our sample of 0.104 (=

917*0.056*0.104 = 5.34 dollars). Given that there were 41 million people in the United States

aged 25 through 34 in 2010, this implies a total cost of roughly 219 million dollars per year.

Note, however, that the cost of 5.34 dollars per victim is likely an underestimate since there are

also costs associated with property crime burdened by non-victims. As a result, we view the

approximation of 219 million dollars as a lower bound for the economic cost of property crime

due to adolescent depression.
28
     See Table 82 in http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/content/pub/pdf/cvus07.pdf.

                                                                 23
       While our study points to a previously undocumented benefit of reducing the prevalence

of adolescent depression, this paper does not come without limitations. In particular, future

research should aim to establish the exact mechanisms through which adolescent depression

influences the propensity to engage in property crime as an adult. We have controlled for a host

of potential channels, but none completely mediate the relationship between depression and

property crime. To better direct intervention programs for youths, these mechanisms should be

established.




                                              24
                                        References

Agnew, Robert. 1992. “Foundation for a General Strain Theory of Delinquency.” Criminology
30: 47-87.

American Psychological Association Task Force on Evidence-Based Practice for Children and
Adolescents. 2008. Disseminating evidence-based practice for children and     adolescents: A
systems approach to enhancing care. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Available at: http://www.apa.org/news/press/releases/2008/08/evidence-based.aspx.

Argys, Laura, Rees, Daniel, Averett, Susan and Witoonchart, Benjama. 2006. “Birth Order and
Risky Adolescent Behavior.” Economic Inquiry 44: 215-233.

Arsenault, L., Moffitt, T., Caspi, A., Taylor, P. and Silva, P. 2000. “Mental disorders and
violence in a total birth cohort: Results from the Dunedin Study.” Archives of General
Psychiatry 57: 979-986.

Becker, Gary. 1968. “Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach.” Journal of Political
Economy 76: 169-217.

Bradley, Robert and Corwyn, Robert. 2002. “Socioeconomic Status and Child Development.”
Annual Review of Psychology 53: 379-399.

Brennan P., Mednick, S and S. Hodgins. 2000. “Major Mental Disorders and Criminal Violence
in a Danish Birth Cohort.” Archives of General Psychiatry 57: 494-500.

Brezina, Timothy, Tekin, Erdal and Topalli, Volkan. 2009. “Might Not Be a Tomorrow:
Anticipated Early Death and Youth Crime.” Criminology 48: 1024-1049.

Broidy, Lisa. 2001. “A Test of General Strain Theory.” Criminology 39: 9-36.

Broidy, Lisa and Agnew, Robert. 1997. “Gender and Strain: A General Strain Theory
Perspective.” Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency 34: 275-306.

Carlson, Marcia. 2006. “Family Structure, Father Involvement, and Adolescent Behavioral
Outcomes.” Journal of Marriage and Family 68: 137-154.

Carpenter, Christopher. 2007. “Heavy Alcohol Use and Crime: Evidence from Underage
Drunk-Driving Laws.” Journal of Law and Economics 50: 539-557.

Caspi, A., Taylor, A., Moffitt, T., Wikstrom, P., Loeber, R. and Novak, S. 2000.
“Neighborhood Deprivation Affects Children’s Mental Health: Environmental Risks Identified
in a Genetic Design.” Psychological Science 11: 338-342.

Cesur, Resul, Sabia, Joseph and Tekin, Erdal. 2013. “The Psychological Costs of War: Military
Combat and Mental Health.” Journal of Health Economics, volume 32, Issue 1, Pages 51-65.


                                             25
Chatterji, Pinka, Alegria, Margarita and Takeuchi, David. 2011. “Psychiatric disorders and
Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence from the National Comorbidity Survey-Replication.”
Forthcoming Journal of Health Economics.

Cherlin, Andrew, Chase-Lansdale, P. Lindsay and McRae, Christine. 1998. “Effects of Parental
Divorce on Mental Health Throughout the Life Course.” American Sociological Review 63:
239-249.

Choe, Jeanne, Teplin, Linda and Abram, Karen. 2008. “Perpetration of Violence, Violent
Victimization, and Severe Mental Illness: Balancing Public Health Concerns.” Psychiatric
Services 59: 153-164.

Coalition for Juvenile Justice. 2012. Mental Health Needs of Youth and Young Offenders.
Factsheet. Available at: http://www.juvjustice.org/media/factsheets/factsheet_8.pdf.

Cobb-Clark, Deborah and Tekin, Erdal. 2011. “Fathers and Youth Delinquent Behavior.”
NBER Working Paper No. 17507.

Compas, B. E., and Hammen, C. L. 1994. “Child and adolescent depression: Covariation and
comorbidity in development.” In R. J. Haggerty, L. R. Sherrod, N. Garmexy, and M.      Rutter,
eds., Stress, risk and resilience in children and adolescents: Processes, mechanism, and
interventions. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Cornwell, Benjamin. 2003. “The Dynamic Properties of Social Support: Decay, Growth, and
Staticity, and Their Effects on Adolescent Depression.” Social Forces 81: 953-978.

Culbertson, F. M. 1997. “Depression and Gender: An International Review.” American
Psychologist 52: 25−31.

Currie, Janet and Stabile, Mark. 2006. “Child Mental Health and Human Capital Accumulation:
The Case of ADHD.” Journal of Health Economics 25: 1094-1118.

Currie, Janet and Tekin, Erdal. 2012. “Understanding the Cycle: Childhood Maltreatment and
Future Crime.” Journal of Human Resources 47: 509-549.

d’Acremont, Mathieu and Van der Linden, Martial. 2007. “How is Impulsivity Related to
Depression in Adolescence? Evidence from a French Validation of the Cognitive Emotion
Regulation Questionnaire.” Journal of Adolescence 30: 271-282.

Daly, K., and Chesney-Lind, M. 1988. “Feminism and Criminology.” Justice Quarterly 5:
497−538.

Donnellan, M. Brent, Trzesniewski, Kali, Robins, Richard, Moffitt, Terrie and Caspi, Avshalom.
2005. “Low Self-Esteem is Related to Aggression, Antisocial Behavior, and Delinquency.”
Psychological Science 16: 328-335.


                                              26
Duncan, Brian and Rees, Daniel. 2005. “The Effect of Smoking on Depression: A
Reexamination of Data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health.” American
Journal of Epidemiology 162: 461-470.

Elbogen, Eric and Johnson, Sally. 2009. “The Intricate Link Between Violence and Mental
Disorder.” Archives of General Psychiatry 66: 152-161.

Ehrlich, Isaac. 1973. “Participation in Illegitimate Activities: A Theoretical and Empirical
Investigation.” Journal of Political Economy 81: 521-565.

Ettner, Susan, Frank, Richard and Kessler, Ronald. 1997. “The Impact of Psychiatric Disorders
on Labor Market Outcomes.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 51: 64-81.

Finley, Gordon and Schwartz, Seth. 2007. “Father Involvement and Long-Term Young Adult
Outcomes: The Differential Contributions of Divorce and Gender.” Family Court Review 45:
573-587.

Fletcher, Jason. 2008. “Adolescent Depression: Diagnosis, Treatment, and Educational
Attainment.” Health Economics 17: 1215-1235.

Fletcher, Jason. 2010. “Adolescent Depression and Educational Attainment: Results Using
Sibling Fixed Effects.” Health Economics 19: 855-871.

Fletcher, Jason. 2012. “Adolescent Depression and Labor Market Outcomes.” Forthcoming
Southern Economic Journal.

Fletcher, Jason and Wolfe, Barbara. 2008. “Child Mental Health and Human Capital
Accumulation: The Case of ADHD Revisited.” Journal of Health Economics 27: 794-800.

Fletcher, Jason and Wolfe, Barbara. 2009. “Long-term Consequences of Childhood ADHD on
Criminal Activities.” Journal of Mental Health Policy and Economics 12: 119-138.

Gjerde, P. F., Block, J., and Block, J. H. 1988. “Depressive Symptoms and Personality during
Late Adolescence: Gender differences in the Externalization-Internalization of Symptom
Expression.” Journal of Abnormal Psychology 97: 475−486.

Goodman, Elizabeth and Capitman, John. 2000. “Depressive Symptoms and Cigarette Smoking
Among Teens.” Pediatrics 106: 748-755.

Goodman, Elizabeth, Slap, Gail and Huang, Bin. 2003. “The Public Health Impact of
Socioeconomic Status on Adolescent Depression and Obesity.” American Journal of Public
Health 93: 1844-1850.

Greden, John F. 2001. “The Burden of Recurrent Depression: Causes, Consequences, and
Future Prospects.” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 62 Suppl 22: 5-9.


                                               27
Greenberg, Paul E. 2003. “The Economic Burden of Depression in the United States: How did
it Change between 1990 and 2000?” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 64: 1465-1475.

Greenfield, Shelly, Weiss, Roger, Muenz, Larry, Vagge, Lisa, Kelly, John, Bello, Lisa and
Michael, Jacqueline. 1998. “The Effect of Depression on Return to Drinking.” Archives of
General Psychiatry 55: 259-265.

Hallfors, Denise, Waller, Martha, Bauer, Daniel, Ford, Carol and Halpern, Carolyn. 2005.
“Which Comes First in Adolescence – Sex and Drugs or Depression?” American Journal of
Preventative Medicine 29: 163-170.

Herbst, Chris M, and Tekin, Erdal. 2012. “Child Care Subsidies, Maternal Well-Being, and
Child-Parent Interactions: Evidence from Three Nationally Representative Datasets.” NBER
Working Paper No. 1774.

Hill, Elizabeth M., Ross, Lisa T. and Low, Bobbi S. 1997. “The Role of Future Unpredictability
in Human Risk-Taking.” Human Nature 8: 287-325.

Hjalmarsson, Randi and Lindquist, Matthew. 2011. “Like Godfather, Like Son: Exploring the
Intergenerational Nature of Crime.” Forthcoming Journal of Human Resources.

Hodgins, S. 1992. “Mental disorder, intellectual deficiency, and crime: evidence from a birth
cohort.” Archives of General Psychiatry 49: 476-483.

Leventhal, T. and Brooks-Gunn, J. 2000. “The Neighborhoods they Live In: The Effects of
Neighborhood Residence Upon Child and Adolescent Outcomes.” Psychological Bulletin 126:
309-337.

Mannuzza, Salvatore, Klein, Rachel, Abikoff, Howard and Moulton, John. 2004. “Significance
of Childhood Conduct Problems to Later Development of Conduct Disorder among Children
with ADHD: A Prospective Follow-Up Study.” Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology 32:
565-573.

Mannuzza, Salvatore, Klein, Rachel and Moulton, John. 2008. “Lifetime Criminality among
Boys with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: A Prospective Follow-Up Study into
Adulthood Using Official Arrest Records.” Psychiatry Research 160: 237-246.

Marcotte, Dave and Markowitz, Sara. 2011. “A Cure for Crime? Psycho-Pharmaceuticals and
Crime Trends.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 30: 29-56.

Marcotte, Dave and Wilcox-Gök, Virginia. 2003. “Estimating Earnings Losses due to Mental
Illness: A Quantile Regression Approach.” Journal of Mental Health Policy and Economics 6:
123-134.




                                              28
Markowitz, Sara. 2005. “Alcohol, Drugs, and Violent Crime.” International Review of Law
and Economics 25: 20-44.

Mazerolle, Paul and Piquero, Alex. 1997. “Violent Responses to Strain: An Examination of
Conditioning Influences.” Violence and Victims 12: 323-343.

Mocan, Naci and Rees, Daniel. 2005. “Economic Conditions, Deterrence and Juvenile Crime:
Evidence from Micro Data.” American Law and Economics Review 7: 319-349.

Mocan, Naci and Tekin, Erdal. 2005. “Drugs and Juvenile Crime: Evidence from a Panel of
Siblings and Twins.” In Lindgren and Grossman, eds., Substance Use: Individual Behavior,
Social Interactions, Markets, and Politics. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Mocan, Naci and Tekin, Erdal. 2006. “Guns and Juvenile Crime.” Journal of Law and
Economics 49: 507-532.

Mocan, Naci and Tekin, Erdal. 2010. “Ugly Criminals.” Review of Economics and Statistics
92: 15-30.

Nelson, Henry and Martin, Catherine. 1985. "Increased Child Abuse in Twins." Child Abuse &
Neglect 9: 501-505.

Pine, Daniel, Cohen, Elizabeth, Cohen, Patricia and Brook, Judith. 1999. “Adolescent
Depressive Symptoms as Predictors of Adult Depression: Moodiness or Mood Disorder?”
American Journal of Psychiatry 156: 133-135.

Piquero, Nicole and Sealock, Miriam. 2004. “Gender and General Strain Theory: A
Preliminary Test of Broidy and Agnew’s Gender/GST Hypotheses.” Justice Quarterly 21: 125-
158.

Radloff, Lenore. 1977. “The CES-D Scale: A Self-Report Depression Scale for Research in the
General Population.” Applied Psychological Measurement 1: 385-401.

Ramrakha, Sandhya, Caspi, Avshalom, Dickson, Nigel, Moffitt, Terrie and Paul, Charlotte.
2000. “Psychiatric Disorders and Risky Sexual Behaviour in Young Adulthood: Cross Sectional
Study in Birth Cohort.” British Medical Journal 321: 263-266.

Rao, Uma, Daley, Shannon and Hammen, Constance. 2000. “Relationship Between Depression
and Substance Use Disorders in Adolescent Women During the Transition to Adulthood.”
Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry 39: 215-222.

Rees, Daniel and Sabia, Joseph. 2011. “The Effect of Migraine Headache on Educational
Attainment.” Journal of Human Resources 46: 317-332.

Rees, Daniel, Sabia, Joseph and Argys, Laura. 2009. “A Head Above the Rest: Height and
Adolescent Psychological Well-Being.” Economics and Human Biology 7: 217-228.


                                            29
Ritakallio, Minna, Kaltiala-Heino, Riittakerttu, Kivivuori, Janne, Luukkaala, Tiina and Rimpela,
Matti. 2006. “Delinquency and the Profile of Offences among Depressed and Non-Depressed
Adolescents.” Criminal Behaviour and Mental Health 16: 100-110.

Roberts, Robert, Lewinsohn, Peter and Seeley, John. 1991. “Screening for Adolescent
Depression: A Comparison of Depression Scales.” Journal of the American Academy of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry 30: 58-66.

Ruhm, Christopher. 1992. “The Effects of Physical and Mental Health on Female Labor
Supply.” In Frank and Manning, Jr., eds., Economics and Mental Health. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press.

Sabia, Joseph and Rees, Daniel. 2008. “The Effect of Adolescent Virginity Status on
Psychological Well-Being.” Journal of Health Economics 27: 1368-1381.

Shrier, Lydia, Harris, Sion Kim, Sternberg, Maya and Beardslee, William. 2001. “Associations
of Depression, Self-Esteem, and Substance Use with Sexual Risk among Adolescents.”
Preventative Medicine 33: 179-189.

Silver, Eric, Felson, Richard and Vaneseltine, Matthew. 2008. “The Relationship between
Mental Health Problems and Violence among Criminal Offenders.” Criminal Justice And
Behavior 35: 405-426.

Sourander, A., Jensen, P., Davies, M., Niemela, S., Elonheimo, H., Ristkari, T., Helenius, H.,
Sillanmaki, L., Piha, J., Kumpulainen, K., Tamminen, T., Moilanen, I., and Almqvist, F. 2007.
“Who is at Greatest Risk of Adverse Long-Term Outcomes? The Finnish From a Boy to a Man
Study.” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 46: 1148-1161.

Steffensmeier, D. and Allan, E. 1995. “Criminal Behavior: Gender and Age.” In J. F. Sheley,
ed., Criminology: A Contemporary Handbook. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.

Stiffman, Arlene, Doré, Peter, Earls, Felton and Cunningham, Renee. 1992. “The Influence of
Mental Health Problems on AIDS-Related Risk Behaviors in Young Adults.” Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease 180: 314-320.

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. 2010 . Results from the 2009
National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Mental Health Findings (Office of Applied Studies,
NSDUH Series H-39, HHS Publication No. SMA 10-4609). Rockville, MD.

Swanson, Jeffrey, Swartz, Marvin, Essock, Susan, Osher, Fred, Wagner, Ryan, Goodman, Lisa,
Rosenberg, Stanley and Meador, Keith. 2002. “The Social-Environmental Context of Violent
Behavior in Persons Treated for Severe Mental Illness.” American Journal of Public Health 92:
1523–1531.

Swendsen, Joel and Merikangas, Kathleen. 2000. “The Comorbidity of Depression and
Substance Use Disorders.” Clinical Psychology Review 20: 173-189.

                                               30
Tekin, Erdal and Markowitz, Sara. 2008. “Suicidal Behavior and the Labor Market Productivity
of Young Adults.” Southern Economic Journal 75: 300-331.

Tekin, Erdal, Liang, Lan and Mocan, Naci. 2009. “Do Adolescents with Emotional or
Behavioral Problems Respond to Tobacco Control Policies?” Southern Economic Journal 76:
67-85.

Teplin, L. A. 1990. “The Prevalence of Severe Mental Disorder among Urban Male Detainees:
Comparison with the Epidemiologic Catchment Area Program.” American Journal of Public
Health 80: 663–669.

Teplin, Linda, McClelland, Gary, Abram, Karen and Weiner, Dana. 2005. “Crime
Victimization in Adults with Severe Mental Illness.” Archives of General Psychiatry 62: 911-
921.

Trzesniewski, Kali, Donnellan, M. Brent, Moffitt, Terrie, Robins, Richard, Poulton, Richie and
Caspi, Avshalom. 2006. “Low Self-Esteem During Adolescence Predicts Poor Health, Criminal
Behavior, and Limited Economic Prospects During Adulthood.” Developmental Psychology 42:
381-390.

Udry, J. Richard. 2003. "The National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health),
Waves I & II, 1994-1996, Wave III, 2001-2002 [machine-readable data file and documentation].
Chapel Hill, NC: Carolina Population Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

Vermeiren R., De Clippele, A. and Deboutte, D. 2000. “A Descriptive Survey of Flemish
Delinquent Adolescents.” Journal of Adolescence 23: 277–285

Waldinger, Robert, Vaillant, George and Orav, John. 2007. “Childhood Sibling Relationships
as a Predictor of Major Depression in Adulthood: A 30-Year Prospective Study.” American
Journal of Psychiatry 164: 949-954.

Wallace, C., Mullen, P., Burgess, P., Palmer, S., Ruschena, D. and Browne, C. 1998. “Serious
criminal offending and mental disorder. Case linkage study.” British Journal of Psychiatry 172:
477-484.

Weissman, M., Wolk, S., Goldstein, R., Moreau, D., Adams, P., Greenwald, S., Klier, C., Ryan,
N., Dahl, R. and Wickramaratne, P. 1999. “Depressed Adolescents Grown Up.” JAMA 281:
1707-1713.

White, Mary Castle, Chafetz, Linda, Collins-Bride, Gerri and Nickens, John. 2006. “History of
Arrest, Incarceration and Victimization in Community-Based Severely Mentally Ill.” Journal of
Community Health 31: 123-135.




                                              31
Wilbur, MaryAnn, Marani, Jodi, Appugliese, Danielle, Woods, Ryan, Siegel, Jane, Cabral,
Howard and Frank, Deborah. 2007. “Socioemotional Effects of Fathers’ Incarceration on Low-
Income, Urban, School-Aged Children.” Pediatrics 120: e678-e685.

Wilcox-Gök, Virginia, Marcotte, Dave, Farahati, Farah and Borkoski, Carey. 2004. “Early
Onset Depression and High School Dropout.” In Marcotte and Wilcox-Gök, eds., The
Economics of Gender and Mental Illness. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.

Wilson, Margo, and Daly, Martin. 1997. “Life Expectancy, Economic Inequality, Homicide,
and Reproductive Timing in Chicago Neighborhoods.” British Medical Journal 314: 1271-1274.

World Health Organization. 2001. “Mental Health: A Call for Action by World Health
Ministers.” Available at:
http://www.who.int/mental_health/advocacy/en/Call_for_Action_MoH_Intro.pdf.

Wyman, Peter, Cowen, Emory, Work, William and Kerley, Judy. 1993. “The Role of
Children’s Future Expectations in Self-System Functioning and Adjustment to Life Stress: A
Prospective Study of Urban At-Risk Children.” Development and Psychopathology 5: 649-661.




                                             32
                                              Table 1 - Descriptive Statistics
                        Full         Full Sample            Full Sample          Sibling        Sibling Sample         Sibling Sample
Variable               Sample       Not-Depressed            Depressed           Sample         Not-Depressed            Depressed
Wave I
  Property              0.294             0.280                0.412***           0.287               0.276                 0.378***
                       (0.456)           (0.449)               (0.492)           (0.452)             (0.447)                (0.486)
  Violent               0.210             0.197                0.327***           0.199               0.188                 0.294***
                       (0.408)           (0.398)               (0.469)           (0.399)             (0.391)                (0.456)
  Selling Drugs         0.075             0.067                0.142***           0.067               0.062                 0.116***
                       (0.263)           (0.250)               (0.349)           (0.251)             (0.240)                (0.320)
  Nondrug               0.394             0.376                0.550***           0.378               0.362                 0.518***
                       (0.489)           (0.484)               (0.498)           (0.485)             (0.481)                (0.500)
Wave IV
  Property              0.075             0.071                0.109***           0.068               0.062                 0.125***
                       (0.264)           (0.257)               (0.311)           (0.253)             (0.241)                (0.331)
  Violent               0.133             0.131                0.156***           0.141               0.137                  0.168
                       (0.340)           (0.337)               (0.363)           (0.348)             (0.344)                (0.374)
  Selling Drugs         0.042             0.041                 0.051*            0.037               0.035                  0.052
                       (0.200)           (0.198)               (0.220)           (0.188)             (0.183)                (0.222)
  Nondrug               0.205             0.200                0.242***           0.202               0.195                 0.259***
                       (0.404)           (0.400)               (0.428)           (0.401)             (0.396)                (0.439)

Depressed               0.104               -                     1               0.106                 -                      1
                       (0.305)              -                    (0)             (0.307)                -                     (0)
CES-D Scale            12.389            10.456                29.129            12.572              10.685                 28.558
                       (8.136)           (5.824)               (5.759)           (8.055)             (5.907)                (5.768)

Observations           15,584            13,971                 1,613             3,116               2,787                   329
   Notes: Standard deviations are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
   respectively, for the difference between the means in columns (2) and (3) and columns (5) and (6).




                                                                   33
                           Table 2 - Estimates from OLS and School Fixed Effects
                                 (1)                            (2)                         (3)                        (4)
Variable                       Property                       Violent                 Selling Drugs                  Nondrug

                     Panel A: OLS with Basic Controls
Depressed                   0.047***               0.020**                                0.013**                    0.045***
                             (0.009)                (0.010)                               (0.005)                     (0.011)

Observations                    15,570                        15,571                       15,582                     15,560
R2                              0.026                          0.010                       0.027                       0.022

                     Panel B: OLS with Basic Controls + Potential Channels
Depressed                   0.043***                 0.015                  0.007                                    0.037***
                             (0.009)                (0.010)                (0.005)                                    (0.011)

Observations                    15,570                        15,571                       15,582                     15,560
R2                              0.037                          0.016                       0.047                       0.028

                     Panel C: School Fixed Effects + Basic Controls + Potential Channels
Depressed                   0.042***                  0.015                 0.008                                    0.036***
                             (0.009)                 (0.010)               (0.005)                                    (0.011)

Observations                    15,570                        15,571                       15,582                     15,560
R2                              0.050                          0.026                       0.059                       0.039

                Panel D: School Fixed Effects + Basic Controls + Potential Channels + Lagged Dependent
                Variable
Depressed              0.035***                  0.013                 0.004               0.029**
                        (0.009)                 (0.010)               (0.005)              (0.011)
Crime in Wave I        0.055***                0.028***              0.082***             0.052***
                        (0.005)                 (0.008)               (0.013)              (0.006)

Observations                    15,467                        15,464                       15,494                     15,504
R2                              0.058                          0.027                       0.070                       0.043
  Notes: Standard errors, corrected for clustering at the school level, are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
  significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Models also include missing binary indicators for each of the control
  variables.




                                                                 34
           Table 3 – Estimates from Family Sample - OLS and Family Fixed Effects
                                  (1)                 (2)                      (3)                          (4)
Variable                       Property             Violent              Selling Drugs                    Nondrug

                          Panel A: OLS with Basic Controls
Depressed                   0.074***          0.027                           0.018                       0.068***
                             (0.019)         (0.023)                         (0.013)                       (0.027)

Observations                    3,114                3,111                    3,116                         3,110
R2                              0.035                0.019                    0.022                         0.033

                          Panel B: OLS with Basic Controls + Potential Channels
Depressed                    0.068**          0.034               0.005                                    0.077*
                             (0.027)         (0.036)             (0.022)                                   (0.040)

Observations                    3,114                3,111                    3,116                         3,110
R2                              0.620                0.558                    0.538                         0.592

                          Panel C: Family Fixed Effects + Basic Controls + Potential Channels
Depressed                    0.058**          0.034               0.001                   0.066
                             (0.027)         (0.036)             (0.023)                 (0.041)

Observations                    3,112                3,109                    3,114                         3,108
R2                              0.636                0.572                    0.552                         0.601

                          Panel D: Family Fixed Effects + Basic Controls + Potential Channels + Lagged
                          Dependent Variable
Depressed                    0.056**          0.033               0.001                   0.064
                             (0.027)         (0.036)             (0.023)                 (0.040)
Crime in Wave I              0.041**         0.067**             0.069**                 0.046*
                             (0.020)         (0.028)             (0.034)                 (0.028)

Observations                    3,097                3,096                    3,105                         3,103
R2                              0.636                0.572                    0.554                         0.602
 Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Standard errors are also corrected for clustering at the school level in
 panels A and B . *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Models also
 include missing binary indicators for each of the control variables.




                                                             35
            Table 4: Gender Specific Family Fixed Effects Estimates of the Relationship
                   between Adolescent Depression and Adult Criminal Behavior
                                              (1)                   (2)                  (3)                  (4)
Variable                                    Property              Violent          Selling Drugs            Nondrug

Depressed                                   0.058*                 0.064                0.028                0.102**
                                            (0.034)               (0.045)              (0.025)               (0.049)
(Male)x(Depressed)                          -0.008                -0.086               -0.072                 -0.107
                                            (0.053)               (0.069)              (0.046)               (0.073)

Observations                                  3,097                3,096                3,105                 3,108
R2                                            0.636                0.574                0.558                 0.603
 Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
 levels, respectively. Models also include missing binary indicators for each of the control variables.




                                                            36
                Table 5: Controlling for Co-morbid Conditions (Anxiety and ADHD)
                                           (1)                    (2)                 (3)                   (4)
Variable                                 Property               Violent         Selling Drugs             Nondrug

                                     Panel A: School Fixed Effects with Full Controls and Comorbidities
Depressed                              0.031***           0.009            0.000            0.021*
                                        (0.009)          (0.010)          (0.005)           (0.011)

Observations                              15,412                15,406               15,431                15,435
R2                                         0.066                 0.028                0.084                 0.048

                                    Panel B: Family Fixed Effects with Full Controls and Comorbidities
Depressed                              0.057**           0.030             -0.007           0.058
                                       (0.027)          (0.037)           (0.023)          (0.041)

Observations                               3,080                3,080                3,088                  3,085
R2                                         0.637                0.579                0.570                  0.607
 Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Standard errors are also corrected for clustering at the school level in
 panel A. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Models also include
 missing binary indicators for each of the control variables.




                                                           37
                              Appendix Table 1: Descriptive Statistics by Depression Status
                                                      Full              Full Sample         Family        Family Sample
                                                     Sample                                 Sample
                                                                      Not-      Depressed                Not-      Depressed
Variable                                                            Depressed                          Depressed

26 yrs. old or younger at wave IVa                    0.157           0.165       0.086       0.147      0.155       0.079
                                                     (0.363)         (0.371)     (0.280)     (0.355)    (0.362)     (0.270)
27 yrs. old at Wave IV                                0.145           0.148       0.118       0.155      0.158       0.134
                                                     (0.352)         (0.355)     (0.323)     (0.362)    (0.364)     (0.341)
28 yrs. old at Wave IV                                0.180           0.179       0.183       0.196      0.190       0.246
                                                     (0.384)         (0.384)     (0.387)     (0.397)    (0.392)     (0.432)
29 yrs. old at Wave IV                                0.188           0.186       0.203       0.194      0.198       0.164
                                                     (0.391)         (0.389)     (0.403)     (0.396)    (0.398)     (0.371)
30 yrs. old at Wave IV                                0.185           0.181       0.224       0.171      0.169       0.188
                                                     (0.388)         (0.385)     (0.417)     (0.377)    (0.375)     (0.392)
31 yrs. old at Wave IV                                0.120           0.117       0.146       0.112      0.107       0.152
                                                     (0.325)         (0.321)     (0.354)     (0.315)    (0.309)     (0.360)
32 yrs. or older at Wave IV                           0.026           0.025       0.040       0.025      0.023       0.037
                                                     (0.160)         (0.155)     (0.195)     (0.155)    (0.151)     (0.188)
Male                                                  0.468           0.478       0.378       0.484      0.495       0.389
                                                     (0.499)         (0.500)     (0.485)     (0.500)    (0.500)     (0.488)
Whitea                                                0.636           0.643       0.574       0.660      0.668       0.590
                                                     (0.481)         (0.479)     (0.495)     (0.474)    (0.471)     (0.493)
Black                                                 0.228           0.227       0.244       0.201      0.200       0.207
                                                     (0.420)         (0.419)     (0.429)     (0.401)    (0.400)     (0.406)
Race/Ethnicity Other                                  0.145           0.140       0.193       0.150      0.143       0.213
                                                     (0.353)         (0.347)     (0.395)     (0.357)    (0.350)     (0.410)
Missing info: Race/Ethnicity                          0.001           0.001       0.001       0.002      0.002       0.000
                                                     (0.038)         (0.038)     (0.035)     (0.040)    (0.042)      0.000
Hispanic                                              0.159           0.153       0.211       0.144      0.138       0.192
                                                     (0.366)         (0.360)     (0.408)     (0.351)    (0.345)     (0.394)
Missing info: Hispanic                                0.003           0.003       0.002       0.001      0.001       0.000
                                                     (0.051)         (0.051)     (0.043)     (0.031)    (0.033)      0.000
Born in the U.S.                                      0.925           0.927       0.913       0.929      0.933       0.891
                                                     (0.263)         (0.261)     (0.282)     (0.257)    (0.250)     (0.313)
Only Child                                            0.198           0.196       0.221       0.011      0.010       0.018
                                                     (0.399)         (0.397)     (0.415)     (0.102)    (0.098)     (0.134)
Missing Info: Only Child                              0.014           0.013       0.015       0.004      0.004       0.000
                                                     (0.115)         (0.115)     (0.121)     (0.062)    (0.066)      0.000
Birth-weight in 250 grams                            10.207          10.298       9.422       9.697      9.739       9.336
                                                     (5.932)         (5.883)     (6.288)     (5.631)    (5.602)     (5.875)
Missing Info: Birth-weight                            0.231           0.224       0.286       0.220      0.216       0.249
                                                     (0.421)         (0.417)     (0.452)     (0.414)    (0.412)     (0.433)
Height in inches                                     65.565          65.598      65.280      65.472     65.515      65.113
                                                     (7.453)         (7.407)     (7.834)     (7.862)    (7.805)     (8.330)
Missing Info: Height                                  0.009           0.009       0.011       0.010      0.010       0.012
                                                     (0.094)         (0.093)     (0.102)     (0.101)    (0.100)     (0.110)
Weight in pounds                                    141.654         141.395     143.898     140.207    139.822     143.472
                                                    (34.830)        (34.873)    (34.382)    (34.485)   (34.430)    (34.828)
Missing Info: Weight                                  0.017           0.017       0.019       0.016      0.016       0.015
                                                     (0.128)         (0.128)     (0.135)     (0.126)    (0.126)     (0.123)
                                                               38
Education: Less than High Schoola                   0.079        0.072       0.146       0.078       0.070       0.140
                                                   (0.270)      (0.258)     (0.353)     (0.268)     (0.256)     (0.347)
Education: High School                              0.162        0.156       0.221       0.170       0.162       0.243
                                                   (0.369)      (0.363)     (0.415)     (0.376)     (0.368)     (0.430)
Education: Some College or Vocational Training      0.442        0.440       0.456       0.414       0.411       0.438
                                                   (0.497)      (0.497)     (0.498)     (0.493)     (0.492)     (0.497)
Education: College Degree                           0.238        0.250       0.137       0.258       0.271       0.146
                                                   (0.426)      (0.433)     (0.344)     (0.438)     (0.445)     (0.354)
Education: Graduate or Professional Degree          0.078        0.082       0.040       0.080       0.085       0.033
                                                   (0.268)      (0.275)     (0.195)     (0.271)     (0.280)     (0.180)
Missing Data: Education                             0.000        0.000       0.000       0.000       0.000       0.000
                                                   (0.008)      (0.009)      0.000       0.000       0.000       0.000
Employed                                            0.651        0.656       0.607       0.642       0.646       0.605
                                                   (0.477)      (0.475)     (0.489)     (0.480)     (0.478)     (0.490)
Missing Info: Employed                              0.000        0.000       0.000       0.001       0.001       0.000
                                                   (0.020)      (0.021)      0.000      (0.025)     (0.027)      0.000
Personal Earnings                                 35242.9      36086.4     27720.6     34915.6     35756.8     27583.2
                                                 (44875.2)    (46303.5)   (28108.9)   (40729.9)   (41304.8)   (34525.6)
Missing Info: Personal Earnings                     0.049        0.046       0.073       0.043       0.040       0.067
                                                   (0.215)      (0.209)     (0.261)     (0.202)     (0.196)     (0.250)
Gut Feeling in Decision Making Wave I               0.089        0.080       0.171       0.090       0.079       0.179
                                                   (0.285)      (0.271)     (0.376)     (0.286)     (0.270)     (0.384)
Missing Info: Gut Feeling                           0.004        0.004       0.006       0.004       0.004       0.000
                                                   (0.061)      (0.060)     (0.075)     (0.062)     (0.066)      0.000
Low Chance to Live to Age 35                        0.143        0.122       0.319       0.142       0.125       0.292
                                                   (0.350)      (0.327)     (0.466)     (0.349)     (0.330)     (0.455)
Mission Info: Low Chance to Live to Age 35          0.003        0.003       0.008       0.001       0.001       0.000
                                                   (0.057)      (0.052)     (0.089)     (0.036)     (0.038)      0.000
Never Marrieda                                      0.502        0.503       0.487       0.490       0.495       0.453
                                                   (0.500)      (0.500)     (0.500)     (0.500)     (0.500)     (0.499)
Currently Married                                   0.434        0.434       0.435       0.448       0.445       0.471
                                                   (0.496)      (0.496)     (0.496)     (0.497)     (0.497)     (0.500)
Divorced                                            0.064        0.062       0.078       0.062       0.060       0.076
                                                   (0.244)      (0.241)     (0.268)     (0.241)     (0.237)     (0.265)
Missing Info: Marriage                              0.001        0.001       0.001       0.000       0.000       0.000
                                                   (0.027)      (0.027)     (0.025)      0.000       0.000       0.000
Add Health Picture Vocabulary Test Score           95.940       96.505      91.042      95.566      96.185      90.322
                                                  (25.601)     (25.620)    (24.909)    (24.423)    (24.361)    (24.353)
Missing Info: PPVT Score                            0.048        0.048       0.047       0.042       0.042       0.049
                                                   (0.213)      (0.213)     (0.211)     (0.201)     (0.200)     (0.215)
Religion: None, Atheist, or Agnostica               0.181        0.180       0.187       0.176       0.174       0.185
                                                   (0.385)      (0.384)     (0.390)     (0.381)     (0.380)     (0.389)
Religion: Protestant                                0.291        0.296       0.252       0.305       0.312       0.246
                                                   (0.454)      (0.456)     (0.434)     (0.461)     (0.464)     (0.432)
Religion: Catholic                                  0.218        0.218       0.225       0.223       0.219       0.252
                                                   (0.413)      (0.413)     (0.418)     (0.416)     (0.414)     (0.435)
Religion: Other Christian                           0.224        0.223       0.229       0.219       0.220       0.210
                                                   (0.417)      (0.416)     (0.420)     (0.413)     (0.414)     (0.408)
Religion: Other                                     0.083        0.081       0.103       0.076       0.073       0.100
                                                   (0.276)      (0.273)     (0.304)     (0.265)     (0.261)     (0.301)
Missing Data: Religion                              0.003        0.003       0.004       0.002       0.001       0.006
                                                   (0.054)      (0.053)     (0.066)     (0.044)     (0.038)     (0.078)

                                                         39
Parents are Married at Wave I                                    0.615          0.624           0.532          0.647     0.657     0.565
                                                                (0.487)        (0.484)         (0.499)        (0.478)   (0.475)   (0.497)
Missing Information: Parental Marital Status                     0.135          0.132           0.167          0.126     0.121     0.161
                                                                (0.342)        (0.338)         (0.373)        (0.331)   (0.327)   (0.368)
Mother’s Education: Less than High Schoola                       0.150          0.143           0.213          0.148     0.137     0.240
                                                                (0.357)        (0.350)         (0.409)        (0.355)   (0.344)   (0.428)
Mother’s Education: High School or Equivalent                    0.312          0.314           0.292          0.325     0.330     0.286
                                                                (0.463)        (0.464)         (0.455)        (0.469)   (0.470)   (0.452)
Mother’s Education: More than High School                        0.439          0.450           0.339          0.436     0.449     0.328
                                                                (0.496)        (0.498)         (0.474)        (0.496)   (0.498)   (0.470)
Missing Info: Mother's Education                                 0.100          0.093           0.156          0.091     0.084     0.146
                                                                (0.300)        (0.291)         (0.363)        (0.287)   (0.277)   (0.354)
Biological Father is Present at Wave I                           0.496          0.507           0.403          0.579     0.590     0.492
                                                                (0.500)        (0.500)         (0.491)        (0.494)   (0.492)   (0.501)
Missing Info: Biological Father is Present at Wave I             0.144          0.141           0.174          0.132     0.127     0.176
                                                                (0.351)        (0.348)         (0.379)        (0.338)   (0.333)   (0.382)
Total HH income in Wave I is < 40ka                              0.379          0.371           0.446          0.388     0.380     0.450
                                                                (0.485)        (0.483)         (0.497)        (0.487)   (0.486)   (0.498)
Total HH income in Wave I is between 40k and 80k                 0.290          0.298           0.213          0.303     0.310     0.243
                                                                (0.454)        (0.458)         (0.410)        (0.460)   (0.463)   (0.430)
Total HH income in Wave I is greater than 80k                    0.091          0.095           0.063          0.094     0.097     0.067
                                                                (0.288)        (0.293)         (0.242)        (0.292)   (0.296)   (0.250)
Missing Info: Parental Income                                    0.240          0.236           0.278          0.216     0.213     0.240
                                                                (0.427)        (0.425)         (0.448)        (0.411)   (0.409)   (0.428)
Biological Father Spent Time in Jail                             0.146          0.141           0.185          0.142     0.136     0.192
                                                                (0.353)        (0.348)         (0.388)        (0.349)   (0.343)   (0.394)
Missing Info: Biological Father Spent Time in Jail               0.070          0.069           0.083          0.046     0.047     0.040
                                                                (0.255)        (0.253)         (0.275)        (0.210)   (0.212)   (0.195)
Ever Been Diagnosed with Anxiety                                 0.117          0.108           0.193          0.109     0.103     0.161
                                                                (0.321)        (0.310)         (0.395)        (0.312)   (0.305)   (0.368)
Ever Been Diagnosed with ADD/ADHD                                0.049          0.047           0.068          0.045     0.044     0.058
                                                                (0.216)        (0.212)         (0.251)        (0.208)   (0.205)   (0.234)
Wave IV Ever Drug                                                0.553          0.552           0.561          0.519     0.515     0.550
                                                                (0.497)        (0.497)         (0.496)        (0.500)   (0.500)   (0.498)
Wave I Alcohol in the Past Year                                  0.474          0.458           0.621          0.449     0.432     0.590
                                                                (0.499)        (0.498)         (0.485)        (0.498)   (0.496)   (0.493)
Missing Info: Wave I Alcohol in the Past Year                    0.008          0.007           0.012          0.007     0.008     0.006
                                                                (0.087)        (0.084)         (0.108)        (0.086)   (0.087)   (0.078)
Wave I Ever Marijuana                                            0.283          0.264           0.446          0.260     0.244     0.395
                                                                (0.450)        (0.441)         (0.497)        (0.439)   (0.430)   (0.490)
Missing Info: Wave I Ever Marijuana                              0.006          0.006           0.010          0.004     0.004     0.006
                                                                (0.079)        (0.076)         (0.099)        (0.065)   (0.063)   (0.078)

Observations                                                     15584          13971           1613           3116      2787      329
         Notes: Standard deviations are in parentheses. a refers to the omitted category in the regression models.




                                                                          40
                            Appendix Table 2: Full Results from Panel D of Table 2
                                                        (1)           (2)             (3)     (4)
Variable                                              Property      Violent          Drug   Nondrug

Depressed                                            0.035***        0.013        0.004      0.029**
                                                      (0.009)       (0.010)      (0.005)     (0.011)
Wave I Crime                                         0.055***      0.028***     0.082***    0.052***
                                                      (0.005)       (0.008)      (0.013)     (0.006)

26 yrs. old or younger at wave IV                    0.041***        -0.017       0.026**       0.015
                                                      (0.013)       (0.021)       (0.013)     (0.022)
27 yrs. old at wave IV                                0.025**        -0.026       0.024**      -0.008
                                                      (0.012)       (0.019)       (0.011)     (0.021)
28 yrs. old at wave IV                                  0.019        -0.009       0.024**       0.002
                                                      (0.011)       (0.018)       (0.011)     (0.018)
29 yrs. old at wave IV                                  0.014         0.003         0.014       0.006
                                                      (0.011)       (0.017)       (0.010)     (0.018)
30 yrs. old at wave IV                                  0.005        -0.012         0.008      -0.015
                                                      (0.010)       (0.016)       (0.010)     (0.017)
31 yrs. old at wave IV                                  0.011        -0.007         0.007      -0.011
                                                      (0.010)       (0.018)       (0.009)     (0.017)
Male                                                 0.049***       0.018**     0.030***    0.064***
                                                      (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.005)     (0.008)
Black                                                   0.006       0.025**     0.024***     0.027**
                                                      (0.008)       (0.011)       (0.007)     (0.012)
Other race                                             -0.003       0.018**        -0.002     0.019*
                                                      (0.007)       (0.008)       (0.005)     (0.011)
Hispanic                                               -0.003        -0.003         0.002       0.002
                                                      (0.008)       (0.014)       (0.008)     (0.014)
Born in U.S.                                            0.004      0.029***         0.005   0.035***
                                                      (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.006)     (0.012)
Only Child                                              0.007         0.011        0.009*   0.027***
                                                      (0.006)       (0.008)       (0.005)     (0.010)
Birthweight in 250 grams                               -0.000        -0.002        -0.000    -0.003*
                                                      (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)
Height in inches                                       -0.001      -0.002**         0.000   -0.003***
                                                      (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)
Weight in Pounds                                        0.000         0.000         0.000       0.000
                                                      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)     (0.000)
Education: High School                                 -0.007        -0.014        -0.003      -0.003
                                                      (0.012)       (0.013)       (0.009)     (0.016)
Education: Some College or Vocational Training          0.004        -0.018        -0.011       0.006
                                                      (0.010)       (0.012)       (0.008)     (0.013)
Education: College Degree                              -0.013       -0.023*     -0.027***      -0.015
                                                      (0.010)       (0.014)       (0.008)     (0.014)
Education: Graduate or Professional Degree             -0.005        -0.025      -0.020**      -0.013
                                                      (0.013)       (0.016)       (0.010)     (0.017)
Employed                                                0.004        -0.009         0.005      -0.001
                                                      (0.005)       (0.006)       (0.004)     (0.007)
Log of Personal Earnings                             -0.002**         0.000     -0.002***      -0.001
                                                      (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)
Relies on Gut Feeling in Decision Making Wave I         0.014       0.021**     0.018***     0.030**
                                                     41
                                                                         (0.009)             (0.010)              (0.006)              (0.012)
Believes Low Chance to Live to Age 35 at Wave I                           -0.003               0.009                0.000                0.008
                                                                         (0.006)             (0.009)              (0.005)              (0.010)
Currently Married                                                      -0.033***               0.009            -0.028***            -0.023***
                                                                         (0.004)             (0.007)              (0.003)              (0.007)
Divorced                                                                  -0.011            0.029***               -0.011              0.022*
                                                                         (0.009)             (0.010)              (0.009)              (0.013)
Standardized Add Health Picture Vocabulary Test score                   0.001**               -0.000              0.000**                0.000
                                                                         (0.000)             (0.000)              (0.000)              (0.000)
Religion: Protestant                                                      -0.007            -0.021**             -0.014**            -0.029***
                                                                         (0.007)             (0.009)              (0.006)              (0.011)
Religion: Catholic                                                         0.001              -0.007               -0.005               -0.009
                                                                         (0.008)             (0.008)              (0.006)              (0.011)
Religion: Other Christian                                               -0.012*               -0.008            -0.018***               -0.016
                                                                         (0.007)             (0.008)              (0.005)              (0.010)
Religion: Other                                                            0.008               0.010               -0.002                0.013
                                                                         (0.010)             (0.010)              (0.007)              (0.013)
Parents are Married at Wave I                                             -0.004             -0.017*                0.006             -0.017*
                                                                         (0.007)             (0.010)              (0.005)              (0.010)
Mother Has a High School Degree of Equivalent                              0.001             0.022**               -0.005                0.016
                                                                         (0.008)             (0.010)              (0.006)              (0.010)
Mother Has more Schooling than High School                                 0.006              0.020*                0.001              0.019*
                                                                         (0.008)             (0.010)              (0.006)              (0.011)
Biological Father is Present at Wave I                                     0.011              -0.006               -0.007                0.001
                                                                         (0.006)             (0.009)              (0.005)              (0.009)
Total HH income in Wave I is between 40k and 80k                          -0.009               0.010               -0.001                0.001
                                                                         (0.006)             (0.008)              (0.004)              (0.009)
Total HH income in Wave I is greater than 80k                             -0.013               0.005                0.011               -0.002
                                                                         (0.010)             (0.012)              (0.007)              (0.015)
Biological Father Spent Time in Jail                                   0.023***                0.008            0.019***             0.031***
                                                                         (0.008)             (0.008)              (0.006)              (0.010)

Observations                                                             15,467              15,464               15,494               15,504
R2                                                                        0.058               0.027                0.070                0.043
      Notes: Robust standard errors, corrected for clustering at the school level, are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
      significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                       42
                         Appendix Table 3: Full Results from Panel D of Table 3
                                                                         (1)           (2)             (3)              (4)
Variable                                                              Property       Violent       Drug Selling       Nondrug

Depressed                                                             0.056**        0.033            0.001            0.064
                                                                      (0.027)       (0.036)          (0.023)          (0.040)
Crime Wave I                                                          0.041**       0.067**          0.069**          0.046*
                                                                      (0.020)       (0.028)          (0.034)          (0.028)

26 yrs. old or younger at wave IV                                       0.057         -0.038           0.010           -0.011
                                                                      (0.052)        (0.088)          (0.030)          (0.097)
27 yrs. old at wave IV                                                  0.023         -0.067           -0.025          -0.059
                                                                      (0.050)        (0.086)          (0.030)          (0.096)
28 yrs. old at wave IV                                                  0.035         -0.017           0.006            0.009
                                                                      (0.049)        (0.080)          (0.030)          (0.090)
29 yrs. old at wave IV                                                  0.005         0.001            -0.008          -0.033
                                                                      (0.046)        (0.080)          (0.026)          (0.089)
30 yrs. old at wave IV                                                  0.001         -0.014           -0.020          -0.017
                                                                      (0.048)        (0.081)          (0.028)          (0.090)
31 yrs. old at wave IV                                                  0.009         -0.019           0.011           -0.026
                                                                      (0.050)        (0.080)          (0.029)          (0.090)
Male                                                                  0.048**         0.026           0.041**           0.046
                                                                      (0.023)        (0.033)          (0.020)          (0.037)
Birthweight in 250 grams                                                0.005         0.003            0.001            0.008
                                                                      (0.005)        (0.007)          (0.004)          (0.008)
Height in inches                                                       -0.002         -0.002           0.001           -0.000
                                                                      (0.003)        (0.005)          (0.003)          (0.005)
Weight in Pounds                                                        0.000         -0.000           -0.000          -0.000
                                                                      (0.000)        (0.000)          (0.000)          (0.001)
Education: High School                                                  0.010         -0.058           0.005           -0.031
                                                                      (0.029)        (0.046)          (0.030)          (0.054)
Education: Some College or Vocational Training                         -0.018         -0.005           -0.003          -0.018
                                                                      (0.030)        (0.043)          (0.028)          (0.051)
Education: College Degree                                              -0.012         -0.011           -0.017          -0.011
                                                                      (0.036)        (0.053)          (0.033)          (0.062)
Education: Graduate or Professional Degree                             -0.057         0.003            -0.013          -0.047
                                                                      (0.045)        (0.066)          (0.037)          (0.077)
Employed                                                               -0.001         -0.025           0.012           -0.010
                                                                      (0.014)        (0.023)          (0.013)          (0.025)
Log of Personal Earnings                                               -0.002        0.008*            -0.003           0.005
                                                                      (0.003)        (0.004)          (0.002)          (0.005)
Relies on Gut Feeling in Decision Making Wave I                         0.004         -0.033           0.037*          -0.007
                                                                      (0.026)        (0.037)          (0.022)          (0.040)
Believes Low Chance to Live to Age 35 at Wave I                         0.008         -0.002           -0.001           0.023
                                                                      (0.020)        (0.032)          (0.016)          (0.034)
Currently Married                                                      -0.018         0.006          -0.029**          -0.021
                                                                      (0.017)        (0.023)          (0.014)          (0.027)
Divorced                                                               -0.011         0.015            -0.029           0.021
                                                                      (0.028)        (0.043)          (0.031)          (0.049)
Older Sibling                                                          0.017         0.028            -0.003           0.036
                                                                      (0.015)       (0.023)          (0.012)          (0.025)

Observations                                                           3,097           3,096              3,105          3,108
R-squared                                                              0.636           0.572              0.554          0.601
   Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
   levels, respectively.

                                                               43
