NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NOTES FOR A NEW GUIDE TO KEYNES (I):
WAGES, AGGREGATE DEMAND, AND EMPLOYMENT
Jordi Galí
Working Paper 18651
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18651

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012

Delivered as the Presidential Address to the 27th Annual Congress of the European Economic Association,
held in Málaga, August 27-31, 2012. I thanks participants at the EEA Congress, the EABCN Workshop,
Bilkent University, Moneda y Crédito Symposium, and the CREI Macro Lunch, as well as an anonymous
referee for useful comments and suggestions. I acknowledge financial support from the Ministerio
de Ciencia e Innovación (ECO2011-23188). The views expressed herein are those of the author and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Jordi Galí. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Notes for a New Guide to Keynes (I): Wages, Aggregate Demand, and Employment
Jordi Galí
NBER Working Paper No. 18651
December 2012
JEL No. E24,E32,E58
ABSTRACT
I revisit the General Theory's discussion of the role of wages in employment determination through
the lens of the New Keynesian model. The analysis points to the key role played by the monetary policy
rule in shaping the link between wages and employment, and in determining the welfare impact of
enhanced wage flexibility. I show that the latter is not always welfare improving.

Jordi Galí
Centre de Recerca en Economia Internacional (CREI)
Ramon Trias Fargas 25
08005 Barcelona
SPAIN
and NBER
jgali@crei.cat

1

Introduction

More than seventy …ve years have gone by since the publication of John Maynard Keynes’s landmark work The General Theory of Employment, Interest,
and Money (Keynes (1936)). Together with Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations
and Karl Marx’s Capital, the General Theory is one of the most in‡uential
books ever written in economics and, arguably, in any …eld. Keynes’s work
triggered a paradigm change with ripple e¤ects that have been echoed to this
day.
Despite its notoriety, the General Theory is generally viewed, even by
professional economists, as an unfriendly read.1 That opacity may account
for the several books and articles that were written after its publication,
largely aimed at economists and students of economics, and whose purpose
was to serve as "tutorial guides" to Keynes’s magnum opus. Among the best
known of such publications is Alvin Hansen’s "A Guide to Keynes" (Hansen
(1953)), which has inspired the title of the present lecture.2
The motivation behind my proposed "new guide to Keynes" is not to
o¤er yet another reader’s companion to the General Theory. Instead, my
objective is to discuss and re‡ect on the connections between Keynes’s original work and so-called New Keynesian economics, the dominant paradigm in
macroeconomics over the past two decades. To be more concrete, my goal is
to revisit some aspects of Keynes’s General Theory through the lens of New
Keynesian economics, i.e. using the tools and language of the latter. The
ultimate aim of a project of this nature is to help one understand better both
Keynes and New Keynesian economics, and, hopefully, to draw lessons from
both that we can apply to our current economic problems.
The themes and topics covered by the General Theory are large in number
and broad in scope. An exhaustive coverage would require more time and
space than is suitable for a lecture of this nature. So I have chosen to restrict
its focus to a narrow theme: the role of wages as a determinant of employment
and, in particular, the welfare and stability gains that may result from greater
wage ‡exibility.
The motivation for choosing this particular topic is twofold. Firstly,
Keynes’s treatment of this subject, focusing on the contrast between his
1

One possible reason for this was Keynes’s reluctance to rely on mathematics to support
or and/or clarify his verbal arguments.
2
John Hicks’s "Mr. Keynes and the Classics; a Suggested Interpretation," (Hicks
(1937)) is another such work.

1

view and that of classical economics, as well as their di¤erential policy implications, arguably constitutes the core of the General Theory. Secondly, the
belief in the virtues of wage ‡exibility and the desirability of wage moderation in the face of high unemployment seem to have permeated fully current
policy thinking. The Great Recession and the "crisis of the euro" have only
reinforced those views, which are often conveyed by messages that have attained the status of mantras in policy circles. The following quotation, drawn
from a recent ECB Monthly Bulletin, exempli…es that perspective:
"...Further signi…cant reductions in unit labor costs and excess
pro…t margins are particularly urgent, especially in countries where
unemployment is very high. To achieve this, …rst, ‡exibility in
the wage determination process has to be strengthened,
for example, where relevant, by relaxing employment protection
legislation, abolishing wage indexation schemes, lowering minimum wages and permitting wage bargaining at the …rm level..."
(ECB, Monthly Bulletin, August 2012)3
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 contrasts
the classical and Keynesian views of employment and wage determination,
as described in the General Theory. In Section 3 I describe the main ingredients of the New Keynesian model used in subsequent sections, emphasizing
di¤erences and similarities with the framework underlying Keynes’s General
Theory. In Section 4 I discuss two issues for which New Keynesian models
o¤er a di¤erent perspective from that in Keynes’s original work: the cyclicality of wages and the impact of technology shocks on employment. Section
5 revisits the case for wage ‡exibility in the context of the New Keynesian
model. Section 6 raises and discusses a number of caveats in the previous
analysis. Section 7 concludes.

2

Keynes vs the Classics in the General Theory

Next I summarize the key di¤erences between the Classical and Keynesian
views on the determinants of employment and their implications regarding
3

Emphasis added.

2

possible cures for the unemployment problem, as described by Keynes himself
in Book I of the General Theory. Throughout I rely on a simple labor market
diagram to convey the main ideas.

2.1

The Classical Theory of Employment

A …rst key element in the classical theory of employment is given by a labor demand schedule. As shown in Figure 1, that schedule determines the
amount of labor n that …rms want to employ given the prevailing real wage,
w p (both variable expressed in logs). It follows from pro…t maximization by perfectly competitive (i.e. price and wage taking) …rms, given the
available technology. The corresponding optimality condition requires that
the …rm hires labor up to the point where its marginal product equals the
real wage. Accordingly, the labor demand schedule corresponds to the the
marginal product of labor, which is assumed to be decreasing. Note that
under that view, causality runs from wages to employment, with the latter
being determined without any consideration of the demand for goods, which
…rms perceive as perfectly elastic at the prevailing equilibrium price. In other
words, …rms view themselves as facing no demand constraints.
A labor supply schedule, depicted in Figure 2, constitutes the second key
element in the classical framework. It determines the size of the labor force,
l, i.e. the number of individuals willing to work given current labor market
conditions. Formally, it can be derived by aggregating the optimal labor
market participation decisions of wage-taking individuals. The labor force
(or labor supply) is made up of all the individuals whose work disutility (or
opportunity cost), expressed in terms of consumption goods, is no greater
than the real wage. It is thus increasing in the latter, as shown in Figure 2.
The corresponding (Walrasian) equilibrium assumes that the wage adjust
so that both equations -labor demand and labor supply- are satis…ed simultaneously, as illustrated in Figure 3. How that adjustment is brought about
is left unexplained, but one can easily come up with stories to motivate it.
The fact that the economy is "on the labor supply" implies that individuals
do not face any constraints or rationing of any sort when supplying their
labor services. In other words, involuntary unemployment does not exist in
such an equilibrium.
As pointed out by Keynes unemployment will emerge in a classical environment only if, due to the e¤ects of collective bargaining or other legal or
institutional constraints, the prevailing wage lies above its Walrasian level,
3

as illustrated in Figure 4. Employment is then determined by labor demand,
and falls short of the quantity of labor supplied at that wage. Accordingly,
a fraction of individuals will be jobless despite their desire to work, i.e. involuntary unemployment will emerge.
In the previous environment, a "natural" relief to the unemployment
problem would come from a downward adjustment in the real wage, possibly as a result of underbidding by the unemployed themselves. This is
illustrated in Figure 5. If there are legal or institutional constraints that
prevent that downward adjustment, employment can still be raised (and unemployment reduced) by means of an employment subsidy, which lowers the
net compensation per worker e¤ectively paid by the …rm, and whose e¤ect is
to shift the labor demand schedule to the right, as illustrated in Figure 6.

2.2

The Keynesian Theory of Employment

Keynes’s fundamental objection to the classical theory of employment lies
in the latter’s assumption that employment is determined by the real wage,
without regard to aggregate demand conditions in the goods market. The
Keynesian theory of employment turns the classical logic upside down, by
viewing the real wage as being determined by employment, not the other way
around. The Keynesian view can be summarized as follows. Employment
is determined by the quantity of output that …rms want to produce, given
the existing technology. In turn, desired output is a function of aggregate
demand (for goods). This is illustrated in Figure 7, which displays labor
demand as a vertical schedule, independent of the wage.
In this context, …rms are viewed as monopolistic competitors in the goods
market, facing a downward sloping demand for their (di¤erentiated) goods.
They price the latter according to a simple markup rule:
pt =

p

+ (wt

mpnt )

where pt denotes the (log) price, wt .is the (log) nominal wage, mpnt is the
(log) marginal product of labor, and p denotes the desired (constant) price
markup over marginal cost, wt mpnt . Rearranging terms one can derive
the implied wage schedule:
wt

pt = mpnt

p

(1)

The latter schedule is represented in Figure 8 by a downward sloping
line, capturing the assumption of decreasing returns to labor. Most impor4

tantly, and as emphasized by the direction of the arrows, the Keynesian wage
schedule should be interpreted as determining the real wage as a function of
employment, given the state of technology. This is in stark contrast with
the classical model, in which the real wage determines employment (with the
latter determining output). Note also that under the Keynesian view, it is no
longer true that the real wage can be determined independently as a result of
bargaining between workers and their employers: any adjustment in the nominal wage would lead to a proportional change in price, leaving the real wage
unchanged.4 Most importantly, involuntary unemployment may emerge in
equilibrium, as illustrated in Figure 9, with no "automatic" force guaranteeing that full employment be restored. Note that under this perspective a cut
in nominal wages which is not accompanied by an expansion in aggregate
demand will leave output, employment and the real wage unchanged, and
will have no impact on unemployment. Similarly, an employment subsidy or
a reduction in payroll taxes will leave employment unchanged, unless it is
accompanied by an expansion of aggregate demand.5
As emphasized by Keynes, and as illustrated in Figure 10, the only solution to the unemployment problem in that environment lies in an expansion
of aggregate demand, possibly brought about by a reduction in interest rates
and/or an expansionary …scal policy.
I have summarized above the fundamental di¤erences between the classical and Keynesian views of employment determination and their implications
regarding the possible role of wage ‡exibility as a cure to the unemployment
problem, as described in Book I of the General Theory. In the remainder
of the paper I revisit the key issues of contention using the New Keynesian
model as a reference framework. I start by describing the main ingredients
of that model.
4

As Keynes emphasized, the previous statement applies to the economy as a whole,
when it can be treated as a closed system. A change in the nominal wage restricted to
one …rm or one sector will trigger a change in its relative price and hence its employment
and the corresponding product wage.
5
Note that unemployment would be expected to rise in response to that policy, due to
the higher participation induced by the increase in the wage accruing to workers (which
will fully absorb the reduction in labor taxes if …rms keep markups unchanged).

5

3

The Standard New Keynesian Model: Key
Ingredients

In the remainder of the paper I use a version of the standard New Keynesian
model with sticky prices and sticky wages, as originally developed by Erceg,
Henderson and Levin (2000). Only some of the model’s key ingredients will
be reviewed here, so I refer the interested reader to the expositions (with
detailed derivations) that can be found in the literature.6

3.1

Households/Preferences

The economy is inhabited by a large number of identical households. Each
household is made up of a continuum of members with measure one. Household preferences are given by
E0

1
X

t

U (Ct ; Nt ; Xt )

t=0

where Ct is a consumption bundle (which in turn is a CES function of the
quantities consumed of the di¤erent types of goods), Nt denotes the fraction
of household members who are employed, and Xt expfxt g.is a stochastic
preference parameter (common to all households) which evolves according to
the exogenous AR(1) process:
xt =

x xt 1

+ "xt

Period utility U is assumed to take the form
U (C; N ; X) =

log C

N 1+'
1+'

X

Each household is specialized in the provision of some di¤erentiated labor service, for which …rms generate an isoelastic demand. Each period only
a fraction 1
w of households, drawn randomly from the population, reoptimize their nominal wage in a way consistent with utility maximization,
6

See e.g. Erceg et al. (2001), as well as the textbook treatments in Woodford (2003)
and Galí (2007).

6

subject to demand for their labor services (current and future).7 The remaining fraction w keep their nominal wage unchanged. Parameter w 2 [0; 1]
can be thus seen as an index of nominal wage rigidities.
In addition to their wage setting decision, households choose the optimal
level and composition of their consumption bundle subject to a sequence of
budget constraints.8

3.2

Firms/Technology

There is a continuum of …rms, each of which produces a di¤erentiated good
using the technology
Yt = At Nt1
where Yt is output, Nt is an employment bundle consisting of a CES function
of the di¤erent types of workers employed, and At expfat g.is a stochastic
preference parameter (common to all …rms) which evolves according to the
exogenous AR(1) process:
at =

a at 1

+ "at

Each period, a subset of …rms of measure 1
p , drawn randomly, reoptimize the price of their good, subject to a sequence of demand schedules for
the latter. The remaining fraction p keep their price unchanged. Parameter
p 2 [0; 1] can thus be interpreted as an index of price rigidities. All …rms
meet the demand for their respective goods at the posted prices.
7
The above description of households and the environment they face, based on the
original model by Erceg et al. (2000), does not give rise to a natural notion of unemployment, since each household itself sets the wage of its members subject to a labor demand
schedule, thus e¤ectively choosing the level of employment. In Galí (2011) I propose a
reformulation of that environment, with wages set at a level above the household (e.g. by
unions), which allows one to introduce a meaningful notion of labor force (or participation)
and thus to de…ne unemployment as the di¤erence between labor force and employment
consistent with existing measurements. Since the focus of the analysis below (as in the
General Theory) is on employment and its ‡uctuations I will stick to Erceg et al.’s original
formulation.
8
The presence of complete markets guarantees that, in equilibrium, consumption is
the same across households, despite their having potentially di¤erent wages and, hence,
di¤erent employment and labor income levels.

7

3.3

Monetary Policy

The central bank’s policy is described by a Taylor-type rule of the form
it =

+

t

+

y yt

where
log is the discount rate, it is the nominal interest rate, t is
the rate of in‡ation between t 1 and t, yt denotes the (log) deviations of
output from steady state.

3.4

Discussion

The New Keynesian model described above includes a number of simplifying
assumptions. Firstly, the model does not allow for investment and capital accumulation. This contrasts with Keynes’s General Theory, in which changes
in investment driven by businessmen’s animal spirits are viewed as a key
driving force behind economic ‡uctuations. That role is taken up here by
consumption, which shares two key properties with Keynes’s model of investment: it responds to changes in interest rates and it is subject to exogenous
‡uctuations resulting from shocks to the preference shifter X (henceforth referred to as aggregate demand shocks). Secondly, the model abstracts from
the existence of a …scal sector and, like the General Theory, assumes a closed
economy. The former assumption is innocuous for the issues at hand, but
the latter isn’t. Some of the possible implications of opening the economy
are discussed in Section 6 below.
Under the assumptions made, the model above features an interesting
(and convenient) property: its e¢ cient allocation, which corresponds to that
of the Walrasian equilibrium, is characterized by a constant level of employment, given by (in logs):9
net =
9

log(1
)
1+'

ne

The corresponding levels of (log) output, yte , and (log) real wage, ! et , are given by
yte = at + (1
! et = at + 1

1+'

)ne
log(1

)

i.e. they adjust one for one with changes in technology, but they are unresponsive to any
other shock.

8

Accordingly, any observed ‡uctuations in equilibrium employment are
ine¢ cient, and might warrant some stabilization measures. But, as is well
known, when both prices and wages are sticky, a trade-o¤ emerges between
stabilization of employment and stabilization of price and wages, for ‡uctuations in the latter also generate welfare losses, as further discussed below.10

3.5

Calibration

The various simulations discussed below rely on a baseline calibration of the
model’s structural parameters. Table 1 summarizes that calibration, which
is largely consistent with that in Galí (2011). Note, in particular, that the
settings for the Calvo stickiness parameters imply an average duration of
individual prices and wages of one year, in a way consistent with much of
the micro evidence. In addition, the coe¢ cients of the interest rate rule are
set at the values proposed by Taylor (1993). The resulting rule is generally
viewed as a realistic description of monetary policy in the U.S., at least for
much of the Volcker-Greenspan period.

Beyond the General Theory: New Insights

4

In the present section I brie‡y revisit two issues pertaining to wages and
employment determination on which the New Keynesian model generates
insights that depart from the General Theory, or are just not discussed in
the latter. The …rst one pertains to the cyclical behavior of wages. The
second one to the e¤ects of technology shocks on employment.

4.1

The Cyclical Behavior of Wages

As discussed above, real wages play an important in the General Theory’s
description of the workings of the economy. In contrast with classical economists, Keynes views wages as being determined by employment (and, indirectly, by aggregate demand), not the other way around. Thus, as shown in
Figure 10, ‡uctuations in aggregate demand generate countercyclical movements in real wages. Formally, this follows from the wage schedule (1),
combined with the assumptions of a decreasing marginal product of labor
and a constant markup.
10

See, e.g., Erceg et al. (2001), Woodford (2003) and Galí (2008) for a discussion.

9

Keynes’s prediction regarding the cyclical behavior of wages contrasts
with the equilibrium response of the real wage to a positive aggregate demand
(i.e., preference) shock in the calibrated New Keynesian model, as displayed
in Figure 11, and which points to a procyclical behavior of the real wage (the
Figure also shows the responses of output, employment and in‡ation, which
have the anticipated sign). The previous prediction of the New Keynesian
model is consistent with existing evidence pointing to a wage rise in response
to an expansionary aggregate demand shock.11
The source of real wage procyclicality is well known to researchers familiar
with the New Keynesian framework: price stickiness. Thus, when prices are
sticky, as assumed in the model used here, the price markup is no longer
constant and the wage schedule must be rewritten as
wt

pt = mpnt

p
t

When aggregate demand and employment expand, the price markup will
generally go down, since the rising marginal cost will not be matched by
a commensurate increase in the price level (due to the presence of sticky
prices). If the decline in the price markup more than o¤sets the lower marginal product of labor, the real wage will go up, as in the case depicted in
Figure 12.
In the New Keynesian model, the relative degree of wage and price stickiness plays a central role in determining the sign of the real wage response
to an aggregate demand shock. This is illustrated in Figure 13, which displays the impact change in the real wage in response to a positive aggregate
demand shock, as a function of the two parameters governing the degree of
price and wage stickiness, respectively (and with the remaining parameters
at their baseline values). Note that when both wages and prices are fully
‡exible the real wage does not change in response to the type of preference
shock assumed here (as in the Walrasian equilibrium). The same is true (for
obvious reasons) when both wages and prices are completely sticky. More
generally, however, Figure 13 makes clear that the sign of the response of
the real wage to a demand shock depends on the relative stickiness of prices
and wages, for that determines the size of the change in the average price
markup. Thus, and for any given degree of price stickiness, marginal costs
will rise less the stickier are wages, and so the decline in the average price
11
See, e.g. Rotemberg and Woodford (1992), Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005),
and Galí, López-Salido and Vallés (2007).

10

markup will be smaller. As a result, the latter will be less likely to o¤set
the downward movement in the marginal product of labor, and the real wage
will go down. Conversely, the stickier are prices (conditional on the degree
of wage stickiness), the larger is the decline in the markup and, hence, the
more likely it is that the real wage rises in response to the positive demand
shock.12
Note that the previous …nding has an important implication for our interpretation of the nature of economic ‡uctuations: the observation of procyclical real wages (as found, e.g. in the postwar U.S. economy) should not
be automatically viewed as evidence against the hypothesis that the business
cycle is largely driven by aggregate demand ‡uctuations.

4.2

The E¤ects of Technology Shocks on Employment

In the General Theory –as in much of macroeconomics before the advent
of real business cycle theory– variations in technology are not viewed as a
relevant source of economic ‡uctuations. The latter are instead interpreted as
the result of aggregate demand variations, largely due to waves of pessimism
and optimism among investors.
Interestingly, however, technology shocks and their e¤ects on the economy provide an excellent testing ground for the predictions of Keynesian vs.
classical models. Thus, in classical models an exogenous improvement in aggregate technology raises the marginal product of labor (given employment)
thus shifting the labor demand schedule to the right, as shown in Figure
14. In the absence of very strong income e¤ects on labor supply, both employment and the real wage are predicted to rise. Output rises due to the
increase in both employment and technology. Hence those models would predict a positive comovement between output and employment in response to
technology shocks.13
12

A fascinating debate on the empirical evidence regarding the cyclical behavior of real
wages and its connection with the predictions of the General Theory can be found in
Dunlop (1938) and Tarshis (1939). See also the response by Keynes (1939). The three
papers contain an enlightened discussion of the di¢ culties in measuring the true cyclical
behavior of wages, as well as a number of conjectures for the apparent procyclicality of
the real wage, including the presence of countercyclical markups, possibly resulting from
sticky prices.
13
Note that the prediction of such a positive comovement between output and employment in response to technology shocks is a necessary property of any business cycle theory
that places a strong weight on those shocks as a source of economic ‡uctuations, other-

11

By contrast, the predictions of the Keynesian model regarding the effects of technology shocks on employment are conditioned by the response
of aggregate demand to those shocks. Thus, in the limiting case that aggregate demand, and hence output, remains unchanged in response to a positive
technology shock, employment would unambiguously decline, for the same
amount of output can now be produced with fewer workers. A similar outcome will obtain as long as aggregate demand increases less than proportionally to the increase in technology. This is the case illustrated in Figure 15,
which also makes clear that the real wage will rise unambiguously in that
case.
Some of the forces at work can be described formally using two equilibrium conditions of the New Keynesian model above. The …rst condition is the
labor demand equation, which follows directly from the production function:
1

(yt at )
(2)
1
The second equilibrium condition is the so-called dynamic IS equation,
which combines the household Euler equation with a goods market clearing
condition to yield:
nt =

yt = Et fyt+1 g

(it

Et f

t+1 g)

+ (1

x )xt

(3)

Iterating (3) forward and substituting into (2) we obtain the following
expression for employment:
)
!
(1
X
1
(it+k Et f t+1+k g)
at
(4)
xt Et
nt =
1
k=0
Equation (4) makes clear that the impact of technology or preference
shocks on employment will depend on the induced changes in current and
anticipated real interest rates, thus pointing to the key role played by the
endogenous component of monetary policy in determining aggregate demand
and, consequently, employment.
What is the prediction of the calibrated New Keynesian model regarding
the e¤ects of technology shocks on employment given a realistic description
of monetary policy? To the extent that the rule proposed by Taylor (1993)
wise that theory would be at odds with the observed high positive correlation between
employment and output at business cycle frequencies.

12

provides a good approximation to actual monetary policy, the answer can be
found in Figure 16: a positive technology shock raises output and the real
wage, but lowers employment and in‡ation. Thus, the rule followed by the
monetary authority does not raise aggregate demand su¢ ciently to prevent
a decline in employment.
The above prediction of the New Keynesian model regarding the impact
of technology shocks on employment has received a good amount of empirical
support, as exempli…ed by the VAR-based evidence in Galí (1999), Basu, Fernald and Kimball (2006), Francis and Ramey (2005) and Barnichon (2010),
among others. Furthermore, the implication that the response of employment should not be invariant to changes in the policy rule also seems to
be consistent with the evidence, as shown in Galí, López-Salido and Vallés
(2003) and Fisher (2006), who compare the estimated responses across the
pre-Volcker and Volcker-Greenspan periods (which are widely viewed as being associated with signi…cantly di¤erent policy rules). Finally, it is worth
noting that estimated DSGE models, which allow for a much richer structure
than the simple model described below, also generate an employment decline
in response to a positive technology shock (see, e.g., Smets and Wouters
(2003, 2007)).

5

The Case for Wage Flexibility Revisited

Next I use the New Keynesian model to study the role of wage ‡exibility
as a factor of macroeconomic stability, with a focus on employment. I pose
the following question: What is the impact of greater wage ‡exibility on the
volatility of employment and on welfare?
Under a classical logic, greater wage ‡exibility will contribute to employment stability to the extent the reductions in wages during downturns
stimulate employment, thus dampening the impact of adverse shocks on that
variable. To what extent this is the case in the New Keynesian model?
Before I analyze the impact of enhanced wage ‡exibility I take a brief
detour and examine the New Keynesian model’s implications regarding the
e¤ectiveness of (exogenous) reductions in wages (or other components of
labor costs) at promoting employment. Again, the answer to that question
is not an unconditional one: it depends on the monetary policy rule in place.
In other words, it hinges on the change in aggregate demand induced by
the change in wages. To see this more formally, consider the expression
13

for employment in equation (4) (interpreted as deviations from steady state)
and assume that the central bank’s policy rule implies a constant real interest
rate.14 Thus, we can rewrite the expression for employment as
nt =

1

(xt

1

at )

We see that in that case employment depends exclusively on the exogenous driving forces themselves, and is fully decoupled from wages. In other
words, there is no direct impact of wage adjustments on labor demand and
employment. The mechanism through which changes in wages may end up
a¤ecting employment operates in the New Keynesian model through the induced response of monetary policy. In particular, a decline in nominal wages
is expected to bring down in‡ation, lower the nominal and real interest rates,
and stimulate output and employment. This highlights the importance of the
endogenous component of monetary policy in determining the e¤ectiveness
of changes in wages (and, as we will see later, in changes in the degree of
wage ‡exibility as well).
To illustrate the previous point, I simulate the response of employment to
a decline in a payroll tax (equivalently, a rise in an employment subsidy) and
look at the dependence of that response on the strength of the central bank’s
response to in‡ation, measured by . I assume that the payroll tax follows
an AR(1) process with autoregressive coe¢ cient of 0:9, with a 1% decline on
impact. Figure 17 displays the implied impulse responses for a range of
values in the (1; 2] interval. When the central bank’s response to in‡ation is
weak, aggregate demand and, hence, employment remain hardly changed in
response to the payroll tax cut. On the other hand, when the central bank
lowers interest rates aggressively in response to the in‡ation decline induced
by reduction in labor costs the e¤ect on employment is substantial. The
Figure makes clear that the e¤ectiveness of the exogenous policy intervention
depends critically on strength of the central bank’s response to in‡ation. The
decline in the payroll tax has, by itself, no e¤ect if unaccompanied by an
expansion in aggregate demand.
Next I turn to the analysis of the consequences of changes in the degree of wage ‡exibility. Figure 18 displays the standard deviation of (log)
employment as a function of the degree of wage stickiness ( w ) and the in‡ation coe¢ cient in the interest rate rule ( ), conditional on technology
14

See Woodford (2011) for a similar approach in the context of an analysis of the impact
of changes in government purchases.

14

shocks being the source of ‡uctuations (see below for the corresponding results conditional on demand shocks). The remaining parameters are kept
at their baseline values. The Figure points to a decline in the volatility in
employment as the degree of wage stickiness is reduced, for all values of
considered. The size of the decline, however, is strongly dependent on the
strength of the central bank’s response to in‡ation. When the latter is strong
(large ), a small increase in wage ‡exibility leads to a large improvement in
terms of employment stability. By contrast, when monetary policy response
is relatively weak ( close to unity), the gains in employment stability that
result from a given reduction in the stickiness parameter are much smaller,
especially in the empirically relevant range of w (say, around 0:75).
What are the e¤ects of greater wage ‡exibility on welfare? Figure 19
shows the average welfare losses as a function of w and , again conditional on technology shocks. I measure average welfare losses of the model’s
representative household using the second order approximation15
L

(1 + ') var(nt ) +

p
p (1

)

var( pt ) +

w
w

var(

w
t )

(5)

)(1
p)
1
w ) 16
where p (1 p )(1
and w (1 ww(1+
.
1
+ p
p
w ')
Note that the sign of the e¤ect is no longer unambiguous, showing instead
a strong dependence on in‡ation coe¢ cient . When the latter is large
(close to 2), enhanced wage ‡exibility reduces average welfare losses. But
the relation becomes non-monotonic for intermediate values of . In that
case, welfare losses increase if wages are made more ‡exible when starting
from an initial condition with su¢ ciently sticky wages. Finally, and perhaps
more surprisingly, when the in‡ation coe¢ cient is close to unity, average
welfare losses always increase, and substantially so, in response to greater
wage ‡exibility.
Figure 20 allows one to uncover the respective role played by the three
additive terms in (5) in determining total welfare losses. Not surprisingly
(given Figure 18), greater wage ‡exibility reduces the contribution of employment volatility to welfare losses. By contrast, it raises the contribution
of price in‡ation volatility, since prices re‡ect the greater volatility in nominal wages induced by the rise in wage ‡exibility. Finally, the contribution
15

See, e.g. Galí (2008, p133), after setting = 1 and using yet = (1
)e
nt .
As is common in the literature I assume the presence of a constant employment subsidy
that exactly o¤sets the distortions generate by market power, rendering the steady state
e¢ cient.
16

15

of wage in‡ation volatility is non-monotonic, independently of the strength
of the monetary policy response. This is the result of the interaction of
two factors. On the one hand, the volatility of wage in‡ation is increasing
when wages become more ‡exible, as noted above. But that e¤ect must
be balanced against the smaller losses resulting from any given volatility of
wage in‡ation, as re‡ected in a smaller weight w = w . This is due to the
smaller relative wage distortions associated with any given volatility of wage
in‡ation when wages are more ‡exible 17 The non-monotonicity follows from
continuity and the fact that in the limiting cases of constant ( w ! 1) and
fully ‡exible ( w ! 0) nominal wages, the contribution of the wage in‡ation
component is zero.18
In Figures 21-23 I report information analogous to that in the Figures
18-20 but conditional on demand/preference shocks as the only source of
‡uctuations. Note that all the qualitative results observed under the assumption of technology shocks carry over to this case.
Thus, the above analysis suggests that, at least in the context of a calibrated New Keynesian model where the central bank follows a Taylor-type
rule, greater wage ‡exibility is not always a good thing, from a welfare standpoint.
The analysis above assumed a simple Taylor-type rule as a description of
monetary policy. Finally, I turn to the case of optimal monetary policy. The
latter is described by a set of seven stochastic di¤erence equations, which
include the optimality conditions associated with the problem of welfare loss
minimization (under commitment) subject to the equations constituting the
non-policy block of the model’s equilibrium (see, e.g. Galí (2008, ch. 6)
for a derivation and discussion). When preference shocks are the source of
‡uctuations the optimal policy takes a simple form: it involves the full stabilization of employment, as well as price and wage in‡ation. In other words,
the natural allocation can be replicated and no trade-o¤s emerge. By contrast when technology shocks are the driving force, the optimal policy must
strike a balance between stabilization of the three welfare relevant variables.
Figure 24 shows the welfare loss under the optimal policy as a function
of the degree of wage stickiness, for the baseline calibration. The graph
uncovers a monotonic relationship: greater wage ‡exibility appears to be
17

Since the implied cross-sectional dispersion of wages is smaller.
Trivially, under constant wages we have var( w
t ) = 0. On the other hand, as wages
approach full ‡exibility we have w ! +1 and, hence, w = w ! 0
18

16

always welfare-enhancing in this case. Figure 25 shows the three components
of welfare losses. Note that the component associated with wage in‡ation
is non-monotonic, capturing the interaction between the greater volatility
of wage in‡ation and the smaller cost of any given wage in‡ation volatility
associated with greater wage ‡exibility. That pattern is, however, completely
dominated by the decline in the contribution of price in‡ation volatility as
wages become more ‡exible. The latter, follows from the fact that, as the
importance of wage stickiness diminishes, the central bank puts an increasing
(relative) weight on price stability. Note also that employment is nearly
stabilized under the optimal policy, independently of the degree of wage
stickiness, so its role is negligible as a source of welfare losses.
One may legitimately wonder whether a monotonic relation like the one
shown in Figure 24 obtains whenever the central bank follows the optimal
policy or whether, instead, it holds only for a subset of parameter con…gurations. If it were completely general, we would have to attribute the possibility
of a welfare-reducing rise in wage ‡exibility uncovered earlier (see Figures 19
and 22) to the central bank following a sub-optimal policy (a Taylor-like rule,
to be speci…c).
The monotonic relation between wage ‡exibility and welfare turns out
not be a general result. Figure 26 displays the welfare loss under the optimal
policy for an alternative calibration of the model characterized by extreme
price stickiness ( p = 0:97). The monotonicity is now lost: when the initial degree of wage stickiness is su¢ ciently high, a marginal increase in wage
‡exibility is shown to be detrimental to welfare. Figure 27 displays the decomposition of the previous welfare loss, pointing to the joint role of the wage
in‡ation and employment components as the explanation behind the larger
welfare losses resulting from greater wage ‡exibility, when wages are very
sticky to begin with. Intuitively, and due to the large distortions associated
with price instability under the present calibration, the central bank focuses
nearly exclusively on stabilizing price in‡ation. More wage ‡exibility leads
to greater volatility of wage in‡ation, making stabilization of price in‡ation
more costly in terms of employment volatility.

6

Caveats and Possible Extensions

Next I brie‡y discuss several caveats associated with the analysis above.
All of them can be potentially overcome through suitable extensions of the
17

framework used above.
A …rst caveat of my analysis has to do with the use of a closed economy
framework, a feature in common with much of the discussion contained in
the General Theory. Keynes himself pointed to the limitations implied by
the assumption of a closed economy, since the latter disregards the "competitiveness channel" of wage adjustments often emphasized in policy circles.
In an open economy, it is argued, lower nominal wages would lead to lower
prices for domestic goods and –in the absence of any o¤setting variations in
the nominal exchange rate–a depreciation of the real exchange rate, which
would stimulate net exports, aggregate demand and employment. The effectiveness of the previous channel depends, however, on two factors. First,
the degree to which lower marginal costs are re‡ected in lower prices for
exported goods. Existing evidence on the importance of pricing to market
in international trade suggests that the e¤ective prices of domestic goods in
foreign markets may end up re‡ecting only part of the adjustment in wages,
thus limiting its expansionary e¤ects on employment. Secondly, the nature
of the endogenous monetary policy response will determine how the nominal exchange rate adjusts. Thus, if the central bank follows a Taylor-like
rule, the expansionary impact of a downward nominal wage adjustment will
be stronger the larger (smaller) is the weight attached to in‡ation (output)
stabilization.
A second caveat pertains to the assumption of identical households/consumers.
Relaxing that assumption along some dimensions may have implications for
the impact of wage adjustments on employment. In particular, if a fraction of
households behave in a non-Ricardian fashion, i.e. equating their consumption to their current labor income, a reduction in wages may lead, through
this channel, to a reduction in aggregate consumption, aggregate demand
and employment.
A …nal caveat has to do with the monetary policy response. In the analysis above, I have assumed that the central bank follows either a Taylor-like
rule or the optimal policy (with commitment). Yet, there are many real world
instances in which those assumptions will not provide a reasonable approximation to the actual monetary policy response to given shock. In particular,
in the case of a currency union, the (common) interest rate is unlikely to
adjust at all in response to the fall in in‡ation induced by lower wages in any
individual member country. The same will be true in an economy in which
interest rates have hit a zero lower bound. In either case, the nominal rate
remains unchanged, and a wage cut may have contractionary e¤ects on ag18

gregate demand and employment if it triggers expectations of lower in‡ation
down the road and, hence, leads to higher real interest rates.
The standard New Keynesian model used as a reference framework in
the present paper does not account for any of the three previous factors
(open economy, non-Ricardian behavior and constraints on monetary policy). Given their relevance, the explicit incorporation of those factors in the
analysis seems to be warranted in order to get a better assessment of the role
of wage ‡exibility in the determination of employment and welfare. This is
an avenue that I plan to pursue in future work.

7

Concluding Remarks

The main objective of the work presented here was to revisit some of the key
themes and propositions in Keynes’s General Theory through the lens of the
New Keynesian model, the workhorse of modern macroeconomic theory. I
have focused on the role of wages vs. aggregate demand in the determination
of employment, an issue at the core of Keynes’s critique of classical economics.
The exercise yields a number of tentative conclusions. Firstly, many of
Keynes’s key insights on the above subject seem to stand up to the scrutiny
of New Keynesian theory. Thus, in the latter, as in the General Theory, wage
adjustments do not play a direct role in the determination of employment.
Their eventual impact on employment is only indirect, through the change in
aggregate demand resulting from the endogenous monetary policy response
to the variations in in‡ation caused by wage adjustments. Accordingly, the
monetary policy rule in place will be critical in determining the degree to
which more wage ‡exibility can play a stabilizing role.
Despite the overall consistency of the New Keynesian framework with
the main qualitative propositions in the General Theory, the former provides
some insights absent from Keynes’s book, namely, (i) the possibility of procyclical real wages when prices are su¢ ciently sticky relative to wages, and
(ii) the likely contractionary e¤ects of positive aggregate technology shocks
on employment.
The New Keynesian model makes it possible to evaluate the desirability
of enhanced wage ‡exibility from a welfare perspective. Above, I have shown
that it is not generally true that welfare is higher when wages are more
‡exible. In particular, when the central bank follows a Taylor-type rule which
responds weakly to price in‡ation, the opposite may be true for reasonable
19

parameter values. By contrast, when an optimal monetary policy is in place,
more ‡exible wages tend to raise welfare for plausible calibrations of the
model. That result can be overturned, though, if prices display extreme
stickiness.
All things considered, the …ndings of the present paper suggest that the
e¤ectiveness of wage cuts in …ghting unemployment and, more generally, the
desirability of more wage ‡exibility are propositions that one should not take
for granted. That lesson, central to Keynes’s General Theory, remains valid
when examined in the context of the New Keynesian framework.

20

References
Barnichon, Régis (2010): "Productivity and Unemployment over the
Business Cycle," Journal of Monetary Economics, 57 (8), 2010, 1013-1025.
Basu, Susanto, John Fernald, and Miles Kimball (2006): “Are Technology
Improvements Contractionary?,” American Economic Review, vol. 96, no.
5, 1418-1448.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans (2005):
“Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamic E¤ects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,"
Journal of Political Economy, vol. 113, no. 1, 1-45
Dunlop, John (1938): "The Movement of Real and Money Wage Rates,"
The Economic Journal, vol 48 (191), 413-434.
European Central Bank (2012), Monthly Bulletin, August.
Erceg, Christopher J., Dale W. Henderson, and Andrew T. Levin (2000):
“Optimal Monetary Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts,”Journal of Monetary Economics vol. 46, no. 2, 281-314.
Fisher, Jonas D.M. (2006): "The Dynamic E¤ects of Neutral and InvestmentSpeci…c Technology Shocks," Journal of Political Economy, 114 (3), 413-451.
Francis, Neville, and Valerie Ramey (2005): “Is the Technology-Driven
Real Business Cycle Hypothesis Dead? Shocks and Aggregate Fluctuations
Revisited,”Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 52, issue 8,1379-1399
Galí, Jordi (1999): “Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle:
Do Technology Shocks Explain Aggregate Fluctuations?,” American Economic Review, vol. 89, no. 1, 249-271.
Galí, Jordi (2008): Monetary Policy, In‡ation and the Business Cycle:
An Introduction to the New Keynesian Framework, Princeton University
Press (Princeton, NJ).
Galí, Jordi (2011): Unemployment Fluctuations and Stabilization Policies: A New Keynesian Perspective, MIT Press (Cambridge, MA).
Galí, Jordi, J. David López-Salido and Javier Vallés (2007): “Understanding the E¤ects of Government Spending on Consumption,” Journal of
the European Economics Association, vol. 5, issue 1, 227-270.
Galí, Jordi, J. David López-Salido, and Javier Vallés (2003): “Technology
Shocks and Monetary Policy: Assessing the Fed’s Performance,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, vol. 50, no. 4., 723-743.
Galí, Jordi and Pau Rabanal (2004): “Technology Shocks and Aggregate
Fluctuations: How Well Does the RBC Model Fit Postwar U.S. Data?,”
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2004, 225-288.

21

Hansen, Alvin H. (1953): A Guide to Keynes, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.
Hicks, John R. (1937): "Mr. Keynes and the "Classics"; A Suggested
Interpretation," Econometrica, vol. 5 (2), 147-159.
Keynes, John M. (1936): The General Theory of Employment, Interest
and Money, MacMillan, London.
Keynes, John M. (1939): "Relative Movements of Real Wages and Output," The Economic Journal, vol. 49 (193), 34-51.
Patinkin, Don (1948): "Price Flexibility and Full Employment," American Economic Review 38, 543-564.
Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford (1992): "Oligopolistic Pricing and the E¤ects of Aggregate Demand on Economic Activity," Journal of
Political Economy, vol. 100, 1153-1207.
Smets, Frank, and Raf Wouters (2003): “An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of the European
Economic Association, vol 1, no. 5, 1123-1175.
Smets, Frank, and Raf Wouters (2007): "Shocks and Frictions in US
Business Cycles: a Bayesian DSGE Approach," American Economic Review,
vol. 97 (3), 586-606.
Tarshis, Lorie (1939): "Changes in real and Money Wages," The Economic Journal, vol. 49 (193), 150-154.
Taylor, John B. (1993): “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,”
Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Policy 39, 195-214.
Woodford, Michael (2003): Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory
of Monetary Policy, Princeton University Press (Princeton, NJ).
Woodford, Michael (2011): "Simple Analytics of the Government Spending Multiplier," American Economic Journal; Macroeconomics, 3, 1-35.

22

'
w
p
p
w
p
y

i

Table 1. Baseline Calibration
Description
Value
Target
Curvature of labor disutility
5
Frisch elasticity 0:2
Index of decrasing returns to labor 1=4
Elasticity of substitution (labor)
4:52
un = 0:05
Elasticity of substitution (goods)
9
S = p =(1 p 1) = 2=3
Calvo index of price rigidities
3=4
avg. duration = 4
Calvo index of wage rigidities
3=4
avg. duration = 4
In‡ation coe¢ cient in policy rule
1:5
Taylor (1993)
Output coe¢ cient in policy rule
0:125
Taylor (1993)
Discount factor
0:99
Persistence exogenous processes
0:9

23

