NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DEREGULATION, MISALLOCATION, AND SIZE:
EVIDENCE FROM INDIA
Laura Alfaro
Anusha Chari
Working Paper 18650
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18650

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012

Work on this paper has been supported by Columbia University’s Program on Indian Economic Policies,
funded by a generous grant from the John Templeton Foundation. The opinions expressed in the paper
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the John Templeton Foundation.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Laura Alfaro and Anusha Chari. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Deregulation, Misallocation, and Size: Evidence from India
Laura Alfaro and Anusha Chari
NBER Working Paper No. 18650
December 2012
JEL No. F43,G31,G38,L10,O12,O14
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the impact of the deregulation of compulsory industrial licensing in India on
firm-size dynamics and the reallocation of resources within industries over time. Following deregulation,
we find that the extent of resource misallocation declines and a considerable thickening of the left-hand
tail of the firm-size distribution suggesting a significant increase in the number of small firms. However,
the dominance and growth of large incumbents remains unchallenged. Quantile regressions reveal
that the distributional effects of deregulation on firm size are significantly non-linear. The size distribution
we observe—namely, a large number of small firms and a small number of large firms—can be characterized
as the “missing middle” in Indian manufacturing and suggests that small firms may continue to face
constraints in their attempts to grow.

Laura Alfaro
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 263
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
lalfaro@hbs.edu
Anusha Chari
301 Gardner Hall
CB#3305, Department of Economics
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
and NBER
achari@unc.edu

Introduction
The misallocation of resources across firms can have important effects on aggregate
efficiency. Policy distortions can adversely impact the allocation of resources between firms with
different productivities such that the more efficient firms produce less output or employment
than they would in the absence of these distortions (Restuccia and Rogerson, 2008). Recent
evidence also suggests that resource misallocation is a significant factor in explaining the
aggregate productivity gap between the United States, China, and India (Hsieh and Klenow,
2009). The general consensus is that not only do developing countries have fewer productive
resources they are also less efficient at allocating these resources across productive uses.1
The rapid transformation of India’s economy presents a unique and important opportunity
for economists to examine the causes and consequences of the accelerated development. While
many institutions and policies can distort resource allocation, in our view, regulations governing
free entry and firm size are a critical source of inefficiency. In this paper, we analyze the
efficiency impact of the removal of a specific distortion: compulsory industrial licensing that
regulated firm entry and imposed output capacity constraints on Indian firms prior to 1991.2
Theory suggests that the regulation of entry into an industry determines both the entry
costs faced by firms and the degree of competition between firms (Blanchard and Giavazzi,
2003; Alesina et al., 2005; Ardagna and Lusardi, 2009, 2010). The deregulation of entry can
therefore reduce and redistribute rents, leading to new distributions of firms within industries
over time. Incumbent firms may either decline in the face of new competitors or consolidate their
positions further if the economy and hence the size of the market grows. Episodes that involve
1

Alfaro, Charlton, and Kanczuk (2009) find that differences in the allocation of resources across heterogeneous
plants are a significant determinant of cross-country differences in income per worker in a sample with plant-level
data for 79 developed and developing countries.
2
An industrial license not only regulated whether a firm could enter an industry, it also specified the maximum
amount a firm could produce.

2

massive deregulation therefore provide a useful setting to examine changes in resource
allocation.
Pro-market reforms in the 1990s rapidly deregulated significant sectors of the Indian
economy previously kept off-limits to private participation. Deregulation of entry and the end of
industrial licensing (also known as the “License Raj”) in all but a small subset of industries had
the capacity to transform the competitive environment in which firms operated. In fact, data from
the Centre for Monitoring the Indian Economy (CMIE) show that thousands of new private firms
were incorporated following deregulation.
In this paper we ask whether industrial delicensing in India, which relaxed entry barriers
and capacity constraints on firm size, led to a change in firm size distributions within industries.
We hypothesize that the wide-ranging restrictions on entry and the artificial constraints on
capacity distorted the size distribution of firms in India. Delicensing provides a unique
experiment to examine the impact on firm size distributions of removing these restrictions. In
this paper we use firm-level financial statement information from the manufacturing sector to
examine the distributional impact of deregulation on firm size and profitability. We also use this
information to measure the extent of resource reallocation in the delicensed industries. In other
words, did the degree of misallocation decline for industries that removed distortions on entry
and capacity in comparison to the industries that continued to restrict entry?
Before 1991, wide-ranging regulation of industries placed numerous restrictions on free
enterprise. First, entry licenses regulated the number of firms operating in an industry. Second,
the government implemented capacity caps that prescribed the scale of production to prevent
firms from getting too large. Third, small-scale reservations restricted industrial production in
several industries to small firms only. Finally, several industries were reserved for state-owned

3

firms and kept off-limits to private participants. Policy-makers were particularly concerned about
the distributional implications of the broad-based deregulation measures of 1991, specifically
whether removing entry restrictions and small-scale industry reservations would drive out small
firms unable to compete with large firms, thus destroying the small-firm style of development
that was championed post-independence.
Models that employ selection mechanisms operate in distinct ways and offer predictions
for changes in the distributions of firm size (Hopenhayn, 1992; Ericson and Pakes, 1995;
Luttmer, 2007; Jovanovic, 1982; and Melitz, 2003). In the Indian context, there are two forces
that can affect firm revenues and interact to determine the total impact of deregulation on firm
size and profitability. First, free entry can lead to a reallocation of factor resources, from less
efficient domestic firms to the more efficient firms. An erosion of domestic incumbent firm
profits through tougher selection implies that the least efficient firms exit the market. Second, the
period of deregulation in the early 1990s in India coincided with rapid economic growth. To
analyze the redistributive effects on firm size and profitability of deregulating entry, we also have
to take into account the effects of growth on market size.
With respect to profitability, theory suggests that through free entry the revenue
distribution can become left truncated due to stronger domestic selection. At the same time, rapid
economic growth can lead to an increase in market size, precipitating a rightward shift in the
revenue distribution for the surviving domestic firms. Our estimations are designed to evaluate
the effects of deregulation on the distributional properties of profitability in order to capture the
selection effects induced by free entry and the size effects associated with a growing economy.
Regarding firm size, recall that the licensing policy in India regulated capacity as well as
entry. This implies that we have to analyze the impact of relaxing constraints on two margins

4

that, in theory, could have opposite effects on firm size. Relaxing capacity restrictions could lead
to increased average firm size due to expansion. Alternatively, an increase in the number of
small firms could lead to a fall in the average firm size. Although the impact of deregulation on
average firm size depends on the net effect of these two countervailing forces, an important
advantage of panel data at the firm level is that it also allows us to analyze changes in the
properties of the entire size distribution.
We use firm-level data from the Prowess database collected by the CMIE from company
balance sheets and income statements. Prowess covers both publicly listed and unlisted firms
from a wide cross-section of manufacturing, services, utilities, and financial industries from
1989–2005. About one-third of the firms in Prowess are publicly listed firms. The companies
covered account for more than 70% of industrial output, 75% of corporate taxes, and more than
95% of excise taxes collected by the Government of India (CMIE). Prowess covers firms in the
organized sector, which refers to registered companies that submit financial statements.3
The advantage of detailed balance sheet and ownership data at the firm level is that we
have information on a number of variables such as sales, profitability, and assets for an average
of more than 10,800 firms across our sample period (1989–2005). Unlike the Annual Survey of
Industries (ASI),4 which has been used in numerous studies on India (for example, Chari, 2011;
Hseih and Klenow, 2009, 2012), Prowess is a firm-level panel dataset. The data are therefore
particularly well suited for understanding how firms adjust over time and how their responses
may be related to policy changes. Previous attempts at estimating the impact of the licensing

3

Section 3 describes in detail the advantages and shortcomings of the dataset.
The ASI is an annual census conducted on a sampling basis of factories employing 100 or more workers. In larger
industries, 20% of the factories are sampled every year, so that any given factory is sampled once in five years. The
data therefore consist of repeated cross-sections.

4

5

regime have been hampered by the fact that the ASI data on factories in India consist of repeated
cross-sections, ruling out the possibility of observing growth at the firm level (Chari, 2011).
We focus on firms classified across 62 three-digit industries in the manufacturing sector.
The data are also classified by incorporation year so that distinctions can be made across firms
by age. As a result, the data contain rich detail to characterize changes in firm size distributions,
as well as differentiate across types of firms such as incumbents and new entrants. The data also
allow us to measure increases in competition in several ways—an increase in dispersion in firm
size distributions, a reduction in concentration ratios, or a decline in average firm size. We also
use quantile regressions to compare the pre- and post-reform distributional properties of firm size
and profitability.
Our main findings are as follows. First, average firm size declines significantly in
deregulated industries consistent with greater competition. Second, there are significant changes
in the firm-size distribution particularly in the tails of the distribution. The left-hand tail of the
size distribution thickens with more small firms in the sample and on the right-hand tail the
largest incumbent firms get significantly bigger following the delicensing of entry and capacity
constraints. Third, quantile regressions show that the U-shaped shift in the distribution of firm
size is non-linear: average firm size increases until around the 15th percentile and then gets
significantly smaller until the 90th percentile, while the largest percentile (95%) gets
significantly bigger over the same time period. Finally, new entrant size increases at the lower
tails of the distributions while incumbent size grows at the upper tails.
The marginal increase in the number of small firms is consistent with an increase in
competition following deregulation, and the reduction in average firm size implies less
monopoly power. These findings confirm the predictions in Blanchard and Giavazzi (2003). The

6

Herfindahl index of firm sales also shows a significant decline. Policy concerns that small firms
would be driven out following the deregulation of entry are not borne out in our estimations.
The finding that large incumbent firms grew larger is consistent with licensing regime
restrictions. Prior to deregulation, a license determined how much (above a minimum threshold)
firms could produce and invest—effectively curtailing their size. The capacity caps may
therefore have constrained the most successful firms by restricting expansion. Removing these
restrictions through deregulation could allow the most dynamic and efficient incumbent firms to
expand unhampered. Inputs imported thanks to trade liberalization may also have allowed the
large incumbents to become more efficient and grow.
The U-shaped pattern observed in the post-liberalization firm size distribution suggests
that deregulation may have created a winner-take-all environment where the largest firms drive
out any competition.5 So, while deregulation leads to more small firms in the sample, there
appears to be a hollowing out in the middle of the size distribution. The size distribution we
observe—namely, a large number of small firms and a small number of large firms—can be
characterized as the “missing middle” in Indian manufacturing and points to constraints that
small firms may continue to face in their attempts to grow.
We also find that the contribution of resource reallocation to growth in India increases in
the years following deregulation, suggesting that distortions have decreased over time with
higher gains for deregulated industries.6 There is, however, substantial variance across years in

5

The evidence of large incumbent dominance is consistent with the findings in Bollard, Klenow, and Sharma (2011)
with respect to the acceleration in manufacturing sector productivity growth in the early 1990s for large incumbents
in particular. Sharma (2008) and Chamarbagwalla and Sharma (forthcoming) also present evidence on the
importance of large plants in raising levels of labor productivity and the demand for skilled workers, respectively.
6
Our findings are consistent with international evidence that allocative efficiency improves following deregulation.
Bertrand, Schoar and Themar (2007) show that the deregulation of the French banking industry led to improvements
in allocative efficiency and promotes the process of “creative destruction.” Similarly, Black and Strahan (2002), and
Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2004) find that competition in the banking sector and financial development fosters
firm entry in the United States and Italy respectively.

7

the extent of reallocation. Most of the reallocation gains in the early period following
deregulation can be attributed to the new entrants in the deregulated industries, while the later
period shows substantial reallocation gains for the incumbent firms in those industries.7 These
findings are consistent with the view that competition effects and other gains from deregulation
required time to materialize and start to have significant impact with a lag.
We conduct a number of tests to ensure the robustness of the findings. The firm size
regressions are estimated for both assets and sales. We use a balanced panel of incumbent firms
with and without fixed effects. The fixed effects specification controls for unobserved
heterogeneity at the firm level. We use an unbalanced panel of firms to allow for new firms to
enter the sample and to examine the distributional impact of deregulation. The specifications
include a year trend variable to control for the overall growth in the economy. Finally, standard
errors are clustered at the three-digit NIC level to allow for correlations in residuals across firms
within an industry. We also control for other economic reforms such as trade or foreign direct
investment (FDI) liberalization that could have a significant impact on the firm-size distribution
and profitability, independent of any effects of delicensing. Our results are robust to the inclusion
of these controls.
The paper is related to a large literature on the size and productivity distribution of firms
in macro, trade, finance, and industrial organization. Recent theoretical attempts to explain the
evolution of the size distribution of firms and resource reallocation focus on (i) selection
mechanisms where unsuccessful firms decline and exit (Hopenhayn, 1992; Ericson and Pakes,
1995; Luttmer, 2004; Jovanovic, 1982; and Melitz, 2003); (ii) inefficiencies in financial markets

7

Bollard, Klenow, and Sharma (2011) using the Indian Annual Survey of Industries, find evidence of a large
acceleration in aggregate productivity growth in formal Indian manufacturing during the sample, for example, in the
early 1990s. The acceleration can be seen in large incumbents in particular.

8

and their impact on small firms (Cabral and Mata, 2003; Clementi and Hopenhayn, 2006;
Albuquerque and Hopenhayn, 2004; and Cooley and Quadrini, 2001); and (iii) managerial ability
(Lucas, 1978; Garciano, LeLarge, and Van Reenen, 2012).
Briefly, some of this research predicts that the deregulation will lead to (i) more firms and
less incumbent power (Blanchard and Giavazzi, 2003; Alesina et al., 2005); (ii) increases in
average firm size and profits through reductions in capacity restrictions (Blanchard and Giavazzi,
2003; Alesina et al., 2005; Campbell and Hopenhayn, 2005); (iii) increasing dispersion in sales,
assets, and profits (Campbell and Hopenhayn, 2005; Syverssen, 2004); and (iv) increasing
turnover and firm age distributions tilting toward younger firms (Asplund and Nocke, 2006).
Recent work using dynamic models provides another strand of literature that highlights
the point that lowering the cost of entry leads to reallocations of resources across firms within an
industry. Jovanovic (1982), Hopenhayn (1992), and Melitz (2003) provide frameworks with
monopolistic competition and heterogeneous firms that highlight the selection mechanisms and
survival as inefficient firms are forced to exit and resources get reallocated to more productive
firms. The models predict that lower entry costs or greater substitutability lead to changes in firm
composition within industries along with improvements in aggregate industry productivity.
Economic units in these models operate as if the discounted sum of their future profit stream is
above the opportunity cost of operating, consistent with our focus on profitability in this paper.
The paper is also related to a vast literature that examines various aspects of the 1991
reforms in India. Most closely related however is Aghion et. al. (2008) who study the effects of
the progressive elimination of the system of industrial regulation on entry and production on
registered manufacturing output, employment, entry and investment across Indian states with
different labor market regulations. The effects are found to be unequal depending on the

9

institutional environment. Our analysis focuses instead on the distributional consequences of
deregulation and the non-linear evolution of the firm size distribution. Our results on large
incumbent dominance and the “missing middle” are consistent with the findings in Bollard,
Klenow, and Sharma (2011) with respect to the acceleration in manufacturing sector productivity
growth in the early 1990s for large incumbents in particular.
It is also important to mention that while theory suggests that the number of firms
operating within industries can change through entry and exit in the face of deregulation, most
models assume that firms are able to efficiently allocate resources within the firm and that factor
markets are frictionless.8 In the Indian context, Panagariya (2008) notes that remnants of
industrial regulation still affect the operation of Indian firms and may constrain their flexibility in
adjusting to new economic conditions. Lingering restrictions, for example, can make it difficult
for small firms to enter. India’s reforms opened up parts of the economy for competition but left
“an alliance of well-connected industrialists and public officials (dubbed as ‘the Resource Raj’)
that between them carve up the permissions and licenses that have in the past underpinned
India’s growth.”9
Evidence also suggests that despite the extensive industrial deregulation in the early
1990s, rigid labor market regulations may continue to affect the daily operations of Indian firms,
potentially precluding them from eliminating unprofitable product lines. For example, an allIndia amendment to the Industrial Disputes Act (1947) in 1982 required firms with more than
100 employees to seek government approval to dismiss workers (Kochhar et al., 2006). In

8

The exception is Garciano, LeLarge, and Van Reenen (2012) who find that sharp increases in firing costs have a
significant impact on the size distribution of firms (a “broken power law”) and productivity and that the costs of the
regulation are sizable.
9
Raghuram Rajan, quoted in James Crabtree “India’s Growth Threatened by Old Abuses,” Financial Times, May
2012.

10

addition, liquidation procedures are cumbersome and long. As noted by Panagariya (2008),
“India operates in a world with virtually no exit doors.” India’s bankruptcy rate was, according
to the World Bank (2005), 4 per 10,000 firms, compared with 15 in Thailand and 350 in the
United States.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a description of the deregulation
measures and Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 presents summary statistics about firm size
distributions and profitability before and after deregulation, and by incumbent and new entrant
status. Section 5 presents the empirical methodology and results. Section 6 presents robustness
checks. Section 7 concludes.

2. The New Industrial Policy of 1991
We analyze the effects of deregulation policy in the manufacturing sector of India to
examine the evolution of the size distribution of firms. We particularly emphasize industrial
policy that required firms to obtain a license to enter an industry and also stipulated the amount
of output a firm could produce once it was in operation. According to Kochhar et al. (2006), the
licensing regime that imposed restrictions on entry and capacity resulted in relatively small firms
such that in 1990, the average manufacturing firm in India was more than ten times smaller than
one in the United States.
Following a balance-of-payments crisis in 1991, a new industrial policy was enacted that
abolished the system of licensing for all but a few key industries, particularly those related to
national security. In addition, private firms were allowed to enter industries previously reserved
for state-owned firms—a policy commonly referred to as “de-reservation.” The broad-based
reform package of 1991 also included concurrent reforms that could impact entry, such as tariff
reductions that could introduce import competition product markets and FDI liberalization that

11

allowed foreign firms into a subset of industries. To test for the robustness of our findings, our
estimations control for the effects of the concurrent policy changes. In this section, we provide a
broad overview of the reforms and refer the reader to studies that provide in-depth detail about
specific measures.
The trend toward delicensing and de-reservation began with the industrial policy
statements in 1985 that outlined many liberalization measures, including not restricting business
houses to Appendix 1 industries as long as they moved to industrially backward regions and
raised the minimum asset limit to define business houses. The pace of these policy trends
accelerated with the new industrial policy outlined in the Industrial Policy Resolution of 1991.
An excerpt from the new industrial policy statement reads, “In order to achieve the
objectives of the strategy for the industrial sector for the 1990s and beyond it is necessary to
make a number of changes in the system of industrial approvals. Major policy initiatives and
procedural reforms are called for in order to actively encourage and assist Indian entrepreneurs to
exploit and meet the emerging domestic and global opportunities and challenges. The bedrock of
any such package of measures must be to let the entrepreneurs make investment decisions on the
basis of their own commercial judgment. The attainment of technological dynamism and
international competitiveness requires that enterprises must be enabled to swiftly respond to fast
changing external conditions that have become characteristic of today’s industrial world.
Government policy and procedures must be geared to assisting entrepreneurs in their efforts.
This can be done only if the role played by the government were to be changed from that of only
exercising control to one of providing help and guidance by making essential procedures fully
transparent and by eliminating delays.”10

10

http://dipp.nic.in/English/Policies/Industrial_policy_statement.pdf.

12

As a result, compulsory industrial licensing was abolished for all except 18 industries
specified in Annex II. The industries in Annex II were to continue to be subject to compulsory
licensing for reasons related to “security and strategic concerns, social reasons, problems related
to safety and over-riding environmental issues, manufacture of products of hazardous nature and
articles of elitist consumption.”11 Finally, areas where security and strategic concerns
predominate will continue to be reserved for the state-owned sector (listed in Annex I).
The statement also iterated that the exemption from licensing was expected to make the
manufacturing sector more competitive and efficient and be particularly helpful to the many
dynamic small and medium entrepreneurs who had been unnecessarily hampered by the
licensing system.
Large companies no longer needed Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Policies Act
(MRTP) approval for capacity expansions. The number of industries reserved for the public
sector in Schedule A (IPR, 1951) was cut from 17 to 8. Schedule B which listed industries open
to the private sector with an increasing role for the state (particularly for new establishments)
was abolished altogether. These industries included minerals, aluminum, and other non-ferrous
metals not listed in Schedule A; machine tools; basic intermediate products required by the
chemicals industries; antibiotics and other essential drugs; synthetic rubber; fertilizers; and road
and sea transport.
A natural question that arises in the context of any policy change that is applied
differentially across industries is why certain industries were deregulated and not others. It is
important to note that the delicensing measures in 1991 were enacted under the auspices of an
IMF structural program in response to a balance of payments crisis. Since the crisis and reforms

11

http://dipp.nic.in/English/Policies/Industrial_policy_statement.pdf.

13

were largely unexpected, it is hard to make a case that certain industries may have anticipated
and lobbied either in favor or against the reforms.12
Following Aghion et. al. (2008), we ran a cross-sectional regression of the year in which
a three-digit industry was deregulated on sales growth in that industry during the 1990–1991
period (prior to deregulation) to see if the government deregulated industries according to their
perceived growth potential. We find no evidence of a relationship between when an industry is
deregulated and pre-reform sales growth (the estimated coefficient of interest is -0.0333, and the
standard error is 0.0785). T-tests of means also confirm that sales growth was not statistically
significantly different across the deregulated and restricted industries in the pre-reform period.
Similar results are found using other measures of pre-reform industrial performance such as asset
growth and firm profitability growth during 1988–1991. The absence of systematic differences in
pre-reform economic performance between industries provides evidence that the deregulation
decision was largely exogenous.
From the lists of industries in Annex I and II it is not also obvious that other usual
suspects for selection bias such as optimal industrial structure were the drivers of the industries
that were deregulated. For instance, the beverages industry was deregulated while the alcoholic
beverages segment was kept restricted out of social concerns. Similarly, the manufacturing of
refrigerators, dishwashers, washing machines, microwave ovens and air conditioners were kept
restricted while the manufacture of TV, radios and other domestic appliances were deregulated.
It appears that an arbitrary distinction was made by the government that certain domestic
appliances were deemed elitest and others not. The main point is that it is not readily apparent

12

Aghion et. al.(2008) advance a similar argument to make the case that the reforms constituted an
exogenous shock,

14

from the list of industries that were not deregulated as to what observable industry characteristic
formed the basis for selection and therefore potential selectivity bias in the sample.
The FDI reforms in 1991 reduced barriers to foreign entry in a subset of industries.
According to the Industrial Policy Resolution of 1991, automatic approval was granted for
foreign direct investment of up to 51% in 46 of 96 three-digit industrial categories (for industries
listed in Annexure III of the Statement of Industrial Policy in 1991). In the remaining 50
industries, the state continued to require that foreign investors obtain approval for entry. The
Industrial Policy Resolution of 1991 provides information about the list of manufacturing
industries in which the state liberalized foreign entry and also a list of industries where domestic
entry restrictions continued to be in effect.
In addition, trade liberalization led to a reduction in the level and dispersion of tariffs, a
removal of quantitative restrictions on imported inputs and capital goods for export production,
and elimination of public-sector monopoly on imports of almost all items. The government’s
export-import policy plan (1992–1997) dramatically reduced the use of quantitative restrictions,
and tariff reductions took place in 77 industrial categories (See Topalova, 2007 for further
details).

3. The Data
We use firm-level data from the Prowess database. The sample period is from the year of
inception of dataset, 1989–2005.13 The data are collected by the CMIE from company balance
sheets and income statements and cover both publicly listed and unlisted firms from a wide
cross-section of manufacturing, services, utilities, and financial industries. About one-third of the

13

The Prowess database has now been used in several studies including Bertrand, Mehta, and Mullainathan (2002),
Khanna and Palepu (1999), Fisman and Khanna (2004), Khanna and Palepu (2005), and Chari and Gupta (2008).

15

firms in Prowess are publicly listed firms. The companies covered account for more than 70% of
industrial output, 75% of corporate taxes, and more than 95% of excise taxes collected by the
Government of India (CMIE).
Prowess covers firms in the organized sector, which refers to registered companies that
submit financial statements. According to the government, “The organized sector comprises
enterprises for which the statistics are available from the budget documents or reports, etc. On
the other hand the unorganized sector refers to those enterprises whose activities or collection of
data is not regulated under any legal provision or do not maintain any regular accounts”
(“Informal Sector in India: Approaches for Social Security,” Government of India, p. 2, 2000).
Indian firms are required by the 1956 Companies Act to disclose information on capacities,
production, and sales in their annual reports. All listed companies are included in the database
regardless of whether financials are available.14
The Indian National Industrial Classification (NIC) (1998) system is used to classify
firms in the Prowess dataset into industries. The data include firms from a wide range of
industries, including mining, basic manufacturing, financial and real estate services, and energy
distribution.
An advantage of firm-level data is that detailed balance sheet and incorporation
information allow us to analyze how incumbent firms are impacted by policy changes such as
deregulation. In contrast, industry-level databases usually do not provide information about sales,
assets, and profits by incorporation year and hence firm age.15

14

Unlisted companies are not required to disclose their financials. CMIE asks their permission, but if they refuse, it
cannot include these companies in Prowess.
15
Since firms are not required to report employment in their annual reports, we observe employment data for only a
more restricted sample of firms. Financial services is the only industry that is mandated by law to disclose
employment information. Since the sample of firms that report employment is small, we do not focus on these
numbers.

16

The data allow us to examine whether the ownership composition of firms changed by
number and size of firms, fraction of sales, or assets and profits by age (incumbent status) and
industry. We can also examine changes in firm activity and market dynamics in industries where
entry restrictions, both foreign and domestic, were lifted. Appendix 1 provides a description of
variables used in the data analysis.
One concern with the data may be related to new entrants versus improvements in the
data coverage by CMIE. However, for all firms that Prowess covers, regardless of when the
decision is made, financial data from 1989 onward—wherever available—is added to the
database. We address the issue of improved coverage in the data versus new entry by making use
of information about incorporation dates. We begin with a sample of firms in 1989 and allow
firms to enter the sample only if the new firms enter with data coinciding with their incorporation
date. Following 1991, a firm is identified as a new entrant only if its data coverage coincides
with its incorporation date (also later than 1991).
A point about firm exit is worth noting. The dataset contains a code for firms that exited
the data via mergers and acquisitions. However, the data do not contain a flag for firms that are
shut down versus those with discontinued coverage. Therefore, when we no longer observe data
for a firm, we assume firm exit. But again, this may also reflect discontinued coverage by
Prowess or the failure of unlisted firms to provide data about their operations. To address this
issue, we construct a balanced panel of incumbent firms we follow over the sample period and an
unbalanced panel of incumbent and new entrant firms into which we only allow a new firm to
enter if data availability coincides with the year of incorporation after 1991. We also classify
firms that do not report data because of mergers and acquisitions as firms that exit the data due to
consolidation.

17

Note that unlike the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) which is a survey of
manufacturing, the Prowess data is a panel of firms. The ASI is a repeated cross-section such that
only a fifth of the total number of factories in any given industry in a given state are in the
sample in any given year. The sampling design implies that any given factory appears in the ASI
sample only once every five years so that the data are not of a panel nature. Prowess is therefore
particularly well suited to examining how firm-characteristics including firm size and
profitability distributions evolve over time and may respond to policy changes.
While Prowess is not a census of manufacturing firms, a number of papers use the data to
exploit its panel nature. For instance, Goldberg et al. (2009) use the Prowess dataset to examine
how firms adjust their product-mix over time. New products that are introduced into the market
by firms not covered by Prowess are also excluded from their study.

4. Summary Statistics
Consistent with the rapid economic growth observed in India after the mid-1980s, firm
activity measured by the number of firms grew substantially relative to the beginning of the
sample period. The data show the incorporation of large numbers of new firms following the
reforms. The acceleration in entry in the period following 1991 continued through the rest of the
decade and by 2005, 4,800 new firms entered the market. The data also show evidence of
lingering exit restrictions, however. While there is significant evidence of increased firm entry,
we observe little firm exit.
Table 1 shows summary statistics for industry concentration (the Herfindahl index16),
firm size, profitability, and dispersion measures (coefficient of variation calculated by assets and

16

The Herfindahl index is an indicator of the degree of competition among firms in an industry. It is defined as the
square of the market shares of each firm in an industry. The value of the Herfindahl index can range from zero in

18

sales). Underlying average market share values are calculated for a given firm across the years in
a sub-period and then the Herfindahl index is calculated by industry for a given subperiod. The
Prowess database provides four- and five-digit industry classifications for most firms. However,
because the deregulation policies were enacted at the three-digit level, industry concentration is
accordingly computed at the three-digit level. We present data for the full sample first and then
by the year of incorporation and for the deregulated industries. Appendix Table 2 presents
detailed information on the industries included in the data.
For the full sample, Table 1 (panel A) shows a reduction in market concentration for the
average firm throughout the sample period. The Herfindahl indices suggest an increased degree
of competition among firms in India. The coefficient of variation (for both sales and assets) also
indicates increased dispersion. A picture emerges of the average manufacturing firm in India
growing smaller—in terms of assets, sales, and profits—along with a substantial increase in
heterogeneity over the period.
Panel B presents information by year of incorporation (between pre-1947, 1947–1985,
1985–2005) for firm size (assets, sales), profitability, and rate of return and their evolution over
the sample period. The oldest firm in the sample (Howrah Mills Company Ltd.) was incorporated
in 1825, and the sample begins with over 390 manufacturing firms that were incorporated before
independence. Some firms from this group exit the sample through mergers. Many of these older
firms (pre-independence), however, remain in operation following the reforms.
Panel C describes how firms evolved in the deregulated industries. Relative to the full
sample in panel A, market concentration seems to have fallen significantly for the deregulated
industries—the Herfindahl index declines from 0.33 to 0.24—consistent with declining

perfectly competitive industries to one in single-producer monopolies. All data are first expressed in constant rupees
crore.

19

incumbent monopoly power. The market share, size, and profitability of the average firm in
deregulated industries declined significantly five years following the policy change. Dispersion
in firm size also increased following deregulation.
Panel D shows the corresponding statistics for the restricted industries. The numbers
suggest that the restricted industries were significantly more concentrated than the deregulated
industries and remained so over the sample period. T-tests of means show that these differences
are statistically significant. Note that new firms could operate in restricted industries if they were
granted a license. Further, in contrast to the pattern of declines in the deregulated industries,
average firm size and profitability remain remarkably unchanged over time in the restricted
industries.
In panels E and F, the total market share variable refers to the fraction of sales accounted
by incumbent and new entrant firms relative to the total sales in a particular industry. It is
interesting to note that the average market share of incumbent firms in total sales declined from
99% to 83% between 1989 and 2005. Mirroring this decline in average incumbent shares is the
increase in the average market share of new entrants incorporated after 1991 from 1% to 22%
over the same period.17
For the average firm, market shares declined significantly following the policy change in
deregulated industries in panel C, as did average firm profits, sales, and assets. However, average
incumbent firm profits in deregulated industries appear to have remained stable.
In brief, summary statistics suggest that industry concentration, average market shares,
firm size, and profits all declined in deregulated industries. The coefficient of variation in
17

Note that the market shares of incumbents and new entrants do not sum to exactly 100% for the following reason.
The total market share measure for incumbents was constructed by taking the ratio of total incumbent sales to total
industry sales by NIC3 industry and taking an average of this ratio across industries. Similarly, the total market
share of new entrants was constructed by taking the ratio of total new entrant sales to total industry sales by NIC3
industry and then averaging this ratio across industries.

20

average firm sales and assets increased, suggesting that there is greater dispersion in firm size
within deregulated industries.

4.1 Distributional Statistics
Table 2 presents detailed distributional statistics for firm size (log sales and log assets)
before and after deregulation. For both assets and sales, the mean and median numbers (P50)
suggest that firm size declined over the sample period; the pattern holds for incumbent firms as
well. New entrants, on the other hand, experienced an increase in firm size, perhaps not
surprisingly.
The average incumbent firm has grown smaller, more profitable, and somewhat more
heterogeneous in firm size.18 For the average incumbent firm, dispersion in firm size measured
by the standard deviation and coefficient of variation has increased. While new entrants have
also grown significantly in terms of sales and assets, the incumbent firms are considerably bigger
than the new entrants. Consistent with international evidence, this suggests that young firms tend
to be small. For new entrants, dispersion also increases during the sample period.
The tails of the size distribution in Table 2 reveal two distinct patterns. First, we see that
the smallest firms in the left-hand tail of the size distribution have become smaller over time. The
firms in the tenth percentile have grown considerably smaller since deregulation. The data also
suggest that there are more small firms in the sample following deregulation, and perhaps not
surprisingly the new entrants are much smaller than the incumbent firms in the lowest percentiles
of size for both assets and sales.

18

Note that the average firm profit, sales, and assets measures were constructed by taking firm averages by year and
industry and then averaging these measures across industries and years with a given time period. For example the
average firm asset size of Rs. (crore) 69.15 was constructed by taking the average of average firm assets by industry
across industries and over the two-year period 1989–1990.

21

Second, the largest firms have grown bigger. For all three samples—the full sample, the
incumbents, and the new entrants—the largest firms in the 99th percentile have grown larger
over time. These two patterns from the distributional data (small firms getting smaller and big
firms bigger) are consistent with an increase in the standard deviation in the size distribution.
Consistent with the increase in the standard deviation of firm size and the fall in the average firm
size, firm-size dispersion measured by the coefficient of variation rises.
With respect to averages, the preliminary findings from the size distribution data are not
entirely consistent with the predictions of models with selection that result in a truncated
distribution and predict that average firm size should rise. While the largest firms increase in
size, the left-hand tail of the size distribution becomes considerably thicker. In addition, average
firm size and average firm profits fall rather than rise as these models predict. The findings are at
first pass consistent with Blanchard and Giavazzi (2003) and Alesina et al. (2005) where, on
average, incumbent firms are predicted to lose monopoly power following deregulation. The
marginal increase in the number of small firms is consistent with an increase in competition
following deregulation.
The final column of Table 2 shows that the size distribution becomes negatively skewed
over time. The pattern is more clearly seen in Figure 1a–d. The size distribution flattens and
shifts in the direction of negative skewness following deregulation with the magnitude of
skewness increasing over time. The size distribution in the early years following deregulation
(1991–1995) is more skewed in comparison to the period prior to deregulation (1989–1990), and
the size distribution in the later years (2003–2005) is more skewed in comparison to the early
years (1991–1995) post-deregulation. The shift in the pattern of skewness holds for both log

22

assets and log sales, as well as for the incumbent firms. We do not conduct the analysis for the
new entrants because by definition they did not exist before deregulation.

5. Empirical Methodology and Results
This section presents formal estimations of the impact of deregulation on firm size. We
begin by considering a balanced panel of incumbent firms that existed before deregulation. Next,
we present unbalanced panel estimates that allow for compositional effects to occur with new
firms in the sample. Last, we present estimates of the extent of resource reallocation or the
efficiency gains that take place in the post-reform period.

5.1 Deregulation and Size: Balanced Panel
To examine the impact of deregulation, a restricted sample panel of incumbent firms is
better suited to analyzing pre- and post- deregulation effects on these firms. By restricting the
sample to incumbent firms, we are able to parse out compositional effects that occur with new
firms entering the sample. We first look at the impact of deregulation on incumbent firms
without firm fixed effects to examine more simply what happens to incumbent firms. Second, we
introduce compositional controls in the form of firm fixed effects to control for unobserved
heterogeneity at the firm level. Third, we examine an unbalanced panel that allows for
compositional effects to occur with new entrants to analyze distributional effects.
We begin with the following benchmark regression specification, for firm i in sector j and
year t,
Yijt = ai + Yeart + d Libjt + + eijt ,

23

(1)

where Yijt represents different outcome variables such as sales or profitability. We also control for
firm fixed effects and a year trend. Standard errors are robust and clustered at the three-digit
industry level.
Since the sample period in this paper coincides with a period of rapid growth in the
Indian economy, we incorporate a linear year trend in our estimations to more precisely isolate
the impact of deregulation policy. We report estimates with and without the year trend to
highlight the impact on the coefficient estimates and their interpretation.
Table 3 presents regression estimates for a balanced panel of firms from in columns 1–7
and column 9. The dependent variable is the logarithm of annual firm sales. Delicense is a
dummy variable that takes a value of one if a firm is an industry that deregulated entry in 1991.
Standard errors are clustered at the NIC three-digit level.
Columns 1 and 3 show the impact of deregulation on log sales and log assets for
incumbent firms with industry fixed effects. To account for the rapid growth in the economy
over this time period, we incorporate a year trend variable into the specifications. The coefficient
on the Delicense dummy is negative and significant for both firm sales and assets. The
coefficient on the year trend, on the other hand, is positive and significant. The results from the
specification in columns 1 and 3 suggest that the impact of deregulation on firm size in the
context of a growing economy can be decomposed into two effects: a competitive effect through
firm entry and a growth effect. Competition through entry appears to reduce average firm size,
while the growing economy lifts all boats, increasing average firm size. Incorporating the year
trend variable is therefore important not only because it allows us to isolate the impact of
deregulation on firm size but also because it suggests that a dynamic model is better suited to

24

examining the effects of deregulation on competition and firm size in a rapidly growing
economy.
It is important to note that the negative and significant coefficient on the deregulation
dummy (Delicense) is consistent with two alternative interpretations. The negative coefficient on
the Delicense variable—along with the positive year trend coefficient—can be interpreted as
either a decline in average firm size in deregulated industries or, alternatively—controlling for
the overall growth of the economy—slower growth in the deregulated industries.
In addition to specifications that incorporate a simple linear trend (Columns 1 and 3), the
specifications in Columns 2 and 4 include year fixed effects to allow for macroeconomic shocks
that affected all industries in the same way. The coefficient on the Delicense dummy remains
negative and significant.
Columns 5 and 6 present regression estimates in a specification where the dependent
variables are firm profitability and the industry-level Herfindahl index of firm sales using an
unbalanced panel of firms. Column 5 shows that average firm profitability rose among the
deregulated industries. Consistent with an increase in competitiveness and with the summary
statistics in Table 1, the Herfindahl index declines significantly in industries that were
deregulated, as column 6 shows. The pattern of declining Herfindahl indices is also seen when
we estimate a specification with a balanced panel of incumbent firms—although with a slightly
smaller magnitude of coefficient estimates—suggesting a decline in the monopoly power of
incumbent firms after deregulation consistent with the predictions from Blanchard and Giavazzi
(2003). The Herfindahl index also shows a significant decline if we restrict the sample period to
the immediate aftermath of the deregulation in 1991–1995. The magnitudes are smaller but
significant. We do not include a year trend variable in the specifications in Columns 5 and 6 as

25

there is no obvious theoretical rationale for why profitability or industry concentration should be
systematically affected by economic growth.

5.2 Deregulation and Size: Unbalanced Panel
With unbalanced panels we allow for compositional effects to occur with entry. We use
quantile regressions to examine the distributional effects of deregulation on firm size. Quantile
(including median) regression models, also known as least absolute value (LAV) models or
minimum absolute deviation (MAD) models. In the median regression estimates version of the
quantile regression model, the median of the dependent variable is analyzed conditional on the
values of the independent variable. This is similar to least squares regression, which estimates
the mean of the dependent variable. Alternatively, quantile regressions find the regression plane
that minimizes the sum of the absolute residuals rather than the sum of the squared residuals.
Since we are interested in characterizing the entire distribution of firm size before and
after deregulation, we specify a regression specification that estimates the regression plane for
quantiles ranging from the 5th percentile to the 95th percentile of the distribution of the outcome
variable of interest (size, profits) at intervals of 5%. Standard errors are bootstrapped.
As described by Koenker and Bassett (1978), the estimation is done by minimizing the
following specification:
∑

:

|

|

∑

:

1

|

|,

(2)

where y is the dependent variable, x is the k by 1 vector of explanatory variables, β is the
coefficient vector, and 1 is the quantile to be estimated. The coefficient vector β will differ
depending on the particular quantile being estimated.

26

Table 4 estimates the quantile regression specification with log sales as the dependent
variable and with the deregulation dummy (Delicense) in panel A. A second specification in
panel B includes the year trend variable. The coefficients on the deregulation dummies display
considerable non-linearity and highlight the heterogeneous effects of deregulation on firms of
different sizes.
The coefficient estimates suggest that the impact of deregulation on log sales for firms
across firm-size quantiles is non-linear. There is an increase in the average firm size for firms in
the 5th through the 15th percentile consistent with entry by small firms from the left-hand tail.
There is, however, a significant decline for all quantiles from the 20th to the 90th percentile.
Finally, the coefficient for the 95th percentile is positive and significant, consistent with large
incumbents growing bigger. Adding a year trend shifts the quantile regression coefficients curve
up.
Figure 2 depicts these findings graphically to highlight the non-linear impact of
deregulation on firm size across quantiles. It also serves to highlight the varying magnitude of
the coefficient estimates across quantiles. Adding a year trend shifts the magnitude of the
coefficient estimates on the deregulation measure on firm size. Adding industry fixed effects
absorb the time-invariant heterogeneity across industries in addition to a year-trend variable
results in a similar pattern.
Panel C of Table 4 presents estimates of the quantile regression specification with the
return on assets as the dependent variable and with the deregulation dummy (Delicense). The
coefficients on the deregulation dummies display considerable non-linearity and highlight the
heterogeneous effects of deregulation on firms of differing profitability. A note of caution is that
the return on asset series is very noisy, with extreme outliers both negative and positive.

27

Therefore, it is not clear how much weight we can place on the patterns observed. The
coefficient estimates indicate that the return on assets declined significantly in industries that
were deregulated consistent with greater competition. Figure 3 displays these results graphically.
We also estimate the quantile regression specification for incumbent and new entrants
with log sales as the dependent variable (with and without the year trend variable). We measure
incumbents as firms that existed in the pre-reform period.
Table 5 presents the results. The coefficients on the deregulation dummies display
considerable non-linearity and highlight the heterogeneous effects of deregulation on firms
existing before 1991 and firms that entered in the post-deregulation period.
Analyzing the tails of the size distribution reveals several interesting patterns. First, in the
right-hand tail of the distribution, the largest incumbents increase in size (measured by sales).
Second, the new entrants also increase in size (measured by sales) in the left-hand tail of the size
distribution. There is, however, a significant reduction in gains as we progress across the
different quantiles of the distribution. Results with and without the year trend behave similarly,
although the significance of the results is varied. Figure 3 depicts these findings graphically to
highlight the non-linear impact of delicensing on incumbents and new entrants. (We show results
only with the year trend.) Following deregulation, the size of new entrants size increase at the
lower levels of the distributions, while incumbents grow at the upper tails of the distribution. We
obtain similar results using incumbents defined as firms existing before 1985 (not shown, results
available upon request). However, shrinking firm sizes in the middle quantiles is consistent with
concerns about the “missing middle” in Indian manufacturing, indicating that small firms may be
constrained in their ability to grow.

28

5.3 Deregulation and Misallocation
Recent research has shown that policy and institutional distortions can have a significant
impact on the efficiency of resource allocation across productive uses. The deregulation policies
implemented in India had the potential to have important effects on the reallocation of resources.
In this section, we examine the effects of deregulation on the allocation of resources across
firms. Our methodology follows Alfaro, Charlton, and Kanczuk (2008), who draw on the work
of Restuccia and Rogerson (2008) and Hsieh and Klenow (2009). We use a monopolistic
competition model to analyze the implications of deregulation for allocative efficiency in the
post-reform period. Given the similarities with previous work, we briefly outline the model and
methodology. (See references for further details.)
Final output is produced by a standard CES aggregate of a continuum of differentiated
goods. This implies that demand for the differentiated good is given by price by the Lerner
formula, (p-c)/p, where p is price and c is the marginal cost. In this economy, there exists a
continuum of production units that share the same Cobb-Douglas functional form, but might
differ in their productivity factors, which are indexed by φ:

y  AA k l1

,

(3)

where A is the economy-wide productivity factor; Aφ is the plant-specific productivity
factor; kφ and lφ are, respectively, the capital rented and labor hired by the firm; and α is the
capital share parameter. Conditional on remaining in operation, the incumbent firm maximizes
its period profit, which is given by:
   (1    ) p y  rk   wl

,

(4)

where τi denotes a firm-specific distortion, and r and w denote the rental rates of capital
and labor, respectively. Firm-specific distortions in this framework are akin to firm-specific

29

output taxes (or subsidies)19 that alter the profit maximization decision across firms. As a result,
these idiosyncratic distortions introduce a dimension along which firms within an industry can be
heterogeneous and can lead to a reallocation of resources across firms. In our setting, distortions
introduced by the licensing requirements and output caps, for example, can impact firm size
distributions as a function of firm productivity.
We assume a large (unbounded) pool of prospective firms that could enter an industry.
Entry is costly, however, and prospective entrants must make the entry decision (or expansion
decisions) in light of a distribution of potential draws for firm productivity (Aφ) and the firmspecific tax (τφ). Although for any given firm, productivity and the tax remain constant over
time, each firm also faces a constant probability of exit (death) in any given period.20
In steady-state equilibrium, the consumer problem determines the rental rate of capital,
which is a function of the time discount factor and capital depreciation rate. Given the rental rate
of capital, the zero profit condition for firm entry determines the steady-state wage rate. Since
labor supply is inelastic in equilibrium, total labor demand must equal one.
The calibration exercise involves matching India’s firm profitability/sales distribution to
the observed distribution in the United States, which we take as the benchmark economy. We
find the distribution of firm-specific distortions needed to match the observed distribution of firm
profitability/sales (histogram) in India, assuming that India faces the same productivity
distribution as the United States. This enables us to estimate how much aggregate output is lost
due to economic distortions that lead to a misallocation of resources across firms in an industry.
19

In Restuccia and Rogerson (2008), the focus is on policies that create idiosyncratic distortions to plant-level
decisions and hence cause a reallocation of resources across plants. While many different types of policies may
generate such effects, the approach Restuccia and Rogerson (2008) take is to analyze a generic set of distortions.
Specifically, they assume that each plant faces its own output tax or subsidy.
20
This is similar to Restuccia and Rogerson (2008), who assume that in any given period after production takes
place, each plant faces a constant probability of death. They argue that it would be easy to allow this value to depend
on the plant-level productivity parameter.

30

For the U.S. data we use Dun & Bradstreet’s (D&B) WorldBase and capital stock and
other data from Penn Table 6.1. We borrow the technology parameters from the literature—we
assume a capital share, α = 1/3. We set the elasticity of substitution, σ = 6, consistent with 20%
mark-up in price over marginal cost (Rotemberg and Woodford, 1992). The output and capital
stock (Y and K) are from the 6.1 version of the Penn World Tables. Capital is calculated by
perpetual inventory method, with the depreciation rate equal to 6% and the initial capital stock
determined by the initial investment rate and its geometric growth over the period. Using the
revenue data and assuming the U.S. economy represents the undistorted benchmark, we recover
the impact of distortions on growth.
Figure 5 decomposes the contributions of various factors to growth in the misallocation
model using the aggregated GDP per worker, Y/L=AD(K/L)H(1-). We measure the
contributions attributable to (i) technology/productivity (A), (ii) capital per worker (K/L), and
(iii) the misallocation factor (D). As the figure shows, over the period of study (1989–2005)
improvements in allocative efficiency via reallocation had, on average, a positive contribution on
growth. In other words, the calibration exercise suggests that distortions decreased over the
1989–2005 period, although the figure shows substantial variance across years.
During the sample period, average GDP per worker growth was 4.4% per year. In the
standard model (with no misallocation), productivity differences were responsible for 3.1% of
this 4.4% growth (capital accumulation accounts for the remaining 1.3%). In the misallocation
model, the pure productivity effect accounts for 2.0% of the growth and misallocation for 1.1%
per year. That is, incorporating a role for reallocation, the misallocation model reduces the
importance of pure productivity when accounting for the observed growth over the sample
period.

31

In Figure 6, we compare the gains due to reallocation of resources in the restricted and
deregulated industries. Consistent with our priors that deregulation leads to a removal of
distortions, the observed gains from reallocation are higher in the deregulated industries.
Between 1991–2005, the average change in allocation efficiency gains was 1.4% in deregulated
sectors compared to 1.3% in restricted sectors. The figure depicts considerable variability
throughout the sample period. In the first period immediately following delicensing restrictions,
the gains due to reallocation in the deregulated industries was close to 3% per year from 1991–
1995, 0.5% between 1996–2000, and 1.75% between 2001–2005.

6. Robustness Checks and Additional Tests
As discussed in Section 2, the domestic entry deregulation was enacted alongside other
reforms such as trade and FDI liberalization in 1991. To control for the potentially confounding
effects of these concurrent policy changes, we include dummies for trade and FDI liberalization
in our regression estimates for a balanced panel of firms. The dependent variable is the logarithm
of annual firm sales. FDI_Lib and Trade_Lib are dummy variables that take a value of one if a
firm is in an industry the liberalized to FDI or Trade in 1991. Standard errors are clustered at the
NIC three-digit level.
When we include dummies for the concurrent reforms along with the Delicense variable
in column 7 of Table 3, the coefficient on the Delicense variable continues to be negative and
significant and the year trend variable is positive and significant, consistent with the findings in
column 1. The coefficients on both FDI_Lib and Trade_Lib are not significant, however. A
similar pattern holds in a specification where the firm size measure is log assets instead of log
sales.

32

Another issue that we address is that while there is a general consensus that the systemic
reforms in the 1990s and 2000s were essential to bringing about changes in Indian
manufacturing, Panagariya (2004) argues that piecemeal external liberalization, along with small
spurts of domestic deregulation on a variety of margins and expansionary policies, combined to
produce a small shift in the Indian growth rate in the 1980s. This is similar to the view that “probusiness” reforms instituted in the mid-1980s had an impact on the competitive environment in
Indian industry. To take into account the possibility that the firms that entered the market
between 1985–1990 may have been new entrants rather than incumbents, we re-estimated all our
regression specifications, defining incumbents as firms incorporated before 1985 and all firms
incorporated after this year as new entrants. Our findings are robust to the change in the year
demarcating the classification of incumbent status. This is largely due to the fact that while some
new firms were incorporated between 1985 and 1990, these numbers are dwarfed by the pace
and acceleration in the birth of new firms following the reforms of 1991.
Another feature of the data related to the classification of incumbent status is that
following deregulation, in some instances, incumbents particularly business groups expanded
into newly deregulated industries. It can be argued that these firms are not new entrants in the
traditional sense in that they were in operation prior to deregulation, albeit in different industries.
To address this issue, we restrict new entrants to the subset of firms that are new in the true sense
of the word and not affiliated to firms that existed prior to deregulation. Once again, since the
number of instances where this occurs is relatively small, our pattern of findings remains robust.

33

7. Conclusion
Deregulation of entry can reduce and redistribute rents, leading to new distributions of
firms within industries over time and improving resource allocation. Industries can go through a
shakeout phase during which the number of producers decline in the industry, as incumbents and
new entrants replace the firms that exit (see Caballero and Hammour, 1996).
India carried out wide-ranging deregulation policies in 1991. The end of the License Raj
and implementation of pro-market reforms have far-reaching implications for the competitive
environment in the Indian economy. Significant sectors of the economy were opened up for
private participation through de-licensing and allowing entry to industries previously reserved
exclusively for the state-owned sector.
We use firm-level data from CMIE’s Prowess database to examine the efficiency impact
of dismantling the compulsory industrial licensing regime that regulated firm entry and imposed
capacity constraints on firm output before 1991. The evidence suggests several interesting
patterns. Average firm size declines significantly in the deregulated industries. Small firms enter
the sample from the left-hand tail of the size distribution while the incumbent firms get
significantly bigger following deregulation.
Quantile regressions to examine the distributional impact of deregulation show that the
shift in the firm size distribution is non-linear; average firm size increases up to around the 15th
percentile and then gets significantly smaller until the 90th percentile, while the largest percentile
(95%) gets significantly bigger over the same time period. We also find that the contribution of
resource reallocation to growth in India increases in the years following deregulation, suggesting
that distortions have decreased over time with higher gains for deregulated industries.

34

The distributional changes in firm size and profitability reveal a more heterogeneous
impact of deregulation. While the data are not consistent with policy concerns that small firms
would be forced out, and although we document improvements in the allocation of resources
over time—particularly in deregulated industries—the dominance of large incumbents in India’s
manufacturing sector remains unchallenged. The “missing middle” in the firm size distribution
suggests that small firms may continue to face distortions that constrain their ability to grow.

35

References
Aghion, P., R. Burgess, S. Redding and F. Zilibotti, 2008. "The Unequal Effects of
Liberalization: Evidence from Dismantling the License Raj in India," American
Economic Review, 98(4), 1397-1412.
Albuquerque, R., and H. A. Hopenhayn, 2004. “Optimal Lending Contracts and Firm
Dynamics,” Review of Economic Studies 71(2), 285–315.
Alesina, A. et al., 2005. “Regulation and Investment,” Journal of the European Economic
Association 3, 791–825.
Alfaro, L., A. Charlton, and F. Kanczuk, 2008. “Plant-Size Distribution and Cross-Country
Income Differences,” in NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics, edited by
Jeffrey A. Frankel. Cambridge, MA: NBER.
Ardagna, S., and A. Lusardi, 2009. “Where does regulation hurt? Evidence from new businesses
across countries,” NBER Working Paper 14747.
Ardagna, S., and A. Lusardi, 2010. “Explaining International Differences in Entrepreneurship:
The Role of Individual Characteristics and Regulatory Constraints,” in “International
Differences in Entrepreneurship,” edited by Joshua Lerner and Antoinette Schoar,
University of Chicago Press.
Asplund, M., and V. Nocke, 2006. “Firm Turnover in Imperfectly Competitive Markets,” Review
of Economic Studies 73, 295–327.
Bertrand, M., P. Mehta, and S. Mullainathan, 2002. “Ferreting out Tunneling: An Application to
Indian Business groups,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 121–48.
Bertrand, M., A. Schoar and D. Thesmar, 2007. “Banking Deregulation and Industry Structure:
Evidence from the French Banking Reforms of 1985,” Journal of Finance, 62, 2, 597628.
Black, S. E. and P. E. Strahan, 2002. "Entrepreneurship and Bank Credit Availability," Journal
of Finance, 57, 6, 2807-2833.
Blanchard, O. J., and F. Giavazzi, 2003. “Macroeconomic Effects of Regulation and
Deregulation in Goods and Labor Markets,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 879–
908.
Bollard, A., P. Klenow, and G. Sharma, 2011. “India’s Mysterious Manufacturing Miracle,”
mimeo, Stanford University.

36

Caballero, R., and M. Hammour, 1996. “On the Timing and Efficiency of Creative Destruction,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 446, 805–852.
Cabral, L., and J. Mata, 2003. “On the Evolution of the Firm Size Distribution: Facts and
Theory,” American Economic Review 93(4), 1075–1090.
Campbell, J. R., and H. A. Hopenhayn, 2005. “Market Size Matters,” Journal of Industrial
Economics 53, 1–25.
Chari, A., and N. Gupta, 2008. “Incumbents and Protectionism: The Political Economy of
Foreign Entry Liberalization,” Journal of Financial Economics 88, 33–656.
Chari, A. V. 2011. “Identifying the Aggregate Productivity Effects of Entry and Size
Restrictions: An Empirical Analysis of License Reform in India,” American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy 3(2), 66–96.
Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy, Prowess Dataset.
http://www.cmie.com/database/?service=database-products/firm-level-dataservices/prowess-corporate-database.htm.
Clementi G. L., and H. A. Hopenhayn, 2006. “A Theory of Financing Constraints and Firm
Dynamics,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(1), 229–265.
Cooley, T., and V. Quadrini, 2001. “Financial Markets and Firm Dynamics,” American
Economic Review 91(5), 1286–1310.
Ericson, R., and R. Pakes, 1995. “Markov Perfect Industry Dynamics: A Framework for
Empirical Work,” Review of Economic Studies 62(1), 53–82.
Fisman, R., and T. Khanna, 2004. “Facilitating Development: The Role of Business Groups,”
World Development 32, 609–628.
Garciano, L., C. LeLarge, and J. Van Reenen, 2012. “Firm Size Distortions and the Productivity
Distribution: Evidence from France,” Centre for Economic Performance discussion paper
No. 1128, February 2012.
Government of India, 2000. http://labour.nic.in/ss/INFORMALSECTORININDIAapproachesforSocialSecurity.pdf.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza and L. Zingales, 2004. "Does Local Financial Development Matter?" The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 3, 929-969.
Hopenhayn, H. A., 1992. “Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium,”
Econometrica 60(5), 1127–1150.

37

Hsieh, C.-T., and P. J. Klenow, 2009. “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and
India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 1403–1448.
Industrial (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951. http://dipp.gov.in/English/Policies/
Industries_act1951.pdf.
Industrial Policy Resolution, 1956. http://www.fipbindia.com/changes_files/changes/
chap001.pdf.
Jovanovic, B. 1982. “Selection and the Evolution of Industry,” Econometrica 50(3), 649–670.
Khanna, T., and K. Palepu, 1999. “Policy Shocks, Market Intermediaries and Corporate Strategy:
The Evolution of Business Groups in Chile and India,” Journal of Economics &
Management Strategy 8, 271–310.
Khanna, T., and K. Palepu, 2000. “Is Group Affiliation Profitable in Emerging Markets? An
Analysis of Diversified Indian Business Groups,” Journal of Finance 55(2), 867–891.
Khanna, T., and K. Palepu, 2005. “The Evolution of Concentrated Ownership in India: Broad
Patterns and a History of the Indian Software Industry,” in A History of Corporate
Governance around the World: Family Business Groups to Professional Managers,
edited by Randall Morck. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kochhar, K. et al., 2006. “India’s Pattern of Development: What Happened, What Follows,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 53, 981–1019.
Koenker, R. W., and G. Basset, 1978. “Regression Quantiles,” Econometrica 46(1), 33–50.
Lucas, R. E., 1978. “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms,” Bell Journal of Economics
9(2), 508–523.
Luttmer, E., 2007. “Selection, Growth, and the Size Distribution of Firms,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 122(3), 1103–1144.
Melitz, M. J., 2003. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
Industry Productivity,” Econometrica 71, 1695–1725.
Office of the Economic Advisor, 2001. Handbook of Industrial Policy and Statistics.
Government of India, New Delhi.
Panagariya, A., 2008. India, the Emerging Giant. New York: Oxford University Press.
Restuccia, D., and R. Rogerson, 2008. “Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity with
Heterogeneous Plants,” Review of Economic Dynamics 11, 707–720.

38

Syverson, C., 2004. “Market Structure and Productivity: A Concrete Example,” Journal of
Political Economy 112, 1181–1222.
Topalova, P., 2007. “Trade Liberalization and Firm Productivity: The Case of India,” IMF
Working Paper, WP/04/28.
World Bank, 2005. “Improving the Investment Climate in India,” South Asia Region and
Investment Climate Unit. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank, 2010. World Development Indicators. Washington, DC: World Bank.

39

ANNEX I
PROPOSED LIST OF INDUSTRIES TO BE RESERVED FOR THE PUBLIC SECTOR
1. Arms and ammunition and allied items of defense equipment, Defense aircraft and warships.
2. Atomic Energy.
3. Coal and lignite.
4. Mineral oils.
5. Mining if iron ore, manganese ore, chrome ore, gypsum, sulphur, gold and diamond.
6. Mining of copper, lead, zinc, tin, molybdenum and wolfram.
7. Minerals specified in the Schedule to the Atomic Energy (Control of Production and Use) Order,
1953.
8. Railway transport.
ANNEX II
LIST OF INDUSTRIES IN RESPECT OF WHICH INDUSTRIAL LICENSING WILL BE
COMPULSORY
1. Coal and Lignite.
2. Petroleum (other than crude) and its distillation products.
3. Distillation and brewing of alcoholic drinks.
4. Sugar.
5. Animal fats and oils.
6. Cigars and cigarettes of tobacco and manufactured tobacco substitutes.
7. Asbestos and asbestos-based products.
8. Plywood, decorative veneers, and other wood based products such as particle board, medium
density fiber board, block board.
9. Raw hides and skins, leather, chamois leather and patent leather.
10. Tanned or dressed fur skins.
11. Motor cars.
12. Paper and Newsprint except bagasse-based units.
13. Electronic aerospace and defense equipment; All types.
14. Industrial explosives, including detonating fuse, safety fuse, gun powder, nitrocellulose and
matches.
15. Hazardous chemicals.
16. Drugs and Pharmaceuticals (according to Drug Policy).
17. Entertainment electronics (VCRs, color TVs, C.D. Players, Tape Recorders).
18. White Goods (Domestic Refrigerators, Domestic Dishwashing machines, Programmable
Domestic Washing Machines, Microwave ovens,
Air conditioners).

Notes: Available from http://dipp.nic.in/English/Policies/Industrial_policy_statement.pdf.

40

Figure 1: Log Sales by Type of Entrant and Period (Manufacturing)

Source: Prowess Data Set

Figure 2: Quantile Regressions, Domestic Delicensing (Log Sales), 1989‐2005
0.30
0.25
0.20

β

0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
‐0.05

q5

q15

q25

q35

q45

q55

q65

q75

q85

q95

‐0.10
‐0.15
Delicense

Delicense‐Year

Source: Prowess Data Set

41

Delicense‐Year‐Industry

Figure 3: Quantile Regressions, Domestic Delicensing (ROA), 1989‐2005
0.0
q5

q15

q25

q35

q45

q55

q65

q75

q85

q95

‐0.5
‐1.0

β

‐1.5
‐2.0
‐2.5
‐3.0
‐3.5

ROA

ROA‐Industry

Source: Prowess Data Set

Figure 4: Delicense: Incumbent versus New Entrants, 1989-2005 (Manufacturing)

0.5
0.4
0.3

β

0.2
0.1
0.0
q05

q15

q25

q35

q45

q55

q65

q75

q85

q95

‐0.1
‐0.2
Incumbent_Delicense_Year

New Entrant_Delicense_Year

Incumbent_Delicense_Year_Industry

New Entrant_Delicense_Year_Industry

Source: Prowess Data Set

42

Figure 5: Efficiency Gains from Delicensing (Manufacturing)

Percentage

12.0
7.0
2.0
‐3.0

1990

1993

1996

1999

2002

2005

‐8.0
capital/labor

Produtivity

Alllocation/Misallocation

Source: Author’s calculation.

Figure 6: Efficiency Gains: Delicensed versus Restricted Sectors (Manufacturing)
130

1991=100

125
120
115
110
105
100
1990

1993

1996
Delicensed

Source: Author’s calculation.

43

1999
Restricted

2002

2005

Table 1: Firm Size, Firm Profits, and Market Concentration in Manufacturing−Summary Statistics
(Constant Rs. Crore)
1989-1990

NIC3 Herfindahl Index (sales)
Average Firm Profits (Rs. Crore)
Average Firm Size (Assets Rs. Crore)
Average Firm Size (Sales Rs. Crore)
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size
(Assets)
Coefficient of Variation of Firm Size
(Sales)
Observations

1991-1995

Panel A: Full Sample
0.33
0.28
10.02
7.96
83.98
69.66
83.97
55.33

1996-2002

2003-2005

0.25
8.01
75.71
59.91

0.24
11.24
90.73
81.07

5.40

6.61

6.61

7.63

5.49

6.66

9.90

11.31

3147

15741

33807

19353

Panel B: Year of Incorporation
Pre-independence, pre-1947
Assets (Rs. Crore)
Sales (Rs. Crore)
PBDIT (Rs. Crore)
ROA (%)

86.74
103.20
10.56
11.52

97.44
97.63
12.54
12.26

129.63
111.95
15.31
7.26

151.30
131.13
21.09
6.31

c1947-1985
Assets (Rs. Crore)
Sales (Rs. Crore)
PBDITA (Rs. Crore)
ROA (%)

87.02
83.15
10.43
13.90

84.71
66.70
9.79
13.21

101.28
87.33
11.56
7.60

129.17
131.19
17.85
10.30

c1985-2005
Assets (Rs. Crore)
Sales (Rs. Crore)
PBDIT (Rs. Crore)
ROA (%)

31.64
18.58
2.33
10.17

24.62
11.43
1.91
9.10

38.49
21.18
2.88
6.01

53.95
37.39
5.00
4.56

0.23
1.29
6.12
50.28
42.98
3.48
3.51

0.21
0.86
7.46
55.10
51.57
4.05
4.58

Herfindahl Index
Market Share (sales)
Firm Profits
Firm Size (Assets Rs. Crore)
Firm Size (Sales Rs. Crore)
CV Firm Size (Assets)
CV Firm Size (Sales)

Panel C: Deregulated Industries
0.28
0.24
3.07
1.53
8.34
6.16
61.77
45.36
62.23
40.41
2.90
3.25
2.17
2.93

TotalMarket Share (sales)
Average Firm Profits (Rs. Crore)
Average Firm Size (Assets Rs. Crore)
Average Firm Size (Sales Rs. Crore)

Panel D: Incumbents
0.99
0.98
10.11
8.82
84.74
76.58
84.64
61.21

0.91
10.05
90.98
74.31

0.84
15.06
115.14
107.33

TotalMarket Share (sales)
Average Firm Profits (Rs. Crore)
Average Firm Size (Assets Rs. Crore)
Average Firm Size (Sales Rs. Crore)

Panel E: New Entrants
0.01
0.02
2.88
1.00
23.71
13.68
30.63
7.76

0.08
2.26
32.83
19.49

0.11
4.78
49.43
36.48

Source: Prowess Data Set. See Appendix Tables A2 for detailed explanation of variables.

44

Table 2: Firm Sales and Assets for Full Sample, Incumbents, and New Entrants

1989-1990
1991-1995
1991-2005
1991-2007

N

p10

mean

3,110
14,794
63,524
73086

1.64
0.24
-0.48
-0.54

3.15
2.43
2.14
2.17

N
1989-1990
1991-1995
1991-2005

3071
13577
55011

N
1991-1995
1991-2005

1217
18075

p10
1.63
0.53
-0.20

p10
-1.91
-1.35

Log Sales
mean
p50
Incumbents
3.15
3.04
2.56
2.62
2.37
2.54

mean

Log Sales
p50
New Entrants

0.92
1.54

1.17
1.79

p99

max

sd

cv

6.86
6.49
6.58
6.71

9.59
9.91
10.81
11.13

1.43
1.84
2.12
2.17

0.45
0.76
0.99
1.00

p99

max

sd

cv

6.89
6.55
6.82

p99
4.72
6.26

9.59
9.91
11.13

1.44
1.76
2.12

max

sd

5.86
9.33

2.04
2.20

0.46
0.69
0.89

cv
2.22
1.43

p99

max

sd

cv

2.99

Log Assets
p50
Full Sample
2.83

7.09

9.37

1.44

0.48

0.68

2.51

2.40

6.84

9.63

1.61

0.64

0.23

2.29

2.23

7.04

10.14

1.88

0.82

max

sd

cv

9.369019
9.6295

1.437729
1.568947

0.479818
0.594743

max

sd

cv

6.998696
8.92607

1.531464
2.097078

1.058447
1.296023

N

p10

mean

1989-1990

3,147

1.42

1991-1995

15,737

1991-2005

68,868

N

Log Sales
p50
Full Sample
3.04
2.52
2.33
2.36

p10
1.424891
0.863827

Log Assets
mean
p50
p99
Incumbents
2.996408 2.829065 7.085483
2.638024 2.505937 7.006509

1989-1990
1991-1995

3108
14007

1991-1995
1991-2005

Log Assets
N
p10
mean
p50
p99
New Entrants
1730 -0.387766 1.446897 1.484264 4.927455
21937 -0.746329 1.618087 1.707527
6.58951

Source: Prowess Data Set. See Appendix Tables A2 for detailed explanation of variables.

45

Table 3: Deregulation and Firm Size
This table presents regression estimates for a balanced panel of firms from 1989-1995. The dependent
variable is the logarithm of annual firm sales in (1), (2), and (7), the logarithm of annual firm assets in (3)
and (4), return on assets in (5) and herfindahl (sales) in (6). Delicense, FDI_Lib and Trade_Lib are dummy
variables that take a value of 1 if a firm is in an industry that deregulated, liberlized to FDI or Trade in
1991. Clustered standard errors in parentheses. *, ** and *** denote significance levels at 10%, 5% and
1%, respectively.
Dependent
Variable
Delicense

(1)

(2)

(4)

(4)

Sales

Sales

Assets

Assets

-0.1640*** -0.1116** -0.1398*** -0.0687*
-0.043
(0.044)
(0.033)
-0.035
0.0666***
0.0965***
(0.007)
(0.006)

(5)

(6)
Herfindahl
Profitability
(Sales)
-0.0548
(0.046)

Sales

-0.1321***
(0.045)
Year Trend
0.0763***
(0.008)
FDI_Lib
-0.0445
(0.037)
Trade_Lib
-0.0518
(0.038)
Constant
2.4053*** 2.5527*** 2.2924*** 2.4963*** 9.6813*** 0.2982*** 2.4120***
-0.016
(0.027)
(0.028)
-0.016
(0.298)
(0.026)
(0.028)
Industry Dummies
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Year Dummies
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Observations
16,648
17,115
17,115
14,347
47,536
16,648
16,648
R-squared
0.93
0.95
0.948
0.95
0.02
0.93
0.926

46

2.7722**
(1.294)

(7)

Table 4: Quantile Regressions of Firm Size (Log Sales), 1989-2005
This table presents quantile regressions for firm size for an unbalanced panel of firms. The dependent variable is the logarithm of annual firm sales in (1)-(2) and return on
assets in (3). Delicense is is a dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if a firm is an industry that delicensed entry in 1991. Yeartrend is a trend variable. *, ** and *** denote
significance levels at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively. Bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses.
Panel A: Delicense (Log Sales)
(1)
Quantile Delicense
q5
q10
q15

(s.e.)

Panel B: Delicense (ROA)
(2)

Constant

(s.e.)

0.1752*** (0.050) -1.7117*** (0.036)

Quantile Delicense

(s.e.)

Yeartrend

(3)
(s.e.)

Constant

(s.e.)

Quantile Delicense

(s.e.)

Constant

(s.e.)

q5

0.2123*** (0.074) -0.2188*** (0.008)

0.7077***

(0.065)

q5

-3.0519*** (0.598) -9.7113*** (0.269)

0.0850*

(0.046) -0.4359*** (0.022)

q10

0.0898**

(0.040) -0.1639*** (0.005)

1.3393***

(0.046)

q10

-1.8887*** (0.266) -2.5932*** (0.108)

0.0305

-0.9336*** (0.138) 0.0000***

(0.031) 0.2675*** (0.015)

q15

0.0710*

(0.037) -0.1305*** (0.003)

1.6406***

(0.034)

q15

-0.0697*** (0.023) 0.7922*** (0.014)

q20

0.0271

(0.032) -0.1051*** (0.003)

1.8565***

(0.025)

q20

q25

-0.1123*** (0.022) 1.1691*** (0.012)

q25

-0.0235

(0.028) -0.0863*** (0.003)

2.0339***

(0.025)

q25

-0.5054*** (0.160) 2.0856*** (0.062)

q30

-0.1226*** (0.021) 1.4856*** (0.013)

q30

-0.0540** (0.024) -0.0732*** (0.002)

2.2076***

(0.024)

q30

-0.5301*** (0.161) 4.0000*** (0.065)

q35

-0.1057*** (0.024) 1.7456*** (0.010)

q35

-0.0589** (0.027) -0.0626*** (0.002)

2.3633***

(0.024)

q35

-0.5553*** (0.149) 5.6551*** (0.060)

q40

-0.0824*** (0.020) 1.9703*** (0.010)

q40

-0.0611**

(0.026) -0.0539*** (0.002)

2.5150***

(0.022)

q40

-0.4325*** (0.121) 7.0524*** (0.053)

q45

-0.0890*** (0.019) 2.1959*** (0.009)

q45

-0.0607** (0.025) -0.0476*** (0.002)

2.6687***

(0.019)

q45

-0.2847** (0.127) 8.2847*** (0.059)

q50

-0.0855*** (0.020) 2.4024*** (0.009)

q50

-0.0625*** (0.021) -0.0412*** (0.002)

2.8129***

(0.018)

q50

-0.2707**

q55

-0.0729*** (0.020) 2.6097*** (0.008)

q55

-0.0467** (0.020) -0.0354*** (0.002)

2.9574***

(0.018)

q55

-0.2378*** (0.090) 10.5575*** (0.053)

q60

-0.0542*** (0.015) 2.8096*** (0.008)

q60

-0.0298

(0.019) -0.0309*** (0.002)

3.1228***

(0.021)

q60

-0.2215** (0.086) 11.6731*** (0.051)

q65

-0.0343** (0.015) 3.0274*** (0.009)

q65

-0.0196

(0.021) -0.0274*** (0.002)

3.3021***

(0.019)

q65

-0.2147** (0.089) 12.8000*** (0.053)

q70

-0.0410*** (0.013) 3.2607*** (0.008)

q70

-0.0303

(0.022) -0.0234*** (0.001)

3.4975***

(0.018)

q70

-0.2043** (0.098) 13.9928*** (0.060)

q75

-0.0539*** (0.011) 3.5259*** (0.009)

q75

-0.0419** (0.019) -0.0193*** (0.002)

3.7190***

(0.022)

q75

q80

-0.0706*** (0.017) 3.8154*** (0.011)

q80

-0.0544** (0.022) -0.0134*** (0.002)

3.9488***

(0.025)

q80

-0.4312*** (0.139) 16.9432*** (0.064)

q85

-0.0745*** (0.017) 4.1520*** (0.013)

q85

-0.0666** (0.030) -0.0101*** (0.002)

4.2537***

(0.030)

q85

-0.5600*** (0.143) 18.9560*** (0.078)

q90

-0.0608** (0.025) 4.5857*** (0.013)

q90

-0.0620*

4.6727***

(0.028)

q90

-0.7654*** (0.124) 21.8362*** (0.081)

q95

0.1567*** (0.045) 5.2373*** (0.010)

q95

5.2491***

(0.031)

q95

-0.5784** (0.276) 26.8781*** (0.146)

q20

(0.035) -0.0084*** (0.002)

0.1596*** (0.046)

-0.0012

Number of Observations= 66,634

47

(0.003)

-0.0951*

-0.2688*

(0.058)

0.0951*

0.000
(0.058)

(0.112) 9.4522*** (0.062)

(0.138) 15.3365*** (0.072)

Table 5: Quantile Regressions of Firm Size (Log Sales) Incumbent, New Entrants, 1989-2005.
This table presents quantile regressions for firm size for an unbalanced panel of firms. The dependent variable is the logarithm of annual firm sales in
(1)-(2) and return on assets in (3). Delicense is is a dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if a firm is an industry that delicensed entry in 1991.
Yeartrend is a trend variable. *, ** and *** denote significance levels at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively. Bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses.
Panel A: Incubments (Log Sales)
Quantile Delicense

Panel B: New Entrants (Log Sales)

(s.e.)

Yeartrend

(s.e.)

Constant

(s.e.)

Quantile Delicense

(s.e.)

Yeartrend

(s.e.)

Constant

(s.e.)

q5

0.0832

(0.069)

-0.2233***

(0.008)

1.0791***

(0.068)

q5

0.3182***

(0.111)

-0.0236

(0.016)

-2.3431***

(0.221)

q10

-0.0166

(0.047)

-0.1581***

(0.004)

1.5608***

(0.040)

q10

0.3837***

(0.086)

0.0084

(0.013)

-1.5836***

(0.146)

q15

-0.0153

(0.033)

-0.1223***

(0.003)

1.8077***

(0.024)

q15

0.4053***

(0.056)

0.0280**

(0.012)

-1.0918***

(0.135)

q20

-0.0639**

(0.027)

-0.0920***

(0.003)

1.9684***

(0.023)

q20

0.3651***

(0.036)

0.0400***

(0.008)

-0.7360***

(0.095)

q25

-0.0997***

(0.027)

-0.0770***

(0.002)

2.1549***

(0.024)

q25

0.2934***

(0.041)

0.0467***

(0.009)

-0.3953***

(0.105)

q30

-0.0988***

(0.021)

-0.0654***

(0.002)

2.3169***

(0.021)

q30

0.2545***

(0.037)

0.0616***

(0.006)

-0.2103***

(0.067)

q35

-0.0748***

(0.022)

-0.0549***

(0.002)

2.4604***

(0.025)

q35

0.1760***

(0.033)

0.0653***

(0.007)

0.068

(0.085)

q40

-0.0761***

(0.023)

-0.0460***

(0.002)

2.6057***

(0.021)

q40

0.1211***

(0.032)

0.0690***

(0.005)

0.3276***

(0.073)

q45

-0.0710***

(0.021)

-0.0387***

(0.002)

2.7421***

(0.018)

q45

0.0744**

(0.030)

0.0702***

(0.005)

0.5694***

(0.071)

q50

-0.0619***

(0.020)

-0.0317***

(0.002)

2.8749***

(0.021)

q50

0.0479

(0.032)

0.0722***

(0.005)

0.7718***

(0.068)

q55

-0.0459*

(0.024)

-0.0261***

(0.002)

3.0198***

(0.021)

q55

0.0011

(0.042)

0.0695***

(0.006)

1.0248***

(0.081)

q60

-0.0471**

(0.021)

-0.0221***

(0.002)

3.1906***

(0.022)

q60

-0.022

(0.045)

0.0712***

(0.005)

1.2394***

(0.065)

q65

-0.0435**

(0.021)

-0.0193***

(0.002)

3.3793***

(0.022)

q65

0.0007

(0.039)

0.0780***

(0.005)

1.3554***

(0.072)

q70

-0.0466**

(0.021)

-0.0138***

(0.002)

3.5601***

(0.024)

q70

0.0043

(0.036)

0.0830***

(0.005)

1.5134***

(0.068)

q75

-0.0652***

(0.023)

-0.0068**

(0.003)

3.7561***

(0.023)

q75

0.0461

(0.048)

0.0790***

(0.006)

1.8139***

(0.091)

q80

-0.0721***

(0.026)

-0.0039

(0.003)

4.0092***

(0.028)

q80

0.0207

(0.040)

0.0768***

(0.005)

2.1186***

(0.077)

q85

-0.0886***

(0.027)

-0.0018

(0.003)

4.3176***

(0.038)

q85

0.0103

(0.051)

0.0756***

(0.006)

2.4577***

(0.085)

q90

-0.0508

(0.038)

0.0007

(0.003)

4.7232***

(0.029)

q90

-0.0037

(0.059)

0.0832***

(0.007)

2.7755***

(0.094)

q95

0.2184***

(0.040)

0.0069*

(0.004)

5.2993***

(0.040)

q95

-0.0297

(0.089)

0.0913***

(0.008)

3.3536***

(0.108)

Number of Observations= 51,922

48

Appendix 1: Industry Classifications
NIC
Class

Description of Economic Ativity

#
Firms

NIC
Class

452

289

67

291

Manufacture of other fabricated metal products; metal
working service activities
Manufacture of general purpose machinery

126

292

Manufacture of special purpose machinery

327

459

293

Manufacture of domestic appliances, n.e.c.
Manufacture of office, accounting and computing
machinery
Manufacture of electric motors, generators and
transformers
Manufacture of electricity distribution and control
apparatus
Manufacture of insulated wire and cable
Manufacture of accumulators, primary cells and
primary batteries

67

Description of Economic Ativity

#
Firms

154

Production, processing and preservation of meat, fish,
fruit vegetables, oils and fats
Manufacture of dairy products
Manufacture of grain mill products, starches and
starch products, and prepared animal feeds
Manufacture of other food products

155

Manufacture of beverages

176

300

160

Manufacture of tobacco products

23

311

171

Spinning, weaving and finishing of textiles

881

312

172

Manufacture of other textiles
Manufacture of knitted and crocheted fabrics and
articles

103

313

49

314

181

Manufacture of wearing apparel, except fur apparel

197

315

Manufacture of electric lamps and lighting equipment

22

191

Tanning and dressing of leather, manufacture of
luggage handbags, saddlery & harness

61

319

Manufacture of other electrical equipment n.e.c.

32

192

Manufacture of footwear

68

321

201

Saw milling and planing of wood

2

322

202

Manufacture of products of wood, cork, straw and
plaiting materials

50

323

210

Manufacture of paper and paper products

266

331

221

Publishing

71

332

222
223

Printing and service activities related to printing
Reproduction of recorded media

51
3

333
341

231

Manufacture of coke oven products

16

343

232

Manufacture of refined petroleum products

90

351

241

Manufacture of basic chemicals

601

352

242
243
251
252
261

Manufacture of other chemical products
Manufacture of man-made fibers
Manufacture of rubber products
Manufacture of plastic products
Manufacture of glass and glass products

993
208
139
428
67

353
359
361
369
401

269

Manufacture of non-metallic mineral products n.e.c.

317

402

271

Manufacture of Basic Iron & Steel

675

410

272

Manufacture of basic precious and non-ferrous metals

158

452

273

Casting of metals
Manufacture of structural metal products, tanks,
reservoirs and steam generators

125

453

83

970

151
152
153

173

281

49

Manufacture of electronic valves and tubes and other
electronic components
Manufacture of television and radio transmitters and
apparatus for line telephony and line telegraphy
Manufacture of television and radio receivers, sound
or video recording or reproducing apparatus, and
associated goods
Manufacture of medical appliances and instruments
and appliances for measuring, checking, testing,
navigating and other purposes except optical
instruments
Manufacture of optical instruments and photographic
equipment
Manufacture of watches and clocks
Manufacture of motor vehicles
Manufacture of parts and accessories for motor
vehicles and their engines
Building and repair of ships & boats
Manufacture of railway and tramway locomotives and
rolling stock
Manufacture of aircraft and spacecraft
Manufacture of transport equipment n.e.c.
Manufacture of furniture
Manufacturing n.e.c.
Production, collection and distribution of electricity
Manufacture of gas; distribution of gaseous fuels
through mains
Collection, purification and distribution of water
Building of complete constructions or parts thereof;
civil engineering
Building installation
Misc. Manufactured Articles and Diversified
Conglomerates

202
208

82
94
45
107
35

124
76
52

109

12
18
20
422
15
11
3
40
14
150
230
15
3
529
28
733

Appendix 2: Description of Variables

Variables

Definition

Sales

Sales generated by a firm from its main business activity measured by charges to customers for goods
supplied and services rendered. Excludes income from activities not related to main business, such as
dividends, interest, and rents in the case of industrial firms, as well as non-recurring income.

Assets

Gross fixed assets of a firm, which includes movable and immovable assets as well as assets which are
in the process of being installed.

Firm Size (Assets &
Sales)

Average firm assets and sales in an industry. For the full sample, the industry-level averages are
averaged across industries.

Market Share

Ratio of Sales to Industry Sales for a firm. Also, ratio of Assets to Industry Assets for a firm.

Herfindahl Index

Sum of the squares of the Market Shareof all firms in an industry in each 3-digit industrial category.

Incumbent

Firm incorporated before 1990.

New Entrant

Firms incorporated after 1991.

Incumbent Share

The ratio of total sales, assets, profits produced by incumbent firms (incorporated before 1990) in an
industry to Industry Sales, Industry Assets, Industry Profits in that industry.

New Entrant Share

The ratio of total sales, assets, profits produced by new entrant firms (incorporated after 1991) in an
industry to Industry Sales, Industry Assets, Industry Profits in that industry.

Industry Sales

Sum of Salesacross all firms in an industry.

Industry Assets

Sum of Assets across all firms in an industry.

PBITDA

Excess of income over all expenditures except tax, depreciation, interest payments, and rents in a firm.

Return on Assets

Ratio of PBITDA to Assets in a firm, averaged across firms in that industry.

Sales Growth

(Industry Sales-Lagged Industry Sales)/Lagged Industry Sales in that industry.

Coefficient of Variation Ratio of standard deviation to mean of assets, sales, return on assets at the industry level
NIC Code

Three-digit industry code includes manufacturing, financial, and service sectors.

50

