NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRADE REFORMS AND CURRENT ACCOUNT IMBALANCES:
WHEN DOES THE GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM EFFECT OVERTURN
A PARTIAL EQUILIBRIUM INTUITION?
Jiandong Ju
Kang Shi
Shang-Jin Wei
Working Paper 18653
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18653

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012, Revised September 2018

We thank Jonathan Eaton, Takatoshi Ito, Maurice Obstfeld, Andrew Rose, Stephanie SchmittGrohe, Nelson Mark, Vincenzo Quadrini, Michael Song, Martin Uribe and seminar/conference
participants at NBER International Trade and Investment Program meeting, NBER East Asia
Conference, San Francisco Federal Reserve Pacific Basin Research Conference, China
Economics Summer Institute, Columbia University, IMF, and the World Bank for helpful
comments. We thank Xinding Yu for very able research assistance and Joy Glazener and Nikhil
Patel for editorial assistance. All errors are our responsibilities. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2012 by Jiandong Ju, Kang Shi, and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Trade Reforms and Current Account Imbalances: When Does the General Equilibrium Effect
Overturn a Partial Equilibrium Intuition?
Jiandong Ju, Kang Shi, and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 18653
December 2012, Revised September 2018
JEL No. F2,F3
ABSTRACT
Permanent shocks such as trade liberalizations are hard to discuss in a standard dynamic
Hechscher-Ohlin model due to potential interest rate over-determination. We make three
contributions. First, we introduce an endogenous discount factor which solves the problem of
interest rate over-determination. Second, we show that trade liberalization in a developing
country generally leads to capital outflow, whereas it produces an opposite pattern for developed
countries. Therefore, efficient trade reforms can contribute to global current account imbalances.
Third, following a trade reform, the current account imbalance first widens and then falls back to
zero. As an application, this model predicts an inverse-V-shape pattern for current account
imbalances following China’s accession to the WTO: Even without policy distortions, China’s
current account imbalance should rise for a few years before it starts to shrink.
Jiandong Ju
Shanghai University of Finance & Economics
Shanghai 200433
CHINA
ju.jiandong@shufe.edu.cn
Kang Shi
Department of Economics
Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shatin, New Territories
Hong Kong
kangshi@cuhk.edu.hk

Shang-Jin Wei
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall 619
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
shangjin.wei@columbia.edu

1

Introduction

How does a reduction in trade costs such as a unilateral tari¤ reduction by the importing
country a¤ects its current account? If the lower costs of importing translate into more
imports, one is tempted to conclude that the importing country’s current account should
deteriorate (i.e. generating either a bigger de…cit or a smaller surplus). This is a partial
equilibrium intuition. In this paper, we argue that the general equilibrium e¤ect can often
have an opposite sign from a partial equilibrium e¤ect, especially for developing countries.
In media and policy discussions, it is often assumed that a country’s restrictions on
imports contribute to its current account surplus. Think of the numerous reports on China’s
and Mexico’s import restrictions and their supposed impact on its current account surplus.
Indeed, the US government routinely blames China’s import restriction as a contributing
factor to China’s trade surplus against the United States. Similarly, it is commonly assumed
that, when a country liberalizes trade (i.e., reducing trade barriers on imports), its trade
balance would decline. One key message of the current paper is that such an assertion
is not correct. To the best of our knowledge, this is the …rst paper that demonstrates
the pitfalls of the conventional view in a dynamic general equilibrium model. Indeed, we
will show that, for a typical developing country, reducing import barriers can be expected
to improve (rather than worsen) its current account. To accomplish this, we propose a
dynamic Heckscher-Ohlin framework, with a necessary modi…cation of the standard setup
to overcome the challenge of interest rate over-determination - to be explained below - and
enable it to study permanent shocks such as a permanent tari¤ cut. Our empirical work
suggests that the data patterns are consistent with the key theoretical predictions.
National trade barriers tend to be placed on products in which the country in question
does not have a comparative advantage. For a typical developing (labor abundant) country,
trade barriers are likely to be disproportionately on capital intensive goods. A reduction
in the import barriers on the capital-intensive good reduces the domestic return to capital,
all else equal. This is the intuition one obtains from the Stolper-Samuelson theorem in the
static trade theory. If the pre-liberation return to capital was equal to the world interest rate
(after adjusting for risk premium and transaction costs), the import liberalization upsets
the equilibrium, by reducing the returns to the relatively scarce factor (i.e., capital) and
2

thus rendering the domestic interest rate to be lower than its international counterpart.
To restore the equilibrium, the country must export enough capital, i.e., running a current
account surplus.
Trade liberalizations would generally induce an opposite current account response in
a rich (or capital abundant) country. Reductions in trade barriers (of the labor intensive
good) in such a country should raise the return to capital by the logic of the StolperSamuelson theorem. As a result, the country would attract capital in‡ow, i.e., creating a
current account de…cit.
The paper aims to make three contributions. The …rst is methodological in nature.
Existing dynamic Hecksher-Ohlin models are not suitable for studying permanent shocks
or structural changes such as trade liberalization due to a potential problem with interest
rate over-determination. To solve the problem, we propose to incorporate an endogenous
discount factor. Second, we show that the Stolper-Samuelson theorem holds in our dynamic
model and this mechanism produces the general equilibrium e¤ect of the current account
described above. Third, the model naturally rationalizes what we observe in the data China …rst experiences a rise in its current account surplus as a share of GDP (up to 2007)
and then a gradual decline (an inverse-V-pattern). Let us explain the three contributions
in turn.
To understand the …rst contribution, we highlight an interest rate over-determination
problem. On the one hand, in a static Heckscher-Ohlin model, if the economy is within the
diversi…cation cone, the interest rate is determined by the zero pro…t conditions from the
supply side. That is, the interest rate, together with the wage, is completely determined
by goods prices. Preference parameters such as the time discount factor play no role. On
the other hand, in a standard intertemporal model, the interest rate in the steady state is
determined by the time discount factor from the demand side. When the two models are
merged, the two interest rates from the two approaches would not be the same in general
except by coincidence. Even assuming that the two are the same initially, any permanent
shock such as trade liberalization would cause the two to diverge again. This problem has
been raised by Stiglitz (1970) when he shows that, in a dynamic HO model, unless the two
countries have identical discount factors, one country must specialize. As specialization does

3

not appear to describe the real world well, and in any case it is hard to discuss structural
changes in a model with complete specialization, it is desirable to have an intertemporal
model with a HO structure that overcomes the problem of interest rate over-determination.
Our solution is to introduce an endogenous discount factor. In that case, the interest
rate is determined by the zero pro…t conditions as in the static HO model. With an endogenous discount factor, the total consumption in the steady state would simply adjust to
conform with the interest rate, avoiding over-determination or inconsistency. With such a
modi…cation, the e¤ect of trade reforms on current accounts can be analyzed.
An endogenous discount rate is a discount rate that varies over time, for example, as a
function of the economy-wide consumption per capital and income per capita. An individual
may become more impatient if her own consumption level falls behind the average level in
the economy, or her own past consumption. In other words, people pay attention to status
competition, where status is de…ned either by one’s consumption relative an economy-wide
average or by one’s own past consumption. An endogenous discount factor is not just
a technical convenience, but, at a philosophical level, can also be regarded as capturing
human nature. Once we recognize this feature (and represent it in the utility function), we
can resolve some seemingly puzzling features in models that impose a constant subjective
discount rate.
To understand the second contribution - deriving a version of the Stolper-Samulson
theorem in our dynamic model, it is useful to note that such a theorem has not been
previously proven in part because the interest rate over-determination problem has not
been tackled before. The new Stolper-Samuelson theorem provides a mechanism for the
current account to react in a seemingly counter-intuitive way following a permanent shock.
The third contribution is an application of our framework to understand the rise and fall
of current account surplus in China in recent years. China’s accession to the World Trade
Organization at the end of 2001 (with massive cuts in the country’s tari¤s and, importantly,
non-tari¤ import barriers) was a watershed event for both China and the rest of the world.
Our model can be used to study the current account dynamics of this event. The model
predicts that China would generate a current account surplus following the WTO accession.
Because many trade reform measures were implemented in a phased manner, the current

4

account surplus would rise for a number of years. Interestingly, the same model also predicts
that the current account surplus would eventually shrink. This is because the economy will
eventually converge to a new steady state in which the net foreign asset remains a constant,
and the current account balance will also converge to zero after the trade reform. Our third
contribution, therefore, is to predict an inverse-V-shape of current account dynamics.
This inverse-V-shape theoretical prediction is broadly consistent with the data. Figure
1 traces out the trajectory of China’s trade-weighted average tari¤ rate from 1998 to 2010.
The average tari¤ rate was as high as 14% before 2001 (with tari¤ rates on many capitalintensive goods in excess of 50%) but declined in phases to a more modest 5% by 2004
and stayed that low afterwards. Consistent with our theoretical model, China’s current
account surplus (at 2% of GDP) was very mild in the year before China joined the WTO,
but started to rise noticeably afterwards until 2007 when it began to fall. The standard
explanation blames the Chinese exchange rate policy for the initial rise, and the contraction
of trade volume triggered by the global …nancial crisis for the decline in the current account
imbalance since 2008. Our model suggests another contributing factor at play - the same
initial shock of China’s WTO accession can simultaneously generate the initial rise in the
imbalance and the subsequent fall.
It is useful to note that the US import barriers also came down in two quantitatively
important way. First, the US quotas on textile and garment imports from China had to
be eliminated in two phases: the …rst batch on December 12, 2001, when China joined
the WTO (and the early rounds of quota elimination under the auspices of the WTO
became applicable to China immediately), and the remaining batch on January 1, 2005.
(See Khandelwal, Schott, and Wei, 2013, for additional details). Second, the US granting of
permanent normal trading relationship (PNTR) to China in October 2000 removed a major
uncertainty on future tari¤s that could be applied to Chinese imports. Without the PNTR,
there is always a chance that the United States could switch to the so-called “Column 2”
tari¤s, which are essentially the very high Smoot-Hawley tari¤ rates set in the 1930s.
By exploring variations in the di¤erence between the Column 2 tari¤ and the PNTR tari¤s (which the US gives to most other trading nations) across industries, Pierce and Schott
(2016) show that this policy change has a very large explanatory power for understanding

5

the rapid rise of Chinese exports to the US and a sharp decline in the US manufacturing
sector employment. Handley and Limao (2017) develop a theoretical model to infer that
the PNTR is equivalent to a permanent cut in the US tari¤ rate by 13 percentage points
(on mostly labor-intensive products). Feng et al (2014) report that the PNTR has had a
noticeable e¤ect on the prices and quality of goods exported by the Chinese …rms to the
United States. Because the US trade protection was heavily geared towards labor intensive
sectors, the PNTR reform is disproportionately more important for the imports of labor
intensive products. The upshot is that at the beginning of this century, the United States
also engaged in a trade reform, albeit in a non-traditional way. Because the United States
is a capital abundant country, our model predicts that its trade reform tends to lead to a
larger current account de…cit.
In sum, our theory suggests that trade liberalizations in both China and the United
States in 2005 may have played a role in both the initial rise in the current account imbalances and the subsequent fall. By this perspective, instead of being driven by underlying
distortions in an economy, current account imbalances can arise as an equilibrium response
to welfare-improving trade reforms. Therefore, not all current account imbalances need
policy corrections.
Reforms in factor markets can also in‡uence how trade reforms a¤ect current account.
This has important practical implications as countries sometimes pursue factor market
reforms in conjunction with trade liberalization. For example, in the case of China’s accession to the WTO, the country has agreed to a set of policies to reform its …nancial market,
including increased openness to direct investment by foreign banks and other …nancial institutions over several phrases, in addition to reducing import barriers. The last part of the
paper explores the consequences of factor market reforms for the current account response
to trade reforms. We show that, with …nancial market reforms, a given amount of tari¤ cut
generates a bigger current account surplus. This theoretical result helps us to understand
why the Chinese trade reform in the early 2000s produces a bigger current account response
than the reforms in the 1980s and 1990s.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a literature review. Section 3
reports some suggestive empirical patterns. After a basic model is presented in Section 4,

6

the e¤ects of trade reforms on the current account and other macroeconomic variables are
derived in Section 5. The interactions between factor market ‡exibility and trade reforms
are discussed in Section 6. Finally, concluding remarks are o¤ered in Section 7.

2

Literature Review

We explain the contributions of the current paper by placing it in the literature that extends models of international trade into studies of current account. Based on Ricardian
comparative advantage, Eaton et al. (2016) and Reyes-Heroles (2015) extend the static
Eaton and Kortum model (2002) to a dynamic setup. The former studies the trade collapse
during the Great Recession where trade imbalances arise from the solution to a planner’s
problem, while the latter considers the role of trade costs on trade imbalances.1 Unlike our
paper, these models feature a single factor of production and do not consider changes in the
composition of tradable sectors (with di¤erent factor intensities) as a channel of adjustment.
The intuition for how a trade cost reduction a¤ects current account imbalances is related
to the classic paper by Obstfeld and Rogo¤ (2000) in which the trade cost acts as a tax on
the intertemporal trade (capital ‡ows).
Note that the form of trade costs is important. For example, Alessandria, Choi and Lu
(2016) study the e¤ects of China’s accession to WTO on China’s current account surplus
in a macroeconomic model that embeds a Melitz style heterogeneous …rm model. There is
a single factor in production and therefore no adjustment in the composition of tradable
sectors with di¤erent factor intensities. To generate an increase in trade imbalance, the
model requires China’s trading partners (not China itself) to reduce trade costs (which
reduces the …xed entry costs for foreign …rms to export to these markets), and also a
symmetric reduction in variable trading costs (think of variable cost of transportation)
for both Chinese and partners’ exports. The calibration results are consistent with the
conventional wisdom: if China’s trading partners reduce import barriers more than China
does, China’s trade surplus goes up. However, the actual evolution of trade costs are
di¤erent from this path. China’s WTO accession in 2001 required China to unilaterally
1

Reyes-Heroles (2015) calibrates the model and shows that 69% of the increase in world trade imbalances

can be explained by sysmetric decline in trade costs across countries.

7

reduce the costs of imports from foreign partners, while its partner countries did not need
to liberalize. (Except for the PNTR reform by the United States, other countries do not
need to reduce their trade barriers to satisfy China’s WTO membership. Even in the case
of the United States, the reduction in trade barriers is smaller than the reduction in Chinese
trade barriers on capital intensive goods.) This seems to run counter the assumptions of
the model. In Reyes-Heroles (2015), whether a country runs a surplus or a de…cit is not
determined by changes in trade costs per se, but by the initial position of the current
account.
The empirical relationship between trade reforms and current account has been examined by Ostry and Rose (1992) and Ju, Wu, and Zeng (2010). They …nd the relationship
to be ambiguous. But these papers do not examine interactions between a country’s factor
endowment pattern and trade reforms. Our theoretical model provides an explanation for
this ambiguity as it shows that the e¤ects of a trade reform on the current account depend on whether a country is relatively labor abundant and whether the pre-liberalization
protection is mostly on capital intensive goods.
Our paper is related to a small but growing literature that studies international capital
‡ows in dynamic HO models. These papers include Cunat and Ma¤ezzoli (2004), Ju and
Wei (2007), and Ju, Shi and Wei (2014). Cunat and Ma¤ezzoli (2004) develop a twocountry model with Hecksher-Ohlin structure to study the correlation between the terms
of trade and output. In their model, trade is balanced by assumption and hence there is
no interesting current account dynamics. Ju and Wei (2007) and Ju, Shi and Wei (2014)
investigate how the domestic labor market a¤ect the current account dynamics in a dynamic
Hecksher-Ohlin framework. However, these papers do not address the interest rate overdetermination problem and do not study tari¤ changes or other permanent shocks that can
alter the interest rate.
Jin (2012) is another important contribution that builds a two-country two-sector overlappinggenerations model. There are a few signi…cant di¤erences between her and our models.
First, factors are sector speci…c in her model (capital can ‡ow between countries but not
between sectors within a country). Due to di¤erences in the factor intensity of the two sectors, trade openness leads capital to ‡ow towards countries that become more specialized

8

in capital-intensive industries. In comparison, we allow for capital reallocation between
sectors. As shown in Antras and Caballero (2009), speci…c-factor models yield an “anti
Stopler-Samuelson theorem,” and, as a result, trade and capital movements are complements. In comparison, the Stolper-Samuelson theorem holds in our model and trade and
capital ‡ows are substitutes. Second, while her paper does not discuss interest rate overdetermination, we address this problem head on.
This paper is related to several papers on the cause of global current account imbalances.
Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2008) and Mendoza, Quadrini, and Rios-Rull (2009)
highlight the role of di¤erences in …nancial development between current account surplus
and de…cit countries. Countries with a relatively weak …nancial development (e.g., China)
cannot produce enough …nancial assets at home to absorb all the savings. As a result, they
export part of their savings to countries with better …nancial development (e.g., the United
States). As a result, countries such as China run a current account surplus, and countries
such as the United States run a de…cit. Song, Storesletten and Zilibotti (2011) also feature
…nancial sector imperfections in China in generating a current account surplus. It stresses
the inability of productive domestic private sector …rms to borrow from the formal …nancial
sector as a key friction. These …rms have to save to …nance their investment. As the share
of these …rms grows in the economy, so does the country’s current account surplus. In
these papers, when China’s …nancial market develops (including improvement in access to
…nance by private …rms), the country’s current account surplus would decline rather than
increase. In contrast, our theory in this paper will suggest that factor market reforms such
as improvements in the …nancial market will reinforce the e¤ect of trade liberalization on
the current account, i.e., making the surplus even bigger than without the improvement in
the …nancial sector. On the other hand, our model predicts that, once the trade reform
stops, the current account surplus would eventually subside.

3

Some Data Patterns

Before we present a formal model, it is useful to look at more facts beyond the China
example. To this end, we examine the current account experience of all countries that
have experienced a major trade policy change in the last two decades. More precisely,
9

we adopt a two-step procedure. First, we identify episodes of large trade policy changes
for all countries since 1990 (for which the relevant data are available). Second, for each
country in the sample, we measure changes in the country’s capital intensity and examine
its relationship with changes in the country’s current account.
We de…ne a trade reform episode as one that simultaneously satis…es two criteria: (a)
there is a reduction in the country’s average tari¤ rate (in terms of either the simple-weighted
tari¤ or the trade-weighted tari¤) by 3 percentage points or more in one or two years; and
(b) there is an increase in the country’s imports-to-GDP ratio by 3 percentage points any
time in the …rst, second or the third year after the tari¤ reduction relative to the ratio in
the year before the tari¤ change. (The second criteria is to ensure that the trade reform is
e¤ective, so that the tari¤ reduction is not o¤set by increased bureaucratic hurdles or other
non-tari¤ import barriers.)
Some trade reforms may result in a decline in the country’s capital intensity in its
production, while others may produce an increase in capital intensity. Our theory suggests
that the current account consequence of trade reforms may di¤er in these two cases. We
now perform a simple check on whether, following a major trade policy change, the change
in a country’s current account pattern is systematically related to the change in its capital
intensity.
While it is relatively straightforward to measure a change in a country’s current account,
how do we measure a change in its capital intensity? Our approach is to measure the capital
intensity of the country’s export structure before and after the trade policy change. (Ideally,
we would like to measure the capital intensity of the country’s entire production structure,
but we do not have as good data on the sector-level production as that on sector-level
exports.) We do it in two steps. First, we use the 2002 US Standard Make and Use Tables
(from the US Bureau of Economic Analysis) to compute capital intensity of each HS 6digit sector. Second, for a given country in the sample in any given year, we can compute
the average capital intensity of its export bundle based on the shares of each HS 6-digit
sector. Our maintained assumption is that the capital intensity of a sector is a technological
feature that does not change across countries. (What we actually need is a somewhat weaker
assumption: the ranking of sectors in terms of capital intensity, rather than the absolute

10

values of capital intensity, is highly correlated across countries.)
By our …ltering criteria, there are 38 episodes, involving 31 distinct countries, that
qualify as trade reforms. Unfortunately, 8 of the episodes su¤er from missing data on
either trade intensity (Bangladesh 2007, Bhutan, Lesotho, Pakistan, Philippines, Syria,
Zimbabwe) or current account (Lebanon). Two episodes appear to be obvious outliers
(Belize and Guyana) as their changes in trade composition are substantially bigger than
other country-episodes. A list of the 38 trade reform episodes is provided in Table 1. A *
is a¢ xed to the country episodes if we also have the relevant data on current account and
capital intensity that are not obvious outliers. There are 28 country episodes that receive
a *.
We present a simple scatter plot in Figure 2 of changes in current account (as a share
of GDP) against changes in capital intensity. A negative relationship between the two
variables is visible. On average, a trade policy change that leads to a reduction in the
capital intensity of the economy tends to be followed by an improvement in the current
account balance.
We then perform the following simple regression:
(
where

CA

( GDPjj ) and

CAj
)=
GDPj

+

kj + Xj + "j

(3.1)

kj represent the change in country j’s current account to GDP ratio,

and the change in the average capital intensity of its export bundle, respectively, while
Xj are other control variables such as the change in the real exchange rate. In Column
1 of Table 2, we report the basic regression result. The regression shows a negative and
statistically signi…cant relationship between the change in capital intensity and change in
current account. The coe¢ cient of course simply captures the slope of the …tted line in
Figure 2. In other words, in episodes in which a trade policy change has led to a decline in
the capital intensity of the country’s exports (e.g., China after the WTO accession in 20022003), the current account balance tends to go up. Conversely, in episodes in which a trade
policy change has led to an increase in capital intensity (such as India during 2005-2008),
the current account balance tends to deteriorate.
In Column 2, we add the change in a country’s real exchange rate over the same period
11

of the trade policy change as a control variable. Because price (or in‡ation) information
is missing for several countries in the sample, the regression sample is greatly reduced
to only 13 countries. In any case, the coe¢ cient on the real exchange rate is negative
and statistically signi…cant, suggesting that a rise in the real exchange rate tends to be
associated with a decline in a country’s current account. More importantly, we continue to
…nd a negative coe¢ cient on capital intensity: a rise in a country’s capital intensity tends
to be associated with a deterioration of its current account.
Because of the small sample size, we are not able to have many control variables. We also
do not investigate potential endogeneity of the regressors. We therefore treat the empirical
pattern as suggestive rather than de…nitive. In the rest of the paper, we aim to provide a
theory that is consistent with this pattern in the data.

4

The Basic Model

Our model, in a nutshell, marries a Heckscher-Ohlin structure (with two tradable sectors
of di¤erent factor intensities) and a small open-economy intertemporal framework. Importantly, we also incorporate a version of an endogenous discount factor (EDF) following
Uzawa (1968), Obstfeld (1982), Mendoza (1991), Uribe (1997), Schmitt-Grohe (1998), and
Choi, Mark, and Sul (2008), among others. The EDF has a built-in “keeping-up-with-the
Joneses”feature - an economic agent tends to become more patient when others in the economy are more patient, and vice versa. Philosophically, this strikes us as having captured a
realistic feature of the world that is especially relevant when it comes to topics related to
savings and consumption.
As noted earlier, the introduction of an endogenous discount factor helps us to address
an inherent tension between the static HO trade model and the standard intertemporal
framework, which is the problem of interest rate over-determination. In the standard intertemporal model of current account, the interest rate in the steady state is determined
by the time discount factor from the demand side. In the HO model, if the economy is
within the diversi…cation cone, the interest rate is determined by the zero pro…t conditions
from the supply side (i.e., the interest rate and the wage are completely determined by
goods prices). In general, the two interest rates are inconsistent with each other except
12

by coincidence. Even assuming the two are the same initially, a permanent shock such
as trade liberalization would cause the two implied interest rates to diverge again. With
an endogenous discount factor, the problem of interest rate over-determination disappears.
For any interest rate that is determined by the zero pro…t condition, the total consumption
adjusts to accommodate that2 .
An endogenous discount rate means a discount rate that varies over time, for example,
as a function of the economy-wide consumption per capital and income per capita. An
individual may become more impatient if her own consumption level falls behind the average
level in the economy, or her own past consumption. In other words, people pay attention to
status competition, where status is de…ned either by one’s consumption relative an economywide average or by one’s own past consumption. It is not just a technical convenience,
but at a philosophical level, can also be regarded as capturing human nature. Once we
recognize this feature (and represent it in the utility function), we can presumably resolve
some seemingly puzzling features in models that impose a constant subjective discount rate.
Uzawa (1968), which …rst introduced the concept of an endogenous discount factor in the
literature, noted that a constant subjective discount rate and a constant interest rate would
produce an unrealistic scenario in which the consumer would either save all the income or
save nothing, except for the knife-edge case in which the subjective discount rate is equal to
the interest rate. Uzawa shows that an endogenous discount factor would produce a more
realistic scenario that gets away from the two extreme cases.
Obstfeld (1981) developed the …rst open-economy macro model that has incorporated an
endogenous discount rate (but no HO feature). In the model, accumulation of the economy’s
external assets attains a stationary state when the (endogenous) discount rate reaches the
level of an (exogenous) world interest rate. The endogenous discount rate ensures the
existence of a stable perfect foresight equilibrium path that converges to the stationary
state. Another important paper with an endogenous discount rate (but no HO feature)
2

Note that the usual motivation for an endogenous discount factor in a dynamic open-economy model is

either to make the steady state di¤erent from initial conditions or to make the current account adjustment
more persistent. We assume an endogenous discount factor because we …nd it both philosophically attractive
in capturing a realistic feature of the world and technically useful in addressing the problem of interest rate
over-determination.

13

is an open-economy real business cycles model developed by Mendoza (1991). The model
produces a well-de…ned stationary equilibrium in an economy’s holdings of foreign assets.
Epstein (1983) argued that an endogenous discount rate is a natural feature in a world
with uncertain future incomes, and helps to ensure that consumption in every period is
a normal good. Other papers have demonstrated that an endogenous discount rate can
help resolve other seemingly puzzling observations such as a low real interest rate when the
government spending is high (Devereux, 1991) or no country owns all the wealth in the
world even if some countries are more patient initially (Daniel, 1997).
In short, an endogenous discount factor has a long intellectual history and has been
found useful in understanding many macroeconomic phenomena including the dynamics of
current account or foreign asset holdings. Our paper is the …rst that combines an endogenous
discount factor with a dynamic HO model. As a result, we are able to study the e¤ects of
a permanent shock to trade costs on the current account.
To complete our framework, we also have to address another technical challenge. In particular, the standard Heckscher-Ohlin model imposes a balanced trade assumption, which
rules out capital ‡ows and non-zero current account. To have a meaningful discussion of
current account changes, we abandon the (unrealistic) restriction of a balanced trade. But
this raises a di¤erent issue, namely, capital ‡ows and goods trade are perfect substitutes in
the absence of any frictions, as was pointed out by Mundell (1957). In other words, the HO
structure without the balanced trade assumption inherently has multiple equilibria. (Or
the balanced trade assumption is a particular way to select an equilibrium out of in…nitely
many possibilities.) To avoid multiple equilibria, we follow Neumeyer and Perri (2005) and
Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2003) and assume convex costs of adjusting the international
asset position.
Convex adjustment costs for international asset position can also render the steady
state independent of initial conditions. In our context, this assumption helps to address the
technical challenge of multiplicity of equilibria. With linear costs of trade in goods and/or
capital, corner solutions occur: either goods trade or capital ‡ow takes place, but the two
do not coexist.3 Once we assume convex costs of adjusting international asset position, we
3

For more detailed discussions on this point, readers are guided to Ju and Wei (2007).

14

can pin down equilibrium capital ‡ows and current account. In an extension to the model
when we introduce costs of adjustment of labor and capital across sectors, the multiple
equilibria problem is resolved as well.

4.1

Household

The economy is inhabited by a continuum of identical and in…nitely lived households that
can be aggregated into a representative household. The representative household’s preference over consumption ‡ows is summarized by the following time-separable utility function
U=

1
X

s U (Cs )

(4.2)

s=t

where Cs is the household’s consumption of a …nal good at date s, and

s

is the discount

factor between period 0 and s as given by
s+1

where

0

= 1 and

~s )
@ (C
~s
@C

< 0 and

= (C~s ;Ye s ) s ; s

@ (Ye s )
@ Ye s

0

(4.3)

> 0. We assume that the endogenous discount

factor does not depend on the household’s own consumption and income, but rather on the
economy-wide average per capita consumption C~s and income Ye s , which the representative

household takes as given.4 The exact functional form of (C~s ;Ye s ) will be presented later.

The household owns both factors of production, capital K and labor L. For simplicity, we
assume a …xed labor supply.

The …nal good is produced by combining two intermediate goods. Each intermediate
good is produced by combining capital and labor. The household supplies labor to both
intermediate good sectors through a competitive spot market. In the benchmark model,
both labor and capital are assumed to be freely mobile across sectors. Factor market frictions
will be discussed later. The household can hold foreign asset Bt to smooth consumption.
Following Neumeyer and Perri (2005), we assume that trade in foreign bonds is subject to
small and convex portfolio adjustment costs. If the household holds an amount Bt+1 , then
4

This preference speci…cation was pioneered by Uzawa (1968) and applied to the small open economy

literature by Obstfeld (1982) and Mendoza (1991).

15

these portfolio adjustment costs, denominated in units of the …nal good, are

b

2

(Bt+1 B)2 ;5

where B is an exogenous capacity level of foreign asset management. For simplicity, we
assume B = 0.
Therefore, the budget constraint and the capital accumulation equation faced by the
representative household are given, respectively, by

b
(Bt+1 B)2 ] + Bt+1 + It
2
= wt L + rt Kt + (1 + r )Bt + T Rt

Pt [Ct +

(4.4)

It
1
)2 Kt
(4.5)
k(
2
Kt
where It is investment in period t, and wt and rt are the wage and the domestic return to
Kt+1 = (1

)Kt + It

capital, while r is the world interest rate.

is the capital appreciation rate and

k

is the

aggregate capital adjustment cost coe¢ cient. The tari¤ revenue, T Rt is rebated in a lump
sum to the representative consumer, which is taken as exogenous by the consumer.6
The …rst order conditions with respect to Ct ; It ; Kt+1 ; and Bt+1 ; give intertemporal and
intra-temporal optimization conditions
Uc0 (Ct )
= t
Pt
It
)) =
t (1
k(
Kt
t

= (C~t; Ye t )
t

where

t

and

t

1+

t+1

1

+

b Pt (Bt+1

It+1
2 Kt+1
k

(

)(

(4.6)
(4.7)

t

It+1
+ ) +
Kt+1

B) = (C~t; Ye t )[

t+1 (1

+ r )]

t+1 rt+1

(4.8)

(4.9)

are Lagrange multipliers for the budget constraint and the law of motion

for capital, respectively.
5

As in Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2003), these portfolio adjustment costs eliminate the unit root in the

economy’s net foreign assets.
6
See Devereux and Lee (1999) for a similar assumption.

16

4.2

Production

The production function for the …nal good is Dt = G(D1t ; D2t ); where Dit is the usage of intermediate good i by the …nal good producer. The production function for the intermediate
good i(= 1; 2) is Xit = fi (Ait Lit ; Kit ) where Ait measures labor productivity. Hit = Ait Lit
can be understood as units of e¤ ective labor. All production functions are assumed to be
homogeneous of degree one. Dit and Xit can di¤er due to international trade.
The unit cost function for Xit is

wt
i ( Ait ; rt ).

Let Pi be the domestic price of intermediate

good i: We assume that the country’s endowment is always within the diversi…cation cone
so that both intermediate goods are produced. In each period t, free entry and zero pro…ts
in both the intermediate good and the …nal good markets imply that
P1t =

1(

wt
; rt ); P2t =
A1t

2(

wt
; rt )
A2t

(4.10)

Pt Dt = Pt G(D1t ; D2t ) = P1t D1t + P2t D2t

4.3

(4.11)

Equilibrium

In equilibrium, trade in intermediate goods equalizes (tari¤-inclusive) good prices between
the home country and the rest of the world in every period. Without loss of generality, we
assume that sector 1 is labor intensive while sector 2 is capital intensive. Considering a
labor abundant country which exports labor intensive good 1, we have:
P1t = P1t ; P2t = (1 + )P2t ;
where Pit denotes the world price and is exogenously given, and

(4.12)
is the import tari¤. Fol-

lowing the standard assumptions in the Hecksher-Ohlin model, we assume that production
functions (and unit cost functions) in all countries are the same (although labor-augmenting
productivity can be di¤erent). Therefore, in the foreign country we also have:
P1 =

1(

w
; r ); P2 =
A1

2(

w
;r )
A2

(4.13)

For simplicity, we assume that the rest of the world is in steady state so the return to
capital, r , is a constant. We will leave out the time subscript for all foreign variables from
17

now on. We have the following market clearing conditions in the home country
Kt = K1t + K2t

(4.14)

Lt = L1t + L2t

(4.15)

Dt = Ct +

It
+ b (Bt+1
Pt
2

B)2

(4.16)

Equation (4.16) implies that the …nal good is used not only for consumption and investment, but also for covering the costs of adjusting the international asset position. The
current account balance over period t is de…ned as CAt = Bt+1

Bt ; thus, noting that

Pit Xit = wt Lit + rt Kit and using equations (4.11) and (4.16)), we can rewrite the budget
constraint as
CAt = P1t (X1t

D1t ) + P2t (X2t

D2t ) + r Bt

(4.17)

That is, the current account balance is equal to the trade balance (evaluated at the world
prices) plus the interest income from the net foreign asset position. For future reference,
we de…ne the gross domestic product as Yt =

5

P1 X1t +P2 X2t
.
Pt

Equilibrium Analysis

To study the equilibrium explicitly, we adopt the following standard functional forms for
preference and technology. The utility function is U (Ct ) =

Ct 1
1

, where

is the inverse

of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution. The production function for the …nal good
is G(D1t ; D2t ) =

1
! ! (1 !)1

!

! D 1 ! , where ! is the share of intermediate good D in the
D1t
1
2t

…nal good production. The production function for intermediate good i is fi (Ait Lit ; Kit ) =
1
i

i (1

i)

1

i. We let

i

1

Kiti (Ait Lit )1
<

2

i

, where

i

is the capital share in producing intermediate good

so that sector 1 is labor intensive. The endogenous discount factor takes

the following function form:
C~t
(C~t ;Yet ) = ( )
C
18

1

(

Ye t
)
Y

2

(5.18)

where

1

> 0 and

2

> 0. C and Y are, respectively, the consumption and output levels in

the initial steady state with tari¤

0.

This form is a variant of Choi, Mark and Sul (2008).

When the representative consumer consumes less than the initial steady state, she becomes
less patient. That is the implication of this type of discount factor. In the new steady state
after a tari¤ reform, the endogenous discounted factor would deviate from the constant .
To make the model parsimonious, we assume

5.1

1

=

2

= .

The E¤ects of Trade Liberalizations

For simplicity, we assume that A1 = A2 = 1. In equilibrium, given the production functions,
from Equation (4.10), we have
(

wt 1
)
A1t

1

rt 1 = P1 ; (

wt 1
)
A2t

2

r

2

= (1 + )P2

(5.19)

which give
rt = r [(

A1t (1
)
A2t

1 )(1

(1

wt = w [

1
(1 + )(1

1
1

1) 2

A1t

A2t1

2)

(1

1
2 ) (1 + )

1

(5.20)

2

1

]
1

2

Three comparative statics can be immediately seen: (a)
@rt
@A2t

]
)

(5.21)

1

@rt
@

> 0; (b)

@rt
@A1t

< 0; and (c)

> 0: By inequality (a), trade liberalization in a labor abundant country (a reduction in

) reduces the return to capital. Inequalities (b) and (c) pertain to sector-biased productivity shocks. While a technological progress in the labor intensive sector reduces the return
to capital, the same change in the capital intensive sector produces the opposite e¤ect. It
can be veri…ed that as long as there is a faster technology progress in the labor intensive
1t
sector relative to the capital intensive sector ( A
A2t increases), the return to capital declines.

These results (in a dynamic setting) are consistent with the Stolper-Samuelson theorem
in a static HO model. That is, an increase in the price of a good will increase the return
to the factor used more intensively in that good, and reduce the return to the other factor.
A tari¤ reduction in the capital intensive sector implies a decrease in the price of capital
intensive goods, therefore, rt decreases but wt increases.
19

It is worth emphasizing that the discussion points to a natural asymmetry between
developed (capital abundant) and developing (labor abundant) countries. Trade liberalizations tend to reduce the domestic return to capital for a developing country, but to raise it
for a developed country.
5.1.1

Net Foreign Asset Positions

We consider two cases of the e¤ects on net foreign asset positions, Bt : First, in the transitional dynamics, we assume that the investment adjustment cost

k

is zero. Using equations

(4.7), (4.8) and (4.9), we obtain:
Bt+1 =

rt+1 +
1 r
b Pt 1 + rt+1

The holding of foreign bond Bt+1 is a function of rt+1 and

(5.22)
@Bt+1
@rt+1

< 0. Second, in the steady

state, using …rst order conditions (4.7), (4.8) and (4.9), we obtain:
B=

r+
1 r
bP 1 + r

(5.23)

That is, when the return to capital in the country decreases, capital ‡ows out so that the net
foreign asset increases in the steady state. Note that the result for net foreign asset positions
does not likely depend on the assumption of an endogenous discount factor, (C~t; Yet ): For
any form of discount factor (endogenous or exogenous), the net foreign asset position must

increase if the domestic interest rate declines. We summarize our discussion by the following
proposition:
Proposition 1 A trade liberalization, or a reduction in trade costs, in a labor abundant
country leads to a decrease in the return to capital in the country, which results in an
increase in foreign asset holding in the steady state. A technological progress in favor of the
comparative advantage sector in a labor abundant country also reduces the return to capital
and produces an increase in the net foreign asset position. An opposite set of results holds
when a trade liberalization, a reduction in trade costs, or a productivity increase in favor of

20

the comparative advantage sector, take places in a capital abundant country.7
5.1.2

Steady State

Using the Euler equation in the steady state (4.8) and the function of endogenous discount
factor (5.18), we solve for the ratio of consumption to income.
cy =
where cy =

C
Y

C
[ (1 + r
Y

)]

1

(5.24)

and C and Y are the consumption and income level in the initial steady

state, respectively. Clearly,

@cy
@r

> 0. Note that the interest rate is determined by the

production side (along the demand curve of capital). A decrease in the interest rate implies
that the combined size of capital stock and foreign asset holding in the new steady state is
larger, which requires that the household becomes more patient and consumes less relative
to income.
The return to factors (r; w) and the holding of foreign asset (B) are given by equations
(5.20), (5.21) and (5.23). Given that, we can solve for the demand for the …nal good, D;
consumption, C; investment I and Gross Domestic Product, Y and sectoral outputs X1 and
X2 from the set of equations listed in Appendix 7.1. We can write the sectoral outputs as
below

P1 X1 =
P2 X2 =
where
7

wL

(1
r B)
2 )(1 + )( P D
(1
(1 + )(1
1)
2)
(1
r B) (1 + )wL
1 )(1 + )( P D
(1
(1 + )(1
1)
2)

(5.25)
(5.26)

= ! + !=(1 + ): The optimization conditions for the …nal good producer yield

Let tc be the iceberg trade cost, we will have: P1t =

P1
1+tc

and P2t = (1 + tc + )P2 : It is immediately

seen that a reduction in trade cost will increase the price of the labor intensive good, P1t ; but reduce P2t :
Similar to the analysis of the tari¤ reduction, a reduction in trade cost will result in a decrease in r: On
the other hand, if the home country were a capital abundant country and exporting good 2, we would have
P2t =

P2
1+tc

and P1t = (1 + tc + )P1 : Now a reduction in tari¤ or trade cost would reduce the price of the

labor intensive good, P1t ; but increase P2t ; which would increase r:

21

P1 D1 = !P D. Thus the exports of intermediate good 1 are given by
N X1 = P1 (X1

D1 ) = P1 X1

!P D

(5.27)

Finally, the factor usages and capital intensities in sector i are given by
Ki =
Ki
Li

=

Pi Xi
; Li = (1
r
w
i
1
i r
i

i)

Pi Xi
; and
w

(5.28)
(5.29)

A tari¤ cut in the capital intensive sector will lead to an expansion of the labor intensive
sector, and a contraction of the capital intensive sector. As a result, labor and capital ‡ow
from the capital intensive sector to the labor intensive sector, and both exports and imports
go up.

5.2

Calibrations in the Basic Model

To calibrate the basic model, we follow the standard approach (as in Backus, Kehoe, and
Kydland, 1992, 1994; and Kehoe and Perri, 2002) as much as possible. The parameter
values are summarized in Table 3. We set the inverse of the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution

= 2, the steady state discount factor

= 0:99, which implies a 4 percent

annual world interest rate. We assume an equal share of the intermediate goods in the …nal
good production, so ! = 0:5. We choose

1

= 0:33 and

2

= 0:7 so that both the average

labor share and the average dispersion of the labor shares in the model economy are the same
as those estimated from China’s input-output Table in 2002. We set capital adjustment cost
k

= 4 so the elasticity of Tobin’s Q with respect to the investment capital ratio is 0.1,

which is within the range reported in the literature. We set the annual depreciation rate
of capital at 10%, which implies

= 0:025: Following Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2003), the

coe¢ cient for bond adjustment costs,

b,

is set to be 0:0007. We set

= 0:1, which is close

to the value chosen by Choi, Mark and Sul (2008). A summary of the parameter choices is
presented in the following table.
Table 3: Parameter Values in the Calibrations

22

discount factor in steady state

0.99

inverse of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution

2

1

capital share in sector 1

0.33

2

capital share in sector 2

0.7

share of goods 1 in …nal good

0.5

coe¢ cient for convex bond adjustment costs

0.0007

capital depreciation rate

0.025

parameter of endogenous discount factor

0.1

coe¢ cient of capital adjustment cost

4

A1

productivity in sector 1

0.8

A2

productivity in sector 2

0.50207

!
b

k

In the initial steady state, the economy is assumed to impose a 15% tari¤ on imports of
the capital intensive good, while the rest of the world has no tari¤. We further choose the
values of the productivity parameters to make r = r so that B = 0, and the domestic wage
is lower than that in the rest of the world. We cannot use the Euler equation to determine
the level of aggregate consumption C and output Y as there are multiple equilibria. As long
as the country’s capital-labor ratio K=L is between

K1
L1

and

K2
L2 ;

any level of capital stock K

could be an equilibrium. A smaller K simply implies that the country would export more
labor intensive good and import more capital intensive good. We use the country’s export
share, therefore, to select the equilibrium in the initial steady state. The mathematical
derivations are relegated to Appendix 7.2.
For the initial productivity, we set A1 = 0:8 and A2 = 0:50207 so that in the initial
steady state, given the tari¤ level, the returns to capital across countries are equalized and
the wage in the domestic economy is lower than that in the rest of the world.
We consider two policy experiments of reducing the import tari¤ by 5 and 10 percentage
points, respectively. In columns 2, 3 and 4 of Table 4, we report the values for both the
initial steady state (when the tari¤=15%) and the new steady states (when the tari¤ = 10%
and 5%, respectively). Price variables, aggregate quantity variables, sectoral variables, and
balance-of-payments (BOP) variables are organized in four panels. The numerical results
con…rm Proposition 1. In particular, the return to capital, r1 = r2 , declines while the wage
23

rate, w1 = w2 ; rises. In the new steady state after the tari¤ cut, aggregate consumption
C; investment I, and GDP Y all increase. The labor intensive sector (Sector 1) expands so
that K1 ; L1 and X1 all increase, while the capital intensive sector (Sector 2) contracts. Both
exports (N X1 ) and imports ( N X2 ) expand. The trade volume to GDP ratio, T V =GDP;
increases by 7 percentage points. Most interestingly, exports expand faster than imports,
and capital ‡ows out of the country so that the cumulative increase in the foreign asset
holding as a share of GDP ratio; reaches the level of 29%. In other words, a relatively
moderate tari¤ reduction (from 15% to 10%) results in a signi…cant capital out‡ow.
In the second policy experiment, a more substantial (but still realistic) tari¤ reduction
by 10 percentage points (from 15% to 5%) leads to an even greater increase in foreign asset
holding to 56% of GDP.
There are also interesting byproducts of the trade reforms. In particular, consumption
as a share of GDP declines while investment to GDP ratio increases. To be precise, both
consumption and output expand from the old to the new steady state (see the row labeled as
“C”in Table 4), so the decline in the ratio of consumption to GDP comes from uneven speeds
of expansion, not from a decline in consumption in the steady level. This is an interesting
bonus …nding. Chinese data in recent years exhibit a declining ratio of consumption to GDP,
and it is commonly interpreted to be a result of some policy distortions (either exchange
rate manipulation or …nancial repression). Our calibration generates such a feature as a
result of a reduction in policy distortions (tari¤s).
In Figure 3, we report the dynamic paths of the economy from the initial to the new
steady state after a 5 percentage points cut in the tari¤ (from 15% to 10%). We assume that
the trade liberalization starts to hit the economy in period 1. We …nd that the structural
adjustment takes place immediately. In particular, sector 1 (the labor intensive sector)
expands immediately with an increase in K1 ; L1 ; and X1 ; while sector 2 contracts immediately, with a decline in K2 ; L2 ; and X2 . As a result, both the export share sx and import
share

sm increase immediately. As noted, the consumption response is interesting. After

a decline in the …rst several periods, consumption rises gradually. Intuitively, because the
domestic return to capital declines after the trade reform, the endogenous discount factor
speci…cation implies that the representative household must become more patient. This in

24

turn causes the household to have a lower ratio of consumption/income (or a higher savings
rate) both during the transition and in the new steady state. (It is important to reiterate
that we can see, from Table 4, that the absolute level of consumption does go up in the
new steady state. In other words, trade reforms do raise consumption, but not the ratio of
consumption to GDP.)
In Figure 4, we report the dynamic paths for some key balance-of-payments items. From
the top left graph, we observe that the trade volume (the sum of exports and imports as
a share of GDP) jumps immediately. This is not surprising as both imports and exports
expand.
There are three ways of viewing a country’s current account: (a) as net capital out‡ows, (b) as the sum of trade balance and net international factor payment, and (c) as the
di¤erence between national savings and national investment. In this case, thinking of the
current account as net capital out‡ows turns out to be most convenient in terms of obtaining intuition for our result. Following a tari¤ cut (on capital intensive goods), Proposition
1 in Section 4.1.1 points out that domestic return to capital would decline if all other things
can be held constant (including imposing a closed capital account). Of course, other things
cannot be held constant. In particular, if the domestic return to capital falls, it immediately
creates incentive for a capital out‡ow. This is why a current account surplus tends to follow
a tari¤ reform that reduces the domestic price of capital intensive goods. The thick line in
the upper right graph traces out the trajectory of current account as a share of GDP which
exhibits a positive current account for over 20 quarters before converging to zero. In our
model economy, the bottom right graph shows how B=GDP increases gradually to the new
steady state level (of 29% of GDP).
Of course, the other two ways of thinking about the current account also have to hold
as a matter of identities. In the top right graph, the broken thin line traces the trade
balance as a share of GDP. This variable jumps into a surplus immediately following the
tari¤ cut, reaching somewhere around 5 percent of GDP, but goes into a de…cit after about
20 quarters since it has to o¤set the positive interest payment the country receives from its
foreign asset holdings in order to produce a zero current account.

25

The identity that current account is the di¤erence between national savings and investment is also respected. The trajectories for savings and investment as shares of GDP are
plotted in the lower left graph. In the graph, the savings rate goes up immediately after
the trade reform, while the investment rate goes up after an initial and temporary fall. The
gap between savings and investment is always equal to the current account indicated by the
thick line in the upper right graph.
Note that the domestic investment (as a share of GDP) can go either up or down,
depending on the parameter values. The initial decrease in investment ratio re‡ects the
immediate expansion of the labor intensive sector and the contraction of the capital intensive
sector after the tari¤ cut, which result in the lower domestic demand for investment. It is
important to note that we only consider here a case in which there is no technological change
accompanying a trade reform. In the real data, there is often technological improvement
that accompanies a trade reform. In our model, technological improvements either uniformly
across both sectors (both A1 and A2 increase proportionally), or just in the comparative
advantage sector (A1 increases), would lead to an immediate jump in the investment to
GDP ratio. (In other words, if a trade reform is modeled as a combination of a tari¤ cut
and an increase in productivity, then there will be a large current account surplus without
much initial fall in the investment/GDP ratio.)
Handley and Limao (2016) argue that the PNTR reform in late 2000 is equivalent to
a permanent cut in the US tari¤ rate by 13 percentage points (on mostly labor intensive
products). For Chinese exporters, this is also equivalent to an export cost reduction. During
the period from 2001-2007, the exports to the US are about 15 percent of China’s total
exports on average. Therefore, we assume that the PNTR e¤ect is equivalent to 2 percent of
export cost reduction on Chinese exporters. In Figure 4A, we report the dynamic responses
of trade volume and balance of payment variables to a simultaneous reduction of tari¤ by 5
percentage points and a reduction in export costs by 2%. With the extra cut in the export
costs, the initial trade volume/GDP increases from 38% to 45%, and the initial current
account/GDP increases from 5.38% to 5.88%. For the foreign asset holding in the new
steady state, it increases from 29% to 33%. The overall e¤ect of export cost reduction is
signi…cant, but quantitatively smaller than that of tari¤ reduction. This is simply because

26

the reduction of import tari¤ is for all the imports while the export cost reduction is only
for the US market.
We now perform some sensitivity analysis. First, we investigate transitional dynamics
when we vary the aggregate capital adjustment cost

k

= 4; 8; and 12: The results are

presented in the top row of Figure 5. Although the steady state is not a¤ected by changes
in

k;

the trade volume, the current account and the foreign asset position in the transition

dynamics become (moderately) larger when

k

becomes smaller. The overall dynamics of

the balance of payments does not appear to be very sensitive to perturbations in the value
of aggregate capital adjustment costs.
Second, we investigate the BOP dynamics at di¤erent bond adjustment costs. As equation (5.23) indicates, the change in the foreign asset position from the initial to the new
steady state is a¤ected by the bond adjustment cost,

b.

In the second row of Figure 5, we

report the transitional dynamics under the assumption of two new values of

b;

0:0005 and

0:0010; in addition to the benchmark value of 0:0007: In all cases, the country still runs a
current account surplus after a tari¤ cut with each of the two alternative bond adjustment
costs. The quantitative e¤ect, however, varies. As expected, a smaller bond adjustment
cost results in a larger current account surplus in transitional dynamics, and larger trade
volume and net foreign asset position in both transitional dynamics and the steady state. In
Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2003), the parameter of bond adjustment cost is chosen to match
the standard deviation of the current account/GDP ratio for Canada (which is 0.015). From
the corresponding annual data for China during 1982-2010, after detrending with an HP
…lter, we calculate that the standard deviation of the CA/GDP ratio is 0.019, which is close
to the Canadian number. Separately, in calibrating a RBC model to explain the business
cycles in the Chinese economy, Curtis and Mark (2010) also choose
for the bond adjustment cost. Therefore, we regard

b

b

= 0:0007 as the value

= 0:0007 as the “right” benchmark

value.

6

Factor Market Frictions

Factor market reforms can a¤ect how a country’s current account responds to a given trade
reform. For the current account to respond to trade reforms, a key intermediary step is
27

a structural adjustment of the domestic economy. Logically, factor market frictions that
block or reduce the extent of the domestic structural adjustment can also block or reduce
the current account response to trade reforms. We now turn to this topic. We start with
…nancial frictions in the form of credit constraints.

6.1

Financial Frictions

Following Antras and Caballero (2009), we make the simplifying assumption that …nancial
frictions are asymmetric in the two sectors: while …rms in the importing sector can employ
any desired amount of capital at the equilibrium interest rate, …rms in the exporting sector
face credit constraints. Note that with a tari¤ cut on the capital intensive good, only the
(labor-intensive) export sector would expand. Therefore, we essentially assume that credit
constraints are more binding in the sector that needs expansion.
Credit constraints are introduced through the following (admittedly arti…cial) setting.
Each capitalist owns one unit of capital so that the capital stock K is owned by a total K
of capitalists. A proportion

of K are endowed with “entrepreneurial ability”and labelled

“entrepreneurs”. Only the “entrepreneurs” know how to operate in the exporting sector.
However, each entrepreneur can borrow only up to

amount of her own capital. Thus the

total amount of capital employed in the exporting sector is given by,
K1t 6 (1 + ) Kt =
where

k

k Kt

(6.30)

= (1 + ) : We focus on the case in which …nancial frictions are binding (or

is su¢ ciently small) so that

kK

is less than the desired amount of capital that exporting

…rms would like to employ in the absence of …nancial frictions.
Let ri be the return to capital in sector i: The …nancial frictions cause a wedge between
the returns to capital in the two sectors, r1t > r2t . The budget constraint (4.4) now is
changed to

Pt [Ct +
= wt L +

b

2
2
X

(Bt+1

B)2 ] + Bt+1 + It

rit Kit + (1 + r )Bt + T Rt

i=1

28

(6.31)

In addition to the capital accumulation equation, the representative household also faces
the credit constraint (6.30) and capital market clearing condition, K1t + K2t = Kt . When
the credit constraint (6.30) is binding, we have K1t =

k Kt

and K2t = (1

k ) Kt :

Using

these results, the budget constraint (4.4) now becomes:

b
(Bt+1 B)2 ] + Bt+1 + It
2
= wt L + [ k r1t + (1
k ) r2t ] Kt + (1 + r )Bt + T Rt

Pt [Ct +

(6.32)

Therefore, the …rst order conditions with respect to Ct ; Kt+1 ; Bt+1 ; and Lit in the
consumer’s maximization problem now remain the same as conditions (4.6), (4.8), and
(4.9) except that we now replace rt+1 by
C
rt+1
=

6.1.1

k r1;t+1

+ (1

k ) r2;t+1

(6.33)

The Steady State Equilibrium

The steady state equilibrium in the case of …nancial frictions is represented by 15 equations
with 15 variables, and is summarized in Appendix 7.3. Similar to equation (5.23), in the
steady state we have
B=
Thus, rC =

k r1

+ (1

k ) r2 ;

rC +
1 r
C
bP 1 + r

(6.34)

is a key variable in determining the country’s net foreign

asset holding B:
Because we are not able to obtain an analytic solution, we will resort to numerical
results. Here we o¤er some intuition for the numerical results to come. When …nancial
frictions become tighter (

k

declines), the capital usage in sector 1 declines. As a result,

the marginal product of capital in the exporting sector, r1 ; increases, but the marginal
product of labor, w1 ; declines. Since the wage rates are equalized in the two sectors in the
steady state, w1 = w2 = w, using the zero pro…t condition in the import-competing sector,
P2 =

w2
2 ( A2 ; r2 );

we infer that the marginal product of capital in the import-competing

sector, r2 must rise. Since both r1 and r2 are larger, therefore, rC becomes larger as
…nancial frictions becomes tighter. Using (6.34), that results in a smaller B: That is, a
29

lower level of …nancial development (a tighter credit constraint) results in a smaller net
foreign asset holding. To summarize, because …nancial frictions impede the expansion of
the exporting sector, a given trade reform produces a smaller capital out‡ow.
Several recent papers (Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas, 2008; Mendoza, Quadrini, and
Rios-Rull, 2009; Ju and Wei, 2010; and Song, Storesletten, and Zilibotti, 2011) have showed
that a low level of …nancial development in a developing country can produce a …nancial
capital out‡ow to developed countries. Therefore, a tighter …nancial friction would lead to
more current account surplus in a developing country. Our paper, however, suggests the
opposite. When credit constraint is asymmetric across sectors, for example, when there is
a credit rationing in one sector but not in another sector, similar to the setup in Antras
and Caballero (2009), we show that a tighter credit constraint induces capital in‡ow (or a
smaller current account surplus). The two parts of the literature can be reconciled when one
realizes that the …rst set of papers emphasizes the e¤ect of …nancial frictions on the supply
side of capital (…nancial frictions reduce the return on savings and generate incentives to
move savings out of the country), while the current paper and Antras and Caballero (2009)
stress the demand side e¤ect (credit constraints could increase demand for capital by …rms
in the unconstrained sector). Our model is di¤erent from Antras and Caballero (2009) in
that trade liberalization always leads to capital out‡ow (current account surplus) under
credit constraints, although the amount of capital out‡ow could be made smaller by a
tighter credit constraint.

6.2

Labor Market Frictions

We can model labor frictions in a similar fashion and obtain qualitatively similar results.
Assume that labor employed in the exporting sector requires “exporting skills”, and the
amount of labor with “exporting skills” does not exceed a certain proportion of the total
amount of labor. In other words, when the labor-intensive sector expands, not all labor
previously working in the importing sector can successfully function in the exporting sector.
As an example, when the textile industry expands but the steel mills are shut down, not all
former steel workers can be productive textile workers. Formally, we model the frictions by
the following inequality:

30

L1t 6

LL

(6.35)

Similarly, the budget constraint (4.4) now becomes

b

(Bt+1 B)2 ] + Bt+1 + It
2
= [ L w1t + (1
L ) w2t ] L + rt Kt + (1 + r )Bt + T Rt
Pt [Ct +

(6.36)

and all the analysis in the basic model goes through except that now we replace wt by
wtc =

L w1t

+ (1

L ) w2t :

Labor market frictions impede the expansion of the exporting

sector. Thus a given trade reform produces a smaller response in both the trade volume
and the current account.

6.3

Numerical Results

For numerical simulations, we focus on the case of credit constraints, while assuming no
labor market frictions. (The results with labor market frictions are qualitatively similar.)
We choose the same structural parameters as in the benchmark case. For …nancial frictions,
we set the credit constraint parameter in the initial steady state

k

= 0:42 so that the initial

net export share is about 10%.
The case of a tari¤ reduction from 15% to 10% under …nancial frictions is presented in
Columns 5 and 6 in Table 4. The return to capital in the importing sector, r2 ; decreases, but
r1 in the exporting sector increases. The labor intensive sector expands while the capital
intensive sector shrinks, and both exports and imports increase. While the qualitative
result is the same as the case without …nancial frictions (Columns 2 and 3 in Table 4), the
magnitude of the changes is (much) smaller. Because the (labor-intensive) export sector
cannot expand as much as before, the wage rate now declines. The ratio of the trade volume
to GDP,

TV
GDP ;

increases by 3:7 percentage points (from 21:1% to 24:8%), compared to an

increase by 6:6 percentage points when there is not credit constraint. The increase in the
net foreign asset position, B=GDP; is on the order of 10% of GDP when there is credit
constraint, compared to an increase by 29% of GDP in the absence of credit constraints.

31

If the tari¤ is cut to 5%, the new steady state (with credit constraint) is presented in
Column 7 of Table 4. Again, comparing the change in the country’s foreign asset position
from Columns 5 to 7, with the change in the same variable from Column 2 to 4, it is
clear that credit constraint can substantially reduce the change in a country’s foreign asset
position for a given trade reform.
We present, in Figure 6, the transitional dynamics of the economy after a tari¤ cut from
15% to 10% in the case with credit constraints. Compared to Figure 3 (the transitional
dynamics after an identical tari¤ cut but without credit constraint), the adjustments are
smaller. The implications of credit constraints for the balance-of-payments variables are
best seen in Figure 7. For ease of comparison with the case of no credit constraint, we use
thick bold lines to represent the transitional dynamics when there is credit constraint, and
thin lines to represent the case of no credit constraint. From the upper left graph, it is clear
that credit constraints reduce the impact of a given tari¤ cut on trade volumes. Similarly,
in the lower left graph, we can see that credit constraints induce a smaller current account
response to the same tari¤ cut than the case of no credit constraints. From the upper right
graph, we can see that the smaller current account response comes from a combination of a
smaller savings response and a smaller investment response. Unsurprising, as shown in the
lower right graph, the accumulation of foreign assets is also stunted by credit constraints.

7

Concluding Discussion

A wave of trade liberalizations take place in both developing and developed countries,
including China’s trade reforms during 2001-2006 following its WTO accession and the
end of import quotas on textiles and garments in the United States and Europe in 2004.
At the same time, both China’s current account surplus and the US de…cit have risen
to an unprecedented level. We suggest that the two developments are intimately related.
By embedding a modi…ed Heckscher-Ohlin structure and an endogenous discount factor
into an intertemporal model of current account, we obtain two key results. First, trade
liberalizations in a developing country (that reduce its capital intensity) would generally
lead to a capital out‡ow, while trade liberalizations in a developed country (that increase
its capital intensity) would result in a capital in‡ow. Thus, trade reforms can produce or
32

contribute to global imbalances. Because such current imbalances are generated by welfareimproving trade reforms, they do not call for a policy correction. Second, factor market
frictions can reduce the current account response to trade reforms by reducing the extent
of economic structural change.
This model o¤ers an interesting interpretation of the Chinese experience with trade
reforms and current account dynamics (both the rapid rise during 2002-2007 and the fall
after 2007). In particular, there are two phases of trade policy changes that appear to be
associated with di¤erent current account patterns. Before China’s accession to the WTO
at the end of 2001, while there had been trade reforms, …nancial sector frictions may have
blunted the current account response. In comparison, the WTO accession represents a
watershed event in two senses. First, not only the dismantling of tari¤ and non-tari¤
barriers on imports was accelerated, there was also a dramatic reduction in trading costs
faced by …rms in the exporting sector. In particular, Chinese …rms that did not enjoy
export rights before the WTO accession acquired an automatic right to exports as a result
of the accession. (This reduction in trade costs is not captured by any measured reduction
in tari¤ rates.) If one counts the number of trade reforms China has to undertake, it is
more than two standard deviations greater than the median value for an accession country
since 1990 (Tang and Wei, 2009). In that sense, China’s trade reforms associated with
its WTO accession may be called the mother of all trade reforms. Second, the accession
protocol also obligates China to engage in a series of …nancial sector reforms over a …veyear transition period after the accession. These reforms have also greatly facilitated the
economic adjustment in the direction of expanding China’s comparative advantage sectors
and reducing its comparative disadvantage sectors.
The di¤erence between the trade reforms in the 1990s and those associated with the
WTO accession can be seen from the time series of the import-to-GDP ratio. The tari¤
cuts before 2001 had led to only a small change in the import/GDP ratio. In comparison,
the WTO accession was followed by a large and sustained increase in the imports from 5%
of GDP in 2001 to close to 30% of GDP by 2007. Interpreted in light of our model, the
combination of trade reforms and factor market reforms brought out by the WTO accession
has the e¤ect of producing a large and positive current account response. Because both

33

trade reforms and …nancial reforms were conducted over a multi-year phase, the current
account response gains strength over time in the …rst few years after the WTO accession
before it peters o¤.
Our theory also sheds new light on the relative decline in China’s current account surplus
after 2007. A common explanation for the current account contraction is a temporary
reaction to the contraction of global trade associated with the global …nancial crisis. The
implication is that the Chinese current account surplus could return to its pre-2007 level
once the world economy is out of the recession. However, our model provides an additional
explanation. In our model, the current account response to a trade policy shock is temporary
(even though it can last for 20 quarters). Therefore, part of the decline of the current account
surplus could result from the end of major trade reforms. The change in current account
due to this factor is not likely to be reversed.
The end of the import quotas on textiles and garments by the United States and Europe in 2004 represents another important event that reduces trading costs. Since this was
a reduction in trade barriers on a labor-intensive product in the United States, our theory
would predict that the U.S. responds by running a current account de…cit. More importantly, because textiles and garments are an important comparative advantage sector for
China, the end of quotas in 2004 represented a big decline in the export costs for Chinese
exporting …rms. Therefore this event also reinforces the rise of China’s current account surplus in recent years. Because Europe is commonly said to have a less ‡exible labor market,
our theory would predict a smaller current account response to the trade policy response,
which appears to be consistent with the pattern in the data.
We do not wish to claim that trade reforms are the only factor that matters for the
evolution of a country’s current account. Rather, it is an important contributing factor
that is thus far neglected in the discussion of current account imbalances. Such omission
could incorrectly color one’s understanding of the source of current account imbalances
and appropriate policy responses. To put it simply, if a portion of the current account
imbalances is caused by e¢ cient trade reforms, we do not need to view it as a problem that
needs a policy correction.
The basic general equilibrium logic linking trade reforms and capital ‡ows is not unique

34

to China. We will see many more trade policy changes in both developed and developing
countries (not always in the direction of reducing trade barriers). We will also see many
more changes in factor markets around the world that could either enhance or reduce their
‡exibility. This paper provides a way to think about the general equilibrium implications
of trade reforms for international capital ‡ows.

References
[1] Alessandria, George, Horag Choi and Dan Lu, 2016, “Trade Integration and the Trade
Balance in China”, University of Rochester, Working Paper.
[2] Antras, Pol and Ricardo J. Caballero, 2009, “Trade and Capital Flows: A Financial
Frictions Perspective,” Journal of Political Economy, 117(4), pp. 701-744.
[3] Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland, 1992, “International Real
Business Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 100(4), pp. 745-775.
[4] Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland, 1994, “Dynamics of the
Trade Balance and the Terms of Trade: The J-Curve,” American Economic Review,
84(1), pp. 84-103.
[5] Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, 2008, “Financial Crash, Commodity Prices, and Global Imbalances,”Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 2008(2), 1-55.
[6] Choi, Horag, Nelson C. Mark, and Donggyu Sul, 2008, “Endogenous Discounting,
the World Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account,” Journal of International Economics, 75(1), 30-53.
[7] Cunat, Alejandro and Marco Ma¤ezzoli, 2004, “Heckscher-Ohlin Business Cycles,”
Review of Economic Dynamics, 7(3), 555-585
[8] Curtis, Chadwick and Nelson Mark, 2010, “Business Cycles, Consumption and RiskSharing: How Di¤erent is China?” in Yin-Wong Cheung, Vikas Kakkar,and Guonan
Ma, (eds.), The Evolving Role of Asia in Global Finance.
35

[9] Daniel, Betty C, 1997, “Precautionary Saving and Persistent Current Account Imbalance,” Journal of International Economics, 42(1):179–193.
[10] Devereux, Michael B., 1991. “Government Purchases and Real Interest Rates with
Endogenous Time Preference,” Economics Letters, Elsevier, vol. 35(2), pages 131-136,
February.,
[11] Devereux, Michael and Khang Min Lee, 1999, “Endogenous Trade Policy and the Gains
from International Financial Markets,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 43, 35-59.
[12] Epstein, Larry G., 1983, “Stationary Cardinal Utility and Optimal Growth under Uncertainty,” Journal of Economic Theory, 31(1), 133-152.
[13] Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, 2002, “Technology, Geography, and Trade?”
Econometrica, 70 (5): 1741-779.
[14] Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, Brent Neiman, and John Romalis, 2016, “Trade
and the Global Recession,” American Economic Review, 106(11), 3401-3438.
[15] Feng, Ling, Zhiyuan Li, and Deborah Swenson, 2014, “Trade Policy Uncertainty and
Exports: Evidence from China’WTO Accession,” CESifo Working Paper, 4780.
[16] Handley, Kyle and Nuno Limao, 2017, “Policy Uncertainty, Trade, and Welfare: Theory
and Evidence for China and the United States,” American Economic Review, 107(9):
2731-2783.
[17] Jin, Keyu, 2012, “Industrial Structure and Financial Capital Flows,” American Economic Review, 102(5): 2111-2146.
[18] Jin, Keyu and Nan Li, 2012, “International Transmission through Relative Prices,”
CEPR Discussion Paper 1090.
[19] Ju, Jiandong, Kang Shi and Shang-Jin Wei, 2014, “On Connections between Intratemporal and Intertemporal Trades,”Journal of International Economics, 92(S2): 3651.

36

[20] Ju, Jiandong and Shang-Jin Wei, 2007, “Current Account Adjustment: Some New
Theory and Evidence,” NBER Working Paper, w13388.
[21] Ju, Jiandong and Shang-Jin Wei, 2010, “Domestic Institutions and the Bypass E¤ect of
Financial Globalization,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2, 173-204.
[22] Ju, Jiandong, Yi Wu and Li Zeng, 2010, “The Impact of Trade Liberalization on the
Trade Balance in Developing Countries,” IMF Sta¤ Papers, 57(2), 427-449.
[23] Kehoe, Patrick J., and Fabrizio Perri, 2002, “International Business Cycles with Endogenous Incomplete Markets,” Econometrica, 70, 907-928.
[24] Khandelwal, Amit, Peter Schott, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2013, “Trade Liberalization and
Embedded Institutional Reform: Evidence from Chinese Exporters,” American Economic Review, 103(6): 2169-2195.
[25] Mendoza, Enrigue, 1991, “Real Business Cycles in a Small Open Economy,”American
Economic Review, 81, 797-818.
[26] Mendoza, Enrique, Vincenzo Quadrini, and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull. 2009, “Financial
Integration, Financial Deepness and Global Imbalances,”Journal of Political Economy,
117(3), 371-410.
[27] Mundell, Robert, 1957, “International Trade and Factor Mobility,”American Economic
Review, 47, 321-335.
[28] Neumeyer, Pablo A., and Fabrizio Perri, 2005, “Business Cycles in Emerging
Economies: The Role of Interest Rates,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52(2): 345380.
[29] Obstfeld, Maurice, 1981, “Macroeconomic Policy, Exchange-Rate Dynamics, and Optimal Asset Accumulation,” Journal of Political Economy, 89(6), 1142-1161.
[30] Obstfeld, Maurice, 1982, “Aggregate Spending and the Terms of Trade: Is There a
Laursen-Metzler E¤ect?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 97, 251-270.

37

[31] Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogo¤, 2000, “The Six Major Puzzles in International
Macroeconomics: Is There a Common Cause?” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual
2000, Volume 15, Bernanke and Rogo¤.
[32] Ostry, Jonathan D. and Andrew K. Rose, 1992, “An Empirical Evaluation of the
Macroeconomic E¤ects of Tari¤s,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 11:
63-79.
[33] Pierce, Justin, and Peter Schott, 2016, “The Surprisingly Swift Decline of US Manufacturing Employment,” American Economic Review, 106(7): 1632-62.
[34] Reyes-Heroles, Recardo, 2015, “The Role of Trade Costs in the Surge of Trade Imbalances”, Federal Reserve Board, Working Paper.
[35] Schmitt-Grohe, Stephanie, 1998, “The International Transmission of Economic Fluctuations: E¤ects of US Business Cycles on the Canadian Economy,” Journal of International Economics, 44: 257-287.
[36] Schmitt-Grohe, Stephanie and Martin Uribe, 2003, “Closing Small Open Economy
Models,” Journal of International Economics, 61:163-185.
[37] Stiglitz, Joseph E, 1970, “Factor Price Equalization in a Dynamic Economy,” Journal
of Political Economy, 78(3): 456-88.
[38] Song, Zheng, Kjetil Storesletten, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, 2011, “Growing like China,”
American Economic Review, 101: 202–241.
[39] Tang, Man-Keung, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2009, “The Value of Making Commitments
Externally: Evidence from WTO Accessions,” Journal of International Economics,
78(2): 216-229.
[40] Uribe, Martin, 1997, “Exchange Rate Based In‡ation Stabilization: the Initial E¤ects
of Credible Plans,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 39: 197-221.
[41] Uzawa, Hirofumi., 1968, “Time Preference, the Consumption Function, and Optimal
Asset Holdings,” in J. N. Wolfe (eds.), Capital and Growth: Papers in Honor of Sir
John Hicks, The University of Edinburgh Press, Edinburgh (1968): 485-504.
38

[42] Wei, Shang-Jin, and Xiaobo Zhang, 2011, “The Competitive Saving Motive: Evidence
from Rising Sex Ratios and Savings Rates in China,” Journal of Political Economy,
119 (3): 511-564.

8

Appendices

8.1

Equations for the Steady State

Given the factor prices (w; r) and the holding of foreign asset B, the output Y , consumption
C, investment I, aggregate demand D, and sectoral outputs X1 and X2 can be determined
by the following six equations.
C
C
= [ (1 + r
Y
Y

= ! + (1

P Y = P1 X1 + P2 X2

(8.3)

1 )P1 X1

+

2 P2 X2

+ (1

=r

I

2 )P2 X2

(8.4)
= wL

(8.5)

P1 X1 + P2 X2 =(1 + ) + r B = P D

(8.6)

!)=(1 + ). Equation (8.6) is derived from the current account equation

in the steady state, P1 (X1

8.2

(8.1)

(8.2)

1 P1 X1

where

1

I
+ b B2
P
2

D=C+

(1

)]

D1 ) + P2 (X2

D2 ) + r B = CA = 0:

Equilibrium Selection in the Initial Steady State

In the initial steady state, we assume an exogenous export share, sx; and an import share,
sm; to select the equilibrium. Let
sx =

N X1
>0
P1 X1 + P2 X2

(8.7)

sm =

N X2
<0
P1 X1 + P2 X2

(8.8)

39

Since B is initially zero, using expressions of sectoral output, we have
P1 X1 + P2 X2 =

(

1 )(1

2

(1

1)

+ ) PD
(1 + )(1

wL
2)

(8.9)

Using the expressions for X1 and D1 , we have
sx =

wL

P D[(1

2 )(1

(

2

+ ) + !((1
1 )(1 + ) P D

1)

(1 + )(1
wL

2 ))]

(8.10)

This implies that given the initial share of export sx, we can determine the initial ratio of
wage income to …nal good expenditure as below

sx(
wL
=
PD
Let

=

wL
PD.

2

1 )(1

+ ) + (1

2 )(1

+ ) + !((1
1 + sx

1)

(1 + )(1

2 ))

(8.11)

We can solve for the initial output Y as
Y =

wL (
P (1

1 )(1

2

+ )
(1 + )(1

1)

1

(8.12)

2)

In the initial steady state, the consumption is given by C = D
is given by I = K = r (

1 P1 X1 +

2 P2 X2 ).

I
P,

and the investment

From the determination of sectoral output, we

have

I=

(1 + )(

2

r

1)

P D (1 + )( 2
(1
(1
1)

1 )r

B (
2 )(1 + )

2 (1

+ )

1 )wL

(8.13)

For simplicity, we rewrite it as
I
= D+
P

(8.14)

where
=
=

(1 + )( 2
r (1
(1
1)
(1 + )( 2
rP
(1

1)

>0
+ )
1 )r B + ( 2 (1 + )
(1
1)
2 )(1 + )

(8.15)

2 )(1

40

1 )wL

(8.16)

Note that

is an investment component determined by the supply side. Therefore, substi-

tuting them into the aggregate demand equation, the initial consumption can be expressed
as
C = D[(1

)

2 (1

+ )
(1

D

]

(8.17)

where

D

=

r (1

1)

wL
1
)(1
+
)
P
D
2

(8.18)

Finally, we obtain the initial consumption as below:
C=

8.3

wL 1
[
P

+

2 (1

r (1

1)

+ )
(1

1
2 )(1

+ )

]

(8.19)

Steady State Equilibrium with Credit Constraint
B=

(
(

1 r
rC +
C
bP 1 + r

w 1
)
A1

w 1
)
A2

2

(8.20)

r1 1 = P1

(8.21)

r2 2 = (1 + )P2

(8.22)

1

K1
=
K2
1

k

(8.23)
k

L1 + L2 = L

(8.24)

r1 K1 =

1 P1 X1

(8.25)

r2 K2 =

2 P2 X2

(8.26)

wL1 = (1

1 )P1 X1

(8.27)

wL2 = (1

2 )P2 X2

(8.28)

rC =

k K1

+ (1

P1 D1 = !P D
41

k )K2

(8.29)
(8.30)

P2 D2 = (1

D=C+

!)P D

(8.31)

(K1 + K2 )
+ b B2
P
2

P1 X1 + P2 X2 =(1 + ) + r B = P D
C
C
= [ (1 + rC
Y
Y

42

)]

1

(8.32)

(8.33)

(8.34)

Table 1: Episodes of Trade Reforms (1990-2010)

Country Name

Period

Albania*

2001-2002

Tariff Change
(Simple Average)

(Weighted Average)

-3.21

-2.93

Imports Change
8.01

Algeria*

2001-2003

-3.44

-3.19

3.8

Bangladesh*

2003-2005

-4.21

0.86

3.01

Bangladesh

2006-2007

-0.72

-8.62

3.51

Belize

1999-2001

-9.18

-0.48

6.31

Bhutan

2005-2007

-0.24

-5.01

4.27

Brazil*

1989-1993

-30.01

-18.9

3.63

Brazil*

1998-2001

-1.76

-5.52

4.56

Cambodia*

2003-2005

-2.14

-5.54

4.35

Canada*

1995-1997

-3.3

-2.34

3.4

China*

1992-1997

-24.57

-16.35

4.86

China*

2001-2003

-4.52

-7.63

6.88

Georgia*

2002-2004

-3.1

-1.33

4.02

Guyana

1999-2001

-9.73

-3.59

6.14

India*

2004-2008

-16.86

-16.55

4.93

Indonesia*

1989-1990

-3.48

0.36

3.55

Indonesia*

1995-1996

-2.99

-3.16

15.57

Indonesia*

1999-2001

-4.3

-1.74

3.03

Kenya*

2004-2006

-4.11

-3.44

3.1

Kyrgyz Republic*

2002-2003

-3.33

-2.52

7.92

Lebanon

2000-2001

-8.72

-8.69

4.01

Lesotho

2006-2007

0.05

-3.04

5.22

Malawi*

1996-1998

-6.67

-4.37

6.23

Mauritius*

1995-1997

-0.99

-4.91

3.19

Mauritius*

2005-2006

-2.96

-3.5

7.05

Morocco*

2006-2009

-6.13

-4.61

5.19

Nigeria*

2001-2002

3.9

-3.02

8.15

Pakistan

2001-2003

-3.01

-3.43

3.85

Paraguay*

2004-2006

-1.91

-5.21

5.6

Peru*

2006-2008

-4.11

-4.04

7.23

Philippines

1989-1990

-8.68

-7.66

3.02

Seychelles*

2005-2006

-3.64

-0.45

4.13

St Lucia*

2000-2001

-9.76

-4.25

4.16

Syrian Arab Republic

2009-2010

0

-4.03

4.61

Thailand*

1993-1995

-22.66

-21.7

6.39

Thailand*

2003-2005

-3.46

-4.15

6.94

Tunisia*

2002-2008

-12.4

-10.46

3.36

Zimbabwe

1996-2003

-25.1

-22.45

8.67

Note: * denotes countries for which data on current account and capital intensity are also available.

Table 2: Changes in Current Account and Changes in Trade Policy, 1990-2010
Dependent variable = Δ (CA/GDP)
ΔK-Intensity

(1)
-61.69*
(30.26)

ΔRER
Constant
# of Observations
* indicates significant at 10% level, ** 5% level, *** 1% level

-0.82*
(0.43)
28

(2)
-139.77*
(63.12)
-0.08*
(0.04)
-1.93**
(0.77)
13

Table 3: Summary of Parameters Used in the Calibrations
(In the text)

Table 4: Steady States Before and After a Tariff Reduction
Variable

Benchmark (No Credit Constraint)
tariff=0.15

(1)

tariff=0.1

(2)

With Credit Constraint

tariff=0.05

(3)

tariff=0.15

(4)

tariff=0.1

(5)

tariff=0.05

(6)

(7)

rc
r1
r2
w1
w2
P1
p2
P

0.0351

0.0324

0.0298

0.0351

0.0342

0.0336

0.0351

0.0324

0.0298

0.0351

0.0357

0.0370

0.0351

0.0324

0.0298

0.0351

0.0331

0.0312

28.038

29.172

30.408

28.038

27.802

27.31

28.038

29.172

30.408

28.038

27.802

27.31

3.5882

3.5882

3.5882

3.5882

3.5882

3.5882

0.3205

0.3066

0.2926

0.3205

0.3066

0.2926

1.0724

1.0488

1.0247

1.0724

1.0488

1.0247

C

8.356

8.457

8.477

8.3575

8.289

8.1641

D

12.536

13.052

13.412

12.549

12.538

12.366

B

0

3.8497

7.5797

0

1.3129

2.0814

K

179.32

192.57

201.49

179.81

178.23

172.17

I

4.483

4.8141

5.0372

4.4951

4.4558

4.3043

Y

12.351

12.841

13.210

12.366

12.379

12.258

K1

75.648

87.886

104.18

75.518

74.858

72.312

K2

103.67

104.68

97.315

104.29

103.38

99.86

L1

0.1923

0.1981

0.2071

0.1920

0.1952

0.1991

L2

0.0556

0.0498

0.0408

0.0560

0.0527

0.0489

X1

2.2424

2.4037

2.6191

2.2386

2.2575

2.2612

X2

16.221

15.798

14.143

16.317

15.927

15.197

D1

1.8733

1.9075

1.915

1.8753

1.8324

1.7657

D2

20.973

22.327

23.483

20.995

21.448

21.652

NX1

1.3245

1.7806

2.5263

1.3038

1.5255

1.7778

NX 2

-1.5232

-2.0014

-2.733

-1.4994

-1.6926

-1.8888

0

0

0

0

0

0

sx

0.1

0.1322

0.1866

0.0983

0.1175

0.1415

sm

-0.115

-0.1486

-0.2019

-0.1131

-0.1304

-0.1504

B/GDP

0.0%

28.6%

56.0%

0.0%

10.1%

16.6%

TV/GDP

21.5%

28.1%

38.9%

21.1%

24.8%

29.2%

C/GDP

67.7%

65.9%

64.2%

67.6%

67.0%

66.6%

I/GDP

33.8%

35.7%

37.2%

33.9%

34.3%

34.3%

CA/GDP

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

Figure 2: Scatter Plot of Delta CA/GDP vs Delta k-intensity (from t-1 to t+1):
Major Trade Policy Changes around the World (1990-2010)

-.03

-.02

-.01
0
delta_intensity
delta_ca

Fitted values

.01

.02

Figure 3: Transition Path of the Economy after a Tariff Reduction by 5 Percentage Points (from 15% to 10%)

Y

C

K

12.8

8.6

190

12.6

8.4

185

12.4

8.2

180

I
5

4.5

12.2
0

20

40

60

8

0

20

r1

40

60

175

0

20

r2

40

60

4

29.5

29.5

0.036

0.036

29

29

0.034

0.034

28.5

28.5

20

40

60

0.032

0

20

K1
110

90

100

80

90

0

20

60

28

0

20

K2

100

70

40

40

60

80

0

20

X1

60

0

60

0.2

0.05

0.19

0

20

20

40

60

0.04

0

20

sx

18

0.25

16

0.2

14

0.15

60

40

60

L2
0.06

40

60

40

60

sm
−0.1

2.4

2.2

28

0.21

X2

2.6

40

L1

40

40

w2

0.038

0

20

w1

0.038

0.032

0

−0.15

0

20

40

60

12

0

20

40

60

0.1

0

20

40

60

−0.2

0

20

Figure 4: Dynamic Responses of Trade Volume and BOP Variables to a Tariff Reduction by 5 Percentage Points (from 15% to 10%)
Trade Balance/GDP & Current Account/GDP

Trade Volume/GDP
0.05

0.4

CA/GDP

0.38

0.34

CA/GDP(TB/GDP)

Trade Volume/GDP

TB/GDP

0.04

0.36

0.32
0.3
0.28
0.26

0.03

0.02

0.01

0.24
0
0.22
0.2

0

10

20

30

40

−0.01

50

0

10

20

Quarters

Saving/GDP & Investment/GDP

40

50

Foreign Asset/GDP

0.37

0.35
0.3

0.36

0.25

0.35
B/GDP

S/GDP(I/GDP)

30
Quarters

S/GDP

0.34

I/GDP

0.2
0.15

0.33
0.1
0.32

0.05
0

0.31
0

10

20

30
Quarters

40

50

0

10

20

30
Quarters

40

50

Figure 4A: Dynamic Responses of Trade Volume and BOP Variables to 5% Tariff Cut and 2% Export Cost Cut
Trade Volume/GDP

Trade balace/GDP&Current Acccount/GDP

0.5

0.06
tariff only

Tariff only CA/GDP

0.04
0.4

CA/GDP(TB/GDP)

Trade Volume/GDP

0.05

tariff+export cost

0.45

0.35

0.3

Tariff only TB/GDP
0.03

Tariff+export cost CA/GDP
Tariff+export cost TB/GDP

0.02
0.01

0.25

0.2

0

0

10

20

30

40

−0.01

50

0

10

20

Quarters

S/GDP & I/GDP

40

50

40

50

Foreign Asset/GDP

0.39

0.4

0.38

0.35
0.3

0.37

0.25
0.36
0.35

B/GDP

S/GDP(I/GDP)

30
Quarters

Tariff only S/GDP

0.15

Tariff only I/GDP
0.34

0.2

Tariff+export cost S/GDP

0.1

Tariff+export cost I/GDP
0.33

0.05

0.32
0

10

20

30
Quarters

40

50

0

0

10

20

30
Quarters

Figure 5: Transition path for different adjustment costs

Trade Volume/GDP

CA/GDP

0.4

B/GDP

0.05

0.35

0.38

0.25

0.34
0.32
0.3

B/GDP

0.03
CA/GDP

trade volume/GDP

0.3

0.04

0.36

0.02

0.15

0.28
0.01
0.26

0.1

ψk=4

0.24

ψk=8

0.22

ψk=12

0.2

0

−0.01
0

10

20
30
Quarters

40

50

0.05

0

10

Trade Volume/GDP

20
30
Quarters

40

0

50

0

10

CA/GDP

0.4

20
30
Quarters

40

50

40

50

B/GDP

0.06

0.45

0.38

0.4

0.05
0.36

0.35
0.04

0.34

0.3

0.3
0.28

0.02

0.25
0.2
0.15

0.26

0.01

ψb=0.0005

0.24

ψb=0.0007

0.22

ψb=0.0010

0.2

0.03

B/GDP

0.32

CA/GDP

trade volume/GDP

0.2

0.1
0
−0.01

0

10

20
30
Quarters

40

50

0.05
0

10

20
30
Quarters

40

50

0

0

10

20
30
Quarters

Figure 6: Transition Path under Credit Constraints after a Tariff Cut by 5 Percentage Points (from 15% to 10%)

Y

C

I

K

8.45

180

4.5

179.5

4.4

179

4.3

12.44
8.4

12.42
12.4

8.35

12.38

8.3

12.36
0

20

40

60

8.25

0

20

40

r1

60

178.5

4.2
0

20

r2

0.0365

40

60

0

20

w1

40

60

w2

0.036

28.2

28.2

0.034

28

28

0.036
0.0355
0.035

0

20

40

60

0.032

0

20

K1

40

60

27.8

0

20

K2

76

40

60

0

20

L1

104.5

0.2

104

0.195

40

60

40

60

40

60

L2
0.058

75.5

0.056

75
74.5

27.8

0.054

0

20

40

60

103.5

0

20

X1

40

60

0.19

0

20

X2

40

60

0.052

0

sx

sm

2.3

16.5

0.15

−0.1

2.25

16

0.1

−0.12

2.2
0

20

40

60

15.5

0

20

20

40

60

0.05

0

20

40

60

−0.14

0

20

Figure 7: Responses of BOP Variables with and without Credit Constraints to a Tariff Cut by 5 Percentage Points (from 15% to 10%)
S/GDP & I/GDP

Trade Volume/GDP
0.37

0.4
uncontrained

0.38

constrainted

0.36

0.34
S/GDP(I/GDP)

Trade Volume/GDP

0.36

0.32
0.3
0.28

0.35

0.34

0.33

0.26

uncontrained S/GDP

0.24

uncontrained I/GDP

0.32

constrainted S/GDP

0.22
0.2

contrained I/GDP
0.31
0

10

20

30

40

0

50

10

20

30

40

50

40

50

Quarters

Quarters

CA/GDP

Foreign Asset/GDP

0.05

0.35
0.3

0.04

0.25
0.2
B/GDP

CA/GDP

0.03

0.02

0.15
0.1

0.01

0.05
0

−0.01

0

0

10

20

30
Quarters

40

50

−0.05

0

10

20

30
Quarters

