                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        WANNA GET AWAY? RD IDENTIFICATION AWAY FROM THE CUTOFF

                                           Joshua Angrist
                                          Miikka Rokkanen

                                        Working Paper 18662
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18662


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2012




Our thanks to Parag Pathak for many helpful discussions and comments, and to seminar participants
at Berkeley, CREST, and Stanford for helpful comments. Thanks also go to Peter Hull for expert research
assistance. Angrist gratefully acknowledges funding from the Institute for Education Sciences. The
views expressed here are those of the authors alone and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research or The Institute for Education Sciences.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Joshua Angrist and Miikka Rokkanen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Wanna Get Away? RD Identification Away from the Cutoff
Joshua Angrist and Miikka Rokkanen
NBER Working Paper No. 18662
December 2012
JEL No. C26,C31,C36,I21,I24,I28,J24

                                                ABSTRACT

In the canonical regression discontinuity (RD) design for applicants who face an award or admissions
cutoff, causal effects are nonparametrically identified for those near the cutoff. The impact of treatment on
inframarginal applicants is also of interest, but identification of such effects requires stronger assumptions
than are required for identification at the cutoff. This paper discusses RD identification away from
the cutoff. Our identification strategy exploits the availability of dependent variable predictors other
than the running variable. Conditional on these predictors, the running variable is assumed to be ignorable.
This identification strategy is illustrated with data on applicants to Boston exam schools. Functional-form-based
extrapolation generates unsatisfying results in this context, either noisy or not very robust. By contrast,
identification based on RD-specific conditional independence assumptions produces reasonably precise
and surprisingly robust estimates of the effects of exam school attendance on inframarginal applicants.
These estimates suggest that the causal effects of exam school attendance for 9th grade applicants
with running variable values well away from admissions cutoffs differ little from those for applicants
with values that put them on the margin of acceptance. An extension to fuzzy designs is shown to identify
causal effects for compliers away from the cutoff.


Joshua Angrist
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-353
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
angrist@mit.edu

Miikka Rokkanen
Department of Economics
MIT(
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
rokkanen@mit.edu
          Both the tie-breaking experiment and the regression-discontinuity analysis are partic-
          ularly subject to the external validity limitation of selection-X interaction in that the
          eﬀect has been demonstrated only for a very narrow band of talent, i.e., only for those
          at the cutting score... Broader generalizations involve the extrapolation of the below-X
          fit across the entire range of X values, and at each greater degree of extrapolation, the
          number of plausible rival hypotheses becomes greater.

              – Donald T. Campbell and Julian Stanley (1963; Experimental and Quasi-Experimental
          Designs for Research)


1        Introduction

In a regression discontinuity (RD) framework, treatment status changes discontinuously as a func-
tion of an underlying covariate, commonly known as the running variable. Provided conditional
mean functions for potential outcomes given the running variable are reasonably smooth, changes
in outcome distributions at the assignment cutoﬀ must be driven by discontinuities in the likelihood
of treatment. RD identification comes from a kind of virtual random assignment, where small and
presumably serendipitous variation in the running variable across the point of discontinuity manip-
ulates treatment. On the other hand, because the running variable is typically related to outcomes,
claims for unconditional “as-if random assignment” are most credible for observations near the point
of discontinuity. RD methods need not identify causal eﬀects for larger and perhaps more represen-
tative groups of subjects. Our epigraph suggests this point was no less apparent to RD’s inventors
than to today’s RD nonparametricians.
        A recent study of causal eﬀects at Boston’s selective public schools – known as “exam schools”
– highlights the possibly local and potentially limiting nature of RD findings. Boston exam schools
choose their students based on an index that combines admissions test scores with a student’s
grade point average (GPA). Abdulkadiroğlu, Angrist, and Pathak (2012) use parametric and non-
parametric RD estimators to capture the causal eﬀects of exam school attendance for exam school
applications with index values in the neighborhood of admissions cutoﬀs. In this case, nonparamet-
ric RD compares students just to the left and just to the right of each cutoﬀ. For most of these
marginal students, the resulting estimates suggest that exam school attendance does little to boost
achievement.1 But applicants who only barely manage to gain admission to, say, the highly selec-
tive Boston Latin School, might be unlikely to benefit from an advanced exam school curriculum.
    1
        Dobbie and Fryer (2012) report similar results for applicants to New York exam schools.


                                                            1
Stronger applicants who qualify more easily may benefit more from an elite public school education.
Debates over aﬃrmative action also focus attention on inframarginal applicants, including some
who stand to gain seats and some who stand to lose should aﬃrmative action considerations be
introduced.
   Motivated by the question of how exam school attendance aﬀects achievement for inframarginal
applicants, this paper tackles the theoretical problem of how to identify causal eﬀects in an RD
setting for applicants other than those in the immediate neighborhood of admissions cutoﬀs. Our
first tack extrapolates parametric models for conditional mean functions estimated to the left and
right of cutoﬀs. As noted by Angrist and Pischke (2009), in a parametric RD world, extrapolation
is easy. In a closely-related approach, inspired by an argument in Dong and Lewbel (2011), we
also use derivatives estimated at the cutoﬀ to extrapolate treatment eﬀects. Dong and Lewbel
exploit the fact that derivatives at the cutoﬀ are non-parametrically identified, though, in practice,
our implementation of derivative-based extrapolation looks a lot like a parametric polynomial. We
therefore see parametric and derivative-based extrapolation as two versions of a common functional-
form-based approach.
   As it turns out, functional-form-based estimation procedures fail to produce compelling results
for the empirical questions that motivate our theoretical inquiry. The resulting estimates of exam
school eﬀects away from the cutoﬀ are mostly imprecise and sensitive to the polynomial used for
extrapolation, with or without the implicit weighting induced by a nonparametric bandwidth. We
therefore turn to a conditional independence argument that exploits a key feature of most RD
assignment mechanisms: RD treatments are assigned as a deterministic function of a single observed
covariate, the running variable. The association between running variable and outcome variables is
therefore the only source of omitted variables bias in RD estimates. If, for example, the running
variable were randomly assigned, or otherwise made independent of potential outcomes, we could
ignore it and analyze data from RD designs as if from a randomized trial.
   This unique feature of RD assignment leads us to a conditional independence assumption (CIA)
that identifies causal eﬀects by conditioning on covariates besides the running variable, with an eye
to eliminating the relationship between running variable and outcomes. It’s not always possible to
find such good controls, of course, but, as we show below, a straightforward statistical test isolates
promising candidates. As an empirical matter, we show that conditioning on baseline scores and
demographic variables largely eliminates the relationship between running variables and test score
outcomes for 9th grade applicants to Boston exam schools. This finding lays the foundation for a
matching strategy that identifies causal eﬀects for inframarginal applicants.


                                                  2
    Our CIA-driven matching strategy is used here to answer two questions about exam school
treatment eﬀects away from admissions cutoﬀs. The first concerns the impact of attendance at
Boston’s most selective exam school, the Boston Latin School (BLS), on applicants with running
variable values that put them well above the BLS admissions cutoﬀ. The second question concerns
the impact of attendance at Boston’s least selective exam school, the O’Bryant School of Math and
Science, on applicants who fall a decile or more below the relevant admissions cutoﬀ. The resulting
estimates are mostly in line with RD estimates of causal eﬀects at the cutoﬀ. In particular, both
strategies suggest BLS attendance generates little eﬀect on either math or English achievement,
while O’Bryant may generate some gains, especially in English Language Arts (ELA). The ELA
gains for successful O’Bryant applicants approach one-fifth of a standard deviation. Interestingly,
therefore, those who seem most likely to gain from any expansion in exam school seats are weak
applicants who currently fail to gain admission to Boston’s least selective exam school. Ultra-high
ability applicants, that is, BLS applicants who easily clear the threshold for Boston’s most selective
public school, are likely to do well with our without a BLS experience, at least as far as standardized
test scores go.


2    Motivation: Causal Eﬀects at Boston Exam Schools

Boston’s three exam schools serve grades 7-12. The high-profile Boston Latin School (BLS), which
enrolls about 2,400 students, is the oldest American high school, founded in 1635. BLS is a model
for other exam schools, including New York’s well-known selective high schools. The second oldest
Boston exam school is Boston Latin Academy (BLA), formerly Girls’ Latin School. Opened in 1877,
BLA first admitted boys in 1972 and currently enrolls about 1,700 students. The John D. O’Bryant
High School of Mathematics and Science (formerly Boston Technical High) is Boston’s third exam
school; O’Bryant opened in 1893 and now enrolls about 1,200 students.
    The Boston Public School (BPS) system spans a wide range of peer achievement. Like urban
students elsewhere in the U.S., Boston exam school applicants who fail to enroll in an exam school
end up at schools with average SAT scores well below the state average, in this case, at schools close to
the 5th percentile of the distribution of school averages in the state. By contrast, O’Bryant’s average
SAT score falls at about the 40th percentile of the state distribution of averages, a big step up from
the overall BPS average, but not elite in an absolute sense. Successful Boston BLA applicants
find themselves at a school with average score around the 80th percentile of the distribution of
school means, while the average SAT score at BLS is the fourth highest among public schools in



                                                   3
Massachusetts.
   Abdulkadiroğlu, Angrist, and Pathak (2012) investigate the causal eﬀects of exam school atten-
dance in a fuzzy RD setup, where exam school oﬀers are used as instrumental variables for mediating
channels that might explain exam school impacts. Because Boston’s exams are ordered by selectiv-
ity, unsuccessful applicants to BLS and BLA mostly find themselves in another exam school. Still,
applicants admitted to each of the three schools are exposed to marked changes in peer composition.
An O’Bryant oﬀer increases average baseline (4th or 8th grade) peer scores by roughly three-fourths
of a standard deviation, while the peer achievement gain is almost .4 at the BLA cutoﬀ, and about
.7 at the BLS cutoﬀ. First-stages for racial composition also show that exam school oﬀers induce
a 12-24 percentage point reduction in the proportion of non-white classmates at each exam school
cutoﬀ. Peer achievement and racial composition are not the only channels by which an exam school
education might matter, but they are clearly important features of the exam school experiment.
   Here, we’re initially interested in the eﬀects of an exam school oﬀer for students away from
admissions cutoﬀs, without the complication of adjustment for possible mediators. We therefore
begin by focusing on what amounts to the reduced form relation in the Abdulkadiroğlu, Angrist,
and Pathak (2012) analysis. In the background, however, is the idea that mediators like exam
school enrollment and peer composition explain why we might expect an exam school eﬀect in the
first place. Following the discussion of reduced form oﬀer eﬀects, we also consider an extension to
fuzzy RD with causal mediators, in this case, a dummy for exam school enrollment and an ordered
treatment variable that counts years of exam school attendance. Extensions to other mediators,
such as peer composition, are straightforward in our fuzzy CIA framework.


2.1   Data

The analysis file used here comes from a data set constructed by Abdulkadiroğlu, Angrist, and Pathak
(2012). This data set merges BPS enrollment and demographic information with Massachusetts
Comprehensive Assessment System (MCAS) scores. MCAS tests are taken each spring, typically in
grades 3-8 and 10. Baseline (i.e., pre-application) scores for grade 7 applicants are from 4th grade.
Baseline English scores for 9th grade applicants come from 8th grade math and 7th grade ELA tests
(the 8th grade English exam was introduced in 2006). We lose some applicants with missing baseline
scores. For the purposes of our analysis, scores were standardized by subject, grade, and year to
have mean zero and unit variance in the BPS population.
   Data on student enrollment, demographics and test scores were combined with the BPS exam
school applicant file. This file records applicants’ current grade and school enrolled, applicants’


                                                 4
preference ordering over exam schools, and applicants’ Independent Schools Entrance Exam (ISEE)
test scores, along with each exam schools’ ranking of its applicants as determined by ISEE scores
and GPA. These school-specific rankings become the exam school running variables in our setup.
      Our initial analysis sample includes BPS-enrolled students who applied for exam school seats in
7th grade from 1997-2008 or in 9th grade from 2001-2007. For reasons explained below, most of the
estimates reported here use 9th grade applicants only. We focus on applicants enrolled in BPS at the
time of application (as opposed to private school students) because we’re interested in how an exam
school education compares to a traditional BPS education. Moreover, private school applicants are
much more likely to remain outside the BPS district and hence out of our sample if they fail to get
an exam school oﬀer. Applicants who apply to transfer from one exam school to another are also
omitted.2


2.2      Exam School Admissions: Defining Sharp Samples

Our sharp CIA-based estimation strategy is predicated on the notion that exam school eﬀects are
a deterministic function of exam school running variables. Exam school running variables are con-
structed by ranking a weighted average of ISEE scores and applicants’ GPAs at the time of appli-
cation. In practice, however, Boston exam school oﬀers take account of student preferences over
schools as well as ISEE scores and GPAs. Students list up to three exam schools for which they wish
to be considered, in order of preference. Admissions oﬀers are determined by a student-proposing de-
ferred acceptance (DA) algorithm, using student preferences and school-specific running variables as
inputs (for more on DA, see Abdulkadiroğlu, Pathak, and Roth (2009), Pathak and Sönmez (2008),
and Pathak and Sönmez (2011)). The DA matching process complicates our RD analysis because
it loosens the direct link between running variables and admissions oﬀers. As in Abdulkadiroğlu,
Angrist, and Pathak (2012), our econometric strategy begins by constructing analysis samples that
restore a deterministic link between exam school oﬀers and running variables, so that oﬀers are sharp
around admissions cutoﬀs.
      Applicants are ranked only for schools to which they’ve applied, so applicants with the same GPA
and ISEE scores might be ranked diﬀerently at diﬀerent schools depending on where they fall in each
school’s applicant pool (each schools also weights ISEE and GPA a little diﬀerently). Applicants
are ranked at every school to which they apply, regardless of how they’ve ordered schools. Student-
proposing DA generates oﬀers from student preference and school-specific rankings as follows:

      • In round 1: Each student applies to his first choice school. Each school rejects its lowest-ranked
  2
      For more on data, see the appendix to Abdulkadiroğlu, Angrist, and Pathak (2012).


                                                         5
      applicants in excess of its capacity, with the rest provisionally admitted (students not rejected
      at this step may be rejected in later steps.)

   • In general, at round ` > 1: Students rejected in Round `-1 apply to their next most preferred
      school (if any). Each school considers these students and provisionally admitted students from
      the previous round together, rejecting the lowest-ranked applicants in excess of capacity from
      this combined pool, producing a new provisional admit list (again, students not rejected at
      this step may be rejected in later steps.)

The DA algorithm terminates when either every student is matched to a school or every unmatched
student has been rejected by every school he has ranked.
   Let ⌧k denote the rank of the last applicant oﬀered a seat at school k; let cik denote student i’s
composite score at school k; and write the vector of composite scores as ci = (ci1 , ci2 , ci3 ), where cik
is missing if student i did not rank school k. A dummy variable qi (k) = 1[cik  ⌧k ] indicates that
student i qualified for school k by clearing ⌧k (rank and qualification at k are missing for applicants
who did not rank k). Finally, let pik denote student i’s kth choice and represent i’s preference list
by pi = (pi1 , pi2 , pi3 ), where pik = 0 if the list is incomplete. Students who ranked and qualified for
a school will not be oﬀered a seat at that school if they get an oﬀer from a more preferred school.
With three schools ranked, applicant i is oﬀered a seat at school k in one of three ways:

   • The applicant ranks school k first and qualifies: ({pi1 = k} \ {qi (k) = 1}).

   • The applicant doesn’t qualify for his first choice, ranks school k second and qualifies there:
      ({qi (pi1 ) = 0} \ {pi2 = k} \ {qi (k) = 1}).

   • The applicant doesn’t qualify at his top two choices, ranks school k third, and qualifies there:
      ({qi (pi1 ) = qi (pi2 ) = 0} \ {pi3 = k} \ {qi (k) = 1}).

We summarize the relationship between composite scores, cutoﬀs, and oﬀers by letting Oi denote
the identity of student i’s oﬀer, with the convention that Oi = 0 means no oﬀer. DA determines Oi
as follows:                             J
                                                        "j 1              #
                                      X                  Y
                                 Oi =     pij qi (pij )      (1 qi (pi` )) .
                                        j=1               `=1
   The formulation shows that the sample for which oﬀers at school k are deterministically linked
with the school-k composite score, a group we refer to as the sharp sample for school k, is the union
of three sets of applicants:

   • Applicants who rank k first, so (pi1 = k)


                                                      6
      • Applicants unqualified for their first choice, ranking k second, so (qi (pi1 ) = 0 \ pi2 = k)

      • Applicants unqualified for their top two choices, ranking k third, so ((qi (pi1 ) = qi (pi2 ) =
        0) \ pi3 = k).

All applicants are in at least one sharp sample (at the exam school they rank first), but can be in
more than one. For example, a student who ranked BLS first, but did not qualify there, is also in
the sharp sample for BLA if he ranked BLA second.
      The sharp RD treatment is an oﬀer dummy, denoted Dik , indicating applicants oﬀered a seat
at school k, defined separately for applicants in each school-specific sharp sample. For the purposes
of empirical work, school-specific ranks are centered and scaled to produce the following running
variable:                                  100
                                           rik =⇥ (⌧k cik ),                                  (1)
                                            Nk
where Nk is the total number of students who ranked school k (not the number in the sharp sample).
Scaled school-specific ranks, rik , equal zero at the cutoﬀ rank for school k, with positive values
indicating students who ranked and qualified for admission at that school. Absent centering, scaled
ranks give applicants’ percentile position in the distribution of applicants to school k. Within sharp
samples, we focus on a window limited to applicants with running variables no more than 20 units
(percentiles) away from the cutoﬀ. For qualified 9th grade applicants at BLS, this is non-binding
since the BLS cutoﬀ is closer to the top of the 9th grade applicant distribution than the .8 quantile.
      Figure 1a plots oﬀers as a function of rik , confirming the sharpness of oﬀers in sharp samples.
Plotted points in this figure are conditional means for all applicants in a one-unit binwidth along
with a conditional mean function smoothed using local linear regression (LLR). Specifically, for
school k, data in the estimation window were used to construct estimates of Ê[yi |rik ], where yi is
the dependent variable and rik is the running variable. The LLR smoother uses the edge kernel,
                                                n r     o ⇣            rik ⌘
                                                   ik
                                  Kh (rik ) = 1       1 · 1                 ,
                                                   h                    h
where h is the bandwidth. In a RD context, LLR has been shown to produce estimates with good
properties at boundary points.3
      In sharp samples, oﬀers are determined by the running variable, but not all oﬀers are accepted.
Figure 1b plots school-specific enrollment rates around cutoﬀs, while Table 1 reports some of the as-
sociated summary statistics. Specifically, Table 1 shows LLR estimates of school-specific enrollment
  3
    The bandwidth used here is a version of the DesJardins and McCall (2008) bandwidth (hereafter, DM) studied
by Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012), who derive optimal bandwidths for sharp RD using a mean square-error loss
function with a regularization adjustment. The DM smoother (which generates somewhat more stable estimates in
our application than the bandwidth Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012) prefer) is also used to construct nonparametric
RD estimates, below.


                                                       7
rates in the neighborhood of each school’s cutoﬀ. Among qualifying 7th grade applicants in the
O’Bryant sharp sample, 72% enroll in O’Bryant, while the remaining 28% enroll in a regular BPS
school. 91% of those qualifying at BLA enroll there the following fall, while 93% qualifying at BLS
enroll there. Many applicants not oﬀered seats at one exam school end up in another, mostly the
next school down in the hierarchy of school selectivity. At the same time, Abdulkadiroğlu, Angrist,
and Pathak (2012) document the fact that movement up the ladder of exam school selectivity is
associated with dramatic changes in peer composition.4


2.3      Results at the Cutoﬀ

As a starting point, we recap the RD estimation strategy that Abdulkadiroğlu, Angrist, and Pathak
(2012) use to estimate the eﬀects of exam school oﬀers at the cutoﬀ. Because there are no estimation
issues unique to a particular school, the k subscript indexing schools is omitted going forward, though
running variables and the conditional expectation functions they generate should still be understood
to be school-specific. Thus, Di indicates a generic exam school oﬀer, from a school with running
variable ri .
       Our graphical analysis begins with plots of binwise and smoothed (LLR) estimates of Ê[yi |ri ],
where yi is a dependent variable and ri is the relevant (school-specific) running variable. These graphs
and the associated estimates of jumps at the cutoﬀ capture causal eﬀects for marginal applicants.
Except in the plots for 10th grade English, which show jumps at two out of three cutoﬀs, we see
little evidence of marked discontinuities in MCAS scores at school-specific cutoﬀs. This is apparent
in Figures 2a and 2b for middle school and Figures 3a and 3b for high school.
       Parametric and non-parametric RD estimates of the eﬀect of an exam school oﬀer using the
centered and scaled composite ranks are derived from models for potential outcomes as follows. Let
Y1i and Y0i denote potential outcomes in treated and untreated states, with the observed outcome
determined by
                                             yi = Y0i + [Y1i     Y0i ]Di .
   4
    A possible concern with the sharp sample strategy originates in the fact that the sharp sample itself may change
discontinuously at the cutoﬀ. Suppose , for example, there are two schools with the same cutoﬀ and a common
running variable. Some students rank two ahead of one and some rank one ahead of two. The sharp sample for
school one includes those who rank 1 first and those who rank two first but are disqualfied there. This second group
appears only to the left of the common cutoﬀ, changing the composition of the sample. In practice, however, Boston
school-specific running variables are distinct and school-specific cutoﬀs are separated. Not surprsingly, therefore, we
find no evidence of discontinuities in sharp sample partiticipation at each cutoﬀ.




                                                          8
The conditional mean functions for potential outcomes given the running variable are modeled as:

                                             E[Y0i |ri ] = f0 (ri )

                                             E[Y1i |ri ] = ⇢ + f1 (ri ),

using polynomials for fj (ri ); j = 0, 1.
   Substituting these expressions in E[yi |ri ] = E[Y0i |ri ] + E[Y1i                       Y0i |ri ]Di , and allowing for the
fact that the estimates pool data from diﬀerent test years and from diﬀerent application years and
entry grades, the parametric estimating equation for applicants in the sharp sample of applicants to
school k is
                                   X
                      yit = ↵t +           ` di`   + (1    Di )f0 (ri ) + Di f1 (ri ) + ⇢Di + ⌘it ,                       (2)
                                   `

where the coeﬃcient of interest is ⇢. Equation (2) controls for test year eﬀects, denoted ↵t , and for
the year and grade of application, indexed by ` and indicated by dummies, di` . The eﬀects of the
running variable are controlled by a pair of pth-order polynomials that diﬀer on either side of the
cutoﬀ, specifically
                             fj (ri ) = ⇡1j ri + ⇡2j ri2 + ... + ⇡pj rip ;            j = 0, 1.                           (3)

The benchmark estimates set p = 3.
   Non-parametric estimators diﬀer from parametric in three ways. First, they narrow the esti-
mation window when the optimal data-driven bandwidth falls below 20, as it usually does. Non-
parametric estimators also use a tent-shaped edge kernel centered at admissions cutoﬀs instead of the
uniform kernel implicit in parametric estimation. Finally, non-parametric models control for linear
functions of the running variable only, omitting higher-order terms. The nonparametric estimating
equation is
                                       X
                        yit = ↵t +            ` di`   +   0 (1       D)ri +    1 D i ri   + ⇢Di + ⌘it
                                       `
                                       X
                                                                     ⇤
                            = ↵t +            ` di`   +   0 ri   +       Di ri + ⇢Di + ⌘it                                (4)
                                       `

Non-parametric RD estimates come from a kernel-weighted LLR fit of equation (4), estimated sep-
arately in the sharp sample of applicants to each of Boston’s three exam schools.
   Estimates of (2) and (4), reported in Table 2, are mostly small and some are precise enough to
support a conclusion of no eﬀect (estimates that pool applicants to the three schools are more precise;
see Abdulkadiroğlu, Angrist, and Pathak (2012) for details). The statistically significant eﬀects at
Latin School are negative (for example, Latin School eﬀects on 10th grade math and middle school



                                                                 9
ELA). On the other hand, as suggested by the figures, Table 2 shows a statistically significant gain
in 10th grade ELA scores at BLA and O’Bryant. This positive finding emerges even more clearly in
an analysis that distinguishes 7th and 9th grade applicants, as we show below.


2.4   To Infinity and Beyond: Extrapolating Across the Cutoﬀ

Researchers relying on RD to identify causal eﬀects must be willing to extrapolate. This is high-
lighted by Figure 4, which illustrates the identification problem for the eﬀects of BLS attendance
on applicants with running variable values both at and away from the cutoﬀ. The running variable
is the star covariate in any RD scene, but plays a role distinct from that played by covariates in
matching and regression-control strategies. In the latter, we look to comparisons of treated and
non-treated observations conditional on covariates to eliminate omitted variables bias. As Figure
4 highlights, however, in an RD design, there is no value of the running variable at which both
treatment and control subjects are observed. Nonparametric identification comes from infinitesimal
movement across the RD cutoﬀ. In empirical work, nonparametric inference compares applicants
in a small neighborhood to the left of the cutoﬀ to those in a small neighborhood to the right in
an eﬀort to ensure that identification involves only modest extrapolation. Identification of causal
eﬀects away from the cutoﬀ necessarily requires a more substantial extrapolatory leap.
   In a parametric setup such as described by the model in (2) and (3), extrapolation is easy though
not necessarily credible. For any relevant value of c, we have

                       ⇢(c) ⌘ E[Y1i     Y0i |ri = c] = ⇢ + ⇡1⇤ c + ⇡2⇤ c2 + ... + ⇡p⇤ cp ,             (5)

where ⇡1⇤ = ⇡11    ⇡10 , and so on. But the notation in (5) buries the extrapolation problem inherent
in identification away from the cutoﬀ: potential outcomes in the treated state are observed for
ri = c > 0, but the value of E[Y0i |ri = c] for positive c is fundamentally counterfactual. The
dotted lines in Figure 4 illustrate two possibilities, implying diﬀerent causal eﬀects at ri = c. It
seems natural to use observations to the left of the cutoﬀ to pin down functional form, and then
extrapolate this to impute E[Y0i |ri = c]. With enough data, and suﬃciently regular conditional
mean functions, f0 (c) is identified for all values of c, including those never seen in the data. It’s also
easy to see, however, why this approach may not generate robust or convincing findings.
   We experimented with parametric extrapolation for the eﬀects of exam school attendance on the
10th grade math scores of 7th and 9th grade applicants to O’Bryant and BLS. This inquiry revolves
around two focused questions, which also anchor our CIA-based analysis. Specifically, we ask:

   1. How would inframarginal low-scoring O’Bryant applicants do if they were lucky enough to

                                                      10
        find seats at O’Bryant; in other words, what if poorly qualified O’Bryant applicants now at a
        regular BPS school were given the opportunity to attend O’Bryant?

   2. How would inframarginal high-scoring BLS applicants do if their BLS oﬀers were withdrawn;
        in other words, what if highly qualified applicants now at BLS had to settle for BLA?

Both questions can be motivated by debates over aﬃrmative action in exam schools. Between
1974 and 1998, Boston exam schools reserved seats for minority applicants. Though quotas are no
longer in place, the role of race in exam school admissions continues to be debated in Boston and
is currently the subject of litigation in New York. The first question above addresses the impact
of exam school attendance on applicants who currently fail to make the cut but might do so with
minority preferences restored. The second question applies to applicants like Julia McLaughlin,
whose 1996 lawsuit ended racial quotas at Boston exam schools. McLaughlin was oﬀered a seat at
BLA, but sued for a seat at BLS, arguing, ultimately successfully, that she was kept out of BLS by
unconstitutional racial quotas. The counterfactual here sends BLS students like McLaughlin back
to BLA.
      The unsatisfying nature of parametric extrapolation emerges in Figure 5. This figure shows
imputed counterfactuals for 10th grade math scores using linear, quadratic, and cubic specifications
for fj (ri ) in a sample that includes both 7th and 9th grade applicants. These models generate
a wide range of estimates, especially as distance from the cutoﬀ grows. The estimated eﬀect of
BLS attendance 15 units out change sign when the polynomial goes from second to third degree.
This variability is not surprising, perhaps, and consistent with the Campbell and Stanley (1963)
observation that, “at each greater degree of extrapolation, the number of plausible rival hypotheses
becomes greater.” On the other hand, given that f0 (ri ) looks reasonably linear for ri < 0 and f1 (ri )
looks reasonably linear for ri > 0, we might have hoped for results consistent with those from linear
models even when the specification allows something more elaborate.
      Panel A of Table 3, which reports estimates and standard errors from the models used to construct
the fitted values plotted in Figure 5, shows that part of the problem uncovered in the figure is
imprecision. Estimates constructed with p = 3 are clearly too noisy to be useful at c = 5 or higher.
Models setting p = 2 generate much more precise estimates of ⇢(c) than when p = 3, though still
fairly imprecise for c      10. On the other hand, for very modest extrapolation (c = 1), a reasonably
consistent picture emerges. Like RD estimates at the cutoﬀ, this slight extrapolation generates small
positive estimates for O’Bryant and small negative eﬀects at BLS, some on the margin of statistical
significance.5
  5
      The estimates in Table 3 parallel those in Figure 5 and are from models omitting controls for test year and


                                                        11
Using Derivatives Instead

Dong and Lewbel (2011) propose an alternative to parametric extrapolation based on the insight
that the derivatives of conditional mean functions at the cutoﬀ are nonparametrically identified (a
similar idea appears in Section 3.3.2 of DiNardo and Lee, 2011). Using the fact that

                                           fj (c) ⇡ fj (0) + fj0 (0) · c,                                       (6)

the necessary conditional mean functions can be approximated for any value of c, though the quality
of the approximation is likely to shrink as c grows.
     The components of (6) are consistently estimated by fitting a linear model to fj (ri ) in a neigh-
borhood of the cutoﬀ using a data-driven bandwidth. Specifically, the eﬀect of an oﬀer at cutoﬀ
value c can be approximated as
                                                               ⇤
                                                ⇢(c) ⇡ ⇢ +         · c,                                         (7)

with parameters taken from equation (4). The innovation here relative to LLR estimation of (4)
is in the interpretation of the interaction term,        ⇤.   Instead of a bias-reducing nuisance parameter,
 ⇤   is seen here as as identifying a derivative of substantive interest. Note also that fj (c) can be
approximated to higher order by setting p > 1 in 2, while still weighting the LLR minimand with a
data-driven bandwidth to keep the estimation local.
     The results of linear extrapolation with local derivative estimates, plotted in Figure 6, seem
mostly like the corresponding linear parametric results plotted in Figure 5. Interestingly, however,
Figure 6 also documents more robustness to the degree of approximation used to estimate eﬀects
to right of the BLS cutoﬀ, with quadratic and cubic results consistently showing no eﬀect for any
positive c. On the other hand, derivative-based extrapolation of O’Bryant eﬀects to the left of the
cutoﬀ appear to be no less sensitive to the choice of p than the corresponding parametric estimates.
This sensitivity emerges is in spite of the fact that Figure 6 oﬀers little evidence of curvature in
conditional mean functions for applicants to either school. The estimates that go with Figure 6,
reported in Panel B of Table 3, suggest once again a big part of the problem here is lack of precision.
Perhaps not surprisingly, treatment eﬀects imputed using local derivative estimates are uniformly
less precise than the corresponding parametric estimates.
application year and grade. Estimates from models with these controls diﬀer little from those reported in the table.
Use of orthogonal polynomials as a model selection device generates no highly significant polynomial coeﬃcients
beyond linear. Still, many of the extrapolated linear estimates seem too imprecise to be useful.




                                                        12
Related Work

Related discussions of RD identification away from the cutoﬀ include DiNardo and Lee (2011) and
Lee and Lemieux (2010), both of which note that the local interpretation of nonparametric RD
estimates can be relaxed by treating the running variable as random rather than conditioning on
it. In this view, observed running variable values are the realization of a non-degenerate stochastic
process assigning values to individuals of an underlying type. Each type contributes to local-to-cutoﬀ
average treatment eﬀects in proportion to the type’s likelihood of being represented at the cutoﬀ.
        Since “type” is an inherently latent construct, the DiNardo-Lee-Lemieux interpretation doesn’t
seem to oﬀer concrete guidance as to how general any particular RD estimate might be. The
distinction between fixed and random running variables parallels that between inference with fixed
and stochastic regressors in classical regression theory. In practice, this distinction oﬀers researchers
the opportunity to fix or ignore the marginal distribution of regressors observed in any particular
sample. The empirical consequences of such regressor conditioning boil down to a modest adjustment
of standard errors.6 At the same time, Lee and Lemieux (2010, p. 298-299) note that observed
covariates may provide a useful lever for the RD extrapolation problem: “It remains to be seen
whether or not and how information on the reliability [of a test-based running variable], or a second
test measurement, or other covariates that can predict assignment could be used in conjunction with
the RD gap to learn about average treatment eﬀects for the overall population.” The next section
takes up this challenge.7


3        Using Conditional Independence

RD designs take the mystery out of treatment assignment. In sharp samples of applicants to Boston
exam schools, we know that oﬀers at a given school and applicant cohort are determined by

                                                 Di = 1[ri > 0].
    6
    See Abadie, Imbens, and Zheng (2011) for a recent discussion of this point.
    7
    Also noteworthy is the study by Jackson (2010), which tackles inframarginal RD identification by exploiting
cross-sectional variation in cutoﬀs. Jackson identifies inframarginal exam school eﬀects at schools in Trinidad and
Tobago by exploiting the fact that students with the same running variable (a test score) can end up at diﬀerent
schools depending on their preferences. Eﬀects away from the cutoﬀ are identified by diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences style
contrasts between infra-marginal high- and low-scoring applicants with diﬀerent rankings. A diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences
approach might also work for Boston exam schools, as here too oﬀers are partly determined by student preferences.
We leave application of this approach to Boston exam schools for future work as the econometric issues seem distinct
from those raised by the conditional independence framework detailed below.




                                                        13
This signal feature of the RD design implies that failure to control for ri is the only possible source
of omitted variables bias.8
       Armed with precise knowledge of the source of omitted variables bias, we propose to identify
causal eﬀects by means of a conditional independence argument. In sharp samples, Boston exam
school oﬀers are determined by measures of past achievement, specifically ISEE scores and students’
GPAs. But these are not the only measures of lagged achievement available. In addition to demo-
graphic variables that are highly predictive of achievement, we observe (pre-application) scores on
MCAS tests taken in 4th grade and, for high school applicants, in 7th or 8th grade. Conditioning
on this rich and relevant set of controls may serve to break the link between running variables and
outcomes.
       Gather the set of available controls in a covariate vector, xi . Our conditional independence
assumption (CIA) asserts that:

CONDITIONAL INDEPENDENCE ASSUMPTION (CIA)

                                             E[Yji |ri , xi ] = E[Yji |xi ]; j = 0, 1


In other words, the CIA says that potential outcomes are mean-independent of the running variable
conditional on xi . This strong assumption identifies any counterfactual average of interest. For
example, the average of Y0i to the right of the cutoﬀ is:

               E[Y0i |Di = 1] = E{E[Y0i |xi , Di = 1]|Di = 1} = E{E[yi |xi , Di = 0]|Di = 1},                  (8)

while the average treatment eﬀect on the treated is identified by a matching-style estimand:

                  E[Y1i    Y0i |Di = 1] = E{E[yi |xi , Di = 1]       E[yi |xi , Di = 0]|Di = 1}.


3.1      Testing the CIA

CIA-type assumptions break the link between treatment status and potential outcomes, opening
the door to identification of a wide range of average causal eﬀects (as in Heckman, Ichimura, and
Todd (1998) and Dehejia and Wahba (1999)). Have we thrown RD out the window in favor of
a conventional matching style conditional independence argument? A key distinction between the
CIA assumption invoked here and conventional matching is exploitation of the deterministic nature
of the RD assignment mechanism.
   8
    Cook (2008) credits Goldberger (1972a) and Goldberger (1972b) for showing that with selection on a pretest,
regression control for the pretest eliminates omitted variables bias. Goldberger credits Barnow (1972) and Lord and
Novick (1972) for similar insights.


                                                        14
   Knowledge of the assignment mechanism is key to our approach because it guides specification
of the covariate vector, xi . By virtue of the conditional independence relation implied by the CIA,
we have:
                            E[Y1i |ri , xi , ri > 0] = E[Y1i |xi ] = E[Y1i |xi , ri > 0],

so we should expect that
                                   E[y i |ri , xi , Di = 1] = E[yi |xi , Di = 1],                   (9)

to the right of the cutoﬀ. Likewise, the CIA also implies:

                            E[Y0i |ri , xi , ri < 0] = E[Y0i |xi ] = E[Y0i |xi , ri < 0],

suggesting we look for
                                   E[yi |ri , xi , Di = 0] = E[y i |xi , Di = 0],                  (10)

to the left of the cutoﬀ.
   Regressions of outcomes on xi and the running variable on either side of the cutoﬀ provide a
natural test for (9) and (10). These testable implications give the CIA a big plausibility boost
when substantiated, while the CIA strategy seems implausible when they fail. Mean independence
is stronger than regression independence but regression testing procedures can easily embed flexible
models that approximate conditional mean functions. As always, researchers face a trade-oﬀ between
power and specification error as the conditional mean parameterization becomes more elaborate,
a fact that favors parsimony. In practice, simple models seem likely to provide the most useful
evidence since any simple model is likely to fail conditional independence tests in the face of strong
dependence between outcomes and running variable, while more elaborate specifications with many
free parameters may come in under the radar when parameter estimates are poorly determined.
   Concerns about power notwithstanding, the CIA is demanding and may be hard to satisfy. A
weaker and perhaps more realistic version limits the range of running variable values for which the
CIA is maintained. A bounded conditional independence assumption asserts that the CIA holds
only over a limited range, as follows:

BOUNDED CONDITIONAL INDEPENDENCE ASSUMPTION (BCIA)

                                  E[Yji |ri , xi , | ri |< d] = E[Yji |xi , | ri |< d]; j = 0, 1


Bounded CIA says that potential outcomes are mean-independent of the running variable conditional
on xi , but only in a d-neighborhood of the cutoﬀ. Testing BCIA, we look for

                               E[y i |ri , xi , 0 < ri < d] = E[yi |xi , 0 < ri < d]               (11)



                                                         15
to the right of the cutoﬀ, and

                               E[yi |ri , xi , d < ri < 0] = E[y i |xi , d < ri < 0]                                (12)

to the left.
    The BCIA is reminiscent of nonparametric RD identification in that it leads to estimation of
casual eﬀects inside an implicit bandwidth around the cutoﬀ. An important distinction, however, is
the absence of any promise to make the d-neighborhood smaller as the sample size grows. Likewise,
there’s no parallel eﬀort to choose bandwidth or local polynomial smoothers with an eye on bias-
variance trade-oﬀs. Researchers need only choose values of d that are large enough to be useful or
interesting in the application at hand. The largest value of d that appears to satisfy BCIA defines
the playing field for CIA-based matching.


CEI vs CIA

A natural alternative to the CIA asserts mean independence of individual causal eﬀects, instead of
potential outcomes. In an RD context, this weaker Conditional Eﬀect Ignorability (CEI) assumption,
similar to the one introduced by Angrist and Fernandez-Val (2010), says:

CONDITIONAL EFFECT IGNORABILITY (CEI)

                                              E[Y1i     Y0i |ri , xi ] = E[Y1i   Y0i |xi ]


CEI means that - conditional on xi - we can ignore the running variable when computing aver-
age causal eﬀects, even if potential outcomes are not marginally mean-independent of the running
variable.9
    CEI has much of the identifying power of the CIA. In particular, given CEI, the eﬀect of treatment
on the treated can be written:

                  E[Y1i     Y0i |Di = 1] = E{E[yi |xi , ri = 0+ ]       E[yi |xi , ri = 0 ]|Di = 1},                (13)

where E[yi |xi , ri = 0+ ] and E[yi |xi , ri = 0 ] denote right- and left-hand limits of conditional-on-xi
conditional expectation functions for outcomes at the cutoﬀ. In other words, the CEI identifies causal
eﬀects away from the cutoﬀ by reweighting nonparametrically identified conditional-on-covariates
eﬀects at the cutoﬀ.
   9
     Lewbel (2007) invokes a similar assumption in a setup using exclusion restrictions to correct for classifcation error
in treatment status.




                                                           16
   The CIA is stronger than CEI and therefore more powerful. In practice, CIA-based estimates also
seem likely to be more useful than those derived from equation (13). For one thing, the CIA can be
expected to generate more precise estimates since, not being limited to identification near the cutoﬀ,
it uses more data. Second, CEI relies on the ability to find a fair number of observations near the
cutoﬀ for all relevant covariate values, a tall order in many empirical applications. Finally, the CEI
framework lacks the strong testable assumptions that fall out of the CIA. Conditional independence
tests based on (11) and (12) make CIA-based estimation credible. Relying as it does on a kernel
of covariate-specific nonparametric estimates at the cutoﬀ, the CEI is hard to assess. Finally, as a
practical matter, our experiments with CEI estimators for Boston exam school applicants failed to
produce estimates that seem precise enough to be useful.


3.2      CIA-based Estimators

We economize on notation by omitting explicit conditioning on running variable values in the [ d, d]
interval. All expectations in this section should be understood to be conditional on the largest value
of d that satisfies BCIA. Where relevant, the constant c is assumed to be no bigger than d in absolute
value.
   At specific running variable values, CIA leads to the following matching-style estimand:

                            E[Y1i     Y0i |ri = c] =

                                  E{E[yi |xi , Di = 1]        E[yi |xi , Di = 0]|ri = c}         (14)

Alternately, on the right-hand side of the cutoﬀ, we might consider causal eﬀects averaged over all
positive values up to c, a bounded eﬀect of treatment on the treated:

                         E[Y1i      Y0i |0 < ri  c] =

                                E{E[yi |xi , Di = 1]        E[yi |xi , Di = 0]|0 < ri  c}       (15)

Paralleling this on the left, the bounded eﬀect of treatment on the non-treated is:

                        E[Y1i     Y0i |   c  ri < 0] =

                             E{E[yi |xi , Di = 1]      E[yi |xi , Di = 0]|     c  ri < 0}       (16)

   We consider two sorts of estimators of (14), (15) and (16). The first is the linear reweighting
estimator discussed by Kline (2011). The second is a version of the Hirano, Imbens, and Ridder
(2003) propensity score estimator based on Horvitz and Thompson (1952). We also use the esti-
mated propensity score to document common support, as in Dehejia and Wahba’s (1999) pioneering


                                                       17
propensity score study of the eﬀect of a training program on earnings.
       Kline’s reweighting estimator begins with linear models for conditional means, which can be
written:

                                                  E[yi |xi ] = x0i             0                                        (17)

                                                  E[yi |xi ] = x0i             1


Linearity is not really restrictive since the parametrization for x0i                   j   can be rich and flexible. Substi-
tuting in (14), we have

                                              E[Y1i     Y0i |ri = c]
                                                                       0
                                                   =(    1        0)       E[xi |ri = c],                               (18)

with similar expressions based on (15) and (16).
       Let   (xi ) ⌘ E[Di |xi ] denote the propensity score. Our propensity score weighting estimator
begins with the observation that the CIA implies
                                   
                                     yi (1 Di )
                                 E                 |xi             = E[Y0i |xi ]
                                     1      (xi )
                                          
                                            yi D i
                                      E            |xi             = E[Y1i |xi ]
                                             (xi )
Bringing these expressions inside a single expectation and over a common denominator, the treatment
eﬀect on the treated for those with 0 < ri < c is given by
                                            ⇢
                                                yi [Di   (xi )] P [0 < ri  c|xi ]
                E[Y1i Y0i |0 < ri  c] = E                        ·                                        .            (19)
                                                (xi ) [1   (xi )]   P [0 < ri  c]
Similar formulas give the average eﬀect for non-treated applicants and average eﬀects at specific,
possibly narrow, ranges of running variable values. Note that implementation of (19) requires a
model for the probability P [0 < ri  c|xi ] as well as for (xi ). It seems natural to use the same
parameterization for both. If c = d, the estimand in (19) simplifies to
                                                   ⇢
                                                       yi [Di      (xi )]
                          E[Y1i Y0i |Di = 1] = E                          ,
                                                      [1     (xi )]E[Di ]
as in Hirano, Imbens, and Ridder (2003).10
  10
    The expectations and conditioning here refer to distributions in the sharp sample of applicants for each school.
Thus, treatment eﬀects on the treated are for the treated applicants in a school-k sharp sample. Assuming the running
variable is continuous, when the estimand targets average eﬀects at ri = c, the probabilities P [ri = c|xi ] and P [ri = c]
needed for (19) become densities.




                                                             18
4         The CIA in Action at Boston Exam Schools

We continue to focus on counterfactual scenarios involving inframarginal unqualified O’Bryant ap-
plicants and highly qualified applicants admitted to BLS. The sample here is limited to 9th grade
applicants because only for this group do we have close-to-outcome-date baseline scores. In combi-
nation with demographic control variables and 4th grade scores, 7th or 8th grade MCAS scores do a
good job of eliminating the running variable from outcome conditional mean functions. By contrast,
the most recent lagged test score available for 7th grade applicants is a 4th grade MCAS score. For
7th grade applicants, the available conditioning variables fail to satisfy bounded CIA for empirically
interesting values of d.
         As a benchmark, Figures 7a and 7b plot 10th grade scores against school-specific running vari-
ables in the sample of 9th grade applicants; the corresponding RD estimates of eﬀects at the cutoﬀ
are reported in Table 4. Consistent with the results for all applicants reported in Table 2, the esti-
mates and figures for 9th grade applicants oﬀer little evidence of a gain in scores at the BLS cutoﬀ.
On the other hand, both figures and estimates point to a possible score gains for marginal O’Bryant
applicants, especially in English. The nonparametric ELA estimate at the O’Bryant cutoﬀ, reported
in column 4 of Table 4, is a reasonably precise .17 .
         Bounded CIA tests for 9th grade applicants come from models that control for 4th and 7th grade
ELA scores and 4th and 8th grade math scores, along with indicators of special education status,
limited English proficiency, eligibility for free or reduced price lunch, race (black/Asian/Hispanic)
and sex.11 The estimation windows set d equal to 10, 15, and 20. Test results, reported in Table 5,
oﬀer only scattered evidence of CIA violations, even where d = 20. Results for d = 10 show mostly
small coeﬃcients, none significantly diﬀerent from zero, while results with d = 15 produce only one
rejection. Results for d = 20 are more worrying, but only one of three rejections here is stronger than
marginal. This scattered pattern of violations allows us to check for changes in impact estimates
across subgroups where the CIA is in doubt. For example, the marginally significant .005 in column
2 when estimated in a window of width 20 (for the math scores of treated O’Bryant applicants)
disappears when the window is narrowed. When findings for this group are similar in estimation
windows of 10, 15 and 20, bias from failure of the CIA seems unlikely. The coeﬃcients in the last
column of Table 5, for the ELA scores of admitted BLS applicants, are large enough to be worrying
even if not significantly diﬀerent from zero. Fortunately, however, the corresponding test results for
math (reported in column 4) are much smaller.12
    11
         Results with quadratic terms in lagged scores and cross-subject interaction terms are similar.
    12
         The unchanging sample size to the right of the BLS cutoﬀ as d shrinks reflects the high BLS admissions threshold



                                                             19
    Columns 1-4 Table 6 report linear reweighting estimates of E[Y1i                          Y0i |0 < ri < d] for BLS
applicants and E[Y1i        Y0i |   d < ri < 0] for O’Bryant applicants, in samples that set d equal to 10,
15, and 20. The estimand for BLS is

                                         E[Y1i       Y0i |0 < ri  d]
                                                                    0
                                                =(     1    0)          E[xi |0 < ri  d],                        (20)

while that for O’Bryant is

                                        E[Y1i     Y0i |    d  ri < 0]
                                                                0
                                             =(    1       0)       E[xi |     d  ri < 0],                       (21)

where    0   and   1   are as defined in (17). The BLS estimand is an average eﬀect of treatment on the
treated, since treated observations in the estimation window must have positive running variables.
Similarly, the O’Bryant estimand is an average eﬀect of treatment on the non-treated.
    As with RD estimates at the cutoﬀ, the CIA results in Table 6 show no evidence of a BLS
achievement boost. At the same time, results for inframarginal unqualified O’Bryant applicants
oﬀer some evidence of gains, especially in ELA. The math estimates range from .08 when d = 10
to .16 when d = 20, though only those for d = 15 and d = 20 are significantly diﬀerent from zero.
Results for ELA are clear cut, ranging from .18                      to .2 , and significantly diﬀerent from zero for
each choice of d. The CIA estimates are remarkably consistent with the corresponding RD estimates
at the cutoﬀ: compare, for example, the estimates in columns 1 and 3 of Table 6 to nonparametric
O’Bryant RD estimates at the cutoﬀ of .12 (SE=.07) in math and .17 (SE=.07) for ELA.
    Figure 8 fills in CIA-based estimates over a range of cutoﬀ values by plotting linear reweighting
estimates of E[Y1i |ri = c] and E[Y0i |ri = c] for all values of c in the [ 20, 20] interval. To the left of
the O’Bryant cutoﬀ, the estimates of E[Y0i |ri = c] are essentially fitted values for observed outcomes
(the line labelled “Estimated” in the figure) while the estimates of E[Y1i |ri = c] are eﬀectively an
extrapolation and labelled accordingly. To the right of the BLS cutoﬀ, the estimates of E[Y1i |ri = c]
are fitted values while the estimates of E[Y0i |ri = c] are an extrapolation. The conditional means
in this figure were constructed by plugging individual values of xi into (17) and smoothing the
resulting individual-level treatment eﬀects using local linear regression.13 The figure presents a
picture consistent with that arising from the estimates in Table 6. In particular, the extrapolated
BLS eﬀects are small (for ELA) or noisy (for math), while the O’Bryant extrapolation reveals a
for 9th grade applicants; setting d = 10 is not binding for BLS on the right.
  13
     This uses the edge kernel with Stata’s default bandwidth.




                                                           20
remarkably stable increase in ELA scores away from the cutoﬀ. The extrapolated eﬀect of O’Bryant
oﬀers on math scores appears to increase modestly as a function of distance from the cutoﬀ, a finding
probed further below.


4.1      Propensity Score Estimates

CIA-based identification strategies for the eﬀect of exam school oﬀers seem like a good application
for propensity score estimators since the covariates generating conditional independence include mul-
tiple continuously distributed control variables. These features of the data complicate full covariate
matching. Our logit model for the propensity score uses the same control variables and parametriza-
tion as were used to construct the tests in Table 5 and the reweighting estimates in columns 1-4 of
Table 6.14
      Estimated score distributions for treated and control observations exhibit a substantial degree
of overlap. This is documented in Figure 9, which plots the histogram of estimated scores for
treated and control observations above and below a common horizontal axis. Not surprisingly, the
larger sample for O’Bryant generates more overlap than the sample for highly selective BLS. Most
score values for untreated O’Bryant applicants fall below about .6. Each decile in the O’Bryant
score distribution contains at least a few treated observations, however; above the first decile, there
appear to be more than enough for accurate inference. By contrast, few non-treated BLS applicants
have covariate values for which a BLS oﬀer is highly likely. We should therefore expect the BLS
counterfactual to be estimated less precisely than that for O’Bryant.
      It’s also worth noting that because the sample contains no BLS controls with propensity score
values above .8 (or .85 in one window), the BLS estimates fail to reflect outcomes for applicants
with admissions probabilities above this value. Figure 9 documents a related and probably unsur-
prising feature of propensity score strategies: the data are likely to be thinnest where we need them
most. The O’Bryant treatment eﬀect on the non-treated implicitly compares the many non-treated
applicants with low scores to the fewer (though still plentiful) treated O’Bryant applicants with
scores in this range. The BLS treatment eﬀect on the treated compares a modest number of treated
applicants, more or less uniformly distributed across score values, with the corresponding untreated
observations, of which many more are low-scoring than high.
      Concerns about limited covariate support notwithstanding, the propensity-score-weighted esti-
mates reported in columns 5-8 of Table 6 are remarkably consistent with the linear reweighting
estimates in columns 1-4 of the table. In particular, the estimates here suggest most BLS students
 14
      Propensity score models omit test date dummies because application and test dates are nearly collinear.



                                                          21
would lose little if they had had to go to BLA instead, while low scoring O’Bryant applicants might
enjoy substantial gains in ELA were they given the chance to attend O’Bryant. At the same time,
the BLS propensity score estimates in columns 6 and 8 are highly imprecise. BLS propensity score
estimates are not only much less precise than the corresponding O’Bryant estimates, the standard
errors here are two-four times larger than those generated by linear reweighting for the same samples
of applicants. Linear reweighting looks like an attractive procedure in this context.15


5         Fuzzy CIA Models

Eﬀects of O’Bryant oﬀers on the ELA scores of 9th grade applicants are reasonably stable as distance
from the cutoﬀ grows. By contrast, the eﬀect of O’Bryant oﬀers on math scores appears to increase
as window width or distance from the cutoﬀ increases. In a window of width 10, estimated O’Bryant
math eﬀects are not significantly diﬀerent from zero, while the estimate in a window of width 20
is fifty percent larger and significant (.13         with a standard error of .05 ). Taken at face value,
this finding suggests that the weakest 9th grade applicants stand to gain the most from O’Bryant
admission, an interesting substantive finding. Omitted variables bias (failure of CIA) seems unlikely
to explain this pattern since the relevant conditional independence tests, reported in columns 1 and
5 of Table 5, show only one (marginally significant) violation.
         An alternative explanation for the pattern of O’Bryant math estimates plotted in Figure 8
begins with the observation that exam school oﬀers aﬀect achievement by facilitating exam school
enrollment. Assuming, as seems plausible, that exam school oﬀers aﬀect outcomes solely through
enrollment (that is, other causal channels, such as peer eﬀects, are downstream to enrollment),
the estimates in Table 6 can be interpreted as the reduced form for an instrumental variables (IV)
procedure in which exam school enrollment is the endogenous variable. The magnitude of reduced
form comparisons is easier to interpret when the relevant first stage estimates scale these eﬀects. If
the first stage changes as a function of the running variable, comparisons of estimates across running
variable values are informative only after appropriate rescaling. In principle, IV methods make the
appropriate adjustment. A subtlety here, however, is how to interpret IV estimates constructed
under the CIA in a world of heterogeneous potential outcomes, where the average causal eﬀects
identified by IV potentially vary with the running variable.
    15
    The standard errors reported in this table use a bootstrap with 500 replications. Bootstrap standard errors provide
asymptotically valid confidence intervals for estimators like (19) since, as note by Hirano, Imbens, and Ridder (2003),
the propensity-score-weighting estimator is asymptotically linear. As noted at the end of Section 3.1, estimates based
on CEI instead of CIA are imprecise. Still, the general pattern is similar, suggesting positive eﬀects at O’Bryant, and
nothing at BLS.



                                                          22
   We estimate and interpret the causal eﬀects of exam school enrollment by adapting the causal
IV framework outlined in Abadie (2003). This framework allows for unrestricted treatment eﬀect
heterogeneity while accommodating covariates without functional form restrictions. The starting
point is notation for potential treatment assignments, W0i and W1i , indexed against the instrument,
in this case, exam school oﬀers indicated by Di . Thus, W0i indicates (eventual) exam school enroll-
ment among those not oﬀered a seat, while W1i indicates (eventual) exam school enrollment among
those oﬀered a seat. Observed enrollment status is

                                    Wi = W0i (1       Di ) + W1i Di .

   The core identifying assumption in our IV framework is a generalized version of CIA:

GENERALIZED CONDITIONAL INDEPENDENCE ASSUMPTION (GCIA)
                                    (Y0i , Y1i , W0i , W1i ) q rik | xi

GCIA can be assumed to hold in a d neighborhood of the cutoﬀ as with BCIA.
   The GCIA generalizes simple CIA in three ways. First, GCIA imposes full independence instead
of mean independence; this seems innocuous since any behavioral or assignment mechanism satis-
fying the latter is likely to satisfy the former. Second, along with potential outcomes, the pair of
potential treatment assignments (W0i and W1i ) is taken to be conditionally independent of the run-
ning variable. Finally, GCIA requires joint independence of all outcome and assignment variables,
while the CIA in Section 3 requires only marginal (mean) independence. Again, its hard to see why
we’d have the latter without the former.


5.1   Fuzzy Identification

As in Section 3.2, all expectations below and in the proofs of the theorems in this section should be
understood to be conditional on the largest value of d that satisfies GCIA.


Local Average Treatment Eﬀects

In a local average treatment eﬀects (LATE) framework with Bernoulli treatment and Bernoulli
instruments, the subset of compliers consists of individuals whose treatment status can be changed
by changing the instrument. This group is defined here by W1i > W0i . A key identifying assumption
in the LATE framework is monotonicity: the instrument can only make treatment more or less
likely. Assuming that the instrument Di satisfies monotonicity with W1i       W0i , and that for some
the inequality is strong so there is a first-stage, the LATE theorem (Imbens and Angrist, 1994) tells


                                                    23
us that
                      E[yi |Di = 1] E[yi |Di = 0]
                                                  = E[Y1i Y0i |W1i > W0i ]
                     E[Wi |Di = 1] E[Wi |Di = 0]
In other words, a simple Wald-type IV estimator captures average causal eﬀects on exam school
applicants who enroll when they receive an oﬀer but not otherwise.
       Abadie (2003) generalizes the LATE theorem by showing that the expectation of any measurable
function of treatment, covariates, and outcomes is identified for compliers. This result opens the
door to IV estimation using a wide range of causal models, including nonlinear models such as those
based on the propensity score. Here, we adapt the Abadie (2003) result for a fuzzy RD setup that
identifies causal eﬀects away from the cutoﬀ. To make this adaptation, we need a conditional first
stage in addition to the GCIA and monotonicity:

CONDITIONAL FIRST STAGE

                           0 < P [Di = 1|xi ] < 1] and P [W1i = 1|xi ] > P [W0i = 1|xi ] a.s.


Given GCIA, monotonicity, and a conditional first stage, the appendix proves the following theo-
rem:

THEOREM 1 (FUZZY CIA EFFECTS)


         E[Y1i   Y0i |W1i > W0i ,0 < ri  c]
                                                                      ⇢
                                                  1                                    P [0 < ri  c|xi ]
                                  =                               E       (Di , xi )                      yi   (22)
                                      P [W1i > W0i |0 < ri  c]                         P [0 < ri  c]
                                         Di    (xi )
                 f or    (Di , xi ) ⌘                                                                          (23)
                                       (xi )[1   (xi )]
This theorem leads to estimators that capture causal eﬀects for compliers with running variable
values falling into any range over which there’s common support.16
       At first blush, it’s not immediately clear how to identify the conditional compliance probability,
P [W1i > W0i |0 < ri  c], appearing in the denominator of (22). Because everyone to the right of the
cutoﬀ is treated, there would seem to be no lever available to construct compliance rates conditional
on 0 < ri  c (in the original LATE framework, the IV first stage measures the probability of
compliance). However, paralleling an argument in Abadie (2003), the appendix shows that
                                             ⇢
                                                              P [0  ri  c | xi ]
                P [W1i > W0i |0 < ri  c] = E  (Wi , Di xi )                                                  (24)
                                                                P [0  ri  c]
  16
    The weighting function in the numerator is much like that used to construct average treatment eﬀects in Hirano,
Imbens, and Ridder (2003) and Abadie (2005). Extensions of the theorem along the lines suggested by Theorem 3.1
in Abadie (2003) identify the marginal distribution of Y0i and Y1i .



                                                        24
where
                                                 Wi (1 Di )          (1    Wi ) Di
                           (Wi , Di xi ) = 1                                      .
                                                  1   (xi )                (xi )

Average Causal Response

The causal framework leading to Theorem 1 is limited to Bernoulli endogenous variables. For many
applicants, however, the exam school treatment is mediated by years of potential attendance rather
than a simple go/no-go decision. We develop a fuzzy CIA framework for ordered treatments by
adapting a result from Angrist and Imbens (1995). This framework relies on potential outcomes
indexed against an ordered treatment, wi . In this context, potential outcomes are denoted by Yji
when wi = j, for j = 0, 1, 2, ..., J. Assume also that potential treatments, w1i and w0i , satisfy
monotonicity with w1i     w0i and that there’s a conditional first stage:

                                        E[w1i |xi ] 6= E[w0i |xi ]

   The Angrist and Imbens (1995) Average Causal Response (ACR) theorem describes the Wald
IV estimand as follows:
             E [yi | Di = 1]   E [yi | Di = 0]          X
                                                 =          ⌫j E [Yji     Yj   1,i   | w1i   j > w0i ]
             E [wi | Di = 1]   E [wi | Di = 0]
                                                        j

where
                                    P [w1i j > w0i ]
                          ⌫j   =   P
                                     ` P [w1i   ` > w0i ]
                                   P [wi  j | Di = 0] P [wi  j | Di = 1]
                               =
                                       E [wi | Di = 1] E [wi | Di = 0]
In other words, a simple Wald-type IV estimator captures a weighted average of the unit causal
treatment eﬀects for compliers whose treatment status is moved by the instrument from below j to
above j. The weights, given by the impact of the instrument on the CDF of the endogenous variable
at each point, are positive and sum to one. The numerator here captures the extent to which the
instrument shifts the distribution of potential treatments at each point of support.
   The GCIA assumption allows us to adapt the Angrist and Imbens (1995) result to identify ACR
away from the cutoﬀ in a fuzzy RD setup with an ordered treatment. The appendix proves the
following:

THEOREM 2 (FUZZY AVERAGE CAUSAL RESPONSE)




                                                   25
                              E {E [yi | Di = 1, xi ] E [yi | Di = 0, xi ] | 0  ri  c}
                              {E [wi | Di = 1, xi ] E [wi | Di = 0, xi ] | 0  ri  c}
                                X
                              =     ⌫jc E [Yji Yj 1,i | w1i j > w0i , 0  ri  c]                                          (25)
                                    j

where
                                                   P [w1i j > w0i | 0  ri  c]
                                    ⌫jc =         P                                                                        (26)
                                                    ` P [w1i ` > w0i | 0  ri  c]
Theorem 2 says that a Wald-type estimator constructed by averaging covariate-specific first-stages
and reduced forms can be interpreted as a weighted average causal response for compliers with
running variable values in the desired range. The weights applied to each incremental average
causal response, E [Yji        Yj   1,i   | w1i    j > w0i , 0  ri  c] , are given by the conditional probability
the instruments moves the ordered treatment through the point at which the increment is evaluated.
       In practice, we estimate the left hand side of (25) by fitting linear models to the reduced form and
first stage using a version of Kline’s (2011) reweighting procedure. The fuzzy reweighting procedure
works as follows: Estimate linear reduced forms based on (17); use these estimates to construct the
desired average reduced form eﬀect as in (20) and (21); divide by a similarly constructed average
first stage.17 The same procedure can be used to estimate (25) for a Bernoulli treatment like Wi ,
in which case the average causal response defined by Theorem 2 becomes the same average causal
eﬀect identified by Theorem 1.


5.2       Fuzzy Estimates

We estimated fuzzy enrollment eﬀects to the left of the O’Bryant cutoﬀ and to the right of the BLS
cutoﬀ in windows setting d equal to 10, 15 and 20. The enrollment first stage changes remarkably
little as distance from the cutoﬀ grows. This can be seen columns 1-4 of Table 7, which report
estimates of the eﬀect of exam school oﬀers on exam school enrollment, constructed separately for
O’Bryant and BLS applicants using equation (24). The propensity score model is the same as
that used to construct the estimates in Table 6 (Table 7 shows separate first stage estimates for
the math and ELA samples, which diﬀer slightly). Given this stable first stage, its unsurprising
that the estimates of E[Y1i               Y0i |W1i > W0i , 0 < ri  d], reported in columns 5-8 of the table,
change qualitatively little as a function of d. The pattern here is consistent with that in Table 6,
showing small and statistically insignificant eﬀects at BLS, with evidence of large eﬀects at O’Bryant.
Estimates of O’Bryant eﬀects on ELA are large, ranging from an impressive gain of .37 when d = 20,
  17
    Specifically, let 0 be the main eﬀect of Di and let     1   be the vector of interactions with xi in a first stage regression
of wi on Di , xi , and Di xi . The denominator of (25) is       0+ 01 µxc , where µxc = E[xi |0  ri  c].



                                                                26
to a still-substantial gain of .27 when the window is half as wide.
    The gains for inframarginal applicants who enroll at O’Bryant are perhaps too large to be credible
and may signal failure of the underlying exclusion restriction. Not everyone who starts in an exam
school completes their schooling there, so we’d like to adjust for years of exam school exposure. We
therefore treat years of exam school enrollment as the endogenous variable and estimate the ACR
parameter on the left-hand side of equation (25), using the modified Kline reweighting procedure
described above. The covariate parameterization used to construct both reduced form and first stage
estimates is the same as that used to construct the sharp estimates in Table 6.
    The first stage estimates for average causal response, reported in columns 1-4 of Table 8, indicate
that successful BLS applicants spend about 1.8 years in BLS between application and test date, while
successful O’Bryant applicants spend about 1.4 years at O’Bryant between application and test date.
The associated 2SLS estimates, reported in columns 5-8 of the table, are in line with those in Table
7, but considerably more precise. For example the eﬀect of a year of BLS exposure on ELA scores
is estimated to be no more than about .04, with a standard of roughly the same magnitude. This
compares with estimates of about the same size in column 8 of Table 7, but standard errors for the
latter are five or more times larger. The precision gain here comes from linearity of the estimator and
not the change in endogenous variable, paralleling precision gains seen in the switch from propensity
score to linear reweighting to construct the sharp estimates in Table 6. The estimate ELA eﬀects
at O’Bryant consistently suggest gains of about .14     per year of exam school exposure, a finding
that’s more stable across window width than the Bernoulli estimates in column 7 of Table 7. This
suggests that some of the variability in the Table 7 estimates comes from changes in the underlying
first stage for years of enrollment in column 3 of Table 8. At the same time, the estimated O’Bryant
math gains in column 5 of Table 8 still seem to fade in a narrower window, the same pattern seen
in Tables 6 and 7.


6    Summary and Directions for Further Work

RD estimates of the eﬀect of an oﬀer at Boston exam schools generate little evidence of an achieve-
ment gain for most applicants on the margin of admission, but these results need not be relevant for
applicants with running variable values well above or well below admissions cutoﬀs. We therefore
develop RD-inspired identification strategies for causal eﬀects away from the cutoﬀ. Parametric
extrapolation seems like a natural first step, but this generates unsatisfying estimates of the eﬀects
of exam school oﬀers, mostly because many of the resulting estimates are too imprecise to be useful



                                                  27
and sensitive to functional form. We therefore turn to identification strategies based on a conditional
independence assumption that focuses on the running variable.
   A key insight emerging from the RD framework is that the only source of omitted variables bias
is the running variable. Our conditional independence assumption makes the running variable ignor-
able, that is, independent of potential outcomes, by conditioning on other predictors of outcomes.
When the running variable is ignorable, treatment is ignorable. The conditional independence as-
sumption invoked here has strong testable implications that are easily checked. Specifically, the CIA
implies that in samples limited to either treated or control observations, regressions of outcomes
on the running variable and the covariate vector supporting CIA should show no running variable
eﬀects. A modified or bounded version of the CIA asserts that this conditional independence relation
holds only in a neighborhood of the cutoﬀ.
   Among 9th grade applicants to the O’Bryant school and Boston Latin School, bounded condi-
tional independence appears to hold over a reasonably wide interval. Importantly, the conditioning
variables supporting this result include 7th or 8th grade and 4th grade MCAS scores, all lagged
versions of the 10th grade outcome variable. Lagged middle school scores in particular seems like a
key control, probably because relatively recent lags are a powerful predictor of future scores. Lagged
outcomes are better predictors, in fact, than the running variable, which is a composite constructed
from applicants’ GPAs and a distinct exam school admissions test.
   Results based on the CIA suggest that inframarginal high-scoring BLS applicants gain little
(in terms of achievement) from BLS attendance, a result consistent with the RD estimates of BLS
eﬀects at the cutoﬀ reported in Abdulkadiroğlu, Angrist, and Pathak (2012). At the same time,
CIA-based estimation using both linear and propensity score models generate robust evidence of
strong gains in English for unqualified inframarginal O’Bryant applicants. Findings showing 10th
grade ELA gains also emerge from the RD estimates reported by Abdulkadiroğlu, Angrist, and
Pathak (2012), especially for nonwhites. The CIA-based estimates reported here suggest similar
gains would likely be observed should the O’Bryant cutoﬀ be reduced to accommodate currently
inframarginal high school applicants, perhaps as a result of changing aﬃrmative action policies. On
the other hand, most exam school seats are oﬀered to rising 7th graders. Unfortunately, CIA-based
estimation strategies have little to say about causal eﬀects in this larger group.
   An additional contribution here is a modification of CIA-based identification strategies for fuzzy
RD. We use this modification to estimate the eﬀects of exam school oﬀers and years of exam school
attendance, in addition to the (reduced form) eﬀects of oﬀers themselves. The fuzzy extension
allows us to explore the possibility that variations in reduced form causal eﬀects as a function of the


                                                  28
running variable might be driven by changes in an underlying first stage. An important by-product
of the fuzzy extension, though one we leave for future work, is that this opens the door to Abadie
(2003)-style identification of causal eﬀects for compliers in RD models for quantile treatment eﬀects.
As noted recently by Frandsen, Frölich, and Melly (2012), the weighting approach used by Abadie,
Angrist, and Imbens (2002) breaks down in the standard RD framework because the instrument
distribution is degenerate conditional on the running variable. By taking the running variable out
of the equation, our framework would seem to circumvent this problem.
   In other work in progress, we’re adapting the identification strategy introduced here for use in
factor models in which the necessary conditioning variable is latent. The availability of multiple noisy
indicators of this latent factor gives leverage in this approach. Finally, an important unsolved prob-
lem implicit in our empirical strategy is causal inference conditional on a pretest. Estimators that
condition on the results of a specification or model-selection test may have sampling distributions for
which conventional asymptotic formulas provide a poor approximation. Pretesting is a challenging
and virtually ubiquitous problem in applied econometrics. It remains to be seen whether recent
theoretical progress on the pretesting problem (e.g., Andrews and Guggenberger (2009); Belloni,
Chernozhukov, and Hansen (2012)) can be fruitfully applied in our context.




                                                  29
                                              Table 1: Boston Destinations
                                                    Table 1. Boston Destinations
                                                                              All Applicants
                                                   O'Bryant                  Latin Academy                         Latin School
                                            Z=0             Z=1           Z=0             Z=1                   Z=0           Z=1
                                            (1)              (2)           (3)             (4)                  (5)            (6)
                                                                    Panel A. 7th Grade Applicants
Traditional Boston public schools           1.00            0.28          0.24            0.09                  0.08             0.05
O'Bryant                                    0.00            0.72          0.75            0.00                  0.06             0.00
Latin Academy                               0.00            0.00          0.00            0.91                  0.86             0.01
Latin School                                 ...              ...           ...             ...                 0.00             0.93

                                                                          Panel B. 9th Grade Applicants
Traditional Boston public schools           1.00             0.34              0.28           0.14              0.15             0.04
O'Bryant                                    0.00             0.66              0.72           0.00              0.00             0.00
Latin Academy                                ...              ...              0.00           0.87              0.86             0.02
Latin School                                 ...              ...              0.00          -0.01              0.00             0.94

Notes: This table (excerpted from Abdulkadiroglu, Angrist, and Pathak, 2012) describes the destination schools of Boston exam school
applicants. Enrollment rates are measured in the fall admissions cycle following exam school application and estimated using local
linear smoothing. The sample of Boston 7th grade applicants includes students who applieds for an exam school seat between 1999-
2008. The sample of Boston 9th grade applicants includes students who applied for an exam school seat between 2001-2007.




             Table 2: Boston Reduced Form Estimates - MCAS Math and English
                           Table 3. Boston Reduced Form Estimates - MCAS Math and English
                                            Parametric Estimates              Non-parametric (DM) Estimates
                                                    Latin           Latin                Latin           Latin
 Application      Test             O'Bryant      Academy          School  O'Bryant     Academy         School
 Grade            Grade                (1)           (2)             (3)     (5)           (6)            (7)
                                                        Panel A. Math
 7th              7th and 8th        -0.128        -0.081          -0.015  -0.087       -0.143*         -0.001
                                    (0.101)       (0.092)         (0.098) (0.069)       (0.076)        (0.062)
                                      4035          4194            3776    3621          3986           3066

 7th and 9th      10th                  0.070            -0.090            -0.053            0.060            -0.050         -0.076**
                                       (0.070)          (0.080)           (0.055)           (0.046)          (0.044)          (0.033)
                                        3370              2702              2457             3067              2022            1825

                                                              Panel B. ELA
 7th              7th and 8th           -0.060           -0.092       -0.183***             -0.072*           0.011         -0.136***
                                       (0.078)          (0.067)         (0.067)             (0.040)          (0.041)          (0.038)
                                         4139             4302           3790                3930             3743             3524

 7th and 9th      10th                  0.125            0.159             0.040           0.152***         0.181***           0.012
                                       (0.083)          (0.105)           (0.089)           (0.047)          (0.064)          (0.066)
                                        3379             2707              2459              3289             1781             1913

 Notes: This table (excerpted from Abdulkadiroglu, Angrist, and Pathak, 2012) reports estimates of the effects of exam school offers
 on MCAS scores. The sample covers students within 20 standardized units of offer cutoffs. Parametric models include a cubic
 function of the running variable, allowed to differ on either side of offer cutoffs. Non-parametric estimates use the edge kernel, with
 bandwidth computed following DesJardins and McCall (2008) and Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012). Optimal bandwidths were
 computed separately for each school. Robust standard errors, clustered on year and school are shown in parentheses. The number of
 observations is reported below standard errors.
 * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                     30
         Table 3: Extrapolation Estimates for 10th Grade Math (7th & 9th grade applicants)
                               Table 3. Extrapolation Estimates for 10th Grade Math (7th & 9th grade applicaants)
                                                  O'Bryant                                                          Latin School
                      c = -1             c = -5              c = -10              c = -15        c=1              c=5          c = 10     c = 15
                      (1)                (2)                   (3)               (4)              (5)              (6)          (7)        (8)
                                                                                  Panel A: Parametric
Linear              0.081**          0.108***            0.142***             0.176***         -0.073**      -0.069**         -0.064     -0.059
                    (0.039)           (0.041)             (0.050)              (0.063)          (0.030)       (0.034)         (0.042)    (0.052)
                     3391              3391                3391                 3391             2460          2460            2460       2460

Quadratic           0.109*           0.199**                 0.325*               0.466*      -0.093**       -0.162**         -0.247*    -0.331
                    (0.057)           (0.091)                (0.166)              (0.264)      (0.045)           (0.077)      (0.143)    (0.229)
                     3391              3391                   3391                 3391         2460              2460         2460       2460


Cubic                0.112             0.211                  0.360                0.539       -0.075            -0.055        0.017      0.207
                    (0.081)           (0.234)                (0.626)              (1.293)      (0.065)           (0.197)      (0.532)    (1.103)
                     3391              3391                   3391                 3391         2460              2460         2460       2460


                                                              Panel B: Derivative-based (Dong & Lewbel 2011)
Linear              0.091**          0.132***            0.178***       0.222***          -0.079**      -0.100**              -0.117**   -0.122*
                    (0.042)           (0.048)             (0.062)        (0.079)           (0.035)       (0.041)               (0.054)   (0.070)
                     3360              3360                3360           3360              1987          2152                  2152      2152

Quadratic           0.111*            0.202*                  0.328                0.475        -0.078            -0.095       -0.110    -0.091
                    (0.062)           (0.114)                (0.222)              (0.365)      (0.052)           (0.109)      (0.225)    (0.382)
                     3360              3360                   3360                 3360          1987              2152         2152      2152


Cubic                 0.120           0.270            0.528           0.920            -0.081           -0.071         -0.070           -0.000
                     (0.090)         (0.294)          (0.834)         (1.780)           (0.079)          (0.308)        (0.938)          (2.076)
                      3360            3360             3360            3360              1987             2152           2152             2152
Notes: This table reports estimated exam school offer effects on 10th grade Math scores extrapolated to points away from the cutoff indicated in the
column headings. Columns 1-4 report estimates of the effect of O'Bryant attendance on unqualified O'Bryant applicants. Columns 5-8 report the
effects of BLS attendance on qualified BLS applicants. Panel A shows parametric estimates computed using first, second, and third order
polynomials, as indicated in rows of the table. Panel B shows estimates based on nonparametric estimates of derivatives for polynomial
approximations of the same degree. The nonparametric bandwidth was constructed as for Table 2. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


Updated: 2012-11-18 (MR)
                                     Table 4: RD Estimates for 9th Grade Applicants
                                                     Table 4. RD Estimates for 9th Grade Applicants
                                                                     Parametric                  Nonparametric
                                                                                  Latin                     Latin
                                                        O'Bryant              School        O'Bryant       School
                                                              (1)                  (2)         (3)           (4)
                                  Math                       0.160            -0.131         0.115*        -0.149*
                                                         (0.109)              (0.116)        (0.066)       (0.077)
                                                             1559                 606         1386           361


                                  ELA                    0.190*                   0.094     0.171***        0.069
                                                         (0.110)              (0.179)        (0.066)       (0.104)
                                                        1564              607               1532            458
                                  Notes: This table reports parametric and nonparametric RD estimates of the effects
                                  of exam school attendance on 10th grade MCAS scores in the sample of 9th grade
                                  applicants. Models and estimators are the same as used to construct the estimates
                                  in Table 2. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
                                  * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


                                  Updated: 2012-11-01 (MR)
                                                                                   31
                                                Table 5: Conditional Independence Tests
                                                         Table 5. Conditional Independence Tests
                                                 Math                                                                    ELA
                           O'Bryant                            Latin School                         O'Bryant                         Latin School
                   D=0                D=1                 D=0             D=1              D=0                 D=1             D=0              D=1
Window              (1)                 (2)                (3)              (4)             (5)                 (6)              (7)              (8)
20                 0.003              0.005*            0.009***          0.009            0.004               0.002           0.008*           0.054
                  (0.004)          (0.003)               (0.004)           (0.024)        (0.004)            (0.004)           (0.005)          (0.044)
                    513              486                   320               49             516                489               320              50


15                0.012**           -0.000                0.008             0.009          0.009              0.001             0.004            0.054
                  (0.006)          (0.005)               (0.005)           (0.024)        (0.006)            (0.006)           (0.006)          (0.044)
                    375              373                   228               49             376                374               229              50


10                  0.002           0.000             0.007            0.009               0.013           -0.004            0.019          0.054
                   (0.011)         (0.009)           (0.009)          (0.024)             (0.011)         (0.010)           (0.014)        (0.044)
                     253             260               142              49                  253             261               142             50
Notes: This table reports regression-based tests of the conditional independence assumption described in the text. Tests statistics consist of the
coefficient on the same-subject running variable in models for 10th grade math and ELA scores that control for baseline scores, along with
indicators for special education status, limited English proficiency, eligibility for free or reduced price lunch, race (black/Asian/Hispanic) and
sex. Estimates use only observations to the left or right of the cutoff as indicated in column headings, and were computed in the window width
indicated at left. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Updated: 2012-11-27 (MR)

                               Table 6: CIA Estimates of the Eﬀect of Exam School oﬀers
                                                 Table 6. CIA Estimates of the Effect of Exam School offers
                                          Linear Reweighting                                                 Propensity Score Weighting
                               Math                                  ELA                              Math                                ELA
                                        Latin                                Latin                             Latin                            Latin
                    O'Bryant           School             O'Bryant          School        O'Bryant             School          O'Bryant         School
Window                 (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)             (5)                (6)             (7)              (8)
20                  0.157***            -0.023           0.205***            0.077         0.134**             -0.028          0.247***         0.054
                     (0.040)           (0.086)            (0.041)           (0.081)        (0.052)             (0.167)         (0.072)          (0.173)
N untreated            513               320                516               320            513                320              516             320
N treated              486               49                 489               50             486                 49              489              50


15                  0.127***            -0.070           0.185***            0.050          0.103*             -0.076          0.200***         0.018
                     (0.043)           (0.049)            (0.044)           (0.075)        (0.053)             (0.213)         (0.062)          (0.233)
N untreated            375               228                376               229            375                228              376             229
N treated              373               49                 374               50             373                 49              374              50


10                    0.083             -0.088           0.186***            0.005          0.094              -0.093          0.186**          -0.052
                     (0.054)           (0.054)            (0.053)           (0.090)        (0.060)             (0.251)         (0.075)          (0.347)
N untreated            253               142                253               142            253                142              253             142
N treated              260               49                 261               50             260                 49              261              50

Notes: This table reports estimates of the effect if exam school offers on MCAS scores for 9th grade applicants to O'Bryant and BLS. Columns 1-4
report results from a linear reweighting estimator, whiles columns 5-8 report results from inverse propesnity score weighting, as described in the text.
Controls are the same as used to construct the test statistics except that the propensity score models omit test year dummies. The O'Bryant estimates are
effects on nontreated applicants in windows to the left of the admissions cutoff; the BLS estimates are are effects on treated applicants in windows to the
right of the cutoff. Standard errors (shown in parentheses) were computed using a nonparametric bootstrap with 500 replications. The table also reports
the number of treated and untreated (offered and not offered) observations in each window, in the relevant outcome sample.

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


Updated: 2012-11-27 (MR)

                                                                              32
                       Table 7: Fuzzy CIA Estimates of LATE (Exam School Enrollment)
                                       Table 7. Fuzzy CIA Estimates of the Effects of Exam School Enrollment
                                                First Stage                                                          LATE
                               Math                                     ELA                         Math                               ELA
                                       Latin                                   Latin                        Latin                              Latin
                    O'Bryant           School             O'Bryant             School    O'Bryant          School           O'Bryant          School
Window                 (1)              (2)                     (3)             (4)         (5)              (6)               (7)              (8)
20                  0.661***          0.898***           0.662***             0.900***    0.203**          -0.031           0.372***          0.060
                     (0.056)          (0.052)                 (0.058)         (0.050)     (0.085)          (0.180)           (0.145)         (0.167)
N untreated            513              320                    516              320         513              320               516             320
N treated              486              49                     489              50          486              49                489              50


15                  0.668***          0.898***           0.669***             0.900***    0.154**          -0.085           0.299***          0.020
                     (0.048)          (0.052)                 (0.049)         (0.049)     (0.078)          (0.222)           (0.113)         (0.238)
N untreated            375              228                    376              229         375              228               376             229
N treated              373              49                     374              50          373              49                374              50


10                  0.676***          0.898***           0.680***             0.900***     0.139           -0.104           0.273**           -0.058
                     (0.048)          (0.050)                 (0.048)         (0.047)     (0.086)          (0.303)           (0.134)         (0.411)
N untreated            253              142                    253              142         253              142               253             142
N treated              260               49                 261             50               260               49               261              50
Notes: This table reports fuzzy RD estimates of the effect of exam school enrollment on MCAS scores for 9th grade applicants to O'Bryant and BLS.
The O'Bryant estimates are effects on nontreated applicants in windows to the left of the admissions cutoff; the BLS estimates are for treated applicants
in windows to the right of the cutoff. The first stage estimates in columns 1-4 and the estimated causal effects in columns 5-8 are from a modified
propensity-score style weighting estimator described in the text. Standard errors (shown in parentheses) were computed using a nonparametric
bootstrap with 500 replications. The table also reports the number of treated and untreated (offered and not offered) observations in each window, in the
relevant outcome sample.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


 Table2012-12-11
Updated: 8: Fuzzy  CIA
                 (MR)             Estimates of Average Causal Response (Years of Exam School Enrollment)
                                  Table 8. Fuzzy CIA Estimates of the Effects of Years of Exam School Enrollment
                                                First Stage                                                          ACR
                               Math                                     ELA                         Math                               ELA
                                       Latin                                   Latin                        Latin                              Latin
                    O'Bryant           School             O'Bryant             School    O'Bryant          School           O'Bryant          School
Window                 (1)              (2)                     (3)             (4)         (5)              (6)               (7)              (8)
20                  1.388***          1.816***           1.394***             1.820***   0.113***          -0.013           0.147***           0.042
                     (0.064)          (0.095)                 (0.065)         (0.090)     (0.029)          (0.046)           (0.030)          (0.043)
N untreated            513              320                    516              320         513              320               516             320
N treated              486              49                     489              50          486              49                489              50


15                  1.347***          1.816***           1.353***             1.820***   0.094***          -0.039           0.137***           0.027
                     (0.064)          (0.096)                 (0.061)         (0.093)     (0.032)          (0.028)           (0.034)          (0.042)
N untreated            375              228                    376              229         375              228               376             229
N treated              373              49                     374              50          373              49                374              50


10                  1.317***          1.816***           1.308***             1.820***     0.063           -0.048           0.142***           0.003
                     (0.076)          (0.096)                 (0.077)         (0.096)     (0.039)          (0.031)           (0.043)          (0.052)
N untreated            253              142                    253              142         253              142               253             142
N treated              260               49                261               50               260              49                 261             50
Notes: This table reports fuzzy RD estimates of the effect of years of exam school enrollment on MCAS scores for 9th grade applicants to O'Bryant and
BLS. The O'Bryant estimates are effects on nontreated applicants in windows to the left of the admissions cutoff; the BLS estimates are for treated
applicants in windows to the right of the cutoff. The first stage estimates in columns 1-4 and the estimated causal effects in columns 5-8 are from a
modified linear 2SLS estimator described in the text. Standard errors (shown in parentheses) were computed using a nonparametric bootstrap with 500
replications. The table also reports the number of treated and untreated (offered and not offered) observations in each window, in the relevant outcome
sample.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%



                                                                                33
                             O’Bryant                               Latin Academy                              Latin School




          1




                                                   1




                                                                                              1
          .8




                                                   .8




                                                                                              .8
          .6




                                                   .6




                                                                                              .6
          .4




                                                   .4




                                                                                              .4
          .2




                                                   .2




                                                                                              .2
          0




                                                   0




                                                                                              0
                −20    −10      0       10    20        −20   −10         0         10   20        −20   −10        0         10   20


                Figure 1A: Oﬀers at Each Boston Exam School for 7th (1999-2008) and 9th (2001-2007) Grade Applicants
                                                           (a)7th
               Figure 1A: Oﬀers at Each Boston Exam School for Oﬀers
                                                                  (1999-2008) and 9th (2001-2007) Grade Applicants


                             O’Bryant                               Latin Academy                              Latin School
           1




                                                   1




                                                                                              1
           .8




                                                   .8




                                                                                              .8
           .6




                                                   .6




                                                                                              .6
           .4




                                                   .4




                                                                                              .4
           .2




                                                   .2




                                                                                              .2
           0




                                                   0




                                                                                              0




                −20    −10       0      10    20        −20   −10         0         10   20        −20   −10         0        10   20




                                                     (b) Enrollment
          Figure 1B: Enrollment at Each Boston Exam School for 7th (1999-2008) and 9th (2001-2007) Grade Applicants
          Figure 1B: Enrollment at Each Boston Exam School for 7th (1999-2008) and 9th (2001-2007) Grade Applicants
Figure 1: Oﬀers and Enrollment at Each Boston Exam School for 7th (1999-2008) and 9th (2001-
2007) Grade Applicants



                                                                       34
                                O’Bryant                                Latin Academy                                Latin School




             2.5




                                                     2.5




                                                                                                  2.5
             2




                                                     2




                                                                                                  2
             1.5




                                                     1.5




                                                                                                  1.5
             1




                                                     1




                                                                                                  1
             .5




                                                     .5




                                                                                                  .5
             0




                                                     0




                                                                                                  0
             −.5




                                                     −.5




                                                                                                  −.5
                    −20   −10      0       10   20          −20   −10         0         10   20          −20   −10        0         10   20
       Figure 2A: 7th and 8th Grade Math (2006-2009/2001-2009) at Boston Exam Schools for 7th Grade Applicants (1999-
       2007/2005-2008)
                                                        (a) Math
       Figure 2A: 7th and 8th Grade Math (2006-2009/2001-2009) at Boston Exam Schools for 7th Grade Applicants (1999-
       2007/2005-2008)

                                O’Bryant                                Latin Academy                                Latin School
              2.5




                                                      2.5




                                                                                                   2.5
              2




                                                      2




                                                                                                   2
              1.5




                                                      1.5




                                                                                                   1.5
              1




                                                      1




                                                                                                   1
              .5




                                                      .5




                                                                                                   .5
              0




                                                      0




                                                                                                   0
              −.5




                                                      −.5




                                                                                                   −.5




                    −20   −10       0      10   20          −20   −10         0         10   20          −20   −10         0        10   20



                                                         (b) English
       Figure 2B: 7th and 8th Grade English (2001-2009/2006-2009) at Boston Exam Schools for 7th Grade Applicants (2000-
       2008/2004-2007)
Figure 2: 7th and 8th Grade Math and ELA Scores at Boston Exam Schools for 7th Grade Applicants
       Figure 2B: 7th and 8th Grade English (2001-2009/2006-2009) at Boston Exam Schools for 7th Grade Applicants (2000-
       2008/2004-2007)




                                                                          35
                               O’Bryant                               Latin Academy                               Latin School




             2.5




                                                    2.5




                                                                                                2.5
             2




                                                    2




                                                                                                2
             1.5




                                                    1.5




                                                                                                1.5
             1




                                                    1




                                                                                                1
             .5




                                                    .5




                                                                                                .5
             0




                                                    0




                                                                                                0
             −.5




                                                    −.5




                                                                                                −.5
                   −20   −10      0       10   20         −20   −10         0         10   20         −20   −10        0         10   20

       Figure 3A: 10th Grade Math (2003-2009) at Boston Exam Schools for 7th (1999-2005) and 9th (2001-2007) Grade Applicants
                                                           (a)
       Figure 3A: 10th Grade Math (2003-2009) at Boston Exam   Mathfor 7th (1999-2005) and 9th (2001-2007) Grade Applicants
                                                             Schools


                               O’Bryant                               Latin Academy                               Latin School
             2.5




                                                    2.5




                                                                                                2.5
             2




                                                    2




                                                                                                2
             1.5




                                                    1.5




                                                                                                1.5
             1




                                                    1




                                                                                                1
             .5




                                                    .5




                                                                                                .5
             0




                                                    0




                                                                                                0
             −.5




                                                    −.5




                                                                                                −.5




                   −20   −10      0       10   20         −20   −10         0         10   20         −20   −10        0         10   20



       Figure 3B: 10th Grade English (2003-2009) at Boston (b)
                                                           ExamEnglish
                                                                Schools for 7th (1999-2005) and 9th (2001-2007) Grade Appli-
       cants
       Figure 3B: 10th Grade English (2003-2009) at Boston Exam Schools for 7th (1999-2005) and 9th (2001-2007) Grade Appli-
Figure 3:cants
            10th Grade Math and ELA Scores at Boston Exam Schools for 7th and 9th Grade Appli-
cants



                                                                        36
                                                                                                                                                        Parametric
                                                                                                                                                       extrapolation

                                                                                                                                                                                                  E[Y1|r]=f1(r)

                                                                                               Dong Lewbel                                                                  B   (c)
                                                                                               extrapolation


                                                                                                                DL   (c)                         A   (c)                                            E[Y0|r]

                                                                              f0’(0)               (0)




  E[Y0|r]=f0(r)




                                                                                                                                                                                      Latin School rank (r)
                                                                            Bandwidth (non parametric)



Figure
  Figure4:4:Identification of Boston
             Extrapolation of  BostonLatin
                                      Latin  School
                                           School     Eﬀects At and Away from the Cutoﬀ. ⇢(0) is an
                                                  Effects
eﬀect at the cutoﬀ; ⇢DL (c) is an eﬀect near the cutoﬀ approximated using a first derivative; ⇢A (c)
and ⇢B (c) are possible eﬀects well away from the cutoﬀ.


                                           .""                                                 O’Bryant                                                                .""
                                          Linear                                                Quadratic                                                             Cubic
             2




                                                                      2




                                                                                                                                     2
             1.5




                                                                      1.5




                                                                                                                                     1.5
             1




                                                                      1




                                                                                                                                     1
             .5




                                                                      .5




                                                                                                                                     .5
             0




                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                     0




                   −20   −15   −10   −5     0      5   10   15   20         −20   −15   −10   −5    0       5        10    15   20         −20   −15       −10   −5     0         5     10   15    20
                                           .""                                                Latin School                                                             .""
                                          Linear                                                Quadratic                                                             Cubic
             2




                                                                      2




                                                                                                                                     2
             1.5




                                                                      1.5




                                                                                                                                     1.5
             1




                                                                      1




                                                                                                                                     1
             .5




                                                                      .5




                                                                                                                                     .5
             0




                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                     0




                   −20   −15   −10   −5     0      5   10   15   20         −20   −15   −10   −5    0       5        10    15   20         −20   −15       −10   −5     0         5     10   15    20


                                                                              Estimated                                    Extrapolated



Figure 5: Parametric Extrapolation     at O’Bryant
                          Figure 1: Parametric       and Boston
                                               extrapolation:  7&9 Latin School.
                                                                   apps, Math 10 O’Bryant extrapolation
is for E[Y1i |ri = c]; BLS extrapolation is for E[Y0i |ri = c].


                                                                                                   37
                                       .""                                                 O’Bryant                                                      .""
                                      Linear                                                Quadratic                                                   Cubic
         2




                                                                  2




                                                                                                                           2
         1.5




                                                                  1.5




                                                                                                                           1.5
         1




                                                                  1




                                                                                                                           1
         .5




                                                                  .5




                                                                                                                           .5
         0




                                                                  0




                                                                                                                           0
               −20   −15   −10   −5     0      5   10   15   20         −20   −15   −10   −5       0    5   10   15   20         −20   −15   −10   −5     0     5   10   15   20
                                       .""                                                Latin School                                                   .""
                                      Linear                                                Quadratic                                                   Cubic
         2




                                                                  2




                                                                                                                           2
         1.5




                                                                  1.5




                                                                                                                           1.5
         1




                                                                  1




                                                                                                                           1
         .5




                                                                  .5




                                                                                                                           .5
         0




                                                                  0




                                                                                                                           0




               −20   −15   −10   −5     0      5   10   15   20         −20   −15   −10   −5       0    5   10   15   20         −20   −15   −10   −5     0     5   10   15   20


                                                                          Estimated                              Extrapolated



Figure 6: Derivative-based
                         FigureExtrapolation at O’Bryant
                                2: Dong & Lewbel           and Boston
                                                 extrapolation:         Latin
                                                                 7&9 apps,    School.
                                                                           Math 10    O’Bryant extrap-
olation is for E[Y1i |ri = c]; BLS extrapolation is for E[Y0i |ri = c].




                                                                                               2

                                                                                               38
                                       O’Bryant                                                  Latin School
                                        Cubic                                                        Cubic




         2




                                                                        2
         1.5




                                                                        1.5
         1




                                                                        1
         .5




                                                                        .5
         0




                                                                        0




               −20   −15   −10   −5       0       5   10      15   20         −20   −15   −10   −5     0        5   10   15   20



                                                           (a) 10th Grade Math
                                  Figure 3: Nonparametric RD plot: 9 apps, Math 10
                                       O’Bryant                                                  Latin School
                                        Cubic                                                        Cubic
         2




                                                                        2
         1.5




                                                                        1.5
         1




                                                                        1




                                                                    3
         .5




                                                                        .5
         0




                                                                        0




               −20   −15   −10   −5       0       5   10      15   20         −20   −15   −10   −5     0        5   10   15   20



                                                      (b) 10th Grade English
                                      Figure 4: Nonparametric RD plot: 9 apps, Eng 10
Figure 7: 10th Grade Math and ELA Scores for 9th Grade Applicants to O’Bryant and Boston Latin
School

                                                                   39
                                        Math 10                                                          Math 10
                                        O’Bryant                                                        Latin School
          2




                                                                         2
          1.5




                                                                         1.5
          1




                                                                         1
          .5




                                                                         .5
          0




                                                                         0



                −20   −15   −10   −5       0        5   10   15     20         −20   −15    −10    −5        0         5   10   15   20
                                       English 10                                                       English 10
                                        O’Bryant                                                        Latin School
          2




                                                                         2
          1.5




                                                                         1.5
          1




                                                                         1
          .5




                                                                         .5
          0




                                                                         0




                −20   −15   −10   −5       0        5   10   15     20         −20   −15    −10    −5        0         5   10   15   20


                                                        Estimated                          Extrapolated



Figure 8: CIA-based Estimates
                       Figure 8: of
                                 CIAE[Y1i |ri = c] and
                                     extrapolation  plotE[Y0i |ri +/-
                                                         (Klein,       for 9c apps
                                                                  = c]20):     in [ 20, 20]. To the left of
the O’Bryant cutoﬀ, the estimates of E[Y0i |ri = c] are fitted values for observed outcomes (the line
labelled “Estimated”) while the estimates of E[Y1i |ri = c] are extrapolations. To the right of the
BLS cutoﬀ, the estimates of E[Y1i |ri = c] are fitted values while the estimates of E[Y0i |ri = c] are
extrapolations. These estimates were constructed using the linear reweighting estimator discussed
in the text.




                                                                     8




                                                                    40
                                      .""                                             O’Bryant                                            .""
                          Window = +/− 20 (N = 999)                           Window = +/− 15 (N = 748)                       Window = +/− 10 (N = 513)
         150




                                                            150




                                                                                                                   150
         100




                                                            100




                                                                                                                   100
         50




                                                            50




                                                                                                                   50
         0




                                                            0




                                                                                                                   0
         50




                                                            50




                                                                                                                   50
         100




                                                            100




                                                                                                                   100
         150




                                                            150




                                                                                                                   150
               0         0.2    0.4         0.6   0.8   1         0          0.2      0.4       0.6   0.8      1         0   0.2    0.4         0.6   0.8   1
                                      .""                                          Latin School                                           .""
                          Window = +/− 20 (N = 369)                           Window = +/− 15 (N = 277)                       Window = +/− 10 (N = 191)
         75




                                                            75




                                                                                                                   75
         50




                                                            50




                                                                                                                   50
         25




                                                            25




                                                                                                                   25
         0




                                                            0




                                                                                                                   0
         25




                                                            25




                                                                                                                   25
         50




                                                            50




                                                                                                                   50




                   218                                                123
         75




                                                            75




                                                                                                                   75




               0         0.2    0.4         0.6   0.8   1         0          0.2      0.4       0.6   0.8      1         0   0.2    0.4         0.6   0.8   1


                                                                            Treated                         Untreated



Figure 9: Histograms of Estimated    Propensity
                          Figure 5: Common       Scores
                                             support     for99th
                                                     check:      Grade
                                                              apps, MathApplicants
                                                                        10         to O’Bryant and
BLS. The y-axis shows the observation count in each score-distribution decile. These estimates were
constructed using a logit model fitted in the sample window indicated above each panel.




                                                                                            5


                                                                                       41
References

Abadie, A. (2003): “Semiparametric Instrumental Variables Estimation of Treatment Response
  Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 113(2), 231–263.

Abadie, A., J. D. Angrist, and G. Imbens (2002): “Instrumental Variables Estimates of the
  Eﬀect of Subsidized Training on the Quantiles of Trainee Earnings,” Econometrica, 70(1), 91–117.

Abadie, A., G. Imbens, and F. Zheng (2011): “Robust Inference for Misspecified Models Con-
  ditional on Covariates,” NBER Working Paper, 17442.

Abdulkadiroğlu, A., J. D. Angrist, and P. Pathak (2012): “The Elite Illusion: Achievement
  Eﬀects at Boston and New York Exam Schools,” IZA Discussion Papers 6790, Institute for the
  Study of Labor.

Abdulkadiroğlu, A., P. A. Pathak, and A. E. Roth (2009): “Strategy-proofness versus Ef-
  ficiency in Matching with Indiﬀerences: Redesigning the New York City High School Match,”
  American Economic Review, 99(5), 1954–1978.

Andrews, D. W. K., and P. Guggenberger (2009): “Hybrid and Size-Corrected Subsampling
  Methods,” Econometrica, 77(3).

Angrist, J. D., and I. Fernandez-Val (2010): “ExtrapoLATE-ing: External Validity and Overi-
  dentification in the LATE Framework,” NBER Working Paper, 16566.

Angrist, J. D., and G. W. Imbens (1995): “Two-Stage Least Squares Estimation of Average
  Causal Eﬀects in Models with Variable Treatment Intensity,” Journal of the American Statistical
  Association, 90(430), 431–442.

Angrist, J. D., and J.-S. Pischke (2009): Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s
  Companion. Princeton University Press.

Barnow, B. S. (1972): Conditions for the Presence or Absence of a Bias in Treatment Eﬀect:
  Some Statistical Models for Head Start Evaluation. University of Wisconsin-Madison.

Belloni, A., V. Chernozhukov, and C. Hansen (2012): “Inference on Treatment Eﬀects After
  Selection Amongst High-Dimensional Controls,” ArXiv:1201.02243.

Campbell, D. T., and J. Stanley (1963): Experimental and Quasi-experimental Designs for
  Research. Rand McNally.

                                               42
Cook, T. D. (2008): “Waiting for Life to Arrive: A history of the regression-discontinuity design
  in Psychology, Statistics and Economics,” Journal of Econometrics, 142(2), 636–654.

Dehejia, R. H., and S. Wahba (1999): “Causal Eﬀects in Nonexperimental Studies: Reevaluating
  the Evaluation of Training Programs,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 94(448),
  1053–1062.

DesJardins, S., and B. McCall (2008): “The Impact of Gates Millennium Scholars Program on
  the Retenion, College Finance- and Work-Related Choices, and Future Educational Aspirations
  of Low-Income Minority Students,” Unpublished manuscript, University of Michigan.

DiNardo, J., and D. S. Lee (2011): Program Evaluation and Research Designsvol. 4 of Handbook
  of Labor Economics, chap. 5, pp. 463–536. Elsevier.

Dobbie, W., and R. G. Fryer (2012): “Exam High Schools and Academic Achievement: Evidence
  from New York City,” NBER Working Paper, 17286.

Dong, Y., and A. Lewbel (2011): “Regression Discontinuity Marginal Threshold Treatment
  Eﬀects,” Working paper, Boston College.

Frandsen, B. R., M. Frölich, and B. Melly (2012): “Quantile Treatment Eﬀects in the Re-
  gression Discontinuity Design,” Journal of Econometrics, 168(2).

Goldberger, A. S. (1972a): “Selection Bias in Evaluating Treatment Eﬀects: Some Formal Illus-
  trations,” Unpublished manuscript.

         (1972b): “Selection Bias in Evaluating Treatment Eﬀects: the Case of Interaction,” Un-
  published manuscript.

Heckman, J. J., H. Ichimura, and P. Todd (1998): “Matching as an Econometric Evaluation
  Estimator,” Review of Economic Studies, 65(2), 261–294.

Hirano, K., G. W. Imbens, and G. Ridder (2003): “Eﬃcient Estimation of Average Treatment
  Eﬀects Using the Estimated Propensity Score,” Econometrica, 71(4), 1161–1189.

Horvitz, D. G., and D. J. Thompson (1952): “A Generalization of Sampling Without Replace-
  ment From a Finite Universe,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 47(260), 663–685.

Imbens, G., and J. D. Angrist (1994): “Identification and Estimation of Local Average Treatment
  Eﬀects,” Econometrica, 62(2), 467–475.

                                               43
Imbens, G., and K. Kalyanaraman (2012): “Optimal Bandwidth Choice for the Regression
  Discontinuity Estimator,” Review of Economic Studies, 79(3), 933–959.

Jackson, K. (2010): “Do Students Benefit from Attending Better Schools? Evidence from Rule-
  Based Student Assignments in Trinidad and Tobago,” Economic Journal, 120, 1399–1429.

Kline, P. M. (2011): “Oaxaca-Blinder as a Reweighting Estimator,” American Economic Review:
  Papers and Proceedings, 101(3).

Lee, D. S., and T. Lemieux (2010): “Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics,” Journal of
  Economic Literature, 48(2), 281–355.

Lewbel, A. (2007): “Estimation of Average Treatment Eﬀects with Misclassification,” Economet-
  rica, 75(2), 537–551.

Lord, F. M., and M. R. Novick (1972): Statistical Theories of Mental Test Scores. Addison-
  Welsley.

Pathak, P. A., and T. Sönmez (2008): “Leveling the Playing Field: Sincere and Sophisticated
  Players in the Boston Mechanism,” American Economic Review, 98(4), 1636–1652.

         (2011): “School Admissions Reform in Chicago and England: Comparing Mechanisms by
  their Vulnerability to Manipulation,” forthcoming, American Economic Review.




                                              44
Appendix

Proof of Theorem 1

We continue to assume that GCIA and other LATE assumptions hold. Given these assumptions,
Theorem 3.1 in Abadie (2003) implies that for any measurable function, g (yi , Wi , xi ), we have
                                                           1
      E [g (yi , Wi , xi ) | xi , W1i > W0i ] =                        E [ (Wi , Di , xi ) g (yi , Wi , xi ) | xi ] (27)
                                                   P [W1i > W0i | xi ]
where
                                                         Wi (1 Di )             (1 Wi ) Di
                        (Wi , Di , xi ) = 1
                                                       1 P [Di = 1 | xi ]      P [Di = 1 | xi ]
and
                                                           1
        E [g (YW i , xi ) | xi , W1i > W0i ] =                         E [W (Wi , Di , xi ) g (yi , xi ) | xi ] ,
                                                   P [W1i > W0i | xi ]
where W 2 {0, 1} and
                                                                 P [Di = 1 | xi ] Di
                    0 (Wi , Di , xi ) = (1        Wi )
                                                          (1 P [Di = 1 | xi ]) P [Di = 1 | xi ]
                                                            Di P [Di = 1 | xi ]
                    1 (Wi , Di , xi ) = Wi                                                 .
                                                  (1     P [Di = 1 | xi ]) P [Di = 1 | xi ]
Using the GCIA, we can simplify as follows:

         E [g (YW i , xi ) | W1i > W0i , 0  ri  c]

         = E {E [g (YW i , xi ) | xi , W1i > W0i ] | W1i > W0i , 0  ri  c}
                      1
           ˆ
         =                            E [W (Wi , Di , xi ) g (yi , xi ) | X] dP [xi | W1i > W0i , 0  ri  c]
              P [W1i > W0i | xi ]
                         1                                                             P [0  ri  c | xi ]
                                            ˆ
         =                                     E [W (Wi , Di , xi ) g (y, xi ) | xi ]                      dP [xi ](28)
           P [W1i > W0i | 0  ri  c]                                                    P [0  ri  c]
                                              
                         1                                           P [0  ri  c | xi ]
         =                                 E W (Wi , Di , xi )                           g (yi , xi ) .
           P [W1i > W0i | 0  ri  c]                                   P [0  ri  c]
This implies that LATE can be written:

                      E [Y1i    Y0i | W1i > W0i , 0  ri  c]

                      = E [Y1i | W1i > W0i , 0  ri  c] E [Y0i | W1i > W0i , 0  ri  c]
                                                      
                                     1                              P [0  ri  c | xi ]
                      =                             E    (Di , xi )                      yi
                        P [W1i > W0i | 0  ri  c]                    P [0  ri  c]




                                                            45
where

                                        (Di , xi ) = 1 (Wi , Di , xi ) 0 (Wi , Di , xi )
                                                              Di P [Di = 1 | xi ]
                                                   =                                       .
                                                     (1 P [Di = 1 | xi ]) P [Di = 1 | xi ]
Finally, by setting g (yi , Wi , xi ) = 1 in equation (27) we get:

                                        P [W1i > W0i | xi ] = E [ (Wi , Di , xi ) | xi ] .

Using the same steps as in equation (28), the GCIA implies:

                     P [W1i > W0i | 0  ri  c] = E {P [W1i > W0i | xi ] | 0  ri  c}
                                                    
                                                                      P [0  ri  c | xi ]
                                                = E  (Wi , Di , xi )                      .
                                                                        P [0  xi  c]

Proof of Theorem 2

Theorem 1 in Angrist and Imbens (1995) implies:
                                                           X
 E [yi | Di = 1, xi ]        E [yi | Di = 0, xi ] =              P [w1i           j > w0i | xi ] E [Yji     Yj   1,i   | w1i   j > w0i , xi ]
                                                             j
                                                           X
E [wi | Di = 1, xi ]        E [wi | Di = 0, xi ] =               P [w1i           j > w0i | xi ] .
                                                             j

Given the GCIA, we have:

    E {E [yi | Di = 1, xi ] E [yi | Di = 0, xi ] | 0  ri  c}
       Xˆ
    =         P [w1i j > w0i | xi ] E [Yji Yj 1,i | w1i j > w0i , xi ] dP [xi | 0  ri  c]
         j
         Xˆ
     =             P [w1i        j > w0i | xi , 0  ri  c] E [Yji           Yj    1,i   | w1i   j > w0i , xi ] dP [xi | 0  ri  c]
         j
         X
     =           P [w1i     j > w0i | 0  ri  c]
         j
             ˆ
       ⇥ E [Yji             Yj    1,i   | w1i   j > w0i , xi ] dP [xi | w1i          j > w0i , 0  ri  c]
       X
     =   P [w1i             j > w0i | 0  ri  c] E [Yji          Yj   1,i   | w1i         j > w0i , 0  ri  c] .
         j

The GCIA can similarly be shown to imply:

                                   E [E [wi | Di = 1, xi ] E [wi | Di = 0, xi ] | 0  ri  c]
                                      X
                                   =     P [w1i j > w0i | 0  ri  c] .
                                          j




                                                                 46
Combining these results, the ACR can be written:
                       E {E [yi | Di = 1, xi ] E [yi | Di = 0, xi ] | 0  ri  c}
                       E {E [wi | Di = 1, xi ] E [wi | Di = 0, xi ] | 0  ri  c}
                         X
                       =     ⌫jc E [Yji Yj 1,i | w1i j > w0i , 0  ri  c]
                           j

where
                                      P [w1i j > w0i | 0  ri  c]
                          ⌫ijc =     P                                .
                                       ` P [w1i ` > w0i | 0  ri  c]




                                                47
