                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                SEARCH AND WORK IN OPTIMAL WELFARE PROGRAMS

                                          Nicola Pavoni
                                           Ofer Setty
                                       Giovanni L. Violante

                                       Working Paper 18666
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18666


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2013




We are grateful to Gayle Hamilton at MDRC for initial help with the NEWWS data, and to Hamish
Low for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Nicola Pavoni, Ofer Setty, and Giovanni L. Violante. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Search and Work in Optimal Welfare Programs
Nicola Pavoni, Ofer Setty, and Giovanni L. Violante
NBER Working Paper No. 18666
January 2013
JEL No. D82,H21,J24,J64,J65

                                                ABSTRACT

Some existing welfare programs (“work-first”) require participants to work in exchange for benefits.
Others (“job search-first”) emphasize private job-search and provide assistance in finding and retaining
a durable employment. This paper studies the optimal design of welfare programs when (i) the principal/government
is unable to observe the agent’s effort, but can assist the agent’s job search and can mandate the agent
to work, and (ii) agents’ skills depreciate during unemployment. In the optimal welfare program, assisted
search is implemented between an initial spell of private search (unemployment insurance) and a final
spell of pure income support where search effort is not elicited. To be effective, job-search assistance
requires large reemployment subsidies. The optimal program features compulsory work activities for
low levels of program’s generosity (i.e., its promised utility or available budget). The threat of mandatory
work acts like a punishment that facilitates the provision of search incentives without compromising
consumption smoothing too much.


Nicola Pavoni                                           Giovanni L. Violante
Bocconi University                                      Department of Economics
pavoni.nicola@gmail.com                                 New York University
                                                        19 W. 4th Street
Ofer Setty                                              New York, NY 10012-1119
Tel Aviv University                                     and NBER
P.O. Box 39040                                          glv2@nyu.edu
Tel Aviv 6997801
Israel
ofer.setty@gmail.com
1 Introduction
Government policies targeting the poor have the twofold objective of (i) offering
income support and (ii) promoting economic self-sufficiency through employment.
Achieving both objectives is challenging because the provision of assistance inter-
feres with individual incentives to find and retain a suitable employment. In order to
strike the right balance between assistance and incentives, governments use a wide
range of policy instruments. These policies typically combine welfare benefits and
earnings subsidies with mandatory activities such as job search, work, and training.
    In the United States, the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconcil-
iation Act (PRWORA) of 1996 deeply reformed the system of cash welfare assistance
for poor households –mostly single parents. The reform ended needy families legal
entitlement to welfare assistance, and imposed work-related requirements for wel-
fare recipients enforced by sanctions (e.g., benefits suspension in case of noncom-
pliance).1 The PRWORA legislation also removed much of the federal regulatory
authority over the structure of the program, giving states full flexibility in choosing
policy instruments and setting benefit levels (Moffitt, 2008). As a result, a variety of
programs was implemented across U.S. states. Some programs are focused on assist-
ing and monitoring individual job search, others on education and training, others yet
on moving the individual as soon as possible into some form of employment. In this
paper, we concentrate on jointly studying job search and work activities.2
    Public programs centered around job search encompass elements of monitoring,
skill enhancement, and help in seeking jobs. Here, we focus on the latter type of
interventions where the public employment agency assists the job seeker by select-
ing suitable vacancies, providing contacts with potential employers, and making job
referrals. We label this intervention “Job-Search Assistance”.3 There is also a large
   1
      The legislation uses the term “work-related requirement” with a broad meaning. In many cases,
programs that enhance job-search skills or assist job-search, as well as education and training pro-
grams, satisfy such requirement.
    2
      For the time being, we leave training and adult education out of the analysis. Normative analyses
of training policies which follow the approach in this paper are contained, for example, in Pavoni and
Violante (2005), Spinnewijn (2010), and Pavoni, Setty, Violante, and Wunsch (2012).
    3
      To enforce active job search, some programs require the welfare recipient to show evidence of
her job-search efforts (applications, contacts, interviews) to the caseworker. The optimal use of mon-
itoring of search activities is analyzed extensively in Pavoni and Violante (2007), and Setty (2012).
We return on monitoring below. Other programs contain an element of training, i.e., the develop-
ment of job-search and interviewing skills. Wunsch (2012) studies the optimal design of this type of


                                                  1
diversity of work-site activities across U.S. states. At one end of the spectrum the
work requirement is simply intended as a “social obligation” for the recipient of a
welfare check. At the opposite end, the work requirement is meant to function as a
transition into self-sufficiency through private employment. For example, while the
participant is mandated to work in a public or non-profit agency, the caseworker ac-
tively assists her search for private employment in a similar job. Or, the caseworker
directly matches the individual to a private employer with the expectation that she
might be retained by that same employer. To distinguish the first type of work (“work
in exchange for benefits”) from the second (“stepping stone to private employment”),
we label them, respectively, “Mandatory Work” and “Transitional Work”.
   Throughout this paper, we use the term “optimal” to denote one among the many
welfare programs that are feasible in our stylized model. An “optimal” program is
one that maximizes the value of the social planner’s objective function, subject to
the government budget constraint and a variety of other incentive compatibility and
promise keeping constraints.
    The central question of the paper is how search-based activities and work-based
activities should be optimally combined in a welfare program, and how the associated
benefits and wage subsidies should be designed. Our point of departure is the clas-
sic setup –originated largely from the seminal article of Shavell and Weiss (1979)–
where the optimal unemployment insurance contract is studied in the presence of a
repeated moral hazard problem: the risk-neutral principal (planner/government) can-
not observe the risk-averse unemployed agent’s effort (hidden action). Following
the most recent contributions in the literature (Atkeson and Lucas, 1995; Wang and
Williamson, 1996; Hopenhayn and Nicolini, 1997; Pavoni, 2007; Shimer and Wern-
ing, 2008; Hopenhayn and Nicolini, 2009), we exploit the recursive representation of
the planner’s problem where the expected discounted utility promised by the contract
to the unemployed agent becomes a state variable.
    We enrich this repeated moral hazard environment by allowing workers’ wages
and their job finding probabilities to depend on human capital (skills), and let human
capital depreciate along the unemployment spell (as in Pavoni and Violante, 2007,
and Pavoni 2009). Human capital is our second key state variable in the recursive
representation. Skill depreciation permits a better representation of labor market data
intervention.


                                          2
along two important dimensions. First, since wages depend on human capital, in our
economy workers experience wage losses associated to unemployment, consistently
with the findings of a vast set of empirical studies (for a survey, see Fallick, 1996;
for recent evidence, see Davis and von Wachter, 2011). Second, since we let the job-
finding probability depend on human capital, search effort becomes less effective as
the unemployment spell progresses, inducing negative duration dependence in the
unemployment hazard–a common feature of the data, as discussed by Machin and
Manning (1999) in their survey.4
   The key innovation that makes this framework amenable to analyze the optimal
design of welfare programs is the introduction of additional “technologies” and as-
sociated worker “activities” (i.e., use of technologies) besides job search. To model
work-based and job-search assistance policies we introduce two technologies. First,
a secondary production technology that is less productive than the (primary) one used
in private employment but that, as the latter, requires effort to yield output. This fea-
ture reflects that work-based activities employ the welfare recipients on basic tasks
with very low value added, usually in a government agency or a non-profit organi-
zation. Second, a costly assisted search technology that allows the agent to sample
a subset of her available job opportunities without search effort (i.e., a government
agency searches on behalf of the unemployed). This technology frees up time from
search to either work or rest.
    We define a “policy” as a principal’s prescription of an activity for the agent with
an associated conditional income transfer. We interpret the use of the secondary pro-
duction technology alone as Mandatory Work, and the joint use of this production
technology and assisted search as Transitional Work. Moreover, since the assisted
search technology can always be used on its own, the model also includes a Job
Search Assistance policy. In addition to these three policy instruments, the frame-
work yields naturally Unemployment Insurance, where the worker exerts search ef-
fort on her own, and Social Assistance, corresponding to income support with no
effort requirements.
   4
     In particular, several studies (e.g., Blank, 1989, for welfare recipients; Bover, Arellano, and Ben-
tolila, 2002, for UI benefits recipients) find a declining hazard even after explicitly controlling for
unobserved heterogeneity. Skill depreciation is also a central ingredient in a popular explanation of
the comparative unemployment experience of the U.S. and Europe in the 1980s (e.g., Ljungqvist and
Sargent, 1998).



                                                   3
    To parameterize the model, we use several program evaluation studies. One of our
main sources of information is the National Evaluation of Welfare-to-Work Strate-
gies (NEWWS), a large-scale longitudinal study, conducted by the U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services between 1991-1999. As part of this survey, 40,000
welfare recipients in seven distinct U.S. locations were randomly assigned to various
treatment and control groups. The randomized nature of these studies enables us to
identify the key parameters of the job search assistance and production technologies.
    We characterize the optimal welfare program along the lines of Pavoni and Vi-
olante (2007). Optimality requires maximization of the agent’s expected discounted
utility subject to the government’s budget constraint. A characterization means study-
ing: 1) in which region of the state space (the two dimensional space in promised
utility and human capital) each policy dominates the others; 2) the optimal sequence
of policies along the program determined by the endogenous dynamics of promised
utility and the exogenous human capital depreciation; 3) the optimal level and time-
path of benefits and wage subsidies upon employment, associated to each policy.
    An important lesson we learn from our exercise is that there are two types of
welfare programs that emerge as optimal, depending on the initial level of generosity
of the program, a parameter of the economic environment determined by politico-
economic or government budget constraints outside our model. After an initial spell
of Unemployment Insurance, common to all programs, a generous (or deep pock-
eted) principal would implement an optimal program based on search which follows
the sequence Job-Search Assistance → Social Assistance. A parsimonious (or more
budget constrained) principal would, instead, implement an optimal program based
on work which follows the sequence Transitional Work → Mandatory Work. For low
levels of promised utility, the effort compensation cost is smaller and it is efficient
for the principal to require the agent to exert work effort and produce in exchange for
welfare benefits. For high levels of promised utility, instead, inducing the agent to
actively search is too expensive, and the principal searches for jobs on her behalf.
    In the baseline model we restrict private job search and work to be mutually
exclusive activities. In an extension, we allow individuals to jointly work part-time in
the secondary production sector and search for an employment in the primary sector.
We show that this joint “Search-and-Work” policy arises in place of Unemployment
Insurance for low levels of promised utility. Put differently, as long as the principal


                                           4
is not too generous, the optimal program should start immediately with a spell of
part-time work, but the agent should also be incentivized to seek a higher-paying job
in the private sector in her residual time.
   In a second extension of the baseline model, we introduce a technology that al-
lows the principal to monitor the agent’s job search effort at a cost, along the lines of
Pavoni and Violante (2007), and Setty (2012). We find that Job Search Monitoring
emerges as optimal between spells of private search (i.e., Unemployment Insurance
for generous programs, Search-and-Work for parsimonious programs) and spells of
assisted search (i.e., Job Search Assistance and Transitory Work, respectively)
    We also study the design of welfare benefits and wage subsidies. Here, the main
result is that the threat of mandatory work is a very useful policy tool to solve the
insurance-incentive trade off. Requiring the agent to work at a future point in the
welfare program serves as a punishment for unsuccessful search: it effectively re-
places large drops in benefits and, as a result, allows to achieve a higher degree of
consumption insurance throughout the program. The counterpart of this result is that,
in search-based programs where compulsory work is absent, the principal instead
needs to create a large gap in consumption across employment states –i.e., between
subsidized wage and welfare benefits– to compensate for the additional work effort
required from the agent once she finds employment. This feature of state-contingent
payments is especially strong during Job Search Assistance, when effort is zero.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes in some detail
the different policies that we aim at modeling. Section 3 formalizes the economic
environment faced by the agent. Section 4 introduces the principal and describes
the set of feasible contracts the principal can offer the agents. Here, we provide a
mapping between the activities recommended by the principal to the agent and the
actual policy instruments of Section 2. Section 5 parameterizes the model based
on program-evaluation studies. Section 6 characterizes the optimal welfare-to-work
programs, i.e., where the different policies emerge as optimal in the (U, h) space, the
optimal sequences of policies, and optimal consumption (i.e., welfare benefits and
wage taxes/subsidies). Section 7 extends the model by incorporating policies that
mix job search and work, and monitoring of job-search effort. Section 8 concludes.




                                           5
2 The US welfare system
For jobless individuals without labor income, but with some significant recent em-
ployment history, the main form of government assistance is Unemployment Insur-
ance. Workers eligible for Unemployment Insurance receive benefits, linked to their
previous earnings, for a given period (ordinarily, 6 months). Upon expiration of
unemployment insurance benefits (or immediately, for those without significant em-
ployment history), a number of transfer programs are in place. Food stamps and
housing subsidies are means-tested, but there is no requirement or obligation attached
to them. They configure a form of pure income assistance policy of last resort, which
we label Social Assistance.
    The other major means-tested transfer program is the Temporary Assistance for
Needy Families (TANF). Since the PRWORA legislation of 1996, welfare recipi-
ents who wish to qualify for TANF benefits are required to participate in work or
work-related (e.g., job-search, vocational training, adult education) activities after
two years of receiving cash assistance. Failure to participate can result in a reduction
or termination of benefits to the family (Moffitt, 2003).
    The legislation gives states ample freedom on how to implement these various
activities. As a result, even abstracting from training/education and just focusing on
search assistance and work, as we do, leaves an enormous variety of policy interven-
tions and summarizing them is an arduous task. At the same time, distilling their key
features is necessary for building a formal model and this is the route we take here.
Search-based activities: There are several examples of search-based policy exper-
iments implemented in recent US history.5 Meyer (1995) surveys six experiments
spanning from the late 1970s to the early 1990s.6 In these experiments, UI recipients
were subject to extensive checks of their search activity, or were provided services
including job-search workshops, additional information on job openings, and often
even direct job placements. Job-search experiments combined elements of monitor-
ing, training, and assistance. States require all UI claimants to submit evidence of
   5
    Bergemann and van den Berg (2008) survey job search assistance programs in Europe.
   6
    The six job search experiments are the Nevada Claimant Placement Program, Charleston
Claimant Placement and Work Test Demonstration, New Jersey UI Reemployment Demonstration,
Nevada Claimant Employment Program, Washington Alternative Work Search Experiment, and the
Wisconsin Eligibility Review Pilot Project.



                                            6
their job search efforts (e.g., details of employer contacts), but often actual enforce-
ment is weak. In some of the experiments, enforcement was increased substantially.
For example, in the Charleston Claimant Placement and Work Test Demonstration
and in the Nevada Claimant Placement Program, UI claimants were actively moni-
tored and required to report every week to employment services who would check on
their eligibility.7 Four experiments, Charleston, New Jersey, Washington, and Wis-
consin, required that claimants groups attend a seminar on how to find a job. The
intensity of the seminar varied across locations. The Charleston workshop lasted ap-
proximately three hours and provided a forum for discussing basic search and inter-
viewing strategies. The Washington workshop lasted two days and included training
on skills assessment, interview and application techniques, and preparing resumes.
Job-finding services provided also differed substantially. Some experiments offered
very little extra services, while others offered substantial assistance to job search. In
the Charleston experiment, claimants were placed in the state job-matching system
and a job-development attempt or referral was made for each claimant. In New Jer-
sey, a job resource center was set up in each office and listings of job openings and
telephones were made available to the unemployed.
    A more recent set of experiments, part of the National Evaluation of Welfare-to-
Work Strategies (NEWWS) conducted between 1991-1999, mandated some welfare
recipients to participate in “job clubs”, i.e., job search activities including instructions
for resume preparation, job search, and interviewing, as well as offering supervised
“phone rooms” where participants could call prospective employers and seek job
leads. Some sites employed job developers on staff who searched for job leads in the
local community on behalf of the unemployed.
    In what follows, we concentrate our attention on the Job Search Assistance com-
ponent of these programs. In an extension, we also analyze Job Search Monitoring
alongside assistance.8
Work-based activities: The most notable movement following the PROWRA leg-
islation has been toward a “work-first” approach in which recipients and new appli-
   7
      Ashenfelter, Ashmore, and Dechenes (2005) discuss randomized experiments in Connecticut,
Massachusetts, Virginia and Tennessee conducted in the mid 1980s which incorporated only stricter
enforcement and verification of job search, and did not contain elements of training or assistance.
    8
      We abstract from the analysis of job-search skill augmentation programs. Wunsch (2012) studies
the optimal design of such programs in the context of the German labor market.


                                                 7
cants for benefits are moved as quickly as possible into work of any kind (Moffitt,
2003). The types of jobs performed by welfare recipients assigned to work activ-
ities involve basic unskilled tasks such as food preparation and delivery, janitorial,
maintenance, and custodial tasks in low-income housing blocks or in schools, street
and park cleaning, garbage collection, entry-level clerical tasks, housekeeping, car-
ing for the children and the elderly, etc. (Brock et al., 1993). Employers are usually
nonprofit organizations, public agencies clustering in social services, and sometimes
private for-profit employers.
   The intent of the program changes substantially from location to location. Ac-
cording to Fagnoni (2000) –a comprehensive report to Congress on work-site activi-
ties in several U.S. locations– there is a “continuum” of work-based policies ranging
from those which can be represented as “work in exchange for benefits” to those
which are heavily supplemented with job search assistance and/or training and there-
fore represent a “stepping stone to private employment.”
    In the former class of pure work-fare programs, the emphasis is on the idea of
personal responsibility: work is a pre-condition to receive public assistance. For
example, in the West Virginia Community Work Experience, and in New York City
Work Experience programs, work was the only activity; there was no training, job-
search assistance, or attempt to further job placement. Required work hours were
calculated based on TANF plus Food Stamps benefits divided by the minimum wage
(Fagnoni, 2000). We label this type of work-based activities Mandatory Work.
    The latter class of programs is, instead, designed with the aim of guiding the
participant towards long-term, private, unsubsidized employment.9 This objective is
pursued in different ways across states.10 In some programs (e.g., Washington State
Community Job Initiative, and Vermont Community Service Employment Program),
while employed on community service jobs, clients receive individualized job search
assistance from the staff of the program or of collaborating agencies. Activities in-
clude job readiness workshops, job clubs, soft skills training, and assistance to job
search through the use of computerized job banks (Pavetti and Strong, 2001). In other
   9
      For example, a common feature is that participants do not work in exchange for TANF benefits,
but they receive a paycheck from their employer subsidized (often entirely) by TANF funds or other
funding, pay FICA and payroll taxes. As a result, they qualify for EITC, unemployment insurance,
and social security benefits.
   10
      Kirby et al. (2002) report that as of May 2001, there were approximately 40 work-based programs
of this type around the country.


                                                 8
programs, participants are initially carefully matched with an employer and, while
there is no contractual obligation on the part of the employer to hire the participant,
there is a mutual expectation of this outcome if the participant performs well. Exam-
ples of this design are the Philadelphia TWC program (Pavetti and Strong, 2001), the
Massachusetts Supported Work program (Fagnoni, 2000), and the Forest City PREP
program (Kirby et al., 2002). We label this type of work-based activities, which com-
bine a work requirement with an active effort to assist job search and job placement,
Transitional Work.11
    Finally, for low-income employed households, the key pillar of the US welfare
system is the Earned Income Tax Credit, an earning subsidy program introduced in
1975, and greatly expanded since then. Our analysis includes the use of history-
dependent wage subsidies with the purpose of making work more attractive, relative
to non-employment, for unskilled individuals.


3 Economic environment
We now describe an economic environment where the policies of Section 2 arise as
activities (i.e., choice of effort and use of technologies) of the individual. Throughout
the analysis, we assume that employment in the primary sector is an absorbing state,
and focus on the optimal design of a welfare program for jobless individuals.12
Demographics and preferences: Individuals are infinitely lived. Preferences are
time-separable and the future is discounted at rate β ∈ (0, 1). Period utility over
consumption c and effort a is given by u(c) − v (a). We impose that c ≥ 0, and that
u (·) is strictly increasing, strictly concave and smooth. The disutility of effort v (a)
is normalized to a, without loss of generality.
Activities and effort: An individual can either rest, search for a job, or work. We
begin by assuming that search and work are mutually exclusive, and relax this as-
  11
      Many transitional work programs also include skill development components (e.g., training re-
lated to the target job, workshops on job readiness and adhering to workplace norms). Since we have
abstracted from the training component in job search-based programs, we abstract from it also in the
context of work-based programs.
   12
      The optimal unemployment compensation contract with job separation and multiple unemploy-
ment spells is studied by Hopenhayn and Nicolini (2009). Their findings are relevant to our set up only
in the sense that, while we assume an exogenous value for initial promised utility of the unemployed,
with multiple spells this initial value would be endogenously determined by the employment history.

                                                  9
sumption in Section 7. Rest corresponds to zero effort (a = 0) . Work uses the whole
effort endowment (a = ē). Search requires effort level e ∈ (0, ē) .
Human capital: At any point in time, agents are endowed with a stock of human cap-
ital (skills) h ≥ 0. During unemployment, human capital depreciates geometrically
and deterministically at rate δ ∈ [0, 1] and follows the law of motion:

                                    h′ = (1 − δ) h                                   (1)

Note that, given an initial level of human capital h0 at the start of the unemployment
spell, unemployment duration d of a worker with human capital h can be recovered
as d = log (h/h0 ) / log (1 − δ).
Production technologies: There are two types of production technologies in the
economy, which we call primary and secondary. They both require effort ē. We think
of the primary technology as the private sector, and of the secondary technology as
the government or non-profit sector.
    An agent of type h employed on the primary production technology produces
output ω (h). We let ω (·) be a continuous and increasing function, with ω (h) ∈
[0, ωmax ], and ω (0) = 0. Note that, human capital depreciation induces wage depre-
ciation –i.e., a deterioration of the agent’s productivity in the primary sector– along
the unemployment spell. Access to an employment opportunity (i.e., a job) in the pri-
mary sector is frictional, i.e., a primary job is not always available for an individual.
Below we describe the friction in detail.
   The principal can, instead, always make a secondary job readily available to the
individual upon payment of κw units of consumption (the government-job adminis-
tration cost). This secondary technology produces an amount ω ≥ 0, independently
of h.
    This dual-sector structure is meant to represent a labor market where finding a job
vacancy that matches the agent’s occupational skills, and hence paying proportionally
to h, takes time, but allocating an agent to perform a simple task (e.g., janitor, fast-
food cook, care worker, street sweeper, etc...) in a government agency, or in a non-
profit organization, is always feasible, upon payment of an administrative cost.
Private search technology: It is useful to distinguish two distinct stages in the pro-
cess of searching for a primary sector job: application and interview. In the first

                                           10
stage, an agent of type h locates all her job opportunities, sends out applications and
she may be re-contacted by employers with probability m (h, a), a function which is
strictly increasing in h for a = e, and identically equal to zero if a = 0.
   If the agent is re-contacted, a meeting (e.g., a job interview or a trial period)
between employer and agent takes place. In this second stage, the firm and the agent
meet and draw an idiosyncratic outcome: with probability θ(r) the worker is retained
by the firm, where r is the worker’s “retention action”. We let r ∈ {0, 1} and θ(1) ≡
θ > θ(0) = 0. The worker has control of the interview and can always, by choosing
r = 0, make sure that it fails and that she does not receive a job offer.13 Putting both
stages of the search technology together, the job finding probability is

                                  π(h, a, r) = θ(r)m (h, a) ,                                  (2)

where it is useful to note that if a = 0 or r = 0, then π = 0. Moreover, since m ≤ 1,
the job finding rate π ∈ [0, θ). It is important to note that, as the unemployment spell
progresses and h declines, so does the hazard rate since the set of job opportunities
shrinks. Let y denote the outcome of the search activity during unemployment, with
y ∈ {f, s}, where f denotes “failure” and s “success”.
Assisted search technology: The principal has the opportunity to relieve the unem-
ployed from searching privately and entirely devolve the job-seeking activity to an
agency which acts on behalf of the unemployed. Upon payment of a fixed cost κs ,
the agency sends out a fixed maximum number of applications which determine a
contact rate m̄. We denote by λ̄ the value θm̄ which is the highest job finding rate
achievable with assisted search.
   When h is large, and m (h, e) > m̄, then assisted search is less effective than
private search and its job finding rate is λ (r) = θ(r)m̄, which is independent of h
and lower than the private contact rate π(h, e, r). When h is low, and m (h, e) ≤ m̄,
then the agency has the ability to apply to all the available job opportunities and
the job finding probability of an individual using the assisted search technology is
λ (h, r) = π (h, e, r) , exactly as if she exerted search effort privately.
       Finally note that the use of assisted search allows to bypass the moral hazard
  13
     For example, the worker can appear “sloppy” and “uninterested” about the job at the interview,
or pretend she is not competent in the required tasks.



                                               11
problem due to the unobservability of the search effort required at the application
stage, but not the one due to the action r that determines whether the worker is re-
tained by the firm after the initial contact.


4 Contractual relationship
We now introduce a risk-neutral planner/government (principal) who faces an in-
tertemporal budget constraint and a real interest rate equal to β −1 − 1. At time t = 0,
the planner offers the unemployed worker (agent) an insurance contract that maxi-
mizes the expected discounted stream of net revenues (fiscal revenues minus expen-
ditures) and guarantees the agent at least an expected discounted utility level U0 . The
value of U0 should be thought of as an exogenous parameter measuring the “gen-
erosity” of the welfare system (e.g., the outcome of voting or a political process).
We study the contract when the individual has no access to insurance markets, credit
markets, or storage.14
Information structure: The use of the private and assisted search technologies and
their employment outcome y is observable and contractible. Initial human capital
is observable, and since depreciation is deterministic, unemployment duration fully
reveals the dynamics of human capital. Output during both primary and secondary
work is observable and, since the technology is deterministic, work effort is con-
tractible. However, search effort and the retention action are private information of
the agent and under her control: these are the sources of moral hazard.
Contract: At every node, the contract specifies a consumption level for the agent,
recommendations on the search or work effort level to exert, on the retention action,
and on the use of available technologies: private search, assisted search, or work on
  14
     If available, the agent would purchase private insurance against the event she remains jobless, if
available. In absence of such markets, she would choose to self-insure by borrowing and saving. In
Pavoni and Violante (2005), we show that when agents have anonymous access to credit markets, but
face a no-borrowing constraint, the optimal contract outlined here can be implemented with a simple
additional instrument: a tax on savings. This tax must be large enough to dissuade the agent from
jointly saving and not searching. The tax induces the actively searching agent to borrow by reducing
the after-tax interest rate. But because of the no-borrowing constraint, the agent optimally chooses to
sit at the kink of her budget constraint and remain hand-to-mouth. The presence of a hidden storage
technology with a negative real return (e.g., because of inflation, the risk of theft, etc.) puts, implicitly,
an upper bound on this saving tax.


                                                     12
            Table 1: Mapping between effort level and technologies into policies

              Private   Assisted   Private Search &   Secondary     Assisted Search &     None
              Search    Search     Assisted Search    Production   Secondary Production
 Effort         UI        ×                ×            MW                 TW             ×
No effort       ×         JA               ×              ×                 ×             SA


the secondary technology. During the unemployment spell, the consumption level
corresponds to the unemployment compensation; during (primary) employment, the
difference between the consumption level and the wage implies a wage subsidy, if
positive, and a tax if negative.
   The period t components of the contract are contingent on all publicly observable
histories up to t and the search-effort and retention-action recommendations must
be incentive compatible. Moreover, at every t, we allow the planner to specify the
contract contingent on the publicly observable realization xt ∈ [0, 1] of a uniform
random variable Xt . This “randomization” may be used in the optimal contract to
convexify the planner’s problem and, thus, enhance utility (Phelan and Townsend,
1991; Phelan and Stacchetti, 2001). A contract is a welfare program.


4.1 Components of the contract as policy instruments of the wel-
        fare program
The combination of recommendations on the search effort level (0, e) and the work
effort level (0, ē) to expend, on the retention action r, and on the use of technolo-
gies (private search, search assistance, and secondary production) configures only
five possible options. All other combinations can be easily excluded: 1) prescribing
positive search effort with the use of the assisted search technology would be redun-
dant; 2) prescribing the use of private search or secondary production and no effort
is not optimal since the technologies require effort as an input to be productive. Sim-
ilarly, we can exclude: 3) recommending the low retention action (r = 0) and the
use of search assistance, as the expenditure κs would be wasted; 4) simultaneously
prescribing r = 0 and use of private search, since the planner could always recom-
mend zero effort and save the agent the disutility of high effort. On this account, the
contract always features r = 1 and, in what follows, we drop the explicit dependence


                                               13
of the hazard rates π (·) and λ (·) from r.
    We label the residual five options “policies” of the welfare program, and we index
them with i. We denote as “Unemployment Insurance” (i = UI) the joint recom-
mendation of private search and positive search effort. The combination of zero effort
together with the use of the assisted search technology corresponds to “Job Search
Assistance” (i = JA). The zero effort recommendation without the use of any
technology denotes “Social Assistance” (i = SA). A positive effort recommenda-
tion paired with the use of the secondary production technology denotes “Mandatory
Work” (i = MW ). Finally, since the costly assisted search technology does not
require any effort, it can be used in conjunction with the secondary production func-
tion. We call this combination of work and search assistance “Transitional Work”
(i = T W ). Table 1 summarizes these combinations.


4.2 Recursive formulation
Following Spear and Srivastava (1987) and Abreu, Pearce, and Stacchetti (1990),
we formulate and solve this problem recursively. The recursive formulation requires
two state variables: human capital h (or equivalently the unemployment duration d)
and the continuation utility U promised by the contract. The planner takes the initial
conditions of this pair (U0 , h0 ) as given.
    Exploiting this recursive representation, consider an unemployed agent who en-
ters the period with state (U, h). At the beginning of the period, the planner selects
the optimal policy instrument i(U, h) by solving

                      V (U, h) =          max              V i (U, h)
                                   i∈{JA,M W,SA,T W,U I}


where the function V is the upper envelope of the values associated to the different
policies which, in turn, we denote by V i . In choosing a particular policy, implicitly,
the planner also chooses an effort recommendation a(U, h), a transfer c(U, h) and the
continuation utilities U y (U, h) conditional on the outcome y of (private or assisted)
search, when recommended. We describe these additional choices in the next section.
   As anticipated, the planner in general may decide to use randomizations through




                                          14
a random variable X. In this case, the value function for the planner solves
                                            Z       1
                      V (U, h) =                        max V (U (x) , h) dx        (3)
                                                0 U (x)∈D
                           s.t.        :    Z       1
                             U =                        U (x) dx
                                                0


where the constraint says that the planner is committed to keep his promises: it must
deliver to the agent continuation utility U in expected value terms (i.e., ex-ante, with
respect to the possible shock realizations x).


4.3 Policies
We now describe in detail the planner problem during employment and for each of
the five policy instruments available during the welfare program.
Primary employment (wage tax/subsidy): Consider a worker with state (U, h) em-
ployed on a primary sector job. Since private employment is an absorbing state with-
out informational asymmetries, the planner simply solves

                    W (U, h) = max
                                 s
                                   ω (h) − c + βW (U s , h)
                                           c,U
                          s.t.     :                                                (4)
                           U = u (c) − ē + βU s

where ē is the work effort level required to produce. The planner will provide full
consumption smoothing to the agent, and thus promised utility is constant over time,
i.e., U s = U. The promise-keeping constraint implies that in every period the optimal
transfer cE during employment is constant and satisfies cE (U) = u−1 ((1 − β) U + ē).
Therefore, the magnitude

                                 τ (U, h) = ω (h) − cE (U)                          (5)

is the implicit tax (or subsidy, if negative) the government imposes on employed
workers. State-contingent taxes and subsidies are a key component of an optimal
welfare plan.


                                                        15
    By inspecting problem (4), it is easy to see that the value of employment has the
following form:
                                  ω (h)     u−1 ((1 − β) U + ē)
                     W (U, h) =          −                                        (6)
                                  1−β               1−β
and therefore W is a continuous function, increasing in h, and decreasing, concave
and continuously differentiable in U.
Unemployment Insurance (UI): When the worker is enrolled in the unemployment
insurance scheme, the problem of the planner is

V U I (U, h) =     max −c + β π(h)W (U s , h′ ) + (1 − π(h))V(U f , h′ )
                                                                        
                  c,U f ,U s
       s.t.   :                                                                       (7)
         U = u (c) − e + β π(h)U s + (1 − π(h)) U          f
                                                            
                                                                 ,
         U ≥ u (c) + βU f ,                                                       (IC-S)
        Us ≥ Uf                                                                   (IC-R)

where e is the effort level during search. Next period human capital h′ is generated
                                                  
through the law of motion (1). The pair U s , U f are the lifetime utilities promised
by the planner contingent on the outcomes (s or f ) of search. Recall that the outcome
of search is verifiable. The first constraint above describes the law of motion of the
state variable U (the promise-keeping constraint). The second constraint (IC-S) states
that payments have to be incentive compatible to induce search. The third constraint
(IC-R) states that payments have to be incentive compatible to induce the worker to
act so that, in case a contact is made, the firm will retain her. Therefore, the value of
employment for the job seeker must be weakly above the value of unemployment.
   By combining the promise keeping constraint and the incentive compatibility
constraint on search effort (IC-S), we can rewrite the latter as

                                                  e
                                    Us − Uf ≥          .                           (IC-S)
                                                βπ (h)

Inspecting this new formulation of (IC-S), it is easy to see that the additional incentive
compatibility constraint on the retention action (IC-R) will never bind during UI,
since the promised utility spread necessary to induce high search effort is also large
enough to induce the high retention action (r = 1). Finally, the expressions for V


                                           16
and W are given by equations (3) and (4), respectively.
Job Search Assistance (JA): The problem of the planner that chooses to use the
assisted search technology and recommends no effort is:

V JA (U, h) =        max −c − κs + β λ (h) W (U s , h′ ) + (1 − λ (h))V(U f , h′ )
                                                                                  
                    c,U f ,U s
        s.t.    :                                                                                  (8)
          U = u (c) + β λ (h) U s + (1 − λ (h)) U f ,
                                                  

         Us ≥ Uf .                                                                            (IC-R)

Notice the similarity between problem (JA) and problem (UI): the two are identi-
cal, except for the fact that there is no effort cost in the promise-keeping constraint
and no incentive-compatibility constraint (IC-S), in exchange for the additional per
period cost κs .15 Another difference with (UI) is that, for high levels of h, λ (·) is
independent of h, as explained in Section 3, and lower than π (h) . Clearly, in JA the
retention constraint (IC-R) is likely to be binding because, as opposed to JA, private
employment requires effort.

Social Assistance (SA): In social assistance, the agent is “released” by the planner
for the current period, in the sense that the planner does not demand high effort or the
use of technologies, but simply transfers some income to the worker. The problem of
the planner is

                            V SA (U, h) = max −c + βV(U f , h′ )
                                                c,U f
                                    s.t.   :                                                       (9)
                                      U = u(c) + βU f .

The expression for V is given by equation (3) and the constraint describes how the
promised utility U can be delivered by a combination of current and future payments.
It is natural to think of SA as a pure income-assistance program.
Mandatory Work (MW): When the planner assigns the worker to the secondary
  15
    In this context, the assisted search cost κs can be interpreted as the salary of the agency em-
ployee (“caseworker”) who inspects available vacancies to find a suitable match for the agent, plus the
additional administrative expenditures associated to this task.



                                                 17
production technology, at a cost κw , its problem becomes

                   V M W (U, h) = max −c − κw + ω + βV(U f , h′ )
                                            c,U f
                                 s.t.   :                                         (10)
                                  U = u (c) − ē + βU f .

   The planner gives up search in the labor market and the worker produces an
amount ω by paying a utility cost in terms of work effort ē. Recall that work ef-
fort can be observed because output is deterministic. Thus, there is no incentive
compatibility constraint during mandatory work. Under this policy, the agent works
in exchange for benefits and has no chance of transiting into private employment.
Transitional Work (TW): When the planner uses the assisted search technology
and, in addition, assigns the agent to work on the secondary production technology,
the planner’s problem is

V T W (U, h) =       max −c − κs − κw + ω + β λ (h) W (U s , h) + (1 − λ (h))V(U f , h′ )
                                                                                         
                    c,U f ,U s
        s.t.   :                                                                          (11)
         U = u (c) − ē + β λ (h) U s + (1 − λ (h)) U       f
                                                             
                                                                  ,
        Us ≥ Uf.                                                                (IC-R)

The way to interpret this policy option, in light of our discussion of Section 2, is
that while the agent is required to produce in a secondary sector job, the caseworker
actively assists her search for a suitable employment in the primary sector. Note that,
because of the use of the assisted search technology, also T W features the incentive
constraint (IC-R).
   It is convenient to state some basic properties of these value functions. By apply-
ing fairly standard results in dynamic programming, the convexified upper envelope
V inherits the same continuity, monotonicity and concavity properties of u, but two
caveats are worth mentioning. First, monotonicity in U is guaranteed whenever at
(U, h) the consumption level c associated to the optimal program is positive (e.g.,
whenever u (0) = −∞). Second, the concavity of V in U is warranted thanks to
the randomization in (3) . Finally, the properties of V are inherited by the value


                                                    18
functions of each single policy V i . In particular, all the problems defining policies
i ∈ {JM, MW, SA, T W, UI} are also concave, and each V i is continuously differ-
entiable in U. See Pavoni and Violante (2007) for details.


4.4 Economic forces in the choice of policies
To understand the economic forces at work in the choice of policies, it is useful to
compare, for a given pair (U, h) the costs and returns of each policy relative to Social
Assistance. SA is a useful benchmark because it has no returns for the planner and,
since effort is zero in SA, its cost to the planner is simply that of delivering promised
utility U by implementing full insurance, i.e., cSA (U) = u−1 ((1 − β) U) .
Costs: All the policies that require effort to succeed (MW, TW, UI) entail an effort
compensation cost for the planner. Since u (c) is concave and disutility from effort
is separable, as U increases, the marginal utility of consumption falls whereas the
marginal disutility of effort is fixed. The higher U, the higher the transfer the planner
has to pay to the agent to deliver the promised utility in order to compensate her for
the fixed effort cost. Therefore, the effort compensation cost, a form of wealth effect
due to the fact that leisure is a normal good in our model, increases with U. This is a
central force in our characterization.
   Some of the policies include the incentive compatibility constraint related to pri-
vate search (IC-S) and the one related to the retention action (IC-R), respectively:

                                                  e
                                 Us − Uf ≥                                     (IC-S)
                                                βπ (h)

                                       Us ≥ Uf                           (IC-R)

   Recall that (IC-S) is present in UI and (IC-R) is present in JA, TW and UI. How-
ever, as explained, (IC-R) is not binding in UI because (IC-S) requires a strictly pos-
itive gap between state-contingent promised utilities already. The (IC-R) constraint
is not binding in T W either because, as we will see below, once the optimal program
has reached T W it will never recommend an effort level lower than ē thereafter.
    Satisfying the incentive compatibility constraints is costly since the agent has
concave utility and dislikes consumption (and, hence, promised utility) to be spread
out across states. A planner facing an incentive compatibility constraint has to pay

                                           19
the agent a larger transfer, on average, to deliver a given level of promised utility
U. These incentive costs for both IC-S and IC-R are increasing in U, since u−1 has
convex first derivative.16 Moreover, the cost associated to IC-S is decreasing in h.
As the unemployment spell progresses and the job-finding probability decreases, the
employment outcome –that can only be achieved if the worker exerts the high job-
search effort level– becomes less likely, and the planner needs to differentiate even
more the future promised utilities across states to induce the agent to search.
    The third, and final, cost component are the fixed costs (κs , κw ) of using the
assisted search technology (during JA and T W ) and the secondary production tech-
nology (during T W and MW ).
Returns: The return to the planner of using the secondary production technology (in
MW and TW) is output ω. The main return of using private or assisted search is that,
with positive probability, a match in the primary sector is created. Recall from (6)
that the net returns to employment in the primary sector for the planner are increasing
in human capital h. There is also an effort compensation cost which makes the return
to primary employment decreasing in promised utility U. Therefore, the net returns
of private employment are small for low h and high U. Finally, the assisted search
technology has an additional return relative to private search: the planner saves on
the effort compensation cost and on the costs associated to the incentive compatibility
constraint IC-S, since job search can take place without unobservable effort.


5 Parameterization
To parameterize our model, we use a variety of data sources. Our principal source of
data is the National Evaluation of Welfare-to-Work Strategies (NEWWS), a longitu-
dinal study that was administered by the US Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices from 1991 to 1999. Its objective was to estimate the effectiveness of welfare-
to-work programs, and specifically “what works best, and for whom?”.17
  16
      The inverse of marginal utility 1/u′ is the marginal cost to the planner of promising an additional
unit of utility U to the agent. By “incentive cost” we mean the extra cost in units of consumption
of promising the agent a state-contingent utility lottery delivering U necessary to satisfy incentive
compatibility, relative to the cost of promising U with certainty. If 1/u′ is convex, this incentive cost
is increasing in the level of U.
   17
      Data files from the NEWWS evaluation are maintained by the National Center for Health Statis-
tics (NCHS) and are publicly accessible. The evaluation was conducted by MDRC under contract to

                                                  20
     The study covered eleven mandatory Welfare-to-Work programs in seven distinct
locations and included over 40,000 individuals over a five-year follow-up period.18
It is based on random assignment to treatment groups (subject to program require-
ments) and to control groups (without any requirement). The vast majority of pro-
gram members were single mothers. In particular, 94% are women, 95% are singles
and all have children. The median number of children is two. Over half of the sample
is composed by blacks and hispanics. The average age of participants is 30.5 years
old. 42% of the participants are high-school dropouts, 51% have a high-school de-
gree or GED, and only 7% has some years of college education. The average years
of education in the sample is 11.2.19
    The study contains several data sources, three of which are used in our analy-
sis. The “full impact” sample collects five years of administrative records on demo-
graphic characteristics, earnings, and benefits for both treatment and control group
members from all seven sites. Additional data on outcomes for adults and children
were collected by interviewing a random sub-sample of about 5,000 members around
two years after their date of random assignment and, in four of the seven sites, around
their five-year anniversary. This survey includes data on the assignment of each par-
ticipant to activities over the period, employment history before assignment, and
history of non-cash benefits receipts. The third data source collects data on the costs
of each activity drawn from state, county, and local fiscal records, supportive service
payment records, administrative records, and case file participation records.
     We now turn to the choice of parameters. The unit of time is set to one month.
It is useful to divide the parameters of the model into three groups: the preference
parameters {u (·) , β, ē, e}; the labor market parameters {ω (h) , δ, π (h)}; the param-
                                                                        
eters of the assisted search and secondary production technologies λ̄, ω, κw , κs .
    We pick a value of of 0.9967 for the monthly discount factor in order to match
an interest rate of 4% on an annual basis, and use a logarithmic specification for
the period utility over consumption. Based on the evidence surveyed in Pavoni and
Violante (2007), we set ē = 0.67. This value represents a cost of working of 49%
the Federal government from 1989 through 2002.
   18
      The seven locations are: Atlanta GA (2 programs), Grand Rapids MI (2 programs), Riverside CA
(2 programs), Columbus OH (2 programs), Detroit MI, Portland OR, and Oklahoma City, OK. This
last location offered programs which are not of interest for our study.
   19
      For more details, see Table 2.3 “Selected Baseline Characteristics of Full Impact Sample Mem-
bers,” pages 43-46 in NEWWS (2001).


                                                21
in consumption equivalent terms. Within female labor force participation models,
Attanasio et al. (2008), Hausman (1980), Cogan (1981), and Eckstein and Wolpin
(1989) computed costs of, respectively, 21%, 27%, 41% and 62% in consumption
equivalent terms (ē = 0.24, ē = 0.31, ē = 0.50, and ē = 0.97).20 We chose a value
on the high end of the range of the existing estimates for women since our sample is
composed of low-skilled single mothers who, arguably, have a high cost of working.
    There is ample evidence showing that the time unemployed individuals devote to
job search is significantly lower than the time the employed ones devote to market
work. Krueger and Muller (2010) conclude, from the American Time Use Survey
(ATUS), that the average daily duration of job search, for those non-employed indi-
viduals who actively seek employment, is 160 minutes. In light of this estimate, we
target an effort cost of job search equal to 1/3 (160/480) of that from work, which
yields e = 0.67/3 = 0.22.
   Without loss of generality, we use a linear monthly earnings function ω (h) =
ωh. We normalize h so that one unit corresponds to monthly earnings of $100. In
the NEWWS data, initial monthly earnings upon entering the program are around
$1,000, and hence h0 = 10. We choose an annual human capital depreciation rate δ
of 15 percent (see Pavoni and Violante, 2007, for details).21
    The unemployment hazard function π (h) is estimated from the monthly Current
Population Survey (CPS) files over the period May 1995-April 1996, in the middle
of the NEWWS sample period.22 By selecting a sample of single women, 18-45
years of age with at most a high-school degree we stay as close as possible to the
NEWWS sample. Overall, we have 5,612 observations. The average age of the sam-
ple is 30, and median weekly wage is $250, consistent with the NEWWS sample (see
NEWWS, 2001, Table 2.3). Our estimation strategy follows closely the maximum
likelihood estimator outlined by Flinn (1986) and assumes a Weibull distribution
  20
      With log utility, the expression for the consumption-equivalent loss is 1 − 1/ exp (ew ) .
  21
      As we explain in Pavoni and Violante (2007), the existing microeconomic estimates of wage
depreciation span a wide range. At the high end, Keane and Wolpin (1997) estimate an average annual
wage depreciation rate of 23%. At the other end, the estimates of Jacobson, LaLonde and Sullivan
(1993, Table 3) imply an annual depreciation of 10%. In the middle of the spectrum, Neal’s (1995,
Table 3) estimates imply an annual decay rate of 17.5%. Addison and Portugal (1989) implicitly
estimate a yearly skill depreciation rate of 16%.
   22
      Within the window 1991-1999, the year from May 1995 to April 1996 witnessed a very stable
unemployment rate, always between 5.5% and 5.7%. We choose these 12 months for our estimation
in order to avoid issues of non-stationarity in the parameters.


                                               22
                                                     Unemployment hazard function                                                             Unemployment hazard function
                                      0.3                                                                                         0.3
                                                              Assisted search hazard (λ(h))
       Exit rate from unemployment                            Private search hazard (π(h))




                                                                                                   Exit rate from unemployment
                                     0.25                                                                                        0.25



                                      0.2                                                                                         0.2



                                     0.15                                                                                        0.15



                                      0.1                                                                                         0.1
                                            0   10     20     30     40     50      60        70                                     10   9        8        7          6     5   4
                                                        Months of unemployment                                                                         Human capital



Figure 1: Exit rates from unemployment π(h) and λ(h). The π(h) function is mod-
eled as a Weibull hazard and is estimated on monthly CPS data May 1995-April
1996) for single women aged 18-45 with at most a high-school degree (left panel).
The mapping from durations to human capital (right panel) is based on a monthly
wage of $1, 000 (h = 10) at duration zero, and a monthly depreciation rate of 0.0135.
The constant portion of the λ(h) function is estimated based on the exit rate into
private employment out of “Job Clubs” from NEWWS data.

αφdφ−1 where d is the duration of the unemployment spell. Our estimation yields
parameter estimates of α = 0.36, and φ = 0.83. Since φ < 1, the estimated hazard
displays negative duration dependence.23 Figure 1 plots the estimated hazard as a
function of duration, and its mapping into levels of h.
    To estimate λ̄, the initial flat region of the hazard rate from JA and T W , we focus
on the transition rates into private employment from “Job Clubs”, the program in the
NEWWS data that most resembles to to job search assistance, at short durations.24
The average hazard over unemployment durations of at most 6 months, weighted
by the number of observations at each duration, yields λ̄ = 0.20.25 To fix ideas,
  23
      We then map this function of duration, into a function of human capital through a depreciation
rate of 15% per year and an initial earnings level equal to $1,000 (i.e., h0 = 100).
   24
      Here is the description of Job Clubs programs in the NEWWS: Programs ran assisted job search
activities, including classroom instruction on techniques for resume preparation, job search, and in-
terviewing, as well as a supervised “phone room” where participants could call prospective employers
and search for job leads. Some sites employed job developers on staff, who searched for job leads in
the community. See NEWWS (2001, p. ES-9 and 15).
   25
      This estimate is robust to different assumptions in computing the hazard. For example, including
only spells of at most 4, 5, 7, or 8 months gives similar results. The NEWWS survey data contains
some monthly records of workers who are simultaneously reported as employed and participants of
“Job Clubs”. This overlap may reflect either very short job spells (less than one month in duration)
or measurement error. To deal with this data anomaly, whenever at month t we have an overlap,
and at month t + 1 an employment spell, we count it as a successful transition from Job Clubs into


                                                                                                   23
Figure 1 shows that our job search hazard reaches 0.20 for h = 8.9, or roughly 10
months into the unemployment spell for a worker who initially has human capital
h0 = 10. We note that Cebi and Woodbury (2011), who study the impact of the
Washington Alternative Work Search Experiment estimate a bi-weekly exit rate from
job-search assistance programs between 0.1 and 0.15 (see their Figure 1), supporting
our estimate of λ̄.
    The value of the output parameter ω is obtained from Kirby et al. (2002), who
analyze in detail six “Transitional Job” programs.26 Across their six sites, hourly
wages for workers on these programs vary between $5.15 and $8.5, and hours worked
vary between 20 and 40 (Kirby et al., Table 1). Using a baseline of 30 hours per week,
monthly output ranges between $618 and $1,020. On average, we obtain a value of
$819 for ω.27
   Among the six programs studied by Kirby et al. (2002), PREP Forrest City, AR,
and TWC Philadelphia, PA are the only two with a full breakdown of service costs
(Kirby et al., 2002, Table V.4). This breakdown can be used to estimate κs and κw .
In our calculation for κs we only include the cost component called “unsubsidized-
job development and placement” (whose description is the closest to the way we
modeled Job-Search Assistance). This component, gross of its share of “general
administration” costs, amounts to 14.2% and 13.4% of the total PREP and TWC
service costs programs, respectively. Applying the average of these two percentages
to the average total service costs across the six sites ($1,087 from Table V.5 in Kirby
et al.), we obtain a value of $150 of “per-worker per-month” cost κs .
    In our calculation for κw , we only include the cost component called “Transitional
Work” (whose description suggests these are costs paid to set-up the job for the wel-
fare recipient). Gross of its share of “general administration”, this cost amounts to
25.9% and 30.6% of the total PREP and TWC service costs programs, respectively.28
employment only if the worker was unemployed at month t − 1. Otherwise, we drop the record.
Slightly different sample selection criteria do not affect the final estimate.
   26
      The six programs studied are: PREP Forrest City, AR; Community Job Tacoma, WA; Community
Job Aberdeen, WA; TWC Philadelphia, PA; GoodWorks! Augusta, GA; CJP San Francisco, CA.
   27
      See also their Table V.2 for similar calculations.
   28
      Of the other components we exclude from κw and κs , the largest one, accounting for over half
of the total cost, is “pre-placement activities“. Kirby et al. (2002, page 82) describe them as fol-
lows: “The courses included information on work culture, developing resumes, interviewing skills,
managing money, and general life skills. Clients were also required to participate in a consumer credit
workshop and a substance abuse workshop.” Therefore, these activities consist mostly of classes aimed


                                                 24
                      Table 2: Summary of model’s parameterization

Parameter                  Symbol    Value                     Source

Preferences
Discount factor            β         0.9967
Work effort                ē        0.67                      Pavoni and Violante (2007)
Search effort              e         0.22                      Krueger and Muller (2010)

Labor market
Initial monthly earnings   h0        $1, 000                   NEWWS
Job search hazard          π (h)     Weibull αφdφ−1 with:      Monthly CPS (1995-1996)
                                     α = 0.36, φ = 0.83
Monthly depreciation       δ         0.0135                    Pavoni and Violante (2007)

Assisted search
Job search hazard          λ̄        0.20                      NEWWS;
                                                               Cebi and Woodbury (2011)
Administrative cost        κs        $150                      Kirby et al. (2002)

Secondary production
Output                     ω         $819                      Kirby et al. (2002)
Administrative cost        κw        $300                      NEWWS; Kirby et al. (2002);
                                                               Brock et al. (1993)
Monitoring
Administrative cost        κm        $5                        Ashenfelter et al. (2004)


Once the average of these two percentages is rescaled to all six programs, we obtain a
cost of $307. Our second source for κw is NEWWS cost data for the activity labeled
“Work Experience,” the closest activity to our Mandatory Work program.29 Remark-
ably, the average estimated cost per worker per month for this activity is $298, very
close to what we obtained from our first source (see NEWWS, 2001, Table 13.2, page
304-306). A third source of data is provided by Brock et al. (1993), a survey of eight
experimental studies of Mandatory Work programs conducted by the MDRC. Our
own calculations based on their cost breakdown for these programs yields a value of
at building job-readiness skills, a dimension we abstract from.
   29
      NEWWS (2001) defines Community Work Experience as programs requiring recipients to “work
off their grant” in community service jobs.


                                              25
$279 for κw .30 Based on these three sources, we set κw at $300.
   Table 2 summarizes all parameter values.


6 Optimal welfare programs
We are now ready to characterize the optimal welfare program. We begin by studying
in which regions of the state space (U, h) the various policies arise as optimal. The
state space can be divided into different connected areas, each corresponding to a
specific policy whose value dominates all the others. The state space can also be
thought of as a phase diagram, where U moves endogenously and h exogenously,
that dictates the optimal sequence of policies along the unemployment spell, for any
given initial pair (U0 , h0 ). Finally, we turn to the dynamics of unemployment benefits
and wage/taxes upon re-employment.

6.1 Optimal policies in the (U, h) space
By projecting the upper envelope V (U, h) = maxi V i (U, h) on the (U, h) state
space, we obtain a graphical representation of which policy is optimally implemented
at every (U, h) pair. Figure 2 depicts this projection at the calibrated values for the
model’s parameter.
     We start by interpreting Figure 2 as we move “horizontally” in the (U, h) space,
i.e., we let h change for a given level of utility entitlement U. Next, we study the
optimal policies as we move “vertically” through the diagram, i.e., we change U for
a given level of human capital h.
Moving horizontally (along h): For high levels of U and high levels of h (top left
region of Figure 2), the planner assigns the worker to UI because the job finding
probability π (h) and the wage ω (h) are both large. As human capital decreases
(still for this high level of promised utility) the job finding rate decreases and, in
order to save on the incentive cost associated to constraint IC-S, the planner shifts
from UI to JA. Finally, as human capital further depreciates, the return to assisted
search decreases because output in primary employment, a function of h, falls. The
  30
     Our calculation is based on their Tables 10 and 11. Table 10 reports a cost breakdown per partic-
ipant. We used the two components called “worksite activities” and “participant monitoring” which
includes worksite development, assignment of participants to positions, monitoring and sanctioning
functions. Table 11 reports the average duration of the program per participant.

                                                 26
Figure 2: Policies of the optimal welfare program in the (U, h) space. The small
arrows indicate the direction of the evolution of U and h under each policy. The two
sample paths plotted in the figure correspond to a search-based program (U0 = 475)
and a work-based program (U0 = 375).

planner finds it optimal to save on the search assistance cost and simply provides
the agent with a constant transfer in SA. Social Assistance tends therefore to emerge
for low h and high U, once the return to employment are too low and/or the effort
compensation cost is too high (top right region of Figure 2).
   Consider now moving horizontally across the state space for lower levels of U.
For low enough levels of U, TW appears in the state space in place of JA. The effort
compensation cost is low enough that, while the planner uses the assisted search
technology, it simultaneously finds it optimal to require the agent to work as well.
Similarly, moving to the right, MW appears instead of SA. The planner gives up the
search technology because its return is too small, since π (h) and ω (h) are too small,
and requires the agent to work in the secondary sector in exchange for her benefits.
Moving vertically (along U): As U decreases, the effort compensation cost declines
and the planner shifts from policies without effort (JA, SA) to policies requiring

                                          27
effort (UI, T W, MW ). The shift from SA to JA (neither one requiring effort) in the
upper part of Figure 2 is explained by two forces. First, as U falls, so does the cost
of satisfying the retention constraint (IC-R). Second, the effort compensation cost
during primary employment (a possible outcome of JA only) falls as U is reduced.31


6.2 Two types of optimal welfare programs
The optimal sequence of policies is dictated by the evolution of the state vector
(U, h). Conditional on unemployment, h declines monotonically. The evolution of
U depends on the specific policy. U is declining during UI and JA because of the
binding incentive constraints, but it remains constant during SA, MW and T W. Dur-
ing T W , the IC-R constraint is not binding because from then onward the program
always specifies the highest level of (work) effort.
   The main insight about optimal policy transitions is that there are two types of
welfare programs that are most likely to emerge as optimal, depending on the ini-
tial level of generosity U0 . The directional arrows in Figure 2 illustrate the policy
sequence in these two programs. After an initial, common spell, of UI a generous
(or deep-pocketed) principal would implement an optimal program based on search
which follows the sequence JA → SA. A more parsimonious (or more budget con-
strained) principal would, instead, implement an optimal program based on work
which follows the sequence T W → MW.
    For h0 = 10, our initial condition for human capital, the relative duration of each
policy depends on initial promised utility. We restrict attention to a high and a low
level, U0high = 475 and U0low = 375, which induce a search-based program and a
work-based program, respectively. In the search-based program, the planner uses UI
until month 9, then it switches into JA until month 47, and then starts implementing
SA, an absorbing state. In the work-based program, UI is used for the first 9 months
as well, T W for the subsequent 39 months, and then the planner switches into MW.
Overall, the switching times from UI to assisted search and from assisted search into
the absorbing program are quite similar across the two welfare programs.
  31
    The higher is h, the higher the level of promised utility U at which this switch takes place. The
reason is that the return to primary employment, present in JA but not in SA, is increasing in h.




                                                28
                                                          Payments (replacement ratio)                                                                  Subsidy/tax upon re−employment
                                     0.95                                                                                                1




                                                                                                            Fraction of current wage
          Fraction of initial wage
                                     0.85                                                                                               0.5




                                     0.75                                                                                                0


                                            UI                   JA                   SA                                                          UI             JA                  SA
                                     0.65                                                                                              −0.5
                                            0        10     20     30     40     50      60       70                                          0        10   20    30     40     50        60   70
                                                              Months in the program                                                                          Months in the program



                                                          Payments (replacement ratio)                                                                  Subsidy/tax upon re−employment
                                      0.8                                                                                                1

                                     0.75                                                                                                                     TW                     MW
                                                                                                                                                  UI




                                                                                                            Fraction of current wage
          Fraction of initial wage




                                                UI            TW                      MW
                                      0.7                                                                                               0.5

                                     0.65

                                      0.6                                                                                                0

                                                                                              u
                                     0.55                                        benefits (c )
                                                                                 net wage (ce)
                                      0.5                                                                                              −0.5
                                            0        10     20     30     40     50      60       70                                          0        10   20    30     40     50        60   70
                                                              Months in the program                                                                          Months in the program




Figure 3: Sequence of payments in two optimal welfare programs. The top two pan-
els plot benefits and re-employment tax/subsidy in the search-based program starting
at (U0 = 475). The bottom two panels correspond to the work-based program with
(U0 = 375).

6.3 Optimal sequence of payments and taxes/subsidies
Figure 3 plots the optimal path of welfare benefits and wage tax/subsidy upon re-
employment corresponding to the search-based program initialized at U0high and to
the work-based program initialized at U0low . In both cases the unemployed worker
starts at h0 = 10, and her job search is never successful, and hence after roughly 4
years she reaches an absorbing policy.
     Consider the search-based program first (top two panels). Unemployment bene-
fits fall during UI because of the binding IC-S constraint. Optimal replacement ratios
for UI benefits are high in search-based programs because of the high initial promised
utility. The top-left panel shows that satisfying the retention constraint during JA re-
quires both declining benefits and a positive wedge between promised consumption
upon employment ce (U, h) and benefits cu (U, h) during unemployment. The reason
is that the agent exerts no effort in JA whereas employment requires high effort ē,


                                                                                                       29
and hence she will choose r = 1 only if the principal promises a level of consump-
tion during employment high enough to compensate for the disutility of work effort.
This consumption wedge grows quickly as JA approaches SA and it entails both a
fast drop in unemployment benefits (left panel) and a fast rise in wage subsidy upon
reemployment (right panel).
    Moving to the work-based program, the bottom-left panel shows that the con-
sumption wedge is negligible in UI and is not present at all in T W . Recall that the
incentive constraint on the retention action IC-R is not binding during T W , since the
program always features an effort level ē from that point onward. As a result, the
principal can fully insure the agent upon her switch from UI into T W, as demon-
strated by the constant consumption path. This result illustrates clearly the effective-
ness of the work-based policies as a way of providing incentives (to search and to
be retained) to the worker without creating too much consumption dispersion. The
punishment for unsuccessful search is administered by enforcing work effort instead
of cutting welfare benefits.
    Finally, because of the higher average level of promised utility and the necessity
of creating a positive consumption wedge, wage subsidies are more generous and
appear at earlier durations in search-based program, compared to work-based welfare
programs. For example, 30 months into the program, T W is still associated with a
small tax upon reemployment, whereas JA requires a subsidy around 25 percent.
Therefore, in order to be effective, Job Search Assistance must be combined with
generous re-employment subsidies.32


7 Extensions

7.1 Joint search-and-work
So far, we have assumed that (i) work takes up the whole effort endowment, and
therefore (ii) search and work are mutually exclusive activities. We now relax these
assumptions and allow part-time work on the secondary technology at effort level
   32
      This normative conclusion receives some support in the empirical literature. Meyer (1995) sur-
veys four re-employment bonus experiments based on random assignment. Bonuses were determined
as a fraction of UI benefits, in turn proportional to previous earnings. Estimated effects are often im-
precise and their range wide, but in general larger bonuses led to significantly shorter unemployment
spells (Meyer, 1995, Table 2).


                                                  30
ē − e, which allows an individual to jointly search and work part-time. The cost and
output of the part-time secondary technology are proportional to hours worked, i.e.,
a fraction (ē − e) /ē of κw and ω, respectively. We retain the assumption that effort
when employed in the primary sector equals ē, i.e., private employment is full time.
   Our first result, which simplifies the analysis significantly, is that part-time work
on the secondary technology alone is never used in the contract. The reason is that
the principal can always randomize across policies to effectively achieve part-time
work. To see this, consider a randomization between SA and MW. Simple inspection
of problems (9) and (10) demonstrates that randomizing across the two policies with
probabilities e/ē and (ē − e) /ē, respectively, is equivalent to part-time MW. More-
over, the planner can always freely choose a different set of probabilities to achieve an
even higher value. Overall, randomizations always dominate part-time work alone.
   In light of these observations, the only additional policy that arises in the opti-
mal program is the joint use of private search and part-time work on the secondary
technology, which we call “Search and Work.”
Search and Work (SW): The problem of the planner is:
                                                       
                                               ē − e
    SW                                 w
                                                            + β π(h)W (U s , h′ ) + (1 − π(h))V(U f , h′ )
                                                                                                          
V        (U, h) =      max −c + (ω − κ )
                      c,U f ,U s                  ē
           s.t.   :                                                                                     (12)
            U = u (c) − ē + β π(h)U s + (1 − π(h)) U             f
                                                                   
                                                                        ,
            U ≥ u (c) − (ē − e) + βU f ,                                              (IC-S)
           Us ≥ Uf                                                                     (IC-R)

As for UI, the (IC-R) constraint is not binding and the (IC-S) constraint reduces
              
to β U s − U f ≥ e/π (s). Therefore UI and SW are easily comparable: SW is a
version of UI augmented with part-time work effort, and hence should be used in,
roughly, the same human capital range as UI, but for lower levels of promised utility
U corresponding to a lower effort compensation cost. Figure 4 illustrates that this is
precisely the area in the state space where SW emerges as optimal.




                                            31
Figure 4: Policies of the optimal welfare program in the (U, h) space in the presence
of Search and Work (SW). The small arrows indicate the direction of the evolution
of U and h under each policy.

7.2 Monitoring of agent’s search effort
As discussed in Section 2, there is a variety of job-search based programs. In some of
these programs, the emphasis is on monitoring and enforcing the individual private
search effort. Here, we introduce a monitoring technology, as in Pavoni and Violante
(2007), i.e., upon payment of a cost κm > 0, the job-search effort of the agent can
be perfectly observed and enforced by the planner.33 This cost should be interpreted
as the additional costs for the caseworker to monitor and enforce the search activity
of the unemployed agent. We maintain the assumption that the retention action r is
unmonitorable.
    Note that monitoring (i) would never be accompanied by a no-effort recommen-
dation, because the cost would be wasted; and (ii) would not be paired with the use
of assisted search for the same reason why private search is not used alongside with
  33
    Setty (2012) generalizes this analysis to the case where monitoring allows the principal to acquire
a costly imperfect signal of the agent’s effort that can be used in the contract.


                                                 32
assisted search. As a result, the only new policy that arises in our environment is one
where the planner prescribes search effort and the use of monitoring, which we call
Job Search Monitoring.

Job Search Monitoring (JM): The problem of the planner that chooses to monitor
the search effort of the agent is:

V JM (U, h) =       max −c − κm + β π(h)W (U s , hf ) + (1 − π(h))V(U f , hf )
                                                                              
                   c,U f ,U s
        s.t.   :                                                                   (13)
          U = u (c) − e + β π(h)U s + (1 − π(h)) U         f
                                                            
                                                                 ,
         Us ≥ Uf.                                                               (IC-R)

Notice the similarity between problem (JM) and problem (UI): the former is iden-
tical to (UI) except for the fact that there is no incentive-compatibility constraint
(IC-S) for effort in exchange for the additional per period cost κm .
    Monitoring could also be used when private search effort e is recommended
jointly with work effort ē − e on the secondary production technology. The only
change in problem (13) is that the planner’s value includes the terms (ω − κw ) ē−e
                                                                                     
                                                                                  ē
                                                                                       .
Instead of defining an extra policy, we use the term Job Search Monitoring in a broad
sense that also encompasses this latter case.

7.2.1 Results

We first discuss the parameterization of the monitoring cost κm . Ashenfelter et al.
(2004) report that, in the experiments they evaluate (discussed in Section 2), the
additional weekly processing costs per claim associated with the treatments varied
from $1 to $15. These costs were mainly due to the added staff-time required to go
through the supplemental eligibility checks and to monitor search effort.
    Corson and Nicholson (1985) and Meyer (1995) evaluate the Charleston Exper-
iment which had the objective of strengthening the monitoring of UI work test, of-
fering job-search workshops to job seekers, and enhancing their placement through
additional services. UI claimants were divided into three groups differing in the in-
tensity of the treatment. Group 3 was only subject to additional eligibility checks.
Corson and Nicholson (1985) estimate that the program cost per claimant in treat-


                                          33
Figure 5: Policies of the optimal welfare program in the (U, h) space in the presence
of Search and Work (SW) and Job Search Monitoring (JM) with cost κm = $5 per
worker per month. The small arrows indicate the direction of the evolution of U and
h under each policy.

ment in this group was roughly $9. Meyer (1995) reports, for this same experiment,
smaller weekly costs, around $6, because he measures costs for the treatment group
net of those for the control group which should be interpreted as the costs of admin-
istering UI and, as such, should be excluded from our calculation.
    Setty (2012) uses data from the Minnesota Family Investment Program, where
each caseworker was responsible for 100 clients and, among other tasks, was as-
signed to apply sanctions, assist with housing, and document client activities. He
obtains a weekly cost of $7.5 per unemployed worker monitored. This value is an
upper bound, since the caseworker is involved in more activities than monitoring
alone.
    In sum, there is a wide range of estimates for κm varying between $4 and $60
per worker per month. Given our parameterization of Section 5, JM never appears
as optimal for monitoring costs beyond $50. Below, we analyze how the optimal


                                         34
welfare program would be modified by the presence of JM when monitoring costs
are on the low-end of available estimates.
    Figure 5 uses κm = $5. Job search monitoring emerges as optimal in the upper
region of the state space between UI and JA. To understand why, move vertically
in the state space from top to bottom in the area where JM penetrates between UI
and JA. For high levels of U, the effort compensation cost is high, and no-effort
search assistance policies are implemented. As we lower U, it becomes efficient to
induce search effort, and the planner switches to JM to avoid the high incentive
costs (increasing in U) associated to the unobservable search effort. As U falls and
incentive costs are reduced, UI becomes optimal.


8 Conclusions
Since Shavell and Weiss (1979), the literature on the efficient provision of consump-
tion insurance and search incentives to the unemployed in presence of private infor-
mation has largely focused on the optimal path of benefits during the unemployment
spell. Unemployment compensation during job search is a key pillar of the welfare
state, but it is by no means the only instrument used by policy makers. Many welfare
programs directed to the low-income unemployed actively assist them in locating
suitable employment, or do not elicit search effort at all from them and, instead,
require them to work in exchange for benefits.
    In this paper, we have proposed extending the tools of recursive contract theory
to study the optimal design of a welfare program that combines private job search,
assisted search, job search monitoring, and work activities. Our novel approach con-
sists in augmenting the standard “optimal UI” environment with additional technolo-
gies, and showing how the use of these technologies, and the associated payments
to the agent, can be mapped directly into a variety of observed policy instruments.
Once these policy instruments arise naturally as components of the optimal contract
between the government-principal and the unemployed-agent, one can study when
and how they should be used along the unemployment spell. The paper contains
such characterization.
   Our investigation can be extended to quantify the potential welfare gains/budget
saving in switching from actual to optimally designed programs. A reduced-form test


                                         35
of whether US states, roughly, get their programs right could be performed. There
is significant variance in the generosity of welfare programs across states (measured
for example by the level of TANF benefits), and our framework suggests that the
most (least) generous states should implement search-based (work-based) programs.
State-level data about expenditures on different types of programs from the U.S. De-
partment of Health and Human Services could, possibly, allow to address this ques-
tion.
    A more structural approach would entail computing the expected promised utility
(U0 in our model) implicit in existing programs (from the observed sequence of poli-
cies, their duration, their benefits and wage subsidies), and calculating the optimal
program corresponding to the same level of U0 . A comparison would then determine
budget savings from switching to the optimal program and would identify the major
discrepancies between actual and optimally designed programs.




                                         36
References
 [1] Abreu D., D. Pearce and E. Stacchetti (1990). “Towards a Theory of Discounted
     Repeated Games with Imperfect Monitoring,” Econometrica, 58(5), 1041-1064.
 [2] Addison J., and P. Portugal (1989). “Job Displacement, Relative Wage Changes
     and Duration of Unemployment,” Journal of Labor Economics, 7(3), 281-302.
 [3] Ashenfelter, O., D. Ashmore, and O. Dechenes (2005). “Do Unemployment
     Insurance Recipients Actively Seek Work? Randomized Trials in Four U.S.
     States,” Journal of Econometrics, 125, 53-76.
 [4] Atkeson, A. and R. Lucas (1995). “Efficiency and Equality in a Simple Model
     of Efficiency Unemployment Insurance,” Journal of Economic Theory, 66, 64–
     88.
 [5] Attanasio, O., H. Low, and V. Sanchez-Marcos (2008). “Explaining Changes
     in Female Labor Supply in a Life-cycle Model,” American Economic Review,
     98(4),1517-1552.
 [6] Bergemann, A. and G.J., Van den Berg (2008). “Active Labor Market Policy
     Effects for Women in Europe: A Survey,” Annales d’Economie et de Statistique,
     385-408.
 [7] Blank, R. (1989). “Analyzing the Duration of Welfare Spells,” Journal of Public
     Economics, 39(3), 245-73.
 [8] Brock T., D. Butler, and D. Long (1993). “Unpaid Work Experience for Welfare
     Recipents: Findings and Lessons from MDRC Research,” Mimeo MDRC.
 [9] Bover O., M. Arellano, and S. Bentolila (2002). “Unemployment Duration,
     Benefits Duration and the Business Cycle,” Economic Journal, 112, 223-265.
[10] Cebi, M. and S. A. Woodbury (2011). “Long-Term Effects of the Work Test and
     Job Search Assistance: Reexamining the Washington Alternative Work Search
     Experiment,” Mimeo.
[11] Cogan, J. F. (1981). “Fixed Costs and Labor Supply,” Econometrica, 49(4),
     945-63.
[12] Corson, W., and W. Nicholson (1985). “Evaluation of the Charlseton Claimant
     Placement and Work Test Demonstration,” Unemployment Insurance Occa-
     sional Papers 85-2, US Department of Labor.
[13] Davis, S., and T. von Wachter (2011). “Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss,”
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Forthcoming.
[14] Eckstein Z., and K.I. Wolpin (1989). “Dynamic Labour Force Participation of
     Married Women and Endogenous Work Experience,” Review of Economic Stud-
     ies, 56(3), 375-390.
[15] Fagnoni C. (2000). “Work-Site Activities can Play an Important Role in TANF
     Programs,” Report to Congressional Requesters, United States GAO.

                                        37
[16] Fallick, B. C. (1996). “A Review of the Recent Empirical Literature on Dis-
     placed Workers,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 50:1, 5-16.
[17] Flinn, C. (1986). “Econometric Analysis of CPS-Type Unemployment Data,”
     Journal of Human Resources, 21(4), 457-484.
[18] Hausman, J. (1980). “The Effect of Wages, Taxes, and Fixed Costs On Womens’
     Labor Force Participation,” Journal of Public Economics, 14, 161-194.
[19] Hopenhayn H., and J. P. Nicolini (1997). “Optimal Unemployment Insurance,”
     Journal of Political Economy, 105(2), 412-438.
[20] Hopenhayn H., and J. P. Nicolini (2009). “Optimal Unemployment Insurance
     and Employment History,” Review of Economic Studies, 76(3), 1049-1070.
[21] Jacobson L. S., R. J. LaLonde, and D. G. Sullivan (1993). “Earning Losses of
     Displaced Workers,” American Economic Review, 83(4), 695-709.
[22] Keane M. P., and K. I. Wolpin, (1997). “The Career Decisions of Young Men,”
     Journal of Political Economy, 105(3), 473-522.
[23] Kirby G., H. Hill, L. Pavetti, J. Jacobson, M. Derr, and P. Winston (2002).
     Transitional Jobs: Stepping Stone to Unsubsidized Employment, Mathematica
     Policy Research Inc.
[24] Krueger, A. B., and A. Mueller (2010): “Job Search and Unemployment In-
     surance: New Evidence from Time Use Data,” Journal of Public Economics,
     94(3-4), 298–307.
[25] Ljungqvist L., and T.J. Sargent (1998). “The European Unemployment
     Dilemma,” Journal of Political Economy, 106(3), 514-550.
[26] Machin S., and A. Manning (1999). “The Causes and Consequences of Long-
     Term Unemployment in Europe,” in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (Eds) Hand-
     book of Labor Economics, Vol. 3C, 3085-3139.
[27] Meyer, B. D. (1995). “Lessons from the U.S. Unemployment Insurance Exper-
     iments,” Journal of Economic Literature, 33(1), 91-131.
[28] Moffitt, R. A. (2003). “The Temporary Assistance to Needy Families Program,”
     in Means tested Transfers programs in the United States, R. A. Moffitt (Ed.),
     Chicago: Chicago University Press.
[29] Moffitt, R. A. (2008). “Welfare Reform: The US Experience,” paper prepared
     for the Economic Council of Sweden conference From Welfare to Work, Stock-
     holm, May 7, 2007. Mimeo, Johns Hopkins University.
[30] National Evaluation of Welfare-to-Work Strategies (2001). “How Effective Are
     Different Welfare-to-Work Approaches? Five-Year Adult and Child Impacts for
     Eleven Programs,” U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, and U.S.
     Department of Education.


                                       38
[31] Neal D. (1995). “Industry-Specific Human Capital: Evidence from Displaced
     Workers,” Journal of Labor Economics, 13(4), 653-677.
[32] Pavetti L., and D. Strong (2001). “ Work-Based Strategies for Hard-to-Employ
     TANF Recipients: A preliminary Assessment of Program Models and Dimen-
     sions,” Mathematica Policy Research.
[33] Pavoni N. (2007). “On Optimal Unemployment Compensation,” Journal of
     Monetary Economics, 54(6), 1612-1630.
[34] Pavoni N. (2009). “Optimal Unemployment Insurance, with Human Capital De-
     preciation and Duration Dependence,” International Economic Review, 50(2),
     323-362.
[35] Pavoni N., and G.L. Violante (2005). “Optimal Welfare-to-Work Programs,”
     Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Discussion Paper 143.
[36] Pavoni N., and G.L. Violante (2007). “Optimal Welfare-to-Work Programs,”
     Review of Economic Studies, vol. 74(1), 283-318.
[37] Pavoni N., O. Setty, G.L. Violante, and C. Wunsch (2012). “Optimal Training
     Programs,” mimeo, NYU.
[38] Phelan C., and E. Stacchetti (2001). “Sequential Equilibria in a Ramsey Tax
     Model,” Econometrica, 69, 1491-1518.
[39] Phelan C., and R. M. Townsend (1991). “Computing Multi-Period,
     Information-Constrained Optima,” Review of Economic Studies, 58, 853-881.
[40] Setty, O. (2012). “Optimal Unemployment Insurance with Monitoring,” mimeo,
     NYU.
[41] Shavell S., and L. Weiss (1979). “The Optimal Payment of Unemployment In-
     surance Benefits over Time,” Journal of Political Economy, 87, 1347-1362.
[42] Shimer R. and I. Werning (2008). “Liquidity and Insurance for the Unem-
     ployed,” American Economic Review, 98(5), 1922-1942.
[43] Spear S. E., and S. Srivastava (1987). “On Repeated Moral Hazard with Dis-
     counting,” Review of Economic Studies, 53, 599-617.
[44] Spinnewijn, J. (2012). “Training and Search During Unemployment.” Mimeo,
     LSE.
[45] Wang C., and S. Williamson (1996). “Unemployment Insurance with Moral
     Hazard in a Dynamic Economy,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
     Public Policy, 44, 1-41.
[46] Wunsch C. (2012). “Optimal Use of Labor Market Policies: The Role of Job
     Search Assistance,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Forthcoming.



                                       39
