NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OPTIMAL FINANCIAL KNOWLEDGE AND WEALTH INEQUALITY
Annamaria Lusardi
Pierre-Carl Michaud
Olivia S. Mitchell
Working Paper 18669
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18669
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2013
The research reported herein was performed pursuant to a grant from the U.S. Social Security Administration
(SSA) to the Financial Literacy Center, funded under the Financial Literacy Research Consortium.
The authors also acknowledge support provided by Netspar, the Pension Research Council and Boettner
Center at The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, and the RAND Corporation. Michaud
acknowledges additional support from the Fond Québécois de Recherche sur la Société et la Culture
(FQRSC - # 145848). We thank Hugh Hoikwang Kim and Yong Yu for excellent reasearch assistance,
and we acknowledge the use of the RAND grid computing server to perform our calculations. Helpful
comments were received from Marco Angrisani, Charlie Brown, Tabea Bucher-Koenen, Joao Cocco,
Eric French, Dan Gottlieb, Michael Hurd, Jan Kabatek, Tullio Jappelli, Raimond Maurer, Alex Michaelides,
Kim Peijnenburg, Karl Sholz, Hans-Martin von Gaudecker, Susann Rohwedder, Maarten van Rooij,
Frank Stafford, Jeremy Tobacman, Chao Wei, and participants at seminars at the Carlson School of
Management, CeRP, The George Washington University, McGill University, Netspar, Tilburg University,
The Wharton School, the 2012 NBER Summer Institute, and the 2012 NBER-Oxford Saïd-CFS-EIEF
Conference on Household Finance. We also thank Audrey Brown and Donna St. Louis for editorial
assistance. Opinions and conclusions expressed herein are solely those of the authors and do not represent
the opinions or policy of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, the National Bureau of Economic
Research, or any other institution with which the authors are affiliated.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18669.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Annamaria Lusardi, Pierre-Carl Michaud, and Olivia S. Mitchell. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Optimal Financial Knowledge and Wealth Inequality
Annamaria Lusardi, Pierre-Carl Michaud, and Olivia S. Mitchell
NBER Working Paper No. 18669
January 2013
JEL No. D01,D1,D31,D83,D91,E21,G11
ABSTRACT
While financial knowledge is strongly positively related to household wealth, there is also considerable
cross-sectional variation in both financial knowledge and net asset levels. To explore these patterns,
we develop a calibrated stochastic life cycle model featuring endogenous financial knowledge accumulation.
The model generates substantial wealth inequality, over and above that of standard life cycle models;
this is because higher earners typically have more hump-shaped labor income profiles and lower retirement
benefits which, when interacted with precautionary saving motives, boost their need for private wealth
accumulation and thus financial knowledge. Our simulations show that endogenous financial knowledge
accumulation has the potential to account for a large proportion of wealth inequality. The fraction
of the population which is rationally financially “ignorant” depends on the generosity of the retirement
system and the level of means-tested benefits. Educational efforts to enhance financial savvy early
in the life cycle so as to produce one percentage point excess return per year would be valued highly
by people in all educational groups.
Annamaria Lusardi
The George Washington University
School of Business
2201 G Street, NW
Duques Hall, Suite 450E
Washington, DC 20052
and NBER
alusardi@gwu.edu
Pierre-Carl Michaud
Université du Québec à Montréal
Département des sciences économiques
Case postale 8888, Succ. Centre-Ville
Montréal, (Québec) CANADA H3C 3P8
michaud.pierre_carl@uqam.ca

Olivia S. Mitchell
University of Pennsylvania
Wharton School
3620 Locust Walk, St 3000 SH-DH
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu

Introduction1

1

Americans are increasingly being asked to manage their own financial wellbeing, both during
their working years and in retirement. This process has been hastened by the movement
away from defined benefit (DB) pensions toward defined contribution (DC) plans: in 1980,
about 40% of private-sector pension contributions went to DC plans, but two decades later,
almost 90% of these contributions flowed to DC plans (which were mainly 401(k) plans; cf.,
Poterba, Venti, and Wise 2007). At the same time, financial markets have become more
complex, expanding the set of instruments that households can use to save and invest. The
trend toward more individual responsibility means that people’s financial decisions made
early in life can have long-term consequences. For example, if young workers direct their
pension contributions to equities instead of money market accounts, this will likely produce
very different wealth levels by retirement age. Moreover, in this new financial environment, investments in financial knowledge can have important consequences for retirement
wellbeing, by influencing people’s ability to save and invest. When the decision to invest
in financial literacy alters life cycle wealth profiles, individuals with similar initial circumstances will end up with very different wealth holdings at retirement. To the extent that
this mechanism is at work, understanding it will help explain wealth inequality.2
This paper proposes that financial knowledge itself should be modeled as an endogenous
choice variable akin to human capital investment. The mechanism we posit is that financial
knowledge can enable individuals to better allocate resources over their lifetimes in a world of
imperfect insurance and uncertainty. Our approach uses an explicit multiperiod theoretical
model which allows us to explore two important questions: (1) What forces shape financial
knowledge accumulation over the life cycle?, and (2) How much wealth inequality can be
attributable to resulting differences in financial knowledge? We also evaluate which types
of consumers would benefit most from investment in financial knowledge and the use of
1

An earlier version of this paper was circulated under the title “Optimal Financial Literacy and Saving
for Retirement” (Lusardi, Michaud, and Mitchell, 2011).
2
Wealth levels do vary considerably across both workers and retirees; see Moore and Mitchell (2000) and
Venti and Wise (2001).

2

sophisticated investment products. These issues have not been explored prevously in a rich
theoretical context with uncertainty, and our answers shed light on the important issue of
wealth disparities over the life cycle.
We build and calibrate a stochastic life cycle model featuring uncertainty in income, capital market returns, and medical expenditures; we also incorporate an endogenous knowledge
accumulation process and a sophisticated saving technology. In the model, financial knowledge permits consumers to use more sophisticated financial products which can help them
raise the return earned on financial assets. Individuals who wish to transfer resources over
time by saving will benefit most from financial knowledge. Moreover, because of how the
U.S. social insurance system works, better-educated individuals have the most to gain from
investing in financial knowledge. As a result, making financial knowledge accumulation endogeneous allows for an amplification of differences in accumulated retirement wealth over
the life cycle.
Our contributions to the literature are several. First, we explain why many consumers
lack knowledge about key aspects of financial markets. Several papers have reported that a
large proportion of the population is not financially literate and cannot grasp the concepts
of inflation and risk diversification (Lusardi and Mitchell 2007, 2011a; Lusardi, Mitchell, and
Curto 2010). Second, we show that some level of financial ignorance may, in fact, be optimal.
That is, we explain why consumers may rationally fail to invest in knowledge, since it is
expensive to acquire financial knowledge and not everyone will benefit from greater financial
sophistication. Third, our model can account for a large share of wealth inequality without
appealing to exogenous preference differences or heterogeneity in fixed costs of investing
(cf., Cagetti 2003; Vissing-Jorgensen 2003). In support of this approach, Venti and Wise
(2001) show that permanent income differences and chance alone can explain only 30-40% of
observed differences in retirement wealth, implying that other factors should be taken into
account. Fourth, our model generates wealth inequality above and beyond what traditional
models of saving normally deliver. Thus it helps account for some of the large differences in
wealth reported in the literature, by recognizing that individuals do not start their economic

3

lives with full financial knowledge and knowledge can be acquired endogenously over the life
cycle.
Finally, we show that financial knowledge can be an important public policy lever. For
example, reducing the cost of financial knowledge by providing financial education in high
school could have potentially large effects on wealth accumulation and welfare. For instance,
we report that a 25-year-old college graduate would be willing to pay more than half of his
initial wealth to boost financial knowledge, if it offered an expected permanent increase of
1% in his annual rate of return. Our estimates also suggest that a large portion of wealth
inequality, over half, can be attributed to financial knowledge that helps people access
a sophisticated technology generating higher returns. Policies such as personal accounts
under Social Security and increased reliance on individually managed retirement accounts,
for example, would be anticipated to lead to higher financial knowledge.
In the remainder of the paper we first briefly summarize prior studies; then we offer
evidence on the life cycle path of assets, consumers’ use of financial products, and financial knowledge accumulation by education group. Next we present our model, outline the
model calibration, and report simulation results. The paper then offers conclusions and
implications.

2

Prior Literature

Our research builds on several related literatures including research on household life cycle
saving patterns.3 We depart from conventional intertemporal models in that we allow for
the endogenous choice of a saving technology with returns and costs that depend on a
consumer’s level of financial knowledge. In this way, we extend the portfolio choice model
(e.g. Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout 2005) in which returns are assumed to be exogenous and
consumers decide only how much they will invest in risky assets. Our work is also informed
by prior studies that examined patterns of financial knowledge in the general population. For
3
See, for instance, Cagetti (2003); DeNardi, French, and Jones (2011); Gourinchas and Parker (2002);
Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes (hereafter HSK; 1995); and Scholz, Seshadri, and Khitatrakun (hereafter SSK;
2006).

4

instance, Bernheim (1995, 1998) was among the first to document that many U.S. consumers
display low levels of financial literacy. Hilgert, Hogarth, and Beverly (2003) showed that
most Americans do not understand basic financial concepts including key aspects of bonds,
stocks, and mutual funds. The National Council for Economic Education’s report (NCEE,
2005) detailed widespread knowledge gaps regarding fundamental economic concepts among
high school students, as did Mandell (2008). Lusardi and Mitchell’s (2008, 2011a) Health
and Retirement Study (HRS) modules on planning and financial literacy confirm that many
older individuals (age 50+) cannot do simple interest-rate computations such as calculating
how money grows at an interest rate of 2% per year, nor do they have a grasp of inflation
and risk diversification concepts. These findings have also been confirmed for younger adults
(Lusardi, Mitchell, and Curto 2010; Lusardi and Mitchell 2011a).4
We are not the first to suggest that financial knowledge is an endogenously determined
choice variable. For example, Delavande, Rohwedder, and Willis (2008) posited that investment in financial knowledge is akin to human capital investment, but their static model
cannot trace life cycle wealth patterns. Jappelli and Padula (2011) discussed investments
in financial knowledge, but they used a life cycle model with certainty and no borrowing
constraint and did not evaluate whether differences in knowledge levels produce wealth inequality. Both papers built on the seminal work of Ben-Porath (1967) and Becker (1975) who
modeled the economic decision to invest in human capital by linking education to wages. By
contrast, we dynamically model investments in financial knowledge in a rich intertemporal
setting with decisionmaking under many sources of uncertainty, an approach that allows us
to evaluate the quantitative importance of financial knowledge and to perform several important policy experiments. Our work also helps explain recent empirical findings regarding
financial knowledge and economically consequential outcomes. For example, our model is
consistent with evidence of a positive empirical link between financial knowledge and wealth
4

Low levels of financial skills are not only a problem in the United States. As illustrated by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD 2005) and the Survey of Health, Aging and
Retirement in Europe (SHARE), respondents around the world also score poorly on several numeracy and
financial literacy scales (Christelis, Jappelli, and Padula 2010). Lusardi and Mitchell (2011b) review a range
of other studies documenting low financial literacy levels around the world.

5

holdings.5 Additionally, our model explains why highly knowledgeable consumers may be
more likely to participate in the stock market6 which in our model is represented by the use
of a sophisticated investment technology.
Finally, our analysis speaks to the difficulty that standard life cycle models have when
attempting to account for observed wealth inequality using heterogeneity in education and
permanent income. In view of the conventional model’s shortcomings, some researchers
have invoked different factors including impatience in the form of hyperbolic discounting
(Angeletos, Laibson, Repetto, Tobacman, and Weinberg 2001) or means-tested programs
(HSZ, 1995). Still others assume that consumers use rules of thumb when making saving decisions (Campbell and Mankiw 1989). By contrast, our approach draws on the fact
that risk-adjusted expected returns from financial products can differ across income groups.
For example, Yitzhaki (1987) established that higher earners enjoyed higher returns on
stock market transitions. In field experiments, Choi, Laibson, and Madrian (2010) and
Hastings, Mitchell, and Chyn (2011) showed that more financially knowledgable individuals paid lower fees for mutual funds. Since such fees can substantially reduce net returns
on such investments, this implies that financial knowledge boosts investors’ net returns.
Moreover, financial knowledge may also have an effect on diversification, which can produce
higher risk-adjusted returns. For example, Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini (2009) showed
that better-educated Swedish households held more stock than others. Using Dutch data,
van Gaudecker (2011) looked at the relationship between investment diversification (return
loss), financial knowledge, and financial advice, and he reported that the least financially
informed were unlikely to do well on diversification.7 Such differences in returns can produce
a considerable amount of wealth inequality: for example, a dollar invested at a 6% versus
a 2% return over 50 years grows to be nearly seven times as large. To simply assume that
5
See for instance Behrman, Mitchell, Soo, and Bravo (2012), Lusardi and Mitchell (2011a and b), and
van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie (2012).
6
See Christelis, Jappelli, and Padula (2010) and van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie (2011) among others.
7
One could argue that financial knowledge would not be needed if individuals could rely on financial
advisers. Our model, explained in detail below, therefore incorporates the cost of obtaining financial advice.
Yet it is worth noting that there are impediments to obtaining good financial advice if consumers lack financial knowledge (Collins 2012; U.S. GAO 2011). For this reason, financial literacy is plausibly a complement
to, rather than a substitute for, financial advice.

6

there is substantial heterogeneity in returns does not help much in explaining wealth heterogeneity, since that merely replaces one source of unexplained heterogeneity with another.
Instead, our approach generates such heterogeneity arising from endogenous accumulation
of financial knowledge.

3

Life Cycle Wealth and Financial Knowledge

3.1

The Evolution of Income and Assets by Education

The basic life cycle economic model posits that individuals will save in order to transfer resources to life stages where the marginal utility of consumption is highest. Given concavity
of the utility function, consumers seek to transfer resources from periods of their lives when
they earn substantial incomes to periods when they earn less. We illustrate typical household income profiles over the life cycle in Figure 1, which plots median net household income
by education group constructed from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID).8 Educational attainment refers to three sets of household heads: those who had not completed their
high school education, high school graduates, and those with at least some college. We focus
on white males throughout this paper to keep our sample as homogeneous as possible. We
also drop individuals with business assets and censor all variables at the 99th percentile.9
[Figure 1 here]
As is evident, life cycle household income for this cohort is hump-shaped. It also rises
at a faster rate for the college-educated than for the less-educated, and from around age
50 onward, incomes slowly decrease for all groups. Post-retirement, income falls due to the
fact that Social Security and pension benefit amounts are generally less than labor earnings.
In the U.S., old-age benefit replacement rates are higher for the least-educated due to the
progressivity of public safety net programs, so better-educated consumers see their incomes
8
These calculations use the PSID CNEF files from 1980 to 1997 (in $2004). To generate the figure, we
first run median regressions with age and cohort effects, and then we predict incomes for the 1935-1945
cohort. Age dummies are smoothed with a lowess filter.
9
Including those with business assets skews the interpretation of saving motives compared to the general
population, because of the large amount of wealth held in these ventures as well as the volatility of this
income (see Hurst, Kennickell, Lusardi, and Torralba 2010).

7

fall relatively more after retirement. Additionally, net household income declines somewhat
for all groups in retirement, probably because of changes in household composition (e.g. loss
of a spouse).
Figure 2 traces life cycle paths of median net wealth (defined as the sum of bank accounts, stocks, IRAs, mutual funds, bonds, and net real estate, minus debt) for these same
individuals.10 For the typical household, wealth grows steadily up to the mid-60s and then
flattens or declines. Again, there are striking differences by educational attainment, with
the median college-educated household having more than $375,000 in wealth at age 65 (in
$2004). By contrast, high school dropouts at the same age had accumulated less than
$125,000, with most of that in the form of housing wealth.
[Figure 2 here]
In the simplest version of a life cycle economic model, individuals will optimally consume
only a portion of their lifetime incomes each period, borrowing in some periods and saving in
others. A key prediction of this framework is that the life cycle path of assets normalized by
lifetime income should be the same across groups. Therefore, as noted by HSZ (1995), higher
earners would be predicted to have wealth-to-income profiles that simply scale-up lower
earners’ paths. Yet our data indicate non-proportional wealth-to-income profiles, implying
that the simple model cannot explain observed wealth heterogeneity. This confirms evidence
from Dynan, Skinner, and Zeldes (2004) who report large differences in saving rates across
education groups, using different datasets (both CEX and PSID).
More sophisticated models allow for a precautionary saving motive, which comes into
play when income is uncertain and borrowing is difficult. In this circumstance, some individuals will want to save more anticipating that they will have a very high marginal utility
of consumption when future income is low. Given a concave utility function exhibiting
prudence, such a consumer will save more in anticipation of this possibility.11 While precautionary saving can explain some of the heterogeneity observed in the data, it still falls
short of explaining wealth differences among those facing similar uncertain income profiles.
10
11

In what follows, we refer interchangeably to net wealth, net assets, net worth, and household wealth.
See Deaton (1992).

8

Yet another explanation for why the less-educated fail to save was offered by HSZ (1995),
who noted that the U.S. social insurance system protects families with limited resources
against bad states of the world. That is, means-tested and redistributive transfer programs
such as Social Security, Medicaid, and Supplemental Security Income provide an explicit
consumption floor in the event that households fall into poverty. In turn, the existence of
this consumption floor dampens consumers’ precautionary saving motives, particularly when
people are rather likely to become eligible for such benefits. Though this does help explain
why the less-educated save little, it cannot explain wealth inequality in the upper half of
the income distribution, where the consumption floor is less likely to be reached.
Other authors resort to differences in preferences to explain observed wealth inequality
patterns. For example, Cagetti (2003) posits that consumers have different high rates of
time preference and low rates of risk aversion, and he suggests that this combination could
lead to small precautionary saving for the less-educated and younger consumers. Differences
in household composition over the life cycle can also affect consumption by directly changing discount factors or the marginal utility of consumption: inasmuch as household size
is negatively correlated with education, this could also account for some portion of wealth
inequality (Attanasio, Banks, Meghir, and Weber 1999; SSK 2006). Another potential channel generating wealth inequality might be differences in anticipated mortality patterns. It is
well-known that the more educated live longer (De Nardi, French, and Jones 2011), which
might also account for a portion of the observed divergence in wealth accumulation (and
decumulation) across groups. Our analysis below incorporates many of these differences, to
assess how their impacts compare to those of endogenous financial knowledge as a separate
channel explaining wealth inequality.

3.2

Differentials in Sophisticated Financial Products by Education

In view of the income paths illustrated above, it should be apparent that college-educated
consumers would optimally do relatively more saving (and borrowing), compared to the lesseducated. In turn, this could make the better-educated group more interested than their

9

less-educated peers in a technology that enhanced returns on resources transferred across
periods. Table 1 shows the fraction of PSID respondents holding stocks, mutual funds,
bonds, and/or individual retirement accounts (IRAs), arrayed by age and education. We
denote these products as relatively “sophisticated,” compared to having only a bank account
(or no saving at all).
[Table 1 here]
From these data, it is evident that college-educated households are much more likely to
use a sophisticated technology for saving, compared to high school dropouts.12 In particular,
more than three-quarters of the older college-educated respondents (age 55-65) use sophisticated products, compared to fewer than one-third of the high school dropouts of the same
age. And even small differences in returns over the working life can generate substantial
differences in wealth levels at retirement, holding saving rates constant.
The ability of the highly educated and better paid to enjoy higher risk-adjusted returns
may result from greater knowledge about financial products. Some authors surmise that
limited numeracy and lack of financial sophistication can explain people’s generally low levels of investment and low participation in the stock market (van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie
2011). Since equity investments provide higher expected returns, one would therefore anticipate that highly educated households would likely earn higher returns on their saving. But
such differences in financial holdings are insufficient to generate observed wealth inequality
patterns. For example, Venti and Wise (2001) report that including controls for stock ownership contributes little to explaining the dispersion of wealth across households: that is,
adding “investment choices” as controls (in addition to lifetime earnings) reduces the unconditional standard deviation of wealth at retirement by only 8%, at the margin. Accordingly,
if the differential take-up of sophisticated products is to account for more of wealth inequality, modelers must allow for the possibility that returns are persistently heterogeneous
across households in a predictable way. In what follows, we endogenize the motivation to
take up sophisticated financial products as a way to motivate the emergence and persistence
12

See also Curcuru, Heaton, Lucas, and Moore (2005) and Campbell (2006).

10

of wealth differences over the life cycle.

3.3

Financial Knowledge and Wealth Accumulation

To understand how financial knowledge can alter the invariance of wealth to income in a
standard life cycle model, we first build an illustrative two-period example, and below we
extend this to a richer framework. Accordingly, assume that the individual receives labor
income y only in the first period. Denoting wealth in period 2 as w, we seek to understand
wealth accumulation in period 2 as a function of lifetime income. The consumer can choose
how much to consume, c, in the first period, and how much to invest in raising R, the return
factor on saving, s. Thus, w = Rs and c = y − πR − w/R where π is the monetary cost of
raising R. Assuming the consumer has a discount factor β, he maximizes:

max u(y − πR − w/R) + βu(w)
w,R

From the first order conditions to this problem and assuming power utility, u(c) =

c1−σ
1−σ ,

we obtain the following condition for optimal wealth:

w

1
1− 2σ

 √ 1/σ
π
(y − 2 πw) =
β
√

While the right-hand side of the equation is constant with wealth, the left-hand side is
not: the left-hand side is decreasing in w for reasonable values of σ and π. A rise in income
increases the left-hand side for a given wealth level. If the wealth ratio is to increase to equal
the right-hand side, wealth must rise by more than income. We use simulations to show
that this is indeed always the case for reasonable parameter values. Figure 3 illustrates how
wealth-to-income ratios vary with income levels, given σ = 1.6, β = 0.96, and π = 2.5; these
are all reasonable parameter values (as discussed below).
[Figure 3 here]
The slope of this line is positive, and the intuition behind the result is clear. There is a
complementarity between an agent’s need to save and his willingness to invest in raising R.
11

For high values of y, the reward to investing in R rises because saving needs are relatively
important. In this two-period model, where lifetime income and the income trajectory are
the same, it is not higher income per se that raises the incentive to invest in financial knowledge but rather the need to smooth marginal utility across periods. The need is greater
when there is a larger gap between first- and second-period consumption. Accordingly, heterogeneity in retiree benefit replacement rates can affect the incentives to invest in financial
knowledge; in turn, this can lead to additional differences in wealth accumulation. The
same can be said of differences in demographic factors that shift the marginal utility of
consumption over the life cycle, as well as differences in expected mortality.
A richer setting with uncertainty and borrowing constraints offers additional motivations
to save. If consumers are liquidity constrained, they may be unwilling to invest in financial
knowledge. Faced with uncertainty, a consumer might also wish to save more and invest
more in financial knowledge for precautionary reasons. Furthermore, the sensitivity of saving
to the interest rate can be smaller than in the certainty case (Cagetti 2003), which may also
affect incentives to invest in knowledge. Accordingly, we next turn to a richer model of
saving to investigate the effects of financial knowledge on wealth inequality.

4

The Model

To allow cross-sectional variation in both financial knowledge and wealth levels, we extend the two-period example above in several directions. First, we introduce uncertainty
regarding asset returns, household income, and out-of-pocket medical expenditures. The
consumer is assumed to choose his consumption stream by maximizing expected discounted
utility, where utility flows are discounted by β. Second, the individual also faces stochastic mortality risk, and decisions are made from time t = 0 (age 25) to age T (or as long
as the consumer is still alive; T = 100). Third, and adding to the heterogeneity created
by the stochastic components, we also examine three different education groups (less than
high school, high school, and college). Across these, we allow for heterogeneity in income,

12

mortality, demographics, out-of-pocket medical expenditure levels, and risk. Importantly,
to highlight how investment in financial knowledge affects outcomes, we do not allow for
differences in preferences, and we assume consumers start their life cycles with no financial
knowledge.
The utility function is assumed to be strictly concave in consumption and defined as
nt u(ct /nt ), where nt is an equivalence scale capturing (known) changes in demographics
(SSK 2006). The marginal utility of consumption is u0 (ct /nt ) and thus rises with nt . Since
the path of nt is hump-shaped over the life cycle, this contributes to generate a hump-shaped
consumption profile with age (Attanasio, Banks, Meghir, and Weber 1999).
The consumer may elect to invest his resources in two different investment technologies.
The first is a basic technology (for example, a checking account) which yields a certain
(low) return r (R = 1 + r). The second is a more sophisticated technology which enables
the consumer to receive a higher expected return, increasing in financial knowledge, f, but
it comes at a price. Specifically, the consumer must pay a direct cost (fee) to use the
technology, cd , and he must also invest time and money in acquiring the knowledge.
Obtaining knowledge, in the form of investment, it , has a cost of πi (it ); we assume that
this cost function is convex, reflecting decreasing returns in the production of knowledge.13
Relatively little is known about how this cost might vary across individuals; for instance, it
could either rise or fall depending on the level of education. Clearly the opportunity cost of
time is higher for higher earners, but education might be a complement in the production
of knowledge, making it easier for the better-educated to learn. We remain agnostic about
whether the average cost of investing in additional knowledge is higher or lower for more
educated households; rather, we assume initially that all households face the same cost
function, and subsequently we explore alternative formulations in sensitivity analyses.14
The rate of return of the sophisticated technology is stochastic, and the expectation of
13

A convex cost has the advantage of avoiding bang-bang solutions where consumers invest massively in
one period; hence it encourages the smoothing of investment over time (cf., Delavande, Rohwedder, and
Willis 2008).
14
Alternatively one might allow for a direct disutility of investing in financial knowledge and try to estimate
it from the data. Here, because we are concerned mainly with the model’s properties rather than its precise
fit to the data, we abstract from the direct disutility channel.

13

e t+1 ). Thus
the return depends on the agent’s level of financial knowledge at the end of t, R(f
the stochastic return function is given by

e t+1 ) = R + r(ft+1 ) + σε εt+1
R(f

where εt+1 is a N(0,1) iid shock and σε is the standard deviation of returns on the sophisticated technology. The function r(ft+1 ) is increasing in ft+1 and it can be interpreted as
an excess return function. Since the variance is assumed fixed, this also implies that agents
with higher financial literacy obtain a higher Sharpe ratio (higher risk-adjusted returns)
on their investments. We denote by κt = 1 an indicator that the consumer invests in the
sophisticated technology in period t, and κt = 0 if not.15
Financial knowledge evolves according to:

ft+1 = δft + it

where δ is a depreciation factor and it is gross investment. Depreciation exists both because
consumer financial knowledge may decay, and also because some knowledge may become
obsolete as new financial products are developed.
The consumer receives a government transfer trt which guarantees a minimum consumption floor of cmin (as in HSZ 1995). This consumption floor may lower the expected variance
of future consumption, which diminishes the precautionary motive for saving. Transfers are
defined as trt = max(cmin − xt , 0) where cash on hand is:

xt = at + yt − oopt
where yt is net household income and oopt represents out-of-pocket medical expenditures.
Both variables are stochastic over and above a deterministic trend. The sophisticated tech15

In this paper we model only the extensive margin of investment in the sophisticated technology, since
exploratory work with the PSID showed that differences across education groups are larger at the extensive
rather than the intensive margin of “how much” to invest. Prohibitive computational requirements put the
latter model beyond current reach.

14

nology cannot be purchased if xt − cd < cmin (that is, the government will not pay for costs
of obtaining the technology). End-of-period assets are given by

eκ (ft+1 )(xt + trt − ct − π(it ) − cd κt )
at+1 = R

e t ). We impose a borrowing constraint on the model
eκ (ft+1 ) = (1 − κt )R + κt R(f
where R
such that assets at+1 must be non-negative.
As in many papers in this literature, we posit that during the work life, the individual’s
net income equation (in logs) is given by a deterministic component which depends on
education, age, and an AR(1) stochastic process:

log ye,t = gy,e (t) + µy,t + νy,t
µy,t = ρy,e µy,t−1 + εy,t
2
2
εy,t ∼ N (0, σy,ε
), νy,t ∼ N (0, σy,v
)

Here e represents the education group, and gy,e (t) is an age polynomial (quadratic). The
error term ηy,t is the sum of a persistent component µy,t and an idiosyncratic component
νy,t . Retirement is exogenous at age 65. After retirement, the individual receives retirement
income which is a function of pre-retirement income.
A similar stochastic AR(1) process is assumed for out-of-pocket medical expenditures.
Log out-of-pocket expenditures follow the process:

log oope,t = go,e (t) + µo,t + νo,t
µo,t = ρo,e µo,t−1 + εo,t
2
2
εo,t ∼ N (0, σo,ε
), νo,t ∼ N (0, σo,v
).

Because these expenditures are generally low prior to retirement (and to save on computation
time), we allow only for medical expenditure risk after retirement (as in HSZ, 1995). Again,
15

the error term ηo,t is the sum of a persistent component µo,t and an idiosyncratic component
νo,t . Finally, we allow for mortality risk at all ages, denoting pe,t as the one-year survival
probability. Mortality risk is allowed to differ across education groups.
The state-space in period t is defined as st = (ηy,t , ηo,t , e, ft , at ). The consumer’s decisions
are given by (ct , it , κt ). Hence there are two continuous control variables (consumption and
investment) and a discrete one (participation). There are five state variables. We represent
the problem as a series of Bellman equations such that, at each age, the value function has
the following form:16
ˆ ˆ

ˆ

Vd (st ) = max ne,t u(ct /ne,t ) + βpe,t
ct ,it ,κt

V (st+1 )dFe (ηo )dFe (ηy )dF (ε)
ε

ηy

ηo

eκ (ft+1 )(at + ye,t + trt − ct − π(it ) − cd I(κt > 0)), at+1 ≥ 0
at+1 = R
ft+1 = δft + it
e t ).
eκ (ft+1 ) = (1 − κt )R + κt R(f
R
We index variables by e where education differences are assumed to be present.17
The model is solved by backward recursion after discretizing the continuous state variables. At each point in the state-space, we use a grid-search method to search for the
optimal solution of consumption, financial knowledge investment, and investment in the
sophisticated technology. We solve for optimal decisions for a grid of 40 net asset points
and 25 financial knowledge points. Bi-linear interpolation is used to find the value function
when net assets or the financial knowledge stock at t + 1 fall off the grid; the value function
behaves smoothly and is concave except at low levels of net assets where liquidity constraints
and the consumption floor bind. Accordingly, the grid for assets in the state-space is defined
as equally spaced points on a0.5 , which leads to more points at lower levels of net assets.
16
This formulation abstracts from bequest motives. While an extension to include bequests could be
interesting, the evidence suggests that this would have a minimal effect on wealth decumulation among the
elderly (DeNardi, French, and Jones 2011). Moreover, incorporating bequests would only increase wealth
inequality, without changing the qualitative nature of our results.
17
There are four sources of risk over which the value function is integrated: mortality, rate of return,
out-of-pocket medical expenditures, and income. These risks are assumed to be independent.

16

We use the method proposed by Tauchen (1986) to discretize the processes for income and
out-of-pocket median expenditures (with nine points each). Finally, we use three points for
rate of return shocks.18

5

Calibration

Our goals are to show how endogenous financial knowledge affects wealth holding, and to
understand the determinants of financial knowledge accumulation patterns. Since we lack
information on individual returns over the life cycle by education group, we do not estimate
all relevant parameters of the model. Rather, we proceed with a calibration using plausible
values from the literature for preferences and constraints for our base case. Additionally, we
provide an extensive sensitivity analysis in Section 6.
To implement the model in the base case, we assume that u(ct /nt ) has a CRRA form with
relative risk aversion σ. The value of 3 for this parameter used by HSZ (1995) is reasonable
in their context, since their main mechanism for creating dispersion in saving patterns
is the differential impact of the precautionary saving motive due to a consumption floor.
Accordingly, in their setting, the precautionary saving motive governed by the coefficient
of relative prudence, 1 + σ, needed to be large. By contrast, our model has an additional
channel for creating wealth dispersion, so there is no need for such a strong precautionary
saving motive. We use a value of σ = 1.6 in the base case, which is close to that estimated
by Attanasio, Banks, Meghir, and Weber (1999) using consumption data. It is worth noting
that the portfolio choice literature typically assumes risk aversion parameters in excess of
four (e.g. Campbell and Viceira 2002; Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout 2005), but we do not
require such a high degree of risk aversion in our model. One reason is that agents with low
financial knowledge already face low returns if they used the sophisticated technology; hence
they will not adopt it. Additionally, the cost of participating in the sophisticated technology
18

The fact that even low literacy individuals act as though they can solve the complex model above may
seem incompatible with their lack of sophistication. But an approximation to these people’s optimal decision
rules can be quite simple in our setup, as noted by Deaton (1992) in his discussion of complex precautionary
saving models.

17

reduces the incentives to use it (Vissing-Jorgensen 2003). Both factors mean that we can
fit market participation patterns relatively well using the sophisticated technology proposed
here, without resorting to high values of risk aversion.
Following SSK (2006), we define an equivalence scale that accounts for consumption
differences in household size by education group and changes in demographics over the life
cycle. Let z(j, k) = (j + 0.7k)0.75 where j is the number of adults in the household and k is
the number of children (under 18 years old). We then define ne,t = z(je,t , ke,t )/z(2, 1) where
je,t and ke,t are the average number of adults and children in the household by age and
education group. We use PSID data to estimate the time series of average equivalence scales
by education group. The age profile of those scales is hump-shaped and more amplified for
less-educated households.19 For the base case, we use a discount factor of 0.96, as in SSK
(2006) and Campbell and Viceira (2002).20 The annual minimum consumption floor is set
at $10,000 per couple with one child.21
Computing post-retirement income as a function of pre-retirement income is notoriously difficult because retirement is endogenous. Here we abstract from this and estimate
fixed-effect regressions of net household income on age and a retirement dummy, analyzed
separately by education level. This produces replacement rates of 0.81 for dropouts, 0.72
for high school graduates, and 0.68 for college graduates. These are higher than rates based
only on Social Security benefits, since older households have additional sources of retirement
income (e.g. spousal earnings, employer pension benefits, annuities, etc.). The replacement
rates are close to those based on total retirement income in the literature (cf. Aon Consult19

In the PSID, we compute the average number per household of adults and children (under 18 years old)
by the head’s education and age. We then implement the equivalence scale according to the formula in the
text.
20
This is also close to the value of De Nardi, French, and Jones (2011) who estimate it to be 0.97, and
Cagetti (2003) who estimates a value of 0.948 for high school dropouts and 0.989 for the college-educated.
21
This value is derived from the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (ASPE,
2008), where the maximum monthly benefit payable to a couple with one child under the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program was $495 (in $2006). The average monthly benefit of recipients on
food stamps (for a 3-person household) was $283. Hence, prior to age 65, the sum of TANF and food stamp
benefits totaled $778/month for a 3-person household or $9,336/year (omitting the lifetime TANF receipt
limit). The Social Security Administration (http://www.ssa.gov/pressoffice/factsheets/colafacts2004.htm)
reports that the 2004 maximum monthly federal payment for SSI was $552 for a single household and $829
for couples; including food stamps yields an annual total of $7,620 for singles and $12,180 for couples.
Accordingly we use a value of $10,000/year, comparable to the $12,000 used by HSZ (1995) in $2004.

18

ing 2008). Following retirement, we let income decline at the rate estimated in PSID data
controlling for educational groups and cohort effects; that pattern is mostly due to changes
in household composition (e.g. widowhood).
The return on the safe asset is set to r =2% (as in Campbell and Viceira 2002). The
form of the excess return function is not available from previous studies. The range of riskadjusted portfolio returns reported, for example, by van Gaudecker (2011) ranges from -0.017
to 0.054.22 Therefore we set the range of possible returns using the technology between 0%
and 4%; we choose the latter figure because it roughly matches the equity premium used in
other studies on portfolio choice.23 Consequently we do not assume a range of returns that
would make financial knowledge artificially important (say, by assuming households could
persistently earn excess returns over 10%).
Another issue has to do with the functional form for the return function that depends on
financial knowledge, r(ft+1 ). As data are not available to calibrate this function, we employ
a linear function by setting rmax = r(fmax ) = 0.04 and rmin = r(fmin ) = 0. Below, we
choose a convex cost function for investing in financial knowledge, which therefore embodies
decreasing returns to producing knowledge. Accordingly, even if the production function
is linear, agents will seek to smooth their investments in financial knowledge over the life
cycle. We adopt this simpler form of the production function in order to show the basic
mechanisms of the model. In the robustness analysis of Section 6, we show how allowing for
an elasticity below one affects results regarding the role of financial knowledge in explaining
wealth inequality.
To compute the deterministic part of net household income, we draw on data from
Cross-National Equivalent files of the PSID, pooling all available waves (1980-2005).24 The
NBER’s Taxsim program is used to compute net household income. We account for cohort
effects when computing income profiles, setting the cohort effect for our calibration baseline
22

We thank Hans-Martin van Gaudecker for sharing the Dutch portfolio data with us. Using expected
portfolio returns and standard deviation (computed using CAPM and historical returns), we then evaluated
the Sharpe ratio for each individual portfolio (the ratio of expected returns to the standard deviation). We
then used a standard deviation of 0.16, as in Campbell and Viceira (2002), to compute risk-adjusted returns.
23
See Campbell and Viceira (2002) and Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout (2005).
24
see http://www.human.cornell.edu/pam/research/centers-programs/german-panel/cnef.cfm.

19

to the 1935-1945 birth group. For comparability with prior studies, we use the AR(1) error
structure estimated by HSZ (1995) for net household income prior to age 65. We use HRS
data to compute the profile of household out-of-pocket medical expenditures allowing for
cohort effects; we predict the profiles for those born between 1935 and 1945, again using the
error structure estimated by HSZ (1995). Both income and out-of-pocket expenditures prove
to be highly persistent, and differences in persistence and variance across education groups
are relatively small. Following the literature (HSZ 1995; SSK 2006), we set the variance
of the transitory error component to zero in the simulations since most of it likely reflects
measurement error.
Estimating the price of acquiring financial knowledge from available data is difficult
because little information is available on inputs to the production process – time and expenditures on financial services – let alone data on investments in, as opposed to the stock
of, financial knowledge. According to Turner and Muir (2012), the cost of a one-hour financial advice consultation averages about $250. Veritat.com offers financial planning at $25 a
month for singles and $40 for families ($35 for retirees), after an initial meeting fee of $250.
Accordingly, the cost ranges from $550 for singles and $730 for families. Less-expensive
alternatives include financial advice software such as ESPlanner, where a one-year license
costs $40 (the upgraded ESPlanner costs $149; see esplanner.com/product_catalog). In our
analysis, we seek to match an average annual expenditure of $500 on financial literacy. We
use the function π(it ) = 100i1.75
which matches this average expenditure in the simulations
t
and yields a smooth financial literacy investment age profile. For the participation cost
of the sophisticated technology (cd ), we use the median estimate of $750 (in $2004) from
Vissing-Jorgensen (2003).
We also require an estimate of the depreciation factor for financial knowledge, δ, but
there is little information on the size of this parameter. One study reported that undergraduates’ economic learning depreciated at 4-10% annually (Kipps, Kohen, and Paden 1984).
Wage and labor supply information have also been used to measure human capital depreciation; for instance, Heckman (1976) estimated annual depreciation rates of 3-7%. For the

20

sensitivity analysis, we start with a value of 6% and study whether results vary from that
baseline. We could permit the depreciation rate to rise with age to reflect the possibility
of cognitive decline, but this is not needed to produce a hump-shaped financial knowledge
profile. Furthermore, it is unclear whether consumers can predict cognitive decline, particularly when it comes to memory, and self-reported memory does not change with age in the
HRS.25
We also allow for mortality risk differences across education groups, estimated using
Gompertz hazard regressions in HRS data for people age 50+, allowing for proportional
education effects.26 We assume the same proportionality by education prior to age 50, but
we use age/mortality profiles taken from population life tables.
Upon finding optimal consumption, financial knowledge investment, and technology participation at each point in the state-space and at each age, we then use our decision rules
to simulate 5,000 individuals moving through their life cycles. We draw income shocks,
out-of-pocket medical expenditure surprises, and rate of return shocks, and we then simulate the life cycle paths of all consumers. These consumers are given the initial conditions
for education, earnings, and assets derived from the PSID for indiviudals age 25-30. We
initialize financial knowledge at the lowest level (0), because we lack baseline information
on financial knowledge. This also makes clear how endogenous accumulation of financial
knowledge affects wealth outcomes, and it abstracts from differences in initial conditions.

6

Simulations

Our discussion of the simulation results focuses on outcomes around the time of retirement,
since this is when heterogeneity in net assets is most evident. Table 2 reports statistics
for each education group at the time of retirement, where we see that wealth patterns are
quite unequal. As of age 65, the median high school dropout has accumulated less than half
25

Objectively-measured memory scores do fall after about age 65, but self-assessed perceptions are more
likely to affect individual behavior.
26
These regressions are available upon request. Life expectancy at age 25 is five years higher for the
college-educated compared to high school dropouts.

21

as much wealth compared to high school graduates ($61,500 versus $180,300), and college
graduates have accumulated twice as much in retirement assets ($370,200) compared to
high school graduates. In fact, compared to the outcomes reported in Figure 2, the model
somewhat overpredicts wealth inequality, due mainly to very low predicted assets among
dropouts. The ratio of median wealth to income (average lifetime income for each group) is
1.91 for dropouts and 7.8 for college graduates. Accordingly, the ratio of wealth to income
for these two groups stands at 4.08. In other words, our model generates a strongly positive
relationship between accumulated wealth (normalized by income) and income. We proxy
the percent of indiviudals who will be poor in old age, proxied by the fraction of consumers
reaching retirement age with assets below their current income levels. As indicated in Figure
2, close to 40% of high school droputs will be poor according to this metric, versus 17% for
college graduates.
[Table 2 here]
At retirement, the fraction of consumers investing in the sophisticated technology also
varies by education group, with 35% of the dropouts, 54% of the high school graduates, and
69% of the college graduates doing so. This pattern nicely matches the patterns shown in
Table 1 for participation in sophisticated financial products. There we found that 32% of
dropouts, 53% of high school graduates, and 76% of college graduates held what we defined
to be sophisticated saving technologies.
Finally, we compute the fraction of consumers with low financial knowledge at the time
of retirement. Given the production function, a threshold of 25 units implies that such
households could expect an excess return of only one percentage point or less. In our model,
such a low level of financial knowledge turns out to be optimal for many, given the constraints
and shocks that individuals face. These “optimally ignorant” individuals include 67% of the
dropouts, 47% of the high school graduates, and 33% of college graduates. Since financial
knowledge strongly influences participation in the sophisticated technology, it is perhaps not
surprising that almost all of those with a financial knowledge level of over 25 do use the
technology. In this way, financial knowledge can be seen as a type of entry cost, allowing

22

users to deploy the technology effectively. This entry cost varies by education groups, since
incentives to invest in financial knowledge also differ.
Figure 4 illustrates the life cycle paths of average financial knowledge by education
groups, all of which which prove to be hump-shaped. Financial knowledge peaks around the
age of 65 and declines thereafter. In the accumulation phase, better-educated consumers
invest more because they have more to gain from higher returns that help them smooth
lifetime marginal utilities. At some point, the opportunity cost of investing becomes too
large in terms of foregone consumption and depreciation, and the marginal benefit decreases
due to the shorter horizon over which consumers have to enjoy the investments. Raising the
depreciation rate of knowledge with age would only make this decline more marked.
[Figure 4 here]

6.1

Quantitative Importance of Endogenous Financial Knowledge

Our model embodies several differences across education groups that generate differential
wealth accumulation patterns. First, the consumption floor acts as a tax on saving for those
most likely to experience a substantial negative income shock, since subsistence benefits
are means-tested (HSZ 1995). Second, differences in replacement rates, demographics, and
mortality patterns can create differential incentives to save. Finally, there is the mechanism
we propose: financial knowledge, which creates a positive relationship between normalized
wealth and income. To clarify the relative contribution of each mechanism in the life cycle
model, we next undertake a decomposition exercise which is depicted in Figure 5.
[Figure 5 here]
To this end, we recall that the ratio of median wealth-to-income for college graduates to
dropouts is 4.08 at retirement in our baseline simulation. To offer a contrast, we eliminate
the possibility of accumulating knowledge along with all differences across education groups
other than income while working and medical expenditure differences. For this alternative
case, we fix all constraints to those of high school graduates and eliminate the consumption
floor. The top bar of Figure 5 shows in the setup with only income and medical expenditure

23

uncertainty that the wealth-to-income ratio of college graduates is virtually the same as that
of dropouts, at 0.96. In other words, confirming what we noted at the outset, the basic life
cycle model predicts that all groups accumulate wealth in the same proportion to income.
Next we reintroduce the consumption floor, which reduces precautionary saving of high
school dropouts by more than that of college graduates. As illustrated, this does raise
the wealth-to-income ratio for college versus high school dropouts, but the impact is small,
raising it only to 1.08 (the second bar in Figure 5). Thus in our model, the consumption floor
plays a relatively inconsequential role in generating wealth inequality. This finding differs
from HSZ (1995) because our precautionary saving motive is much smaller than theirs due
to lower risk aversion. Reintroducing differences in old-age income replacement rates is
important since college graduates have much lower replacement rates than do dropouts.
Moreover, this change alters both wealth accumulation and lifetime income patterns; the
net effect, of course, depends on the substitutability of retirement wealth and private wealth.
The third bar in Figure 5 represents this simulation, which does increase inequality by 50%
(from 1.08 to 1.5). Introducing differences in demographics (the 4th bar down) contributes
another increase of roughly 0.5 in the ratio. What this means is that, in the model, differences
in household composition are as important as differences in replacement rates. Accounting
for mortality differences (the 5th bar) again increases the ratio, now to 2.49. This is because
college-educated households must finance consumption over a longer horizon, while high
school dropouts face a shorter horizon. Consequently, this is the amount of inequality
generated using a life cycle model that lacks endogenous financial knowledge.
The bottom bar in Figure 5 shows how outcomes change when we reintroduce the possibility of consumer investments in financial knowledge, in addition to the other factors
mentioned above. The impact of allowing consumers to access the sophisticated technology
and earn higher expected returns is striking. Now the wealth-to-income ratio across education groups rises from 2.49 to 4.09, an increase in the ratio of 1.6 (or 65%). Thus of all
the explanations examined here for heterogeneity in wealth outcomes, financial knowledge
accounts for more than half the cross-group wealth inequality [0.51=1.6/(4.09-1)].

24

To more fully illustrate the impact of having access to the higher returns as a result of
investing in financial knowledge, we undertake a simple counterfactual exercise. For each
schooling group, we first compute average simulated consumption, investment, and medical
expenditures by age. Then we evaluate the average return factor for each educational group
by age using its accumulated financial knowledge, and we compare this to the average
wealth path assuming all groups could only earn the average return earned by high school
dropouts. We find that wealth would have been 39% lower for college graduates at the
time of retirement if they had experienced the returns paid to dropouts; for high school
graduates, the decline would have been just over 30% compared to the paths using their
actual average rates of return. Since rates of return differ by roughly 1% between education
groups, over many years these differences compounded produce substantial differences in
wealth. Moreover, our model generates this wealth inequality endogenously, building only
on differences in marginal utilities of consumption over the life cycle.

6.2

Policy Simulations

In the real world, several institutional factors can help shape the process of financial knowledge accumulation. For instance, means-tested benefits protect consumers against bad states
of nature: when consumers seek financial knowledge to create a buffer stock of saving, having
such programs may provide a disincentive to invest in financial knowledge. Similarly, Social
Security benefits may crowd out household saving and also discourage the accumulation of
financial knowledge. And the educational system can be influential in boosting initial levels
of financial knowledge, as demonstrated by Bernheim (1998); Behrman, Mitchell, Soo, and
Bravo (2012) and Lusardi, Mitchell, and Curto (2010).
To explore the relative importance of each type of policy, we next undertake three policy
simulations. First, we reduce expected retirement benefits by 20%, which might mimic what
Social Security can pay future retirees unless revenues to the program are increased (Cogan
and Mitchell 2003). Second, we examine the impact of a reduction in means-tested benefits
by half, which could mean either that generosity is decreased or that eligibility is restricted.

25

Finally, our last scenario is aimed at understanding what would happen if all consumers
starting their life cycle had a financial knowledge level of 25; this implies that they would
start their life cycle with a possible excess rate of return of 1%. Results are reported in
Table 3.
[Table 3 here]
Panel A reports the impact of a 20% reduction in the retirement income benefit. Across
all educational groups, median assets rise compared to Table 2, which is not surprising
because retirement income crowds out private wealth accumulation in a life cycle setting.
Median assets more than double for dropouts, and they rise by roughly one-third for college
graduates. Lowering retirement income generosity thus reduces wealth inequality, instead
of increasing it.
We can also compute the change in the present value of retirement income by education
group in this scenario. Expressing the change as a fraction of the change in the expected
present value of retirement income yields an estimate of the displacement or crowd-out effect
of retirement income. A naive life cycle model would predict a complete offset, once adjustment is made for the fact that wealth is measured at the time of retirement, so the reduction
in lifetime income is only partially offset by that age. By contrast, the unadjusted displacement effects in our simulations range from -0.79 to -1.03.27 The percentage of dropouts
who face shortfalls due to having assets below their current income falls by 30%, with not
much change among the best educated. All groups boost their holdings of the sophisticated
technology, and even more interestingly, the fraction of optimally ignorant respondents falls.
In other words, since all consumers must now save for retirement, investment in financial
knowledge rises across the board. Of course, this comes at a cost: the present value of investment expenditures rises by about $8,000 for dropouts, $4,000 for high school graduates,
and $6,000 for college graduates.28
27

These numbers are computed as the change in wealth at retirement divided by the change in the present
value of retirement income when we reduce the generosity of pensions. We use a discount rate of 3% for
these calculations.
28
These present values are computed using simulated data on financial knowledge investment over the life
cycle, the cost function, and a discount rate of 3%.

26

The next scenario, in Panel B, halves the means-tested consumption floor from $10,000
to $5,000 per year. As before, this boosts incentives to save for precautionary reasons.
But because our precautionary saving motive is less important than in other studies, such a
policy change would produce few differential effects for wealth accumulation and/or financial
knowledge. That is, both wealth and knowledge rise following the benefit reduction, but
the impact is relatively similar across education groups. Accordingly, in this model, meanstested benefits do not appear to be an important factor shaping saving and investment in
financial knowledge.
The final policy scenario, reported in Panel C, considers the possibility that consumers
could start on their life cycle paths already having a positive endowment of financial knowledge. This could happen, for instance, if financial education were included in high school
curricula. To explore how results change, we chose a level of 25; this implies consumers can
earn an initial excess return of 1% on their investments. Interestingly, this policy changes
retirement outcomes only slightly. Since financial knowledge is endogenous in the model,
people who do not need the knowledge will let it depreciate to their target optimal levels.
Although wealth is slightly greater at retirement and financial ignorance less prevalent, these
effects are small in comparison to the initial change in financial knowledge.
The fact that outcomes at retirement are relatively insensitive to this policy change does
not, however, mean that financial education is unimportant to welfare. In fact, the last row
of Panel C in Table 3 reports the change in initial wealth at age 25 that a consumer would
require to make him as well off as with the initial endowment of financial knowledge. It
would take an additional $6,800 to make a dropout equally well off, $6,900 for a high school
graduate, and $15,400 for a college graduate. In other words, high school dropouts would
need 82% more initial wealth to make them as well off in expected utility terms, as with a
higher starting value of literacy; the wealth equivalent value is 56% for college graduates.
Such substantial wealth equivalence measures demonstrate that consumers do value financial
knowledge, even when they make no new investments thereafter.29 A large part of this value
29

Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini (2007) also report large welfare consequences of enhancing consumer
knowledge, in a very different framework.

27

is due to the fact that investment costs are reduced when people are endowed with a positive
level of initial financial knowledge.
Interestingly, this last simulation suggests that a policy which exogenously raises financial
knowledge early in life might not have measurable long-term effects, when consumers have
both optimal financial knowledge and optimal target wealth levels in mind when solving
their life cycle problems. In other words, it is possible that a financial education program
could enhance saving in the short run, but it might have little enduring impact in terms
of additional future wealth. Nonetheless, the training would still bring important welfare
benefits, since additional short-term saving increases lifetime consumption and thus utility.
Therefore any effort to evaluate the impact of financial knowledge programs should take
these factors into account.

6.3
6.3.1

Sensitivity Analysis
Preference, Depreciation, and Cost Parameters

We have not estimated all parameters of the model because we lack data on individual rates
of return. For this reason, we next provide a rich set of sensitivity analyses to help assess
how results might change when important parameters are varied. To this end, we explore
sensitivity of the asset ratio of college-educated individuals relative to dropouts, the fraction
using the sophisticated technology, and the fraction optimally ignorant at retirement, for
key model parameters. Table 4 permits a comparison of results for the baseline case, as well
as the case where we vary one variable at a time. In all cases, we report the college to high
school dropout ratio, with the first column showing the ratio of wealth values at retirement;
the second providing the ratio of persons with the sophisticated technology; and the third
reporting the ratio of the populations with low financial knowledge.
[Table 4 here]
The first two rows of Table 4 indicate how results change with different values of the
relative risk aversion parameter σ. We vary this parameter from 1.1 to 3, spanning the
baseline value of 1.6. This variation proves to have an important impact on wealth inequal28

ity as well as on the fraction holding sophisticated technology and with low knowledge.
Specifically, when risk aversion is low (σ = 1.1), individuals save more for retirement. Since
the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is large, better-educated people are also willing
to invest in financial knowledge and hold equities. Such complementarity substantially increases the wealth dispersion across educational groups; the degree of inequality rises by
more than half [53%=(6.25-4.08)/4.08]. In contrast, setting σ to 3 produces the opposite
result: the precautionary saving motive is now more important, so all groups accumulate
more wealth and financial knowledge. Accordingly, in a cross-sectional context, our model
implies that more risk averse individuals would invest more in financial literacy, hold more
assets, and invest in financial knowledge. Overall, this reduces wealth inequality and reduces
the financially ignorant share of the population.
The next two lines illustrate that results change relatively little when we vary the depreciation rate for financial knowledge, δ, from the baseline level of 0.06 to a low of 0.03 and a
high of 0.09 (always holding other factors constant). Wealth inequality changes are small,
from 0 to 10% [=(4.08-3.58)/4.08]. The higher depreciation rate generates a bit less wealth
heterogeneity because college graduates cut back on their financial knowledge investments.
Relatively more of the college-educated group now fall in the low knowledge category than
at baseline.
The next four rows indicate that the sensitivity of results depends on the production
function for financial knowledge, π(i). It will be recalled that the baseline representation of
this function π(it ) = 100i1.75
had two parameters. The multiplicand affects the average cost
t
of acquiring financial knowledge, while the exponent influences the function’s convexity. We
vary both in Table 4, in turn. Varying the multiplicand from its baseline value of 100 to
a low of 75 and a high of 125, has a relatively small impact on the results. By contrast,
changing the function’s convexity has a non-linear effect. Increasing convexity gives larger
incentives to spread investment over the life cycle and to avoid large investments. Hence,
this should lower differences in financial knowledge. However, raising convexity increases
the average cost of reaching a certain level of financial knowledge. Hence, this could amplify

29

differences as college-educated households have more resources. The effect we observe is not
monotonic: inequality first increases (from 3.81 to 4.08) and then decreases (from 4.08 to
3.42).
The final four rows of Table 4 change the fixed cost of participation in the sophisticated
technology, cd , and the discount factor, β. Altering cd around the baseline value of $750
has relatively little impact on wealth-to-income ratios as well as the other two outcomes.
By contrast, the wealth inequality ratio is relatively sensitive to changes in the discount
factor, β, set initially to a value of 0.96. In the final row of Table 4, we see that setting β =
0.98 produces one-third less wealth inequality compared to the baseline [=(4.08-2.69)/4.08],
less dispersion in risky asset holdings, and far smaller differences in financial literacy across
groups.
In sum, our sensitivity analysis illustrates that, although results are somewhat dependent
on parameter values, the amount of wealth inequality generated by financial knowledge
remains high.

6.3.2

Production of Returns

In order to assess how the production function shapes the role of financial knowledge in
wealth dispersion, we next examine a different model from the one used in the baseline
setup. Consider the following function:
α1
r(ft+1 ) = α0 ft+1
.

Here α1 is the elasticity of risk-adjusted returns to financial knowledge. Lacking data on
rates of return at the household level, there is little known about this elasticity. We use
a plausible range from the human capital literature as reported in Browning, Hansen, and
Heckman (1999), namely 0.5 to 0.9, and we consider three elasticity values: low (α1 = 0.5),
medium (α1 = 0.75), and high (α1 = 0.9). Table 5 reports the ratio of college to less-thanhigh school median wealth for each of these scenarios.

30

[Table 5 here]
What we find is that when the production function is more concave, less dispersion in
income-to-wealth ratios is generated. For example, an elasticity of 0.9 yields a ratio of 4.02,
versus 4.09 in the base case. An elasticity of 0.75, at the mid-range of the human capital
literature, yields a ratio of 4.0. The lower-bound elasticity of 0.5 yields a value of 3.35.
It is worth noting that even the lowest value of 3.35 represents considerably more wealth
inequality than results from a model without financial knowledge (there the ratio was 2.5).
Accordingly, more concavity in the knowledge production function attenuates the wealth
inequality created by financial knowledge. This is mostly due to the fact that, relative to
when the technology is linear, less-educated households now have higher marginal returns to
investing. Better-educated individuals have slightly flatter incremental returns to investing
in knowledge, relative to the baseline, and thus they invest slightly less. In general, concavity
of the function does therefore influence the degree of inequality generated, when financial
knowledge is endogenous. Yet in any case, allowing for a concave production function with
plausible elasticities instead of a linear function still implies a substantial role for financial
knowledge.

7

Discussion and Conclusions

This paper has developed an augmented stochastic life cycle model that endogenizes the
decision to acquire financial knowledge. Our goals were to explore the forces that shape
financial knowledge accumulation over the lifetime and to evaluate how much wealth inequality might be attributable to differences in financial knowledge. Our formulation posits
that financial knowledge offers higher expected returns though it is costly to acquire and
depreciates with time. The profile of optimal financial knowledge is shown to be humpshaped over the life cycle, and it also differs by educational groups because of differences
in life cycle income paths. Most importantly, we demonstrate that allowing for endogenous
financial knowledge creates large differences in wealth holdings, and that social insurance

31

influences the incentives to acquire financial knowledge. Thus our model can rationalize and
account for a sizeable share of observed differences in wealth across education groups, while
other authors have had to rely on social insurance and preference parameters to produce
similar dispersion.
In generating wealth inequality above and beyond what traditional models of saving
have delivered, we also can account for some of the large differences in wealth found in most
empirical work on saving. The precise values depend on model parameters, but our estimates
are strongly supportive of the conclusion that financial literacy plays a key role in explaining
inequality and should not be ignored. The model relies on an important and intuitively
sensible fact: individuals do not start their economic lives with full financial knowledge, so
this knowledge may be acquired endogenously over the life cycle. Moreover, we show that
some level of financial ignorance may actually be optimal: since it is expensive to acquire
financial knowledge and not everyone benefits from greater financial sophistication, some
consumers will rationally fail to invest. We also show that financial knowledge can be an
important public policy tool. For example, we predict that growing reliance on individually
managed 401(k) accounts or personal Social Security accounts would be accompanied by
more financial knowledge and more wealth inequality. Additionally, an increase in labor
income risk, as in the current macroeconomy, is likely to be accompanied by an increase not
only in precautionary saving but also in financial knowledge.
Our theory is also helpful in explaining several recent empirical findings mentioned
above, including the widespread low levels of measured financial knowledge in the U.S.
and around the world. Our model has predictions about why some population sub-groups
are ill-informed, particularly those anticipating larger old-age social insurance benefits. This
also would imply that nations promising higher levels of old-age benefits will also be those
with lower population levels of financial knowledge. And finally, our model helps explain
why financial education programs may not appear to generate large behavioral changes,
particularly for those finding it suboptimal to invest in financial knowledge.
In sum, we have shown that allowing for different levels of financial knowledge early in

32

life has important implications for how much people will save. Adding financial knowledge to
life cycle models permits a more accurate rendering of a world where consumers must cope
with complex financial markets and must save so as to provide for their own retirement.
Incorporating these more realistic features in life cycle models will permit us to better
understand empirical regularities, make predictions for the future, and provide more accurate
policy recommendations. An important task for future research would be to obtain evidence
on differential returns over the life cycle, to confirm the exact form of the financial knowledge
production function.

References
[1] Angeletos, G.M., D. Laibson, A. Repetto, J. Tobacman and S. Weinberg. 2001.
“The Hyperbolic Consumption Model: Calibration, Simulation and Empirical
Evaluation.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 15(3): 47-68.
[2] Aon Consulting. 2008. Replacement Ratio Study:

A Measurement Tool

for Retirement Planning. Global Corporate Marketing and Communications
(www.aon.com/retire).
[3] Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (ASPE). 2008. Indicators of Welfare Dependence (Appendix A, Program Data. (see
http://aspe.hhs.gov/hsp/indicators08/apa.shtml#ftanf2)
[4] Attanasio, O., J. Banks, C. Meghir and G. Weber. 1999. “Humps and Bumps
in Lifetime Consumption.” Journal of Economic and Business Statistics. 17(1),
23-35.
[5] Becker, G. S. 1975. Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, 2nd
Ed. New York: Columbia University Press.

33

[6] Behrman, J., O. S. Mitchell, C. Soo, and D. Bravo. 2012. “Financial Knowledge,
Schooling, and Wealth Accumulation.” American Economic Review. 102(3):
300–304.
[7] Ben-Porath, Y. 1967. “The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle
of Earnings,” Journal of Political Economy, 75(4): 352-365.
[8] Bernheim, B. D. 1995. “Do Households Appreciate Their Financial Vulnerabilities? An Analysis of Actions, Perceptions, and Public Policy.” In Tax Policy
and Economic Growth. American Council for Capital Formation, Washington,
DC: 1–30.
[9] Bernheim, B. D. 1998. “Financial Illiteracy, Education and Retirement Saving.”
In Living with Defined Contribution Pensions. O. S. Mitchell and S. Schieber,
eds. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press: 38–68.
[10] Browning, M., L. Hansen, and J. Heckman. 1999. “Micro Data and General
Equilibrium Models.” In Handbook of Macroeconomics. J.B. Taylor and M.
Woodford, Eds. Amsterdan: Elsevier Science B.V.: 543-633 .
[11] Cagetti, M. 2003. “Wealth Accumulation Over the Life Cycle and Precautionary
Savings.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics. 21(3): 339-353.
[12] Calvet, L., J. Campbell and P. Sodini. 2007. “Down or Out: Assessing the Welfare Costs of Household Investment Mistakes.” Journal of Political Economy.
115: 707-747.
[13] Calvet, L., J. Campbell and P. Sodini (2009): “Measuring the Financial Sophistication of Households.” American Economic Review. 99(2): 393-398.
[14] Campbell, J. Y. 2006. “Household Finance.” Journal of Finance. 61: 1553–1604.
[15] Campbell, J. Y. and N. G. Mankiw. 1989. “Consumption, Income and Interest
Rates: Reinterpreting the Time Series Evidence.” In NBER Macroeconomics
34

Annual. O. J. Blanchard and S. Fischer, eds. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press:
185-216.
[16] Campbell, J. Y. and L. Viceira. 2002. Strategic Asset Allocation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[17] Choi, J., D. Laibson and B. Madrian. 2010. “Why Does the Law of One Price
Fail? An Experiment on Index Mutual Funds.” Review of Financial Studies.
23(4): 1405-1432
[18] Christelis, D., T. Jappelli and M. Padula. 2010. “Cognitive Abilities and Portfolio Choice.” European Economic Review, 54: 18–38.
[19] Cocco, J., F. Gomes, and P. Maenhout. 2005. “Consumption and Portfolio
Choice over the Life-Cycle.” Review of Financial Studies. 18: 491-533.
[20] Cogan, J. F. and O. S. Mitchell. 2003. “Perspectives from the President’s Commission on Social Security Reform.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 17(2).
Spring: 149-172.
[21] Collins, M. 2012. “Financial Advice: A Substitute for Financial Literacy?”
University of Wisconsin-Madison, unpublished paper.
[22] Curcuru, S., J. Heaton, D. Lucas, and D. Moore. 2005. “Heterogeneity and Portfolio Choice: Theory and Evidence.” In Handbook of Financial Econometrics.
Y. Ait-Sahalia and L. P. Hansen, eds. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science: 338-376.
[23] Deaton, A. 1992. Understanding Consumption. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
[24] Delavande, A., S. Rohwedder, and R. J. Willis. 2008. “Preparation for Retirement, Financial Knowledge and Cognitive Resources.” MRRC Working Paper
Series 190.

35

[25] DeNardi, C., E. French and J. Jones. 2011. “Why Do the Elderly Save? The
Role of Medical Expenses.” Journal of Political Economy. 118(1): 39–75.
[26] Dynan, K., J. Skinner and S. Zeldes. 2004. “Do the Rich Save More?” Journal
of Political Economy. 112 (2): 397-444.
[27] French, E. 2005. “The Effects of Health, Wealth, and Wages on Labor Supply
and Retirement Behavior.” Review of Economic Studies. 72(2): 395-427.
[28] Gourinchas, P.O., and J.A. Parker. 2002. “Consumption Over the Life Cycle.”
Econometrica. 70(1): 47-89.
[29] Hastings, J., O. S. Mitchell, and E. Chyn. 2011. “Fees, Framing, and Financial
Literacy in the Choice of Pension Managers.” In Financial Literacy: Implications for Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace. O. S. Mitchell
and A. Lusardi, eds. Oxford: Oxford University Press: 101-115.
[30] Heckman, J. 1976. “A Life-Cycle Model of Earnings, Learning, and Consumption.” Journal of Political Economy. 84 (4): S11-44.
[31] Hilgert, M. A., J. Hogarth, and S.G. Beverly. 2003. “Household Financial Management: The Connection between Knowledge and Behavior.” Federal Reserve
Bulletin. July.
[32] Hubbard, R. G., J. Skinner, and S. Zeldes. 1995. “Precautionary Savings and
Social Insurance.” Journal of Political Economy. 103(2): 360-399.
[33] Hurst, E., A. Kennickell, A. Lusardi, and F. Torralba. 2010. “Precautionary
Savings and the Importance of Business Owners.” Review of Economics and
Statistics., 92(1): 61-69.
[34] Jappelli, T., and M. Padula. 2011. “Investment in Financial Knowledge and
Saving Decisions.” CSEF Working Paper 272, University of Salerno.

36

[35] Kipps, P. H., A. Kohen, and D. W. Paden. 1984. “The Depreciation of Human
Capital over Time: The Case of Economic Knowledge Revisited.” The Journal
of Economic Education 15(1): 90-91.
[36] Lusardi, A., P-C. Michaud, and O.S. Mitchell. 2011. “Optimal Financial Literacy and Saving for Retirement.” Financial Literacy Center Working Paper
WR-905-SSA, September.
[37] Lusardi, A., and O. S. Mitchell. 2007. “Baby Boomer Retirement Security:
The Roles of Planning, Financial Knowledge, and Housing Wealth.” Journal of
Monetary Economics. 54: 207-224.
[38] Lusardi, A., and O. S. Mitchell. 2011a. “Financial Literacy and Planning: Implications for Retirement Wellbeing.” In Financial Literacy: Implications for Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace. O. S. Mitchell and A. Lusardi,
eds. Oxford: Oxford University Press: 17-39.
[39] Lusardi, A., and O. S. Mitchell. 2011b. “Financial Literacy around the World:
An Overview.” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance. 10(4): 497-508.
[40] Lusardi, A. and O. S. Mitchell. 2008. “Planning and Financial Literacy: How
Do Women Fare?” American Economic Review. 98(2): 413-17.
[41] Lusardi, A., O. S. Mitchell, and V. Curto. 2010. “Financial Literacy among the
Young.” Journal of Consumer Affairs. 44(2): 358-380.
[42] Lusardi, A., O. S. Mitchell, and P-C Michaud. 2011. ”Optimal Financial Literacy and Saving for Retirement.” Pension Resarch Council Workig Paper
WP2011-20. Wharton School.
[43] Mandell, L. 2008. “Financial Education in High School.” In Overcoming the
Saving Slump: How to Increase the Effectiveness of Financial Education and

37

Saving Programs. A. Lusardi, ed. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press:
257-279.
[44] Moore, J., and O. S. Mitchell. 2000. “Projected Retirement Wealth and Saving Adequacy”. In Forecasting Retirement Needs and Retirement Wealth. O. S.
Mitchell, B. Hammond, and A. Rappaport, eds. Philadelphia, PA: University
of Pennsylvania Press: 68-94.
[45] National Council on Economic Education (NCEE). 2005. “What American
Teens and Adults Know About Economics.” Unpublished monograph, Washington, D.C.
[46] Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). 2005. Improving Financial Literacy. Analysis of Issues and Policies. Geneva: OECD
Publications.
[47] Poterba, J., S. Venti, and D. Wise. 2007. “The Shift from Defined Benefit
Pensions to 401(k) Plans and the Pension Assets of the Baby Boom Cohort.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 104: 13238-13243.
[48] Scholz, J., A. Seshadri, and S. Khitatrakun. 2006. “Are Americans Saving Optimally for Retirement?” Journal of Political Economy. 114(4): 607-643.
[49] Tauchen, G. 1986. “Finite State Markov-Chain Approximations to Univariate
and Vector Autoregressions.” Economic Letters. 20: 177–181.
[50] Turner, J. A., and D. Muir. 2012. “The Market for Financial Advisers.” Pension
Research Center Working Paper WP2012-06. Wharton School.
[51] U.S. General Accounting Office. 2011. Regulatory Coverage Generally Exits for
Financial Planners, but Consumer Protection Insurers Remain. GAO Report,
GAO-11-235.

38

[52] van Gaudecker, H. M. 2011. “How Does Household Portfolio Diversification
Vary with Financial Sophistication and Advice?” NETSPAR Discussion Paper
2011-026.
[53] van Rooij, M., A. Lusardi, and R. Alessie. 2011. “Financial Literacy and Stock
Market Participation. Journal of Financial Economics. 101(2011): 449–472.
[54] van Rooij, M., A. Lusardi and R. Alessie. 2012. “Financial Literacy, Retirement
Planning, and Household Wealth.” Economic Journal. 122: 449–478.
[55] Venti, S., and D. Wise. 2001. “Choice, Chance and Wealth Dispersion at
Retirement.” In Aging Issues in the United States and Japan. S. Ogura, T.
Tachibanaki, and D.A. Wise, eds. Chicago, IL: Univ. of Chicago Press: 25-64.
[56] Vissing-Jorgensen, A. 2003. “Perspectives on Behavioral Finance: Does ’Irrationality’ Disappear with Wealth? Evidence from Expectations and Actions.”
NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
[57] Yitzhaki, S. 1987. “The Relation between Return and Income.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 102(1): 77-95.

39

Figure 1: Life Cycle Net Household Income Profiles by Educational Attainment.
This figure shows median net household income by education group computed from the
PSID for waves 1980-1999 (in $2004; see text). The term <HS refers to households where
the head has less than a high school diploma, HS means the head completed high school, and
College+ means the head had some college. The figure adjusts for cohort effects based on
median regressions with age controls; predictions are for those born 1935-1945. Age profiles
are smoothed using a lowess filter.

40

Figure 2: Life Cycle Wealth by Educational Attainment. This figure shows median
wealth profiles by education group, from the PSID (in $2004; see text). The curves are
predicted from median regressions with a correction for cohort effects (following French,
2005); wealth refers to the sum of assets minus debt. Wealth is predicted for all persons
born 1935-1945; age profiles are smoothed using a lowess filter.

41

10

9

wealth to income ratio

8

7

6

5

4

3

2
20

30

40

50

60
income

70

80

90

100

Figure 3: Relationship of the Wealth-to-Income Ratio and Income in a TwoPeriod Model. This figure shows how the wealth-to-income ratio increases with income in
a two-period model with first-period consumption, y, and cost of investing, π = 2.5. Also
σ = 1.6, and β = 0.96. See text and Figure 1 for definitions.

42

Figure 4: Baseline Scenario: Simulated Life-cycle Profile of Financial Knowledge
by Age. This figure plots simulated average financial knowledge scores (0 to 100) by age
and education level. See text and Figure 1 for definitions.

43

Figure 5: Decomposition of Wealth Inequality at Retirement by Education Group.
This figure reports the simulated median wealth-to-lifetime income ratios expressed as a ratio
of the College+ to those with no high school (<HS). The top bar accounts only for differences
in uncertain lifetime income and medical expenditures; all other differences across education
groups are suppressed and all education groups use the values for those who finished high
school. Subsequent bars then progressively add mechanisms that can generate dispersion
in asset ratios. The second bar adds a realistic consumption floor. For the third bar, we
add differences in replacement rates by education group. The fourth bar includes differences
in household size over the life cycle. The fifth bar incorporates mortality differences by
education. The bottom bar adds the impact of financial knowledge accumulation.

Age group
25-35
35-45
45-55
55-65
Total

<HS
21.8
24.6
24.1
32.1
25.9

HS
24.8
39.8
42.3
53.3
38.5

College+
51.5
58.3
65.5
75.6
61.1

Total
38.6
48.7
53.4
59.5
49.1

Table 1: Life Cycle Participation (%) in Sophisticated Financial Products (Stocks
and IRAs) by Educational Attainment. This table reports participation percentages
predicted from regressions in the PSID with controls for age categories and cohort dummies;
cohort born 1935-1945. See text and Figure 1 for definitions.

44

At retirement
Med. wealth ($ 000)
Med. wealth-to-income ratio
% Poor (at < yt )
% Sophis. Tech. (κt = 1)
% Low Knowledge (ft ≤ 25)

<HS
61.5
1.91
0.39
0.35
0.67

HS
180.3
4.7
0.22
0.54
0.47

College+
370.2
7.8
0.17
0.69
0.33

College/<HS
6.05
4.08
0.44
1.95
0.48

Table 2: Simulated Outcomes at Retirement (age 65). This table summarizes outcomes from baseline simulations at age 65. The last column shows the ratio of college to high
school dropout values for each row ($2004). Note: Assets (at ), income (yt ), sophisticated
technology (κt ), and financial knowledge (ft ); poor is defined as having less net wealth than
annual income. See text and Figure 1 for definitions.

45

Panel A.
At retirement
Med. wealth ($ 000)
% Poor (at < yt )
% Sophis. Tech. (κt > 0)
% Low knowledge (ft ≤ 25)
Panel B.
At retirement
Med. wealth ($ 000)
% Poor (at < yt )
% Sophis. Tech. (κt > 0)
% Low knowledge (ft ≤ 25)
Panel C.
At retirement
Med. wealth ($ 000)
% Poor (at < yt )
% Sophis. Tech. (κt > 0)
% Low knowledge (ft ≤ 25)
Wealth Equiv. ($)

↓20% in Retirement Income
<HS
HS
College College /<HS
115.9 258.4
468.9
4.04
0.27
0.12
0.07
0.26
0.45
0.63
0.79
1.75
0.57
0.38
0.23
0.39
↓Means-Tested Benefits to $5000
<HS
HS
College College /<HS
68.1 198.7
384.9
5.65
0.36
0.20
0.16
0.42
0.37
0.57
0.71
1.89
0.64
0.44
0.29
0.47
↑Financial Knowledge at Age 25
<HS
HS
College College/<HS
65.1 195.4
391.9
6.01
0.38
0.21
0.165
0.42
0.37
0.57
0.71
1.90
0.64
0.43
0.30
0.47
6.8
6.9
15.4
2.26

Table 3: Simulation Results of Policy Experiments. This table summarizes outcomes
from simulations at the time of retirement in three scenarios. The first lowers retirement
income by 20%; the second lowers means-tested benefits from $10,000 to $5,000. The last
scenario provides a boost of 25 units of financial knowledge at age 25 for all consumers; here,
we compute the initial wealth equivalent at age 25 that would make the average consumer
at baseline as well-off in terms of utility, compared to the scenario where he inherits 25 units
of financial literacy. See Figure 1 and Table 2 for definitions.

46

College+/<HS
Baseline
σ = 1.1
σ=3
δ = 0.03
δ = 0.09
π(i) = 75i1.75
π(i) = 125i1.75
π(i) = 100i1.25
π(i) = 100i2
cd = 1000
cd = 500
β = 0.94
β = 0.98

Wealth-to-income ratio
4.08
6.25
1.94
4.08
3.58
4.01
3.81
2.75
3.42
4.23
4.02
3.34
2.69

Sophis. Tech. ratio
1.95
2.33
1.56
1.79
2.14
1.80
2.05
1.58
2.13
2.10
1.82
2.09
1.61

Low knowledge ratio
0.48
0.56
0.36
0.36
0.56
0.43
0.53
0.36
0.53
0.49
0.36
0.75
0.21

Table 4: Sensitivity Analysis for Preference and Cost Parameters. Each row computes the ratio of college+ to <HS outcomes as of age 65, for the case when we vary the
single parameter indicated versus the baseline value. Baseline values as reported in the
text are: relative risk aversion (σ = 1.6), financial knowledge depreciation rate (δ = 0.06),
investment production function (π(i) = 100i1.75 ), participation cost (cd = 750), discount
factor (β = 0.96). See Figure 1 and Table 2 for definitions.

47

At retirement:
Baseline (α1 = 1)
α1 = 0.9
α1 = 0.75
α1 = 0.5

<HS
1.91
1.97
2.04
2.52

College+
7.83
7.97
8.16
8.46

College+/<HS
4.09
4.03
4.00
3.35

Table 5: Sensitivity Analysis for Production Function. Each row reports wealth-toincome ratios for College+ and <HS groups, as well as the ratio of the two, for the baseline
as well as three scenarios where we reduce the elasticity of returns to financial knowledge
(α1 ) in steps. See Figure 1 and Table 2 for definitions.

48

