NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DEVELOPMENTAL APPROACH TO CHILD AND ADULT HEALTH
Gabriella Conti
James J. Heckman
Working Paper 18664
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18664

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2012

Gabriella Conti is Assistant Professor at the Harris School of Public Policy, University of Chicago.
James Heckman is the Henry Schultz Distinguished Service Professor in the Department of Economics,
the University of Chicago, a Senior Research Fellow of the American Bar Foundation and Professor
of Science and Society, University College Dublin. This research was supported in part by the American
Bar Foundation, the JB and MK Pritzker Family Foundation, the Buffett Early Childhood Fund, NICHD
R37HD065072, R01HD54702, a grant to the Human Capital and Economic Opportunity Global Working
Group - an initiative of the Becker Friedman Institute funded by the Institute for New Economic Thinking
(INET), and an anonymous funder. We acknowledge the support of a European Research Council
grant hosted by University College Dublin, DEVHEALTH 269874. The views expressed in this paper
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the funders or persons named here, nor of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Gabriella Conti and James J. Heckman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Developmental Approach to Child and Adult Health
Gabriella Conti and James J. Heckman
NBER Working Paper No. 18664
December 2012
JEL No. I12,I18
ABSTRACT
Pediatricians should consider the costs and benefits of preventing rather than treating childhood diseases.
We present an integrated developmental approach to child and adult health that considers the costs
and benefits of interventions over the life cycle. We suggest policies to promote child health which
are currently outside the boundaries of conventional pediatrics. We discuss current challenges to the
field and suggest avenues for future research.

Gabriella Conti
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
gconti@uchicago.edu
James J. Heckman
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and University College Dublin and IZA
and also NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu

1 Introduction
Modern medicine focuses on treatment rather than prevention. Great strides have been made
in finding effective cures for many pediatric illnesses. Novel drugs and innovative new
treatments have been developed. Child health insurance coverage has been expanded, and
vaccination programs have rendered certain diseases extremely rare. While these are important
advances of which pediatricians are justly proud, the field can do even better.
By many indicators of child health, the United States has not kept up with progress in other
industrialized countries. One leading example is infant mortality (Heisler, 2012). For this and
other child conditions, many causes are preventable. Yet a growing body of knowledge about the
origins of child disease has not made its way into mainstream pediatric practice. Strategies
currently well outside the boundaries of medicine can be very effective in preventing illness and
promoting health.
Recent evidence from both the biological and social sciences points to the importance of the
early years in building the foundations for lifelong health (Knudsen et al, 2006). It is now
recognized that human development is a dynamic process that starts in the womb (Gluckman and
Hanson, 2006), and that early life conditions affect the emergence and evolution of human traits
(Conti and Heckman, 2012b) which affect a variety of adult outcomes, including health
(Almlund et al., 2011; Almond and Currie, 2011; Conti and Heckman, 2010). Later life
environmental influences on development also matter, as does resilience in response to adversity.
For policy purposes, it is not enough to know that early-life conditions matter. It is important to
know the costs and benefits of remediating early life deficits at different stages of the lifecycle.

3

A developmental focus suggests new channels of policy influence. Early childhood
interventions that enrich the environments of disadvantaged children can be effective policy tools
to prevent disease and promote health. An integrated developmental approach to health, starting
before conception, is needed to analyze synergies in producing health, cognition, and other
mental and behavioral traits, and to model the economic, social and biological mechanisms that
produce health over the life course and transmit it across generations.

2 The Longlasting Effects of Early Life Experiences
The contribution of the social and economic circumstances of early childhood to health
throughout the lifecourse is now well documented (Anda et al., 1999; Danese et al., 2008). Some
of the most compelling evidence on the consequences of early maternal and social deprivation
comes from children raised in the adverse settings of Romanian orphanages of the 1980s and
1990s. The most recent research shows a high degree of persistence until 15 years of age of
cognitive impairments, sub-optimal physical development and behavioral problems (Rutter,
2010). Detrimental long-term effects of early life adverse rearing conditions on physical health
and behavioral development have also been recently shown in experimental studies on
nonhuman primates (Feng et al., 2011; Conti et al., 2012). Environmental enrichment later in life
can partially remediate the consequences arising in part from adverse early environments, both in
animals (Francis et al, 2002; Champagne et al., 2003; Rutter, 2010) and in humans, even
following severe deprivation (Sheridan et al., 2012). In every case, the timing of the intervention
is a crucial factor. The earlier the intervention, the higher the probability of remediating early
disadvantage.

4

In recent years we have begun to gain a much more sophisticated understanding of how the
circumstances in which children are born and raised ‘get under the skin’, and affect the
biological development of the brain and of the rest of the body. Studies of stress response
pathways, allostatic load, neuronal development, and more recently, epigenetic mechanisms,
have shown that the environment can become biologically embedded in the body, in ways that
can affect – also through latent pathways – health across the lifecourse. However, the exact
mechanisms through which the environment operates and the nature of the biological embedding
are just beginning to be understood. The current state of knowledge suggests that adverse
conditions early in life induce changes in brain structure and functions, and that these
environmental stressors can affect epigenetic programming of long-term changes in neural
development and behaviors (Murgatroyd et al., 2009). The temporal nature of brain development
implies that environmental exposures at different ages will affect different areas of the brain.
However, the way epigenetic marks translate from a transient state to lasting cellular memory is
still unknown. Experimental evidence for rhesus monkeys suggests that early adversity gets
under the skin and establishes stable marks very early and independently of cumulative
exposures (Cole et al., 2012). Comparable evidence for humans finds persistent epigenetic
differences associated with early adversity (Heijmans et al., 2008). However, the quantitative
importance and the causal nature of these biological changes still needs to be rigorously
established.
On the other hand, the family environments in which children are being raised have been
worsening over time (McLanahan, 2004). Divorce rates have been on the rise, and less-educated
women tend to be single parents. They also tend to work in lower wage jobs and invest less in
their children than more educated women (Heckman, 2008). The economic recession and the
5

financial stress coming with it has been a primary contributor to family conflict. And, for the first
time in more than thirty years, mental health problems have displaced physical conditions as the
leading causes of disabilities2 in U.S. children (Slomski, 2012). It is hard to believe that the rise
of developmental disorders such as ADHD, which are caused by multiple and complex genetic
and environmental factors, might be due entirely to better diagnostic tools or thresholds.
Nonetheless, this change in the epidemiology of child illness finds the pediatric system
unprepared and there is the risk of incurring huge costs in the future if they are not properly
faced. Child mental health problems affect a wider variety of adult outcomes than physical
conditions, ranging from reduced educational attainment to increase in the probability of
engaging in unhealthy behaviors (Goodman et al., 2011; Conti et al., 2012).
This evidence suggests that inequalities in endowments and environments present at birth can
affect the biology of the body, propagate throughout childhood, and persist into adulthood. It
also reveals promising avenues for interventions, by enriching the nurturing environments of
children born in disadvantaged families and allow them to develop their full potential. However,
despite a large body of evidence on the beneficial effects of such policies (Almond and Currie,
2011; Cunha et al., 2006), early childhood programs still are not considered an option in
pediatric practice. Before reviewing evidence from interventions, we now present a lifecycle
developmental framework to conceptualize and interpret it.

2

The leading causes of limitation in usual activities due to chronic conditions in U.S. children are: speech
problems; learning disability; ADHD; other emotional, mental, and behavioral problems; and asthma or
breathing problems, see Halfon et al. (2012).
6

3 The Biology and Economics of Health and Human Development
Heckman (2007) and Cunha and Heckman (2007) develop a framework for analyzing the
expression and evolution of capabilities, since conception through adulthood, which links earlylife conditions to late-life outcomes by accounting for intervening mechanisms and a variety of
exposures at different levels. This framework recognizes the multiple nature of capabilities, the
synergies across them, and the need to consider the child in her entirety, by developing her
cognitive potential, together with her physical and mental health. Hence, the different aspects of
the well-being of the child can be written in terms of the capability vector t , which can have
different components, such as cognition ( C ,t ), mental (  MH ,t ) and physical health (  PH ,t ).
Capabilities are the capacities to function effectively in economic and social life. There are many
different capabilities. These capabilities of the child can have different weights in affecting adult
outcomes, so that a shortfall in one dimension can be compensated by a greater strength in
another. Other capabilities, instead, can have a great degree of specificity. Some of these traits
might operate as determinants of choices, while others operate through purely biological
mechanisms.3 These capabilities are not solely genetically determined. They are produced early
in the life of the child, and their evolution over time can be represented by the following
dynamics of capability formation (Heckman, 2007):

t 1  ft (

t

,

I
t

,

ht


,

P

t

).

Self-Productivity Investments Environments Parental Traits

This equation captures the notion that the development of child health and other capabilities
in subsequent periods depends on the stock already present, and on parental traits, environments,
3

For example, an obese child is likely to become an obese adult, since the metabolic rate is set early in
life.
7

and investments,4 starting with the initial endowments determined at conception ( 0 ), which are
function of maternal investments in pregnancy ( I 1 ). It also embeds the idea that capabilities at
one age enhance capabilities at later ages.
For example, a healthy child who is able to pay attention in class learns more and increases
her cognitive ability. This can, in turn, have positive effects on her mental and physical health.
This framework also recognizes that the productivity of investments depends on the age at which
they are made, so that it is easier to develop certain capabilities at certain ages. This depends on
the plasticity of the organs which govern the functions underlying these capabilities. If
investment effects are especially strong in one period, that is called a sensitive period. If
investments are productive in only one period, that is called a critical period. An important
feature of this framework is the complementarity of capabilities with investments, i.e. the fact
that investments are more productive in children with higher stocks of capabilities. This not only
implies that providing early nurturing environments to children affects their health and
development, but also that early life interventions have to be followed-up with quality schooling
and health care, in order for them to be effective in the long-term.

4

The latter include investments made by parents, teachers and doctors in the health and development of
the child.
8

Figure 1: A Life Cycle Framework for the Development of Capabilities

Figure 1 summarizes the framework graphically. Progress has been made in estimating some
of the linkages displayed in this figure but most remain unknown.5 The figure suggests both
opportunities and dangers. Investments and environments shape capabilities. There are many
stages and strategies for intervention. Understanding at what stages investments are most
effective for shaping which capabilities will inform health policy. To make wise policy choices,
it is necessary to have a deeper understanding of the mechanisms – both social and biological –
displayed in Figure 1. Knowing that early-life conditions causally affect adult health does not tell
us the channels through which they operate or the mechanisms through which effective
remediation might occur. Early-life conditions might trigger a series of later-life events that
5

Estimates reveal sensitive periods in early life (before age 10) for cognitive capabilities and sensitive
periods for behavioral traits through adolescence (Cunha et al., 2010).
9

shape the capabilities that produce adult outcomes. Perhaps later-life interventions are highly
effective and later life remediation is effective. Alternatively, early-life conditions might affect
biology in an irreversible way. In that case, early life interventions are essential. The current
literature offers only hints at answers to these questions. When the causal links of Figure 1 are
fleshed out, analysts will be better able to suggest effective, age-graded policies for promoting
child health and development. Surely our ability to design effective policies will increase as
evidence from the biological sciences on windows of plasticity for specific organs sharpens. For
the time being, we review in the following promising interventions on the basis of the best
available evidence.

4 Policies to Promote Child Health and Development
In this section we review recent evidence on the effectiveness of interventions at different
stages of childhood, which compensate, in part, for the risks arising from growing up in
disadvantaged environments.
4.1 Early Interventions
We first consider research focusing on the earlier channels of influence displayed in Figure 1.
The most reliable evidence on the effectiveness of early interventions comes from experiments
that substantially enriched the early environments of children born in disadvantaged families. We
consider two iconic interventions, the Perry Preschool Project and the Abecedarian Project, since
they have been evaluated by the method of random assignment, they have long-term follow-ups,
and their health effects have recently been investigated.

10

The High/Scope Perry Preschool Project (PPP) is a social experiment designed to evaluate
the impact of the novel Perry curriculum on highly disadvantaged African-American children of
3-5 years of age. It was administered to five cohorts of children during the early- to mid-1960s in
the district of the Perry Elementary School in Ypsilanti, Michigan. The intervention consisted of
2.5 hours classes for five days per week during the regular school year, and included weekly
home visits lasting 1/1.5 hours. The curriculum was based on the concept of active learning,
which is centered around play, based on problem-solving, and placed within a structured daily
routine. The final sample consisted of 123 children over five entry cohorts.
The Carolina Abecedarian Project (ABC) is a social experiment designed to test if an
intellectually stimulating environment could prevent the development of mild mental retardation
for disadvantaged children. The intervention was much more intense than the Perry. It was yearround and full-day. It consisted of a two-stage treatment: a preschool treatment targeting early
childhood education (from 2 months6 until 5 years), and a subsequent school-age treatment
targeting initial schooling (from 5 to 8 years). It used a systematic curriculum specially
developed by Sparling and Lewis (Sparling and Lewis, 1979, 1984) that consisted of a series of
‘learning games'', but also included a nutritional and health care component.7 It was administered
to four cohorts of children born between 1972 and 1977 and living in or near Chapel Hill, North
Carolina (NC). Eligibility was based on a High-Risk Index computed from 13 socioeconomic
factors capturing disadvantage. The final sample consisted of 111 children recruited over a 5year period, resulting in four cohorts. Unlike Perry, ABC provided access to well- and ill-child
care to participants as well as adequate nutrition.

6

The average age at entry for the treated was 8.8 weeks, and it ranged between 3 and 21 weeks.

7

The treated children had breakfast, lunch and an afternoon snack at the child care center, and were also
given pediatric care.
11

Both the Perry and the Abecedarian interventions show consistent patterns of successful
outcomes for treatment group members as compared to control group members for both boys and
girls (Heckman et al., 2010; Campbell et al., 2008). While among Perry participants, an initial
increase in IQ gradually faded out in the four years following the intervention, still at the oldest
age studied (age 40), treated individuals had attained higher levels of education, earned higher
wages, and were less likely to be on welfare and to commit crime than the controls.
Heckman et al. (2012) show that the effects of the intervention on life outcomes operate
primarily through the program's reduction in child's externalizing behavior. Previous attempts at
analyzing the effects of these programs on health and risk behaviors (Muennig et al., 2009, 2011)
have not accounted for the variety of statistical challenges that these small sample RCTs pose,
have not investigated gender differences in the treatment effects, and have not considered health
effects across the whole lifecourse of the subjects. Conti et al. (2012) overcome all these
limitations and carry out an extensive analysis by taking advantage of all the health information
available in the Abecedarian and Perry samples, since early childhood, and including newly
collected unique biomedical data. They find statistically significant and economically important
program effects for both males and females which were not uncovered in the pooled gender
analysis, and which survive when simultaneously tackling all the statistical challenges. Both the
Abecedarian and the Perry participants had significantly fewer behavioral risk factors (such as
smoking, drinking, drug use, adhering to safe traffic practices), and higher health care coverage.
The Abecedarian participants had also a leaner physical constitution in childhood;8 additionally,
the analysis of the biomeasures recently collected for this sample reveals that they were in better
physical health also by the time they reached their mid-thirties. See Table 1 for an overview of

8

Childhood health measures are not available for the Perry sample.
12

the results. Other studies – such as the Nurse-Family Partnership (Kitzman et al., 1997), which
visits pregnant girls and teaches them prenatal health practices and parenting – also provide
evidence of a variety of positive health effects from early environmental enrichment (Heckman
et al., 2012). Prenatal home visiting programs such as the NFP or the Doula9 are also particularly
appealing, both because they reach at-risk families as early as possible, and because they
intervene at the same time on children and adolescent mothers, by affecting those traits still
amenable to change during adolescence (Brown and Hurlock, 1977).

9

Doulas are trained mentors from the community who help young expectant mothers by encouraging
healthy prenatal practices, offering support during labor and delivery, and fostering bonds between babies
and their parents (Klaus et al., 1993).
13

Table 1: Health Effects from the Perry and the Abecedarian Interventions—Selected Results
Perry Preschool Project (PPP)
Variable Description

Abecedarian Project (ABC)

Control
Mean

Diff.
Means

Asym.
p-value

Never drunk without permission by
age 15 (F)

0.682

0.152

0.140

Never smoked marijuana by age
27 (F)
Drinks alcohol never or once in a
while at age 27 (F)
Non-smoker at age 27 (M)

0.364

0.156

Behavioral Risk Factors
0.040 Started smoking by age 15 (parent
report) (M)
0.146
0.089 First tried marijuana before age 17 (F)

0.773

0.107

0.169

0.013

0.462

0.119

0.164

0.080

0.618

0.182

0.057

0.080

0.472

0.161

0.098

Any change in diet in past 15y at
age 40

0.229

0.151

0.097

Covered by health insurance in
past 15y at age 40 (F)

0.682

0.068

0.308

Never classified as mentally
impaired by age 19 (F)

0.636

0.280

0.010

Always wears a seat belt at age
40 (M)
Non-smoker at age 40 (M)

IPW
p-value

Variable Description

Control
Mean

Diff.
Means

Asym.
p-value

IPW
pvalue

0.190

-0.114

0.127

0.064

0.393

-0.233

0.031

0.053

First drink before age 17 (F)

0.571

-0.291

0.016

0.047

Started smoking regularly before age
17 (M)
Always wears a seat belt at age 21 (F)

0.304

-0.189

0.052

0.030

0.500

0.220

0.052

0.028

Has drank and driven in past month at
age 21 (F)
0.018 Physical activity in past week at age
21 (F)
Health Care Coverage
0.044 Covered by health insurance at age 30
(M)
Health
0.036 BSI Depression score at age 21 (F)

0.222

-0.102

0.170

0.042

0.071

0.249

0.010

0.012

0.476

0.228

0.057

0.088

59.643

-5.601

0.026

0.002

0.601

-0.695

0.009

0.026

0.020

BMI z-score at 60m (M)

Notes: This table is made of two panels, the left panel for the Perry Project, the right panel for the Abecedarian Project. Each panel is made of five columns: (1) The first column describes
the variable of interest, the age at which the information was collected, and the gender (M=male, F=female). PPP: `Any change in diet' is in relation to health reasons. ABC: `Wearing a seat
belt' refers to when riding in a car driven by someone else. `Physical activity' is defined as exercise or participation in sports activities for at least 20 minutes on 4 or more of the past 7 days
at age 21. The BMI z-score is computed using the 2000 CDC growth charts. BSI=Brief Symptom Inventory. (2) The second column shows the mean of the control group, i.e. the group
who was not administered the intervention. (3) The third column shows the unconditional difference in means between the treatment and the control group. (4) The fourth column presents
the asymptotic p-value of the one-sided single hypothesis based on the t-statistic associated with the unconditional difference in means in (3). (5) The fifth column presents the one-sided
single hypothesis constrained permutation p-value based on the IPW (Inverse Probability Weighting) t-statistic associated with the difference in means between treatment and control
groups. We implement conditional inference to account for compromisation of the randomization protocol. We use permutation-based inference to account for the small size of the samples.
By constrained permutation we mean that permutations are done within strata defined by the pre-program variables used in the randomization protocol. We use IPW to account for nonrandom attrition. Note all these treatment effects survive correction for multiple hypothesis testing. See Conti et al. (2012) for details.

14

4.2

Later Life Interventions

While the economic benefits to early interventions are substantial (Heckman et al., 2010), at
the same time we cannot abandon the children who have had no access to this foundational
opportunity and the adults, who did not have such opportunities as children. We now consider
the effectiveness of later channels of influence displayed in Figure 1. The key to successful
remediation is to invest in carefully designed programs which address those capabilities
amenable to change. On the one hand, while the reversibility of structural and functional changes
in the brain following early life adverse conditions has not been systematically investigated,
recent research in humans is beginning to document the effects of specific interventions in adults
to reduce stress and promote mental well-being (Davidson and McEwen, 2012). On the other
hand, while environmental enrichment in puberty has shown positive effects both in animals
(Imanaka et al., 2008) and in humans (Fisher et al., 2007), the optimal timing and duration, and
the most effective components of these interventions are not well understood yet. Nonetheless,
knowledge is accumulating rapidly, and designing and implementing biologically-based
interventions is the key to promoting the health of the future generation, while not abandoning
the current one.
Here we consider in particular one later intervention: education. Is education policy a
promising avenue for promoting child health? Specifically what is the effect of education in the
adolescent years on health and healthy behaviors? Enhanced capabilities promote schooling, and
also promote health and healthy behaviors, both beyond their direct effects on education and
through the effects of education on health (Conti et al., 2010). While gaps in cognitive ability
emerge early and persist strongly, those in other mental traits are less persistent. The fluidity of
personality traits over the adolescent years is associated with the slowly emerging prefrontal

15

cortex (Steinberg, 2008). At current levels of practice, adolescent remediation for cognitive
deficits has largely proved ineffective. Adolescent interventions in personality are more
promising instead, although there is less evidence to date on them (Almlund, Duckworth,
Heckman, and Kautz, 2011; Heckman and Kautz, 2012; Heckman, Humphries, and Kautz, 2012;
Borghans, Diris, Heckman, Kautz, and ter Weel, 2012). Traits beyond cognition have been
shown to play a fundamental role in understanding disparities in health and health behaviors by
education (Conti and Heckman, 2010; Conti and Hansman, 2012).

16

Figure 2: Mean Differences in Outcomes Due to Early Life Factors versus the
Causal Effect of Education

17

But what is the relative importance of education as compared to factors formed before the
adolescent years? Figure 2, based on British data analyzed by Conti et al. (2010), shows the
effect (by gender) of attendance beyond compulsory schooling on health and healthy behaviors
measured at age 30. The height of the bars (including both the light and dark portions) displays
mean differences in a variety of outcomes between those who stop their education at the
minimum compulsory schooling level and those who stay-on. It is clear that more educated
individuals are better off under a variety of dimensions. However, the crucial question is how
much of the difference between more and less educated individuals is caused by education, so
that increasing the educational level of the population would be an effective health policy. If the
more educated individuals are in better health simply because they have better capabilities
developed during the early years, which are associated both with increased education and better
health outcomes, then early intervention is a more effective strategy to promote health not only
in childhood, but throughout the lifecourse. In order to answer this question, Figure 2
decomposes the drivers of a variety of outcomes by gender. The dark portion of each bar in the
graph is the causal contribution of education, and the light portion quantifies the contribution of
early capabilities (cognition, mental and physical health traits) shaped by family investments and
environments. It shows that these early life factors account for at least a half of the adult
disparities in poor health, depression, and obesity. In addition, these early life traits promote
education, which has independent effects on outcomes, in particular on healthy behaviors.
Finally, capabilities developed in early childhood can also affect health in the next
generation, both directly, and by affecting education and the choices that the mothers make while
pregnant. Conti, Heckman, Pinger, and Zanolini (2012) study the determinants of newborn
health outcomes as a crucial link in the intergenerational transmission of disadvantage, using

18

British data on a cohort of women born in 1958.10 They analyze the role of maternal endowments
and investments (education and smoking in pregnancy) on the probability of having a baby who
is small for gestational age (SGA). They estimate the total impact of maternal endowments on
birth outcomes, and analyze the mechanisms through which they operate. They find that
cognition affects the health of the newborn primarily through education, that personality traits
mainly operate by changing smoking behavior, and that the physical fitness of the mother has a
direct, “biological” effect on SGA. Additionally, they estimate the causal effects of maternal
choices, and find significant variability in the effects of education and smoking in pregnancy
along the distribution of maternal physical traits, which suggests that women with a less healthy
physical constitution should be the primary targets of prenatal interventions.
Such evidence shows that the capabilities developed in early childhood may have longlasting benefits, not only in adulthood but also into the next generation. It also underscores the
importance of going beyond a mere collection of treatment effects or correlations between early
life conditions and later life outcomes, in order to understand the mechanisms through which
these interventions operate and their benefits emerge.

5 Lessons for Health Policy
Three important lessons emerge from this research that should shape future policies to
improve the health of the children.
Lesson 1: Develop the Whole Child
To promote the health of the children, pediatricians and policymakers should consider their
overall well-being, by viewing the child in her entirety as a human being in fieri. Currently,

10

The National Child Development Study (NCDS).
19

health policy in the United States focuses primarily on extending health insurance coverage.
While universal health insurance is an important ingredient in promoting the health of children, it
is not the only one. There are also likely to be substantial benefits to improving the conditions in
which children live, and promote the diverse capabilities – not only health, but also cognition
and character traits – which will allow them to become highly adaptive, productive, and healthy
adults.
In their quest for accountability in public investments, policymakers should consider
accounting for the development of the whole child and evaluating progress based on
measurements that reflect the full range of capabilities that are essential for success in life and
that are highly valued in the labor market. Policymakers could develop more inclusive testing
metrics that go beyond tests of cognition as the only indicator of child development. A neglected
avenue of investigation to promote health is interventions that form these capabilities by
exploiting the synergisms among diverse policies. A good health policy may be a good family
policy. This argument goes beyond just considering education or nutrition but is consistent with
both and integrates these more specialized emphases into a general framework.
Lesson 2: Start Early in Life
We live in an era of substantial and growing social and economic inequality. A large body of
research confirms that the accident of birth is a primary source of inequality. Families play a
powerful role in creating adult outcomes, by shaping the capabilities of children. Health
inequalities between the advantaged and the disadvantaged open up early in the lives of children,
well before they enter school. They are already visible at birth. In fact, they can be detected even
before birth. Parental choices and family environments are major causal factors.

20

Family environments in the United States have deteriorated over the past 40 years. A greater
fraction of children is being born into disadvantaged families with fewer parenting resources. At
the same time, parents in the top-earning families invest far more in their children than ever
before. Due to growing inequality in parental resources and child-rearing environments, the
disparity of resources between the haves and the have-nots has increased substantially. If this
trend is not reversed, it will create greater economic and social polarization and health disparities
in the next generation. Supplementing at-risk families with quality early childhood development
resources can help stem this inequality and promote health. (Heckman, 2008)
Lesson 3: Prevention, Not Remediation
Early intervention is far more effective than later remediation. The capabilities that matter
can be created. Child health is not solely determined by family income, but also by the parenting
resources – the attachment, the guidance and the supervision accorded to children, as well as the
quality of the schools, of the neighborhoods and of the hospitals surrounding them. Investments
in early childhood development can improve cognitive and character traits and the health of
disadvantaged children. Such early efforts promote schooling, reduce crime, foster workforce
productivity, reduce teenage pregnancy and foster healthy behaviors. The rates of return on these
investments are higher than stock market returns, even in normal times.
The substantial benefit from early investments arises because life cycle skill formation is
dynamic in nature. Capabilities cross-foster each other. Early health is critical to this
developmental process. A healthy child is ready to engage, will learn more, and is more likely to
be a healthy and productive adult. The longer society waits to intervene in the life of a
disadvantaged child, the more costly it is to remediate disadvantage in the form of public job
training, convict rehabilitation programs, adult literacy programs, or treatment for chronic health

21

conditions. And there is no equity-efficiency trade-off for early interventions for the
disadvantaged.
Acting on this knowledge requires a paradigm shift. The pediatric health system, developed
more than fifty years ago to primarily cure acute infectious diseases, has to interface and to
interact with families, schools, and local communities. A shift to primary prevention will require
pediatricians to go beyond the current “siloed” policies which provide short-term fixes using
separated and limited budgets, towards an integrated approach to child and adult health and
development.

22

References
Almlund, M., A. Duckworth, J. J. Heckman, and T. Kautz (2011). Personality psychology and
economics. In E. A. Hanushek, S. Machin, and L. Wößmann (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics
of Education, Volume 4, pp. 1−181. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Almond, D. and J. Currie (2011). Human capital development before age five. In O. Ashenfelter
and D. Card (Eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4B, Chapter 15, pp. 1315−1486.
North Holland: Elsevier.
Anda, R. F., J. B. Croft, V. J. Felitti, D. Nordenberg, W. H. Giles, D. F. Williamson, and G. A.
Giovino (1999, November). Adverse childhood experiences and smoking during adolescence and
adulthood. Journal of the American Medical Association 282 (17), 1652--1658.
Borghans, L., R. Diris, J. J. Heckman, T. Kautz, and B. ter Weel (2012). Fostering non-cognitive
traits to promote lifetime success. Technical report, OECD.
Brown, M. and J. Hurlock (1977). Mothering the mother. The American Journal of Nursing 77
(3), 439−441.
Campbell, F. A., B. Wasik, E. Pungello, M. Burchinal, O. Barbarin, K. Kainz, J. Sparling, and
C. Ramey (2008). Young adult outcomes of the Abecedarian and CARE early childhood
educational interventions. Early Childhood Research Quarterly 23 (4), 452−466.
Champagne, F., D. Francis, A. Mar, and M. Meaney (2003). Variations in maternal care in the
rat as a mediating influence for the effects of environment on development. Physiology &
Behavior 79 (3), 359−371.
Cole, S. W., G. Conti, J. M. Arevalo, A. M. Ruggiero, J. J. Heckman, and S. J. Suomi (2012).
Transcriptional modulation of the developing immune system by early life social adversity.
PNAS.
Conti, G., S. Frühwirth-Schnatter, J. J. Heckman, and R. Piatek (2012). The early life
determinants of adult health and wages. Unpublished manuscript in preparation, University of
Chicago, Department of Economics.
Conti, G. and C. Hansman (2012). Personality and the education-health gradient: A note on
“Understanding differences in health behaviors by education". Journal of Health Economics. In
press.
Conti, G., C. Hansman, J. Heckman, M. Novak, A. Ruggiero, and S. Suomi (2012). Primate
evidence on the late health effects of early-life adversity. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 109 (23), 8866−8871.
Conti, G. and J. J. Heckman (2010). Understanding the early origins of the education-health
gradient: A framework that can also be applied to analyze gene-environment interactions.
Perspectives on Psychological Science 5 (5), 585−605.
23

Conti, G. and J. J. Heckman (2012a). Early childhood development: Creating healthy
communities with greater efficiency and effectiveness. Investing in What Works for America's
Communities.
Conti, G. and J. J. Heckman (2012b). The economics of child well-being. Technical report,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Conti, G., J. J. Heckman, S. Moon, and R. Pinto (2012). The long-term health effects of early
childhood interventions. Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of
Economics.
Conti, G., J. J. Heckman, P. Pinger, and A. Zanolini (2012). Intergenerational transmission of
inequality: Maternal endowments, investments, and birth outcomes. Unpublished manuscript,
University of Chicago, Department of Economics.
Conti, G., J. J. Heckman, and S. Urzúa (2010, May). The education-health gradient. American
Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 100 (2), 1−5.
Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2007, May). The technology of skill formation. American
Economic Review 97 (2), 31−47.
Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, L. J. Lochner, and D. V. Masterov (2006). Interpreting the evidence on
life cycle skill formation. In E. A. Hanushek and F. Welch (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of
Education, Chapter 12, pp. 697−812. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, and S. M. Schennach (2010, May). Estimating the technology of
cognitive and noncognitive skill formation. Econometrica 78 (3), 883−931.
Danese, A., T. E. Moffatt, C. M. Pariante, A. Ambler, R. Poulton, and A. Caspi (2008, April).
Elevated inflammation levels in depressed adults with a history of childhood maltreatment.
Archives of General Psychiatry 65 (4), 409−415.
Davidson, R. and B. McEwen (2012). Social influences on neuroplasticity: stress and
interventions to promote well-being. Nature Neuroscience 15 (5), 689{695.
Feng, X., L. Wang, S. Yang, D. Qin, J. Wang, C. Li, L. Lv, Y. Ma, and X. Hu (2011). Maternal
separation produces lasting changes in cortisol and behavior in rhesus monkeys. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 108 (34), 14312−14317.
Fisher, P., M. Stoolmiller, M. Gunnar, and B. Burraston (2007). Effects of a therapeutic
intervention for foster preschoolers on diurnal cortisol activity. Psychoneuroendocrinology 32
(8-10), 892.
Francis, D., J. Diorio, P. Plotsky, and M. Meaney (2002). Environmental enrichment reverses
the effects of maternal separation on stress reactivity. The Journal of Neuroscience 22 (18),
24

7840−7843.
Gluckman, P. D. and M. A. Hanson (2006). Developmental Origins of Health and Disease.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Goodman, A., R. Joyce, and J. Smith (2011). The long shadow cast by childhood physical and
mental problems on adult life. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 (15),
6032−6037.
Halfon, N., A. Houtrow, K. Larson, and P. Newacheck (2012). The changing landscape of
disability in childhood. The Future of Children 22 (1), 13−42.
Heckman, J., M. Holland, T. Oey, D. Olds, R. Pinto, and M. Rosales (2012). A reanalysis of the
nurse family partnership program: The memphis randomized control trial.
Heckman, J. J. (2007, August). The economics, technology and neuroscience of human
capability formation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104 (3), 13250−13255.
Heckman, J. J. (2008, July). Schools, skills and synapses. Economic Inquiry 46 (3), 289−324.
Heckman, J. J., J. E. Humphries, and T. Kautz (2012). The GED and the Role of Character in
American Life. Unpublished book manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.
Heckman, J. J. and T. Kautz (2012). Hard evidence on soft skills. Labour Economics 19 (4),
451−464.
Heckman, J. J., S. H. Moon, and R. Pinto (2010). The effects of early intervention on abilities
and social outcomes: Evidences from the Carolina Abecedarian study. Unpublished manuscript,
University of Chicago.
Heckman, J. J., S. H. Moon, R. Pinto, P. A. Savelyev, and A. Q. Yavitz (2010, February). The
rate of return to the HighScope Perry Preschool Program. Journal of Public Economics 94 (1-2),
114−128.
Heckman, J. J., R. Pinto, and P. A. Savelyev (2012). Understanding the mechanisms through
which an influential early childhood program boosted adult outcomes. Forthcoming, American
Economic Review.
Heijmans, B. T., E. W. Tobi, A. D. Stein, H. Putter, G. J. Blauw, E. S. Susser, P. E. Slagboom,
and L. H. Lumey (2008, November). Persistent epigenetic differences associated with prenatal
exposure to famine in humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105 (44),
17046{17049.
Heisler, E. J. (2012). The U.S. infant mortality rate: International comparisons, underlying
factors, and federal programs. Congressional Research Service Report.

25

Imanaka, A., S. Morinobu, S. Toki, S. Yamamoto, A. Matsuki, T. Kozuru, and S. Yamawaki
(2008). Neonatal tactile stimulation reverses the effect of neonatal isolation on open-field and
anxiety-like behavior, and pain sensitivity in male and female adult sprague-dawley rats.
Behavioural Brain Research 186 (1), 91−97.
Kitzman, H., D. L. Olds, C. R. Henderson, C. Hanks, R. Cole, R. Tatelbaum, K. M.
McConnochie, K. Sidora, D. W. Luckey, D. Shaver, K. Engelhardt, D. James, and K. Barnard
(1997, August). Effect of prenatal and infancy home visitation by nurses on pregnancy outcomes,
childhood injuries, and repeated childbearing: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of the
American Medical Association 278 (8), 644−652.
Klaus, M., J. Kennell, and P. Klaus (1993). Mothering the mother: how a doula can help you
have a shorter, easier, and healthier birth. Addison-Wesley Reading, Mass.
Knudsen, E. I., J. J. Heckman, J. Cameron, and J. P. Shonko_ (2006, July). Economic,
neurobiological, and behavioral perspectives on building America's future workforce.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103 (27), 10155−10162.
McLanahan, S. (2004, November). Diverging destinies: How children are faring under the
second demographic transition. Demography 41 (4), 607−627.
Muennig, P., D. Robertson, G. Johnson, F. Campbell, E. Pungello, and M. Neidell (2011). The
effect of an early education program on adult health: the carolina abecedarian project
randomized controlled trial. American Journal of Public Health 101 (3).
Muennig, P., L. Schweinhart, J. Montie, and M. Neidell (2009). Effects of a prekindergarten
educational intervention on adult health: 37-year follow-up results of a randomized controlled
trial. American Journal of Public Health 99 (8).
Murgatroyd, C., A. Patchev, Y. Wu, V. Micale, Y. Bockm uhl, D. Fischer, F. Holsboer, C.
Wotjak, O. Almeida, and D. Spengler (2009). Dynamic dna methylation programs persistent
adverse effects of early-life stress. Nature Neuroscience 12 (12), 1559−1566.
Rutter, M. (2010). Deprivation-specific psychological patterns: Effects of institutional
deprivation, Volume serial no. 295, vol. 75, no. 1, 2010. Boston, Mass.: Wiley-Blackwell.
Sheridan, M., N. Fox, C. Zeanah, K. McLaughlin, and C. Nelson (2012). Variation in neural
development as a result of exposure to institutionalization early in childhood. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 109 (32), 12927−12932.
Slomski, A. (2012). Chronic mental health issues in children now loom larger than physical
problems. JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical Association 308 (3), 223−225.
Sparling, J. and I. Lewis (1979). LearningGames for the First Three Years: A Guide to Parent/Child Play. New York, NY: Berkley Books.

26

Sparling, J. and I. Lewis (1984). LearningGames for Threes and Fours. New York, NY: Walker
and Company.
Steinberg, L. (2008). A social neuroscience perspective on adolescent risk-taking.
Developmental Review 28 (1), 78−106.

27

