NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THREE BRANCHES OF THEORIES OF FINANCIAL CRISES
Itay Goldstein
Assaf Razin
Working Paper 18670
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18670
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2013

Previously circulate as "Review of Theories of Financial Crises". The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Itay Goldstein and Assaf Razin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Three Branches of Theories of Financial Crises
Itay Goldstein and Assaf Razin
NBER Working Paper No. 18670
January 2013, Revised September 2013
JEL No. E61,F3,F33,G01,G1
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we review three branches of theoretical literature on financial crises. The first one deals
with banking crises originating from coordination failures among bank creditors. The second one deals
with frictions in credit and interbank markets due to problems of moral hazard and adverse selection.
The third one deals with currency crises. We discuss the evolutions of these branches of the literature
and how they have been integrated recently to explain the turmoil in the world economy around the
East Asian Crises and in the last few years. We discuss the relation of the models to the empirical
evidence and their ability to guide policies to avoid or mitigate future crises.
Itay Goldstein
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
itayg@wharton.upenn.edu
Assaf Razin
Department of Economics
Cornell University
Uris 422
Ithaca, NY 14853
and Cornell University
and also NBER
ar256@cornell.edu

1. Introduction
Financial and monetary systems are designed to improve the efficiency of real
activity and resource allocation. A large empirical literature in financial economics
provides evidence connecting financial development to economic growth and efficiency;
see, for example, Levine (1997) and Rajan and Zingales (1998). In theory, financial
institutions and markets enable the efficient transmission of resources from savers to the
best investment opportunities. In addition, they also provide risk sharing possibilities, so
that investors can take more risk and advance the economy. Finally, they enable
aggregation of information that provides guidance for more efficient investment
decisions. Relatedly, monetary arrangements, such as the European Monetary Union
(EMU) and many others in the past, are created to facilitate free trade and financial
transactions among countries, thereby improving real efficiency.
A financial crisis – marked by the failure of banks, and/or the sharp decrease in
credit and trade, and/or the collapse of an exchange rate regime, etc. – generates extreme
disruption of these normal functions of financial and monetary systems, thereby hurting
the efficiency of the economy. Unfortunately, financial crises have happened frequently
throughout history and, despite constant attempts to eliminate them, it seems unlikely that
they will not repeat in the future. Clearly, the last few years have been characterized by
great turmoil in the world’s financial systems, which even today, more than five years
after its onset, does not seem to have a clear solution. Between the meltdown of leading
financial institutions in the US and Europe, the sharp decrease in lending and trading
activities, and the ongoing challenge to the European Monetary Union, these events

2

exhibit ingredients from several types of financial crises in recent history: banking crises,
credit and market freezes, and currency crises.3
Over the years, many theories have been developed to explain financial crises and
guide policymakers in trying to prevent and mitigate them. In this article, we review
models from three different branches of literature that have been developed more or less
in parallel: banking crises and panics, credit frictions and market freezes, and currency
crises. At a later stage, mainly following the East Asian crisis in the late 1990s, these
literatures have become more integrated, as the events in the real world proved that the
different types of crises can occur together and amplify each other in different ways. Our
article is not meant to be a comprehensive survey of the financial-crises literature. The
literature is too big to be meaningfully covered in full in one survey. In fact, there is not
even consensus on what this literature includes, as different people have different views
on what constitutes a financial crisis. Instead, we attempt to present basic frameworks
linked to the broad topic of financial crises and describe some of the directions in which
they influenced the literature and the way they relate to recent events. We also address
some of the policy challenges and shed light on them using the analytical tools at hand.
We hope that this survey will be helpful in highlighting the basic underlying forces that
have been studied in the literature for over three decades in a simple and transparent way,
and will be an easy and accessible source to the many economists who are now interested
in exploring the topic of financial crises following the events of the last few years.
In Section 2, we review the literature on banking crises and panics. This literature is
perhaps most directly linked to the concept of crises. For example, Gorton (2013) writes

3

Many authors provide detailed descriptions of the events of the last few years. For example, see
Brunnermeier (2009) and Gorton (2010).

3

that financial crises are always about bank runs. Banks are known to finance long-term
assets with short-term liabilities. One advantage of this arrangement is that it enables
banks to provide risk sharing to investors who might face early liquidity needs. However,
this also exposes the bank to the risk of a bank run, whereby many creditors decide to
withdraw their money early. The key problem is that of a coordination failure, which
stands at the root of the fragility of banking systems: When more depositors withdraw
their money from a bank, the bank is more likely to fail, and so other depositors have a
stronger incentive to withdraw. These strategic complementarities lead to either multiple
equilibria or abrupt regime shifts, echoing the view held by many economists that crises
are sudden and unexpected events that have an element of panic (see: Friedman and
Schwartz (1963) and Kindleberger (1978)). In this section, we describe the theoretical
underpinnings behind bank runs and the lessons to policy analysis.
Banking systems have been plagued with bank runs throughout history; see, e.g.,
Calomiris and Gorton (1991). Policy lessons adopted in the early 20th century led
governments to insure banks, which substantially reduced the likelihood of such events.
However, runs are still a prominent phenomenon behind financial crises. Many runs
happened in East Asian and Latin American countries even in the last two decades. In the
recent turmoil, a classic ‘text-book’ type of bank run was seen in the UK for Northern
Rock Bank (see Shin (2009)), where investors were lining up in the street to withdraw
money from their accounts. Beyond that, there were many other examples of runs in the
financial system as a whole. The repo market, where investment banks get short-term
financing, was subject to a run according to Gorton and Metrick (2012). This led to the
failure of leading financial institutions, such as Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers. One

4

can think of the credit squeeze in the repo market as a coordination failure among
providers of capital, who refused to roll over credit, expecting deterioration in the value
of collateral and the ability of borrowers to pay due to the refusal of other lenders to roll
over credit. This shares similarities with models of bank runs due to coordination
problems that we review in this section. Others documented runs in money-market funds
and in the asset-backed-commercial-paper market (see for example, Schmidt,
Timmermann, and Wermers (2012) and Schroth, Suarez, and Taylor (2012)), which were
under clear distress during the recent crisis.
While Section 2 emphasizes fragility faced by financial institutions due to
coordination failures by their creditors, in Section 3 we review models that analyze
frictions in loans extended by financial institutions and other lenders. Broadly speaking,
these are models of credit frictions and market freezes. Traditionally, this literature has
developed without addressing crises per se, but more recently its basic mechanisms have
been increasingly mentioned in connection to major events around financial crises. This
literature highlights two key problems that create frictions in the flow of credit from
lenders to borrowers. When these frictions strengthen, a financial crisis ensues and can
even lead to a complete freeze. One problem is that of moral hazard. If a borrower has the
ability to divert resources at the expense of the creditor, then creditors will be reluctant to
lend to borrowers. Hence, for credit to flow efficiently from the creditor to the borrower,
it is crucial that the borrower maintains ‘skin in the game’, i.e., that he has enough at
stake in the success of the project, and so does not have a strong incentive to divert
resources. This creates a limit on credit, and it can be amplified when economic
conditions worsen, leading to a crisis. Another problem is that of adverse selection. In the

5

presence of asymmetric information between lenders and borrowers or between buyers
and sellers, credit and trade flows might freeze. Again, this may lead to a crisis if
asymmetric information is very extreme.
There is ample empirical evidence highlighting the importance of credit frictions of
the kind described in this section. For example, Gan (2007 a, b) documents reduced
lending and firm investment, as firms’ collateral value and banks’ capital deteriorated
following the collapse of the Japanese real estate market in the early 1990s. In the period
leading to the recent crisis, Chaney, Sraer, and Thesmar (2012) find that increased real
estate values for companies were related to increases in firm borrowing and investment.
In general, it is not difficult to link such forces to the events of the recent crisis. The
credit freeze following the financial meltdown of 2008, whereby financial institutions
were reluctant to lend money to operating firms, and the freeze in the flow of funds
between financial institutions in the interbank markets seem both to be related to the
amplification of economic shocks due to the frictions in credit provision, brought by the
principal-agent models that we review here. As economic conditions deteriorated,
borrowers found themselves with less ‘skin in the game’, and so lenders refused to
provide credit to them. This, in turn, worsened the economic conditions of borrowers,
amplifying the initial shock. Similarly, the potential increase in asymmetric information,
following the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008, may have contributed to a total
market freeze, where investors were reluctant to trade in assets with each other, due to the
heightened uncertainty about the value of assets they trade.
Overall, the models of Sections 2 and 3 highlight fragility on the different sides of
the balance sheet of a financial institution. It seems that both types of fragility have been

6

at work in recent crises, as we mention above. Importantly, such fragilities can reinforce
each other. For example, creditors of a financial institution are more likely to panic and
run when problems of moral hazard and asymmetric information reduce the value of its
assets or make it more uncertain. A small problem on the asset side of a financial
institution, that would not be usually called a ‘crisis’, might then get amplified and
reinforced via the mechanisms highlighted in the two sections, and turn into a crisis. This
is how the models described in Section 3 were drawn closer to the traditional crises
literature in Section 2, and now all are used to describe parts of the system of
interdependent forces that leads to the pronounced outcomes we see around times of
financial crises. We elaborate more on this in Section 3.
Another literature that evolved independently is focused on currency crises.
Traditionally, these were viewed as a separate phenomenon, unrelated to banking crises,
but more recently the literatures have moved towards each other. In Section 4, we review
models of currency crises. Many currency crises, e.g., the early 1970s breakdown of the
Bretton Woods global system, originate from the desire of governments to maintain a
fixed exchange rate regime which is inconsistent with other policy goals such as free
capital flows and flexible monetary policy. This might lead to the sudden collapse of the
regime. Like in the bank-run literature, coordination failures play an important role here
too. When the central bank tries to maintain a fixed exchange rate regime, it might decide
to abandon it under pressure from speculators. Then, speculators again find themselves in
a coordination problem, where they attack the regime if and only if they believe others
will do so. In such coordination failures, the event of a currency crisis becomes a selffulfilling belief. This is also similar to debt crises, where the government may decide to

7

default under pressure from creditors. Then, creditors are facing a coordination problem,
where they liquidate their bond holdings if and only if they expect that others will
liquidate their claims. Consequently a debt crisis becomes a self-fulfilling expectation.
Such models are highly relevant to the current situation in the European Monetary
Union. In the basis of the theory of currency crises is the famous international-finance
trilemma, according to which a country can choose only two of three policy goals: free
international capital flows (benefitting international risk sharing), monetary autonomy
(the ability to employ monetary policy tools to stabilize inflation and output fluctuations),
and the stability of the exchange rate (bringing about a reduction in transaction costs
associated with trade and investment). Countries in the Euro zone now realize that in
their attempt to achieve the first and third goal, they have given up on the second goal,
and so have limited ability to absorb the shocks in economic activity and maintain their
national debts, triggered by the global financial crisis. Coordination problems among
investors and currency speculators aggravate this situation, and may have an important
effect on whether individual countries in Europe are forced to default and/or leave the
monetary union.
While the traditional literature on currency crises focused on the government alone,
in Section 4.3 we review the ‘third-generation’ models of currency crises, which
essentially connect models of banking crises and credit frictions (reviewed in Sections 2
and 3, respectively) with traditional models of currency crises (reviewed in Subsections
4.1 and 4.2). Such models were motivated by the East Asian Crises of the late 1990s,
where financial institutions and exchange rate regimes collapsed together, demonstrating
the linkages between governments and financial institutions that can expose the system to

8

further fragility. This is again relevant for the current situation in Europe, as banks and
governments are intertwined, and the fragility of the system depends to a large extent on
the connections between them. We elaborate on this in Section 4.3.

2. Banking Crises and Panics
Depository institutions are inherently unstable because they have a mismatch in the
maturity structure between their assets and liabilities. In particular, they finance longterm investments with short-term deposits. This exposes banks to a risk of bank runs:
when many depositors demand their money in the short term, banks will have to liquidate
long-term investments at a loss, leading to their failure. This can lead to a self-fulfilling
belief, whereby the mere belief that a bank run will occur causes a bank run, as depositors
are better off withdrawing their money if they expect others to do so.
Diamond and Dybvig (1983)4 provide a classic framework capturing this
phenomenon. They first provide a rationale for why banks expose themselves to this
maturity mismatch. In their model, agents may suffer idiosyncratic short-term liquidity
needs. By offering demand-deposit contracts, banks enable short-term consumers to
enjoy the fruits of long-term investments. Banks rely on the fact that only a forecastable
fraction of agents will need to consume early, and thus offer a contract that transfers
consumption from the long-term consumers to the short-term consumers. Banks thereby
enable risk sharing among agents who ex ante do not know whether they will have early
liquidity needs or not. However, the contract may also lead to a catastrophic bank run,
where all depositors demand early withdrawal and the bank collapses.

4

Another important paper on the topic from that period is Bryant (1980).

9

2.1 Diamond-Dybvig Economy
We now provide a formal description of an economy based on Diamond and Dybvig
(1983). The version here follows Goldstein and Pauzner (2005). This will enable us to
talk about equilibrium selection and policy implications.
There are three periods (0,1,2), one good, and a continuum [0,1] of agents. Each
agent is born in period 0 with an endowment of one unit. Consumption occurs only in
period 1 or 2 (c1 and c2 denote an agent’s consumption levels). Each agent can be of two
types: With probability  the agent is impatient and with probability 1- she is patient.
Agents’ types are i.i.d.; we assume no aggregate uncertainty. Agents learn their types
(which are their private information) at the beginning of period 1. Impatient agents can
consume only in period 1. They obtain utility of u (c1 ) . Patient agents can consume at
either period; their utility is u ( c1  c2 ) . Function u is twice continuously differentiable,
increasing, and for any c  1 has a relative risk-aversion coefficient,  cu ' ' ( c ) / u' ( c ) ,
greater than 1. Without loss of generality, we assume that u(0)=0.5
Agents have access to a productive technology that yields a higher expected return
in the long run. For each unit of input in period 0, the technology generates one unit of
output if liquidated in period 1. If liquidated in period 2, the technology yields R units of
output with probability p(), or 0 units with probability 1-p(). Here,  is the state of the
economy. It is drawn from a uniform distribution on [0,1], and is unknown to agents
before period 2. We assume that p() is strictly increasing in . It also satisfies
E [ p ( )]u ( R)  u (1) .

5

Note that any von Neumann-Morgenstern utility function, which is well defined at 0 (i.e., u (0)   ),

can be transformed into an equivalent utility function that satisfies u(0)=0.

10

In autarky, impatient agents consume one unit in period 1, whereas patient agents
consume R units in period 2 with probability

. A transfer of consumption from

patient agents to impatient ones could be beneficial, ex-ante, to all agents, although it
would necessitate the early liquidation of long-term investments. A social planner who
can verify agents’ types, once realized, would set the period-1 consumption level c of
the impatient agents so as to maximize an agent’s ex-ante expected welfare,
1

.

Here, λc units of investment are liquidated in period 1 to satisfy the consumption needs
of impatient agents. As a result, in period 2, each one of the patient agents consumes an
amount of

with probability

.

The first-best period-1 consumption
welfare. It can be shown that

is set to maximize this ex-ante expected

1, i.e., the consumption available in period 1 to

impatient consumers exceeds the endowment. Hence, at the first best allocation, there is
risk sharing, which is achieved via maturity transformation: a transfer of wealth from
patient agents to impatient ones.
Without a social planner, risk sharing can be achieved via a banking sector. Suppose
the bank sets the payoff to early withdrawal r1 at the first-best level of consumption, c1FB .
If only impatient agents demand early withdrawal, the expected utility of patient agents is

E [ p( )]  u ( 11r1 R) . As long as this is more than the utility from withdrawing early u (r1 )
, there is an equilibrium in which, indeed, only impatient agents demand early
withdrawal. In this equilibrium, the first-best allocation is obtained.

11

However, as Diamond and Dybvig point out, the demand-deposit contract makes the
bank vulnerable to runs. There is a second equilibrium in which all agents demand early
withdrawal. When they do so, period-1 payment is now r1 with probability 1/r1, and
period-2 payment is 0; so that it is indeed optimal for agents to demand early withdrawal.
This equilibrium is evidently inferior to the autarkic regime. The reason for multiplicity
of equilibria is the strategic complementarities among agents: It is optimal for them to run
if they think that others are going to run.
Table 1 describes the payments expected by agents when they withdraw at Period 1
vs. Period 2 as a function of the proportion n of agents between 0 and 1 who decide to
withdraw at Period 1. Looking at the table, it is easy to see that under the above
assumptions, there is an equilibrium with no run (n=0) and an equilibrium with a run
(n=1).
[ Insert Table 1 Here ]
The multiplicity of equilibria is perceived by many to be a strength of the model,
since it seems to capture the fragility of banks and the element of surprise in financial
crises in general. However, it poses two major difficulties for researchers and
policymakers. First, the model provides no prediction as to when a bank run is more
likely to occur. This stands in contrast to the vast empirical research that finds evidence
that financial crises are linked to various variables that capture the strength of
fundamentals of the banking system (see for example, Gorton (1988) and Demirguc-Kunt
and Detragiache (1998); for a recent review, see Goldstein (2012)). Second, policy
analysis becomes quite difficult with multiple equilibria. If a policy measure is intended
to reduce the likelihood of bank runs but also has other costs, then assessing the

12

desirability of this policy measure becomes impossible if the likelihood of bank runs
cannot be pinned down (with and without the policy measure in place).

2.2 Heterogeneous Signals and Unique Equilibrium
The global-games literature offers a solution to the problems mentioned above while
still maintaining the element of panic in financial crises. The literature was pioneered by
Carlsson and van Damme (1993), and then applied to financial crises in the context of
currency attacks by Morris and Shin (1998). In this literature, assuming that agents
observe noisy signals of the fundamentals of the economy leads to a unique equilibrium,
where the fundamentals uniquely determine whether a crisis will occur or not. Goldstein
and Pauzner (2005) build on this literature in the context of bank runs and derive a unique
equilibrium.
Technically, the proof of uniqueness in Goldstein and Pauzner (2005) is quite
different from that employed in the rest of the global-games literature due to the nature of
payoffs in the bank run model, which violates a central assumption in the global-games
framework. Specifically, in traditional global-games models, an agent’s incentive to take
a certain action monotonically increases in the proportion of other agents taking this
action.6 As one can see in Table 1, this does not hold in the bank run model, since in the
region where the bank is bankrupt, the net benefit from running decreases when more
people run. Goldstein and Pauzner (2005) overcome this problem and show uniqueness
nevertheless under some conditions. For the purpose of our review, we will not get into
these complexities here, but rather just briefly describe the intuition behind the traditional

6

This property is referred to as “Global Strategic Complementarities”.

13

global-games framework and how it generates a unique equilibrium. The intuition in the
bank-run context is closely related to the traditional intuition.
If the realization of the fundamental

is common knowledge to agents before they

make their choice whether to run or not, the model of Goldstein and Pauzner (2005)
generates three regions of the fundamentals, which are depicted in Figure 1. Below a
threshold , there is a unique equilibrium where all depositors – patient and impatient –
run on the bank and demand early withdrawal. Here, the fundamentals are so low that the
bank is insolvent and will fail no matter what other depositors do, and hence each
depositor undoubtedly finds it profitable to withdraw. Above a threshold ̅ , there is a
unique equilibrium where patient depositors do not withdraw.7 Here, the fundamentals
are so high that the bank can survive and pay its liabilities even if all depositors demand
early withdrawal. Hence, they choose not to withdraw. Between

and

̅ , there are

multiple equilibria. Either everyone runs and the bank fails, or only impatient agents
withdraw and the bank remains solvent. There are strategic complementarities, since
depositors benefit from the run if and only if other depositors run, and hence there are
two possible equilibria.
[ Insert Figure 1 Here ]
However, introducing noise in speculators’ information about the fundamental
such that every depositor gets a signal composed of the true fundamental

,

plus i.i.d.

noise, changes the predictions of the model dramatically (even if the noise is very small).
The new predictions are depicted in Figure 2. Now, the intermediate region between

7

This upper dominance region is obtained with an additional assumption introduced by Goldstein and
Pauzner (2005).

14

and ̅ is split into two sub-regions: below

∗

, a bank run occurs and the bank fails, while

above it, there is no run and the bank remains solvent.8
[ Insert Figure 2 Here ]
This result can be best understood by applying the logic of a backward induction.9
Due to the noise in patient depositors’ information about , their decisions about whether
to withdraw no longer depend only on the information conveyed by the signal about the
realization of the fundamental. It also depends on what the signal conveys about other
depositors’ signals. Hence, between

and

̅ , depositors can no longer perfectly

coordinate on any of the outcomes (whether to run or not to run), as their actions now
depend on what they think the other depositors will do based on the signal they receive.
Hence, a depositor observing a signal slightly below ̅ knows that many other depositors
may have observed signals above ̅ and therefore choose not to run. Taking this into
account, this depositor also chooses not to run. Then, we know that depositors who
receive signals just below ̅ do not run on the bank. Applying the same logic, depositors
who receive even lower signals also choose not to run. This logic can be repeated again
and again, establishing a boundary well below ̅ , above which depositors do not run on
the bank. The same logic can then be repeated from the other direction, establishing a
boundary well above , below which depositors do run on the bank. The mathematical
proof shows that the two boundaries coincide at a unique
below

∗

, and do not run above

∗

∗

, such that all depositors run

.

8

This sharp outcome is obtained when the noise in the signal approaches zero. For larger noise, the
transition from run to no-run will not be so abrupt, but rather there will be a range of partial run. This does
not matter for the qualitative message of the theory.
9
Strictly speaking, this intuition holds for the traditional global-games framework where global strategic
complementarities hold. The intuition in the bank-run model of Goldstein and Pauzner (2005) is more
involved.

15

As Figure 2 shows, in the range between

and ̅ , the level of the fundamental now

perfectly predicts whether or not a crisis occurs. In particular, a crisis surely occurs below
∗

. We refer to crises in this range as “panic-based” because a crisis in this range is not

necessitated by the fundamentals; it occurs only because agents think it will occur, and in
that sense it is self-fulfilling. However, the occurrence of a self-fulfilling crisis here is
uniquely pinned down by the fundamentals. So, in this sense, the “panic-based” approach
and the “fundamental-based” approach are not inconsistent with each other. The
occurrence of a crisis is pinned down by fundamentals, but crises are self-fulfilling as
they would not have occurred if agents did not expect them to occur. The key is that the
fundamentals uniquely determine agents’ expectations about whether a crisis will occur,
and in doing this, they indirectly determine whether a crisis occurs. Agents’ self-fulfilling
beliefs amplify the effect of fundamentals on the economy. Similarly, between

∗

and ̅ ,

even though the fundamental could support a crisis, it does not occur, as agents’
expectations are coordinated on the no-crisis outcome. Note that crises below

can be

thought of as purely “fundamental-based” because here the fundamentals are so bad that
crises must occur no matter what agents think other agents are going to do, i.e., it is their
dominant action to run.
Hence, the global-games approach produces empirical predictions that are consistent
with the vast empirical literature that links the occurrence of a crisis to fundamental
variables characterizing the state of the economy or the banking system. A classic
reference in this context is Gorton (1988). Studying the national banking era in the US
between 1863 and 1914, he shows that crises were responses of depositors to an increase
in perceived risk. He demonstrates that crises occurred whenever key variables that are

16

linked to the probability of recession reached a critical value. The most important
variable is the liabilities of failed firms. He also shows an effect of other variables, such
as the production of pig iron, which he uses as a proxy for consumption. When the
perceived risk of recession based on these variables becomes high, depositors believe that
the deposits in banks – which have claims in firms – become too risky, and hence they
demand early withdrawal, leading, in aggregate, to mass withdrawals.
Similar evidence is obtained in international studies trying to understand what brings
down a whole banking sector. A banking crisis in this literature is manifested by large
withdrawals out of the banking system, leading to bank closures, government help to
banks, or suspension of convertibility. For example, Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache
(1998) conduct an international study to understand the determinants of banking crises in
a sample of developing and developed economies in late 20th century (1980-1994). They
again find that a number of variables connected to the fundamental state of the economy
are related to the occurrence of crises. The key predictors in their study are: low GDP
growth (which reflects declining economic activity that reduces the value of banks’
assets), high real interest rates and inflation (which both induce banks to offer higher
deposit rates, while the rates on their loans are fixed given that they are mostly long-term
loans), and high level of outstanding credit (which obviously makes the banking system
fragile.
Other authors have shown that bank-specific variables have an effect on the
withdrawals from specific banks. One example is Schumacher (2000), who conducts her
study around the runs on Argentine banks following the devaluation of the Mexican
currency in December 1994. The devaluation in Mexico was of significance to the

17

Argentine banks because it led to speculation that Argentina would also have to devalue
its currency. Schumacher conjectures that depositors’ runs were triggered by information
they had about the ability of banks to survive the currency collapse, and that according to
this information they transferred money from banks they considered “bad” to banks they
considered “good”. She finds evidence in support of this conjecture. In similar spirit,
Martinez-Peria and Schmukler (2001) analyze the behavior of depositors in Argentina,
Chile, and Mexico over two decades in the late 20th century, showing that depositors’
behavior is affected by banks’ risk characteristics. Deposits decrease and interest rates
rise in banks with low ratio of capital to assets, low return on assets, high level of nonperforming loans, and high ratio of expenditures to assets. Finally, Calomiris and Mason
(2003) study banking crises during the great depression. They show that bank specific
variables – such as leverage, asset risk, and liquidity – affect the likelihood of failure, and
so do variables that capture the local or regional economic situation.
It is important to note again that even though the global-games approach generates a
unique equilibrium, where the occurrence of crises is determined by fundamental
variables, it still maintains the flavor of panic or self-fulfilling beliefs that emerges from
the Diamond-Dybvig model, as crises are still driven by agents’ expectations and not by
fundamentals alone. The fundamentals pin down agents’ expectations about others’
behavior, and together they pin down agents’ behavior. This combination is an appealing
feature of the global-games solution. An alternative line of models describes banking
crises as a result of bad fundamentals only. See, for example, Jacklin and Bhattacharya
(1988), Chari and Jagannathan (1988) and Allen and Gale (1998). As we will discuss in

18

the next subsection, the distinction between fundamental-based and panic-based crises is
important for policy analysis.
Interestingly, the fundamentals in the global-games models are not known publicly
at the time before a crisis erupts; information about the fundamentals is available to
agents privately with noise. Hence, consistent with the observations of Friedman and
Schwartz (1963) and Kindleberger (1978), crises may be hard to predict ex ante, and may
seem sudden and unexpected when they occur. This is also consistent with observations
about the recent crisis: While fundamental weaknesses accumulated in the financial
system, the information about them took a long time to aggregate in publicly available
measures, and hence the crisis came as a surprise (see Gorton (2010)).
Aside from casual observations, an important question is how to provide empirical
validation for the existence of panic and self-fulfilling beliefs in real-world crises. In the
past, authors interpreted the evidence of the link between fundamentals and crises to go
against theories of panic and self-fulfilling beliefs (e.g., Gorton (1988)), but given the
results of the global-games literature described here, this conclusion is clearly flawed.
Two recent papers attempt to identify the role of panic and strategic complementarities
more directly. Chen, Goldstein, and Jiang (2010) identify the effect of strategic
complementarities in outflows from mutual funds by showing that the sensitivity of
outflows to bad performance is stronger in funds that exhibit stronger strategic
complementarities. Hertzberg, Liberti, and Paravisini (2011) use a natural experiment
from Argentina and show that the release of public information makes banks react to
information they already had, essentially because they expect other banks to react to it.
The use of such methodologies in more traditional crises datasets can prove useful for our

19

understanding of the role that strategic complementarities and panic may have in such
crises.10
Another appealing feature of the global-games solution is that the equilibrium in the
global-games model captures the notion of strategic risk. Depositors who observe signals
near the threshold where the bank fails, who ultimately determine the likelihood of a run,
are not sure about how many people are going to run and whether the bank will fail. This
strategic risk is of course very realistic; albeit it is missing from the multiple-equilibria
framework, where in equilibrium agents know for sure how many people run and whether
the bank will survive.
Another advantage of pinning down a unique equilibrium is that it enables the
researcher to compute the probability of a run and relate it to the terms of the banking
contract.11 Do demand deposit contracts improve welfare even when their destabilizing
consequences are taken into account? How will they be designed in light of their effect
on fragility? Goldstein and Pauzner (2005) show that banks become more vulnerable to
bank runs when they offer a higher level of risk sharing. That is, the threshold

∗

, below

which a run happens, is an increasing function of the short-term payment offered to
depositors

.12 However, even when this destabilizing effect is taken into account, banks

still increase welfare by offering demand deposit contracts, provided that the range of
fundamentals where liquidation is efficient is not too large. Characterizing the short-term
payment in the banking contract chosen by banks taking into account the probability of a

10

See Goldstein (2012) for a review of the empirical literature and a discussion of strategies to identify
strategic complementarities.
11
Cooper and Ross (1998) study the relation between the banking contract and the probability of bank runs
in a model where the probability of bank runs is exogenous.
12
Note that the lower threshold below which running is a dominant strategy is also an increasing function
of .

20

run, they show that this payment does not exploit all possible gains from risk sharing,
since doing so would result in too many bank runs. Still, in equilibrium, panic-based runs
occur, resulting from coordination failures among bank depositors. This leaves room for
government policy to improve overall welfare.13

2.3 A Basis for Micro Policy Analysis
One of the basic policy remedies to reduce the loss from panic based runs is the
introduction of deposit insurance by the government. This idea goes back to Diamond
and Dybvig (1983), where the government promises to collect taxes and provide liquidity
(or bailout money) to the bank in case the bank faces financial distress (i.e., when the
number of agents demanding early withdrawal n exceeds the number of impatient agents

).
In the context of the model described above, with deposit insurance, patient agents
know that if they wait they will receive the promised return independently of the number
of agents who run. Hence, panic based runs are prevented: patient agents withdraw their
deposits only when this is their dominant action, i.e., when  is below  ( r1 ) (rather than
below the higher threshold  * ( r1 ) ). Then, in many cases, federal deposit insurance deters
bank runs with no need to exercise the liquidity enhancing power. Extending the context
of the above model, Keister (2012) highlights another benefit of deposit insurance: it
helps providing a better allocation of resources by equating the marginal utility that

13

Note that the Goldstein-Pauzner model only focuses on demand deposit contracts to ask whether they
improve welfare and how much risk sharing they should provide. Outside the global-games framework,
there are papers that study a wider variety of contracts, e.g., Green and Lin (2003), Peck and Shell (2003),
and Ennis and Keister (2009). Models by Calomiris and Kahn (1991) and Diamond and Rajan (2001)
provide justification for the demand deposit contract based on the need to monitor bank managers. We
expand more on this below.

21

agents derive from private consumption and public-good consumption. That is, when
bank runs occur, private consumption decreases, generating a gap between the marginal
utility of private consumption and that of public-good consumption, so with bailouts, the
government can reduce the public good and increase private consumption to correct the
distortion.
However, deposit insurance also has a drawback, like any insurance it creates moral
hazard: when the bank designs the optimal contract, it does not internalize the cost of the
taxes that might be required to pay the insurance. Thus, the bank has an incentive to overexploit the deposit insurance by setting r1 higher than the socially optimal level. This
drawback of deposit insurance is consistent with the critique made by Calomiris (1990)
that “today’s financial intermediaries can maintain higher leverage and attract depositors
more easily by offering higher rates of return with virtually no risk of default”. In the
context of the model, this is costly as it increases the lower threshold  ( r1 ) , below which
crises occur even without a coordination failure.
The framework developed above enables one to compare the benefits and costs of
deposit insurance, and provide policy recommendations regarding the optimal amount
and design of this insurance. As mentioned above, the unique equilibrium coming out of
the global-games framework enables the researcher to pin down the likelihood of a crisis,
and analyze the effect of deposit insurance on it. Then, one can compare the benefit of
deposit insurance due to the reduction in the probability of panic-based runs with the cost
due to the moral hazard leading to an increase in government expenditure to help banks
and potentially an increase in the probability of fundamental-based runs. In a recent
paper, Allen, Carletti, Goldstein, and Leonello (2013) use the global-games framework to

22

conduct such analysis of optimal deposit insurance policy. Generally, given the tradeoff
described here, they show that some limits on insurance will be desirable. Even though
full deposit insurance can completely eliminate panic-based runs, its consequences for
moral hazard are too severe, leading banks to expose themselves to excessive risks,
which lead to increased cost for the government and sometimes lead to more
fundamental-based runs. Keister (2012) conducts analysis of optimal deposit insurance
policy without employing the global-games methodology (and thus without pinning down
the probability of a crisis) by checking the effect that the policy has on the range of
fundamentals where a run may occur.
Overall, deposit insurance had a profound impact on the banking industry in many
countries by reducing significantly the likelihood of runs and crises. However, its
implications for moral hazard have to be considered carefully, and so there is room for
more research on the optimal deposit insurance policy, as described in this subsection.
Indeed, it is possible that such moral hazard has made crises overall more likely, even
though they don’t come in the form of panic-based crises, as suggested by DemirgucKunt and Detragiache (1998).
In addition, as we discuss in the introduction, while deposit insurance was enacted
for banks and was effective in reducing the likelihood of traditional bank runs, there are
many sectors of the financial system – money market funds, repo markets, etc. – that are
uninsured and in which massive runs have occurred in recent years.14 The institutional
details of these parts of the financial system are quite different than those of traditional
commercial banks. For example, in the repo market, a lender is secured by collateral, and

14

See, for example, Gorton and Metrick (2012), Schmidt, Timmermann, and Wermers (2012), and Schroth,
Suarez, and Taylor (2012).

23

so the run of other lenders does not have a direct effect on how much he can get back
from the borrower. But, considering market forces, strategic complementarities can still
emerge: A fire sale of assets used as collateral, due to a systemic run, can lead to the
reduction in the value of collateral, making quick withdrawal the optimal action for each
lender (as he may be able to avoid the effect of the expected decrease in the value of
collateral). A recent paper by Martin, Skeie, and von Thadden (2012) adapts the
traditional theories of runs to these new settings to discuss when runs will emerge and
when they will not. Overall, given the proven fragility of these parts of the financial
system, there is room to consider optimal insurance and regulation for them in light of the
tradeoffs described here.

2.4 Why Debt Contracts? The Reasons Behind Bank Fragility
One of the main criticisms of the Diamond and Dybvig (1983) model was raised by
Jacklin (1987). He showed that demand-deposit contracts offered by banks are not
necessary for achieving the optimal allocation. Instead, this can be achieved in a market,
where patient agents and impatient agents trade after finding out their types. In such a
market solution, fragility does not arise. Hence, one can say that demand deposit
contracts and bank runs will only occur in a model with limitations on trading.
Such limitations on trading are not unreasonable if one thinks of the real world.
Indeed, many households in the United States and other countries stay away from
financial markets for various reasons. Diamond (1997) was trying to formally analyze the
implications of such limitations in a formal model. He analyzes an environment where
some agents have access to financial markets and others do not. While the reason why

24

some agents have access to financial markets and others do not is not modeled, one can
think of this as a result of differences in sophistication across different investors. In such
a model, banks will naturally emerge as part of the optimal solution, and so will the
fragility and runs they bring with them.
But, overall the question of why banks are so highly leveraged and why they expose
themselves to such high fragility remains open and deserves attention. A line of literature
led by Calomiris and Kahn (1991) and Diamond and Rajan (2001) argues that bank
fragility generated by high leverage is desirable because the threat of a run helps in
disciplining bank managers. Gorton and Pennacchi (1990) and, more recently, Dang,
Holmstrom, and Gorton (2012) argue for a different reason for debt contracts: the fact
that they are not very sensitive to information makes them desirable for uninformed
investors who might need to sell securities to informed investors.
However, various explanations for bank debt have a hard time explaining why banks
are so much more leveraged than non-financial firms. For example, monitoring needs are
not so different between banks and non-financial firms. A claim that is often mentioned is
that there is a strong element of moral hazard in bank leverage (see for example Admati
and Hellwig (2013)). Knowing that their debt is guaranteed by the government (either
implicitly or explicitly), banks can borrow more cheaply, imposing a large cost on the
government. Hence, unlike in the Diamond and Dybvig (1983) model, a run does not
emerge out of an ideal situation. Rather, banks may be over leveraged, and vulnerabilities
may be accumulating in the system until they burst in the form of a run.
Overall, more work is needed to understand the period before the crisis and to
understand why leverage and vulnerability are increasing in the financial system leading

25

up to a run and a crisis. This work should also connect to the policy issues discussed in
the previous subsection to understand optimal guarantees by the government in light of
the tradeoff between panic reduction and moral hazard that might increase fundamental
fragility. Still, the analysis of the onset of a run, using the global-games framework as
described in Section 2.2, is not so much affected by the source of the vulnerability. The
global-games analysis, which helps us pin down the likelihood of a crisis can be
employed in interaction with the analysis of the sources of debt and fragility to get the
full picture.

2.5 Contagion and Systemic Risk
A main reason for concern with banking crises is that they spread across banks
leading many to fail at the same time, and hence creating systemic risk. There is a large
literature on contagion of banking crises, highlighting the different sources for spillovers
and coordination among banks. Allen and Gale (2000b) and Lagunoff and Schreft (2001)
show how contagion arises due to bank inter-linkages. Banks facing idiosyncratic
liquidity needs insure each other and so provide efficient risk sharing. However, this
creates links across banks, leading to spillover of shocks and contagion of crises.
Dasgupta (2004) extends their model, using the global-games framework described
above, analyzing the optimal insurance contracts among banks taking into account their
undesirable implications for contagion. In Goldstein and Pauzner (2004), contagion is
generated due to a common pool of investors investing in different banks. The failure of
one bank leads investors to lose wealth and become more risk averse, and so they are
more likely to run on the other bank. Kyle and Xiong (2001) and Kodres and Pritsker

26

(2002) analyze related models, where contagion across assets is generated by the
portfolio rebalancing made by investors who hold the different assets.
Some authors analyze contagion as a result of transmission of information. In these
models, a crisis in one market/bank reveals some information about the fundamentals in
the other and thus may induce a crisis in the other market/bank as well. Examples
include King and Wadhwani (1990) and Chen (1999). Calvo and Mendoza (2000)
suggest that the high cost of gathering information on each and every market may induce
rational contagion. Recently, Oh (2012) analyzes a model of contagion where investors
learn about other investors’ types and points out that this can be a source of contagion.
Another source of systemic risk is the ‘too big to fail’ problem. Banks who become
too big pose a big threat on the economy in case they fail, and so governments will be
willing to provide a bail out to prevent this from happening. This, in turn, generates
disincentives such that the bank will take on excessive risk knowing that the
consequences will be borne by the taxpayer. Similarly, the government might be
particularly concerned about the possibility of several banks failing together due to the
particularly adverse implications this might have on the economy. Hence, the government
will bail out banks only when many of them are about to fail. As pointed out by Acharya
and Yorulmazer (2007) and Farhi and Tirole (2012), this might provide incentives to
banks to choose correlated risks ex ante, which leads to correlated failures and
destabilizes the system as a whole.

27

3. Credit Frictions and Market Freezes
In the above models of financial-institution failures, the returns on assets and loans
held by the bank were generally assumed to be exogenous, and the focus was on the
behavior of depositors or creditors of the banks. However, problems in the financial
sector often arise from the other side of the balance sheet. The quality of loans provided
by the banks is determined in equilibrium by the behavior of the bank and the behavior of
its borrowers. Moral hazard between the bank and its borrowers and between the bank
and its lenders affects the amount of bank lending and its return. This can lead to frictions
in the flow of credit in the economy.
The forces in this literature can be traced back to Stiglitz and Weiss (1981), who
provide a basic rationale for the presence of credit rationing, which is a common
phenomenon in financial crises. While basic economic theory suggests that in equilibrium
prices adjust so that supply equals demand and no rationing arises, they show that this
will not occur in the credit market due to the endogeneity of the quality of the loan. There
are two key frictions. The first one is moral hazard: If borrowers are charged a very high
cost for credit, they lose the incentive to increase the value of their projects, and so are
less likely to be able to pay back. The second one is adverse selection: If interest rates are
high, only borrowers with bad projects will attempt to get loans, and again the bank is
unlikely to receive the money back.
For these reasons, banks will ration credit, hampering the effectiveness of the
financial system in providing capital to those who need it, and in extreme cases leading to
a financial crisis, where credit drops dramatically. As mentioned in the introduction,
credit rationing and credit freeze have been a very important part of the recent financial

28

crisis, as lending to firms and households decreased sharply (see e.g., Ivashina and
Scharfstein (2010)). In this section, we review basic theories of this kind.

3.1

Moral Hazard
When an entrepreneur borrows money to finance a project, he can take actions that

reduce the value of the project and increase his own private benefits. Hence, a lender
needs to make sure that the entrepreneur has a large enough incentive to preserve (or
improve) the quality of the project, which will enable him to repay the loan. A direct
implication is that the entrepreneur has to have a large enough stake in the investment or
he has to be able to secure the loan with collateral. These considerations limit the amount
of credit available to firms. They can lead to amplification of shocks to fundamentals and
ultimately to financial crises.
Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) provide a canonical representation of this mechanism.
In their model, there is a continuum of entrepreneurs, with access to the same investment
technology and different amounts of capital A. The distribution of assets across
entrepreneurs is described by the cumulative distribution function G A . The investment
required is I, so an entrepreneur needs to raise I-A from outside investors. The gross
return on the investment is either 0 or R>0, and the probability of getting R instead of 0
depends on the type of project that the entrepreneur chooses. The possible projects are
described in Table 2.
[ Insert Table 2 Here ]
If the entrepreneur chooses a good project, the probability of a high return is p . On
the other hand, if he chooses a bad project, the probability of a high return is only p . Of

29

course, the assumption is that p

p . However, the entrepreneur may choose a bad

project because a bad project provides him a non-pecuniary private benefit. The private
benefit is either b or B, where B>b, so if unconstrained, the entrepreneur will always
choose a bad project with private benefit of B over a bad project with private benefit of b.
The rate of return demanded by outside investors is denoted by γ, which can either
be fixed or coming from an upward sloping supply function S γ . The assumption is that
only the good project is viable:
p R

γI

0

p R

γI

B.

That is, investing in the bad project generates a negative total surplus. Hence, for outside
investors to put money in the firm, it is essential to make sure that the entrepreneur
undertakes the good project. The incentive of the entrepreneur to choose the good project
will depend on how much “skin in the game” he has. That is, the entrepreneur will need
to keep enough ownership of the project, so that he has a monetary incentive to make the
“right” decision. A key implication is that it would be easier to provide external financing
to entrepreneurs with large assets A, since they are more likely to internalize the
monetary benefit and choose the good project rather than enjoying the non-pecuniary
private benefits of the bad project.
To see this, let us derive the solution of this basic model. Consider a contract where
the entrepreneur invests his funds A together with an amount I-A raised from an outside
investor. Clearly, no one will receive any payment if the project fails and yields 0. The
key is to determine how the entrepreneur and the outside investor split the return of the
project in case it succeeds, yielding R. In general, one can denote the payment to the
entrepreneur as R and the payment to the outside investor as R , such that R

30

R

R.

A necessary condition for outside investors to be willing to provide financing to the
entrepreneur is that the entrepreneur has an incentive to choose the good project.
Otherwise, the total net present value is negative, and so the outside investor cannot break
even. Hence, it is crucial that the entrepreneur benefits more from taking the good project
than from taking the bad project. This implies:
p R
Denoting ∆p

p

p R

B.

p , we get the incentive compatibility constraint:
B⁄∆p.

R

This implies that the maximum amount that can be promised to the outside investors –
the pledgeable expected income – is:
B⁄∆p .

p R

Hence, to satisfy the participation constraint of the outside investors, i.e., to make
sure that they get a high enough expected income to at least break even, we need:
γ I

A

p R

B⁄∆p .

This puts an endogenous financing constraint on the entrepreneur, which depends on how
much internal capital A he has. Defining the threshold A γ as:
A γ

I

p R

B⁄∆p ⁄ ,

we get that only entrepreneurs with capital at or above A γ can raise external capital and
invest in their projects. This is the classic credit rationing result going back to Stiglitz and
Weiss (1981). The entrepreneur cannot get unlimited amounts of capital, since he needs
to maintain high enough stake in the project so that outside investors are willing to
participate.

31

Holmstrom and Tirole go on to introduce financial intermediaries, who have the
ability to monitor entrepreneurs.15 The monitoring technology available to financial
intermediaries is assumed to prevent the entrepreneur from taking a bad project with high
non-pecuniary private benefit B, thereby reducing the opportunity cost that the
entrepreneur incurs when taking the good project from B to b. Monitoring yields a private
cost of c to the financial intermediary. Financial intermediaries themselves need to have
an incentive to pay the monitoring cost and make sure entrepreneurs are prevented from
enjoying high private benefits B. Hence, they need to put in their own capital, and the
amount of intermediary capital K

available in the economy is going to be a key

parameter in determining how much lending will occur.
An intermediary can help relax the financing constraint of the entrepreneur by
monitoring him and reducing his incentive to take the bad project. Hence, even
entrepreneurs with a level of capital lower than the threshold A γ will be able to get
financing assisted by the intermediaries. Denoting the return required by the
intermediaries as β, where β is determined in equilibrium and is decreasing in the amount
of capital K

that is available in the financial-intermediary sector, the threshold A γ, β

of entrepreneur’s capital A above which the entrepreneur can raise capital via financial
intermediaries and invest is:
A γ, β
Here, I

I

I

β

p R

b

c ⁄∆p ⁄γ.

β is the amount of capital provided by the financial intermediary, which is

decreasing in the return β demanded by financial intermediaries. Hence, the entrepreneur

15

Strictly speaking, the financial intermediaries here are not necessarily intermediating between the outside
investors and the entrepreneurs, but rather could be providing a different type of financing that can relax
financial constraints via monitoring.

32

only needs to raise I

I

β directly from outside investors. At the same time, the

entrepreneur can only promise them an expected payment of p R

b

c ⁄∆p , so

that the entrepreneur and the financial intermediary maintain incentives to pick the good
project and monitor, respectively. This implies that only entrepreneurs with more internal
capital than A γ, β

defined above will be able to raise capital via the financial

intermediary sector.
Figure 3 depicts the equilibrium outcomes with regard to which entrepreneurs will
be financed and invest, depending on how much capital they have. We can see that
entrepreneurs with little capital – i.e., below A γ, β

– cannot get financed and do not

invest in their projects. Entrepreneurs with an intermediate level of capital – i.e., between
A γ, β and A γ

– can get financed only through financial intermediaries who assist

them with their monitoring technology. Entrepreneurs with a high level of capital – i.e.,
above A γ – can get financed directly by the outside investors without the monitoring of
the financial intermediaries. Of course, a key condition for this figure to hold is that
A γ, β is smaller than A γ . This will happen when c and β are not too large. In such a
case, the financial intermediary sector is efficient and hence can provide financing to
entrepreneurs, who are otherwise rationed in the credit market. If this condition does not
hold, then the financial intermediary sector does not exist, and entrepreneurs simply get
financing if and only if their level of internal capital is above A γ .
[ Insert Figure 3 Here ]
Overall, the model demonstrates the frictions in the financial system. Entrepreneurs
with profitable investment opportunities might not be able to finance them if they do not
have enough capital already. This is because of a moral hazard problem, according to
33

which they might not make the right choices with their projects unless their own wealth is
at stake. As a result, investors and financial intermediaries will not finance the projects
unless the entrepreneurs have their own capital at stake. Gan (2007a) and Chaney, Sraer,
and Thesmar (2012), among others, provide micro-level evidence of the effect of this
‘balance-sheet channel’, where a decrease in the value of firms’ assets reduces their
ability to borrow and invest. For identification, they use exogenous shocks to the prices
of real estate.
While such frictions always exist, they might be exacerbated leading to severe credit
rationing, which can be referred to as a “crisis”. Indeed, this literature was not developed
to describe crises per se, but is increasingly used to describe phenomena around financial
crises, given that during financial crises the flow of credit is interrupted or even freezes.
For example, in this model, a negative aggregate shock in the economy, shifting the
distribution of capital G A to the left, i.e., such that entrepreneurs have less capital on
average, will be amplified, as entrepreneurs having less wealth will face stricter financial
constraints and will be less likely to raise external financing. Hence, there is an
accelerator effect, whereby shocks to the economy are amplified: An initial loss of capital
causes further losses due to the tightening of financial constraints, making entrepreneurs
unable to make profitable investments. When the shocks are sufficiently big or when the
accelerator is sufficiently powerful, one may say that we are in a financial crisis.
Another form of accelerator effect in this model operates via the financial
intermediary sector, as a decrease in the capital K

of the financial intermediary sector

will also have an adverse effect on the real economy. This is because it leads to an
increase in the equilibrium return β demanded by financial intermediaries, and to an

34

increase in the threshold A γ, β , above which middle-size entrepreneurs can get financed
and invest. Hence, a decrease in financial intermediary capital will lead to contraction in
real investment, specifically of middle-sized firms. Gan (2007b), among others, provides
evidence of this ‘lending channel’, where the decrease in the value of banks’ assets
reduces their ability to lend to firms, and hence reduces the ability of firms to borrow and
invest.
Holmstrom and Tirole (1998) study a related setup and develop the implications for
government policy. Recall that entrepreneurs need to keep sufficient ownership in the
firms that they run (

needs to be sufficiently high), so that they take the good project

rather than the bad project. This limits their ability to offer sufficient return to outside
investors (

is limited), and so in case of an adverse liquidity shock, they are limited in

how much capital they can raise to keep running their projects and prevent welfarereducing bankruptcy. This creates an incentive for holding liquid securities ex ante, so
that they can use them when they are hit by adverse shocks and are financially
constrained. Holmstrom and Tirole (1998) show that, in case of aggregate uncertainty,
the government can improve overall welfare by issuing government debt and
supplementing the supply of liquid securities in the economy.
The model of Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) and the related literature focus on the
quality of loans provided by banks and other lenders, as they are determined
endogenously in equilibrium. A limitation of these models is that they ignore the
financing pressure faced by banks, as they may be subject to panics and runs by their
creditors, as in the models described in Section 2. Clearly, in the real world, these two
types of frictions co-exist and amplify each other. When the quality of loans extended by

35

banks deteriorates due to moral hazard considerations, bank depositors might panic and
run, which will amplify the problem. Hence, frictions on the asset side and frictions on
the liability side can reinforce and amplify each other, and this may be the feedback loop
that gives crises their enormous force. One interesting exception is a line of papers led by
Calomiris and Kahn (1991) and Diamond and Rajan (2001), that study models where the
two sides of banks’ balance sheets are considered endogenously, albeit they do not pin
down when panic will arise. These papers focus on the benefit of having a fragile liability
structure, as it induces the bank managers to monitor loans more forcefully. Overall,
more work is needed to connect the models of Section 2 with those of Section 3 in order
to get a better understanding of the interaction of forces, which is key for understanding
financial crises. We will return to this point in the next subsection.
Finally, while the models described here focus on credit rationing and credit freeze
due to incentive problems, a key question is why at certain times there are credit booms
and excessive lending. It seems that this was a key factor leading to the 2007 turmoil, as
banks extended excessive credit for home purchases, fuelling a bubble in the real estate
sector, which was the seed for the crisis. Allen and Gale (2000a) present a model where
the possibility of risk shifting leads borrowers to borrow excessively, inflating the prices
of the projects they invest in. When a bad shock occurs, the bubble bursts, and credit
dries up. Lorenzoni (2008) studies a model of inefficient credit booms, where borrowers
and lenders do not internalize the negative externalities that credit imposes on others.
These externalities emerge due to fire sales that happen upon a bad shock that forces
many borrowers to liquidate their assets at once. The presence of these externalities calls
for government intervention to tame credit booms. Models by Bebchuk and Goldstein

36

(2011) and Benmelech and Bergman (2012) study externalities in a credit freeze, and
discuss optimal government policies to get the economy out of the freeze.

3.2

Implications for Macroeconomic Models
Incorporating the basic frictions described thus far into macroeconomic models is a

very important task, since such models go towards calibration and can potentially be used
directly for policymaking. Financial accelerators in the spirit of Holmstrom and Tirole
(1997) have been discussed in macroeconomic setups, showing how shocks to asset
values can be amplified and become persistent in equilibrium. The downside in
macroeconomic models in many cases is that they do not provide rich microfoundations
as, for example, in Holmstrom and Tirole (1997). But, this is where the interaction
between microeconomic models and macroeconomic models is important. Embedding
the basic frictions and mechanisms in macroeconomic models enables researchers to
move towards calibration and direct use of these models in policymaking. While there is
still a lot of progress to be made before these models replace the traditional models used
in central banks, a lot of progress has been made already.16
Bernanke and Gertler (1989) provide one of the first financial-accelerator models in
macroeconomics, emphasizing that financial frictions amplify adverse shocks and that
they are persistent. That is, a temporary shock depresses not only current but also future
economic activity. The mechanism goes through the agency problem between borrowers
and lenders as described above. A negative shock to the net worth of a borrower
strengthens the agency problem between the borrower and potential lenders, which
reduces lending and investment in equilibrium, hence amplifying the initial shock.
16

For a survey of this literature, see: Brunnermeier, Eisenbach, and Sannikov (2012).

37

Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) identify an important dynamic feedback mechanism that
strengthens the above forces. The reduction in investment in the future following a
negative shock today lowers future economic activity and will reduce future asset prices.
But since this decline is anticipated, it is immediately reflected in a fall in current asset
prices. As a result, current net worth of potential borrowers is reduced today, lowering
the collateral value they can provide, and hence limiting their debt capacity even further.
Then, investment today is reduced more, and so demand for assets falls today even more,
and price declines further, eroding productive agents’ net worth in turn and so on. This
feedback loop can amplify shocks significantly.
A large body of recent work builds on the models of Bernanke and Gertler (1989)
and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) to analyze the effect of financial frictions due to credit
constraints in macroeconomic settings. One important point in the data is the asymmetry
between recessions and booms. Kocherlakota (2000) builds a model where credit cycles
of the kind described by Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) are asymmetric: sharp downturns are
followed by slow recoveries. Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006) develop a model where credit
constraints are more binding in recessions, and so they match the empirical regularity that
capital reallocation is lower in downturns than in booms. Iacoviello (2005) adds nominal
mortgage debt using real estate as collateral to evaluate the quantitative relevance of the
Kiyotaki-Moore mechanism. Other authors have adopted similar framework to an
international setting, for example Caballero and Krishnamurhty (2001) and Mendoza
(2010), who study the dry-up of international capital inflows. We discuss this line of
research more in the next section.

38

While in Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) credit is limited by the expected price of the
collateral in the next period, other models emphasize the role of volatility. In
Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), for example, borrowing capacity is limited due to the
volatility of future prices. In Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2010), even productive
entrepreneurs are concerned about hitting their solvency constraint in the future and
consequently do not fully exploit their debt capacity. As volatility rises they cut back on
borrowing by selling assets. This depresses prices further, leading to rich volatility
dynamics.
A key feature missing from the macroeconomic models with frictions described
above is the role of financial intermediaries. The model of Holmstrom and Tirole (1997)
gives banks a special role in their ability to monitor firms. Evidence from the recent crisis
has shown the important role of financial intermediaries and the importance of
distinguishing between loans extended to firms by banks and other types of corporate
debt (see Adrian, Colla, and Shin (2012)). In asset pricing, Adrian, Etula, and Muir
(2013) demonstrate the importance of the conditions in the financial intermediary sector
for determining asset prices in the economy. Recently, models by Gertler and Kiyotaki
(2011), He and Krishnamurthy (2012, 2013), and Rampini and Viswanathan (2011) add a
financial intermediary sector, in the spirit of Holmstrom and Tirole (1997), and analyze
the dynamic interactions between this sector and the rest of the economy. Introducing this
sector into macroeconomic models enables elaborate discussions on various policies
conducted by governments during the recent crisis in attempt to stimulate the economy
via the financial intermediation sector. Such policies are discussed by Gertler and
Kiyotaki (2011).

39

A different angle on the role of credit frictions in the macro economy is provided by
Eggertsson and Krugman (2012). They study a model with heterogeneous agents, where
patient agents lend and impatient agents borrow subject to a collateral constraint. If, for
some reason, the collateral requirement becomes tighter, impatient agents will have to go
into a process of deleveraging, reducing the aggregate demand. This excess saving leads
to a reduction in the natural interest rate that might become negative, and the nominal
(policy) interest rate hits the zero bound, putting the economy into a liquidity trap. Then,
traditional monetary policy becomes impossible, but fiscal policy regains some potency.
Finally, and as mentioned above, an important task is to integrate the models
describe here with those of Section 2. This is particularly important in macroeconomic
models that are trying to provide quantification and guide policymakers on the
quantitative implications of various policy steps. In the recent crisis, it seems that
frictions on both sides of the balance sheet reinforced each other. The deterioration in the
quality of financial intermediaries’ assets provided creditors of the intermediary a
stronger incentive to run, which further reduced the value of bank assets and so on.
Hence, in order to provide a macroeconomic model that fully captures real-world
dynamics, it is crucial to incorporate the insights from the bank-run literature into the
models described here. Recently, Gertler and Kiyotaki (2013) make this exact point.
They build on the traditional macroeconomic model with moral hazard frictions in
lending, and add to it fragility on the liability side due to potential runs. They analyze the
extent to which runs further amplify the effects of shocks on the economy.
In our view, more work is needed in this direction. In particular, in Section 2, we
reviewed the global-games framework that enables determination of the probability of a

40

run and how it interacts with key parameters of the economy. Introducing such a tool in
the macroeconomic models will enable researchers to develop sharper predictions on the
dynamics of runs, financial intermediaries’ assets, and so on, which is important for
matching the data and guiding policy.

3.3

Asymmetric Information
While the previous subsections emphasized moral hazard as a source of failure in

financial systems, another key factor behind the breakdown of financial markets,
including credit markets, is adverse selection. As we mentioned before, Stiglitz and
Weiss (1981) point to adverse selection as a potential reason for credit frictions: When
lenders do not know the quality of their borrowers, increasing the interest rate will only
attract bad borrowers to them, and so the interest rate cannot increase freely to clear the
market, and we might get an equilibrium with credit rationing.
The analysis of market breakdown due to asymmetric information and adverse
selection goes back to Akerlof (1970). He analyzes a market where sellers have private
information about the quality of the assets that they are trying to sell. As a result, buyers
are reluctant to buy the assets from them because they realize that the sale represents
negative information about the asset. In extreme situations, when the only motivation to
trade is based on information, this leads to a complete market breakdown: no transactions
will happen in equilibrium. If there are other gains to trade between sellers and buyers,
trade may still occur. But, the increase in the magnitude of asymmetric information, due
to an increase in the share of informed agents or in the degree of underlying uncertainty,
might reduce trade.

41

This analysis can be easily applied to credit markets or interbank markets. Indeed,
many commentators have attributed the freeze in these markets during the recent crisis to
a sharp increase in the degree of asymmetric information about the credit quality of
borrowers and the value of assets in the financial system. This is because the toxic assets
held by banks were hard to evaluate and the exposure of different institutions to them was
unknown. So, a financial crisis here represents an outcome where the market ceases to
perform its fundamental role of enabling the realization of gains from exchange due to
the increase in asymmetric information that makes agents reluctant to perform such an
exchange. Gorton and Ordonez (2013) study a model in this spirit, where a small shock
can cause the asymmetry in information about collateral to be too large, and this harms
trade and credit. Several government programs were designed to alleviate the problem of
adverse selection in financial markets by removing toxic assets from the financial system
and restore flows of trade and credit as a result. Recent papers by Tirole (2012) and
Philippon and Skreta (2012) perform theoretical analysis of such policy intervention in
light of the problem of asymmetric information.
An interesting feature of models of asymmetric information and adverse selection is
that they generate externalities that might lead to amplification and extreme equilibrium
outcomes. In models by Pagano (1989) and Dow (2004), uninformed traders have
stronger incentive to participate in the market if they know that there are more
uninformed traders there, since then they are exposed to a lesser adverse selection
problem. As a result, there is a coordination problem that can lead to sharp changes in
market depth, resembling what we see in a financial crisis. Recently, Morris and Shin
(2012) show that the amplification becomes even more severe when traders have

42

different information about the extent of the adverse selection problem, i.e., about how
many informed traders are present. This leads to a contagious process, by which very
small changes can lead to a market freeze.

4. Currency Crises
The literature on currency crises has been developed for a long time independently
of the literatures on runs and frictions in the financial sector described above.
Empirically, however, there is a strong link between the different types of crises, which
led to some integration of the different literatures. Indeed, historically, financial crises
have often been marked with large disturbances in currency markets, which have spilled
over to the financial sectors and the real economies of affected countries in various ways.
In the events of the recent years, the deepening of the crisis in Europe is strongly
associated with the attempt to maintain the common currency area, which also has
implications for the financial sectors and real economies of countries in the Euro zone. In
this section, we review the development of the theoretical literature on currency crises
from its very beginning. We then discuss the connection of this literature to the literatures
on banking panics and credit frictions.
In general, currency crises originate from the attempt of governments to maintain
certain financial and monetary arrangements, most notably a fixed-exchange rate regime.
Their goal is to stabilize the economy. At times, these arrangements become unstable,
which leads to a speculative attack on a fixed exchange rate regime and from there to a
financial crisis.

43

The best way to understand the origins of currency crises is to think about the basic
trilemma in international finance. A trilemma, as Mankiw (2010) recently wrote in the
context of the 2010 Euro crisis, is a situation in which someone faces a choice among
three options, each of which comes with some inevitable problems. In international
finance, it stems from the fact that, in most nations, economic policy makers would like
to achieve the following goals. First, make the country’s economy open to international
capital flows, because by doing so they let investors diversify their portfolios overseas
and achieve risk sharing. They also benefit from the expertise brought to the country by
foreign investors. Second, use monetary policy as a tool to help stabilize inflation, output,
and the financial sector in the economy. This is achieved as the central bank can increase
the money supply and reduce interest rates when the economy is depressed, and reduce
money growth and raise interest rates when it is overheated. Moreover, it can serve as a
lender of last resort in case of financial panic. Third, maintain stability in the exchange
rate. This is because a volatile exchange rate, at times driven by speculation, can be a
source of broader financial volatility, and makes it harder for households and businesses
to trade in the world economy and for investors to plan for the future.
The problem, however, is that a country can only achieve two of these three policy
goals. In order to maintain a fixed exchange rate and capital mobility, the central bank
loses its ability to control its policy instruments: the interest rate, or equivalently the
monetary base. Because, under free capital mobility, the interest rate becomes anchored
to the world interest rate, by the interest rate parity, and the monetary base is
automatically adjusted to the pre-determined money demand. This is the case of
individual members of the European Monetary Union. In order to keep control over the

44

interest rate or equivalently the money supply, the central bank has to let the exchange
rate float freely, as in the case of the US. If the central bank wishes to maintain both
exchange rate stability and control over the monetary policy, the only way to do it is by
imposing capital controls, as in the case of China.
Currency crises occur when the country is trying to maintain a fixed exchange rate
regime with capital mobility, but faces conflicting policy needs, such as fiscal imbalances
or fragile financial sector, that need to be resolved by independent monetary policy. This
leads to a shift in the regime from the first solution of the trilemma described above to the
second one. The sudden depreciation in the exchange rate is often referred to as a
currency crisis. It often has implications for the financial system as a whole and for the
real economy, where agents were used to rely on a fixed exchange rate regime, and often
have to adjust to the change abruptly and unexpectedly. We elaborate more on this in
Subsection 4.3.
The theoretical currency-crises literature is broadly classified into three generations
of models, which we now turn to describe in more detail.

4.1

First-Generation Model of Currency Crises
This branch of models, the so-called ‘first generation models of currency attacks’

was motivated by a series of events where fixed exchange rate regimes collapsed
following speculative attacks, for example, the early 1970s breakdown of the Bretton
Woods global system.

45

The first paper here is the one by Krugman (1979).17 He describes a government that
tries to maintain a fixed exchange rate regime, but is subject to a constant loss of
reserves, due to the need to monetize persistent government budget deficits. These two
features of the policy are inconsistent with each other, and lead to an eventual attack on
the reserves of the central bank, that culminate in a collapse of the fixed exchange rate
regime. Flood and Garber (1984) extended and clarified the basic mechanism, suggested
by Krugman (1979), generating the formulation that was widely used since then.
Let us provide a simple description of this model. The model is based on the central
bank’s balance sheet. The asset-side of the central bank’s balance sheet at time t is
composed of domestic assets
,

, where

,

, and the domestic-currency value of foreign assets

denotes the exchange rate, i.e., the value of foreign currency in terms of

domestic currency. The total assets have to equal the total liabilities of the central bank,
which are, by definition, the monetary base, denoted as

.

In the model, due to fiscal imbalances, the domestic assets grow in a fixed and
exogenous rate:
,

,

μ.

,

Because of perfect capital mobility, the domestic interest rate is determined through
the interest rate parity, as follows:
1
where

1

∗

,

denotes the domestic interest rate at time t and

∗

denotes the foreign interest

rate at time t. Finally, the supply of money, i.e., the monetary base, has to be equal to the

17

The model by Krugman (1979) builds on an earlier paper by Salant and Henderson (1977) about a
speculative attack on gold reserves.

46

demand for money, which is denoted as

, a decreasing function of the domestic

interest rate.
̅, with

The inconsistency between a fixed exchange rate regime,

capital mobility and the fiscal imbalances comes due to the fact that the domestic assets
of the central bank keep growing, but the total assets cannot change since the monetary
base is pinned down by the demand for money,

∗

, which is determined by the foreign

interest rate. Hence, the obligation of the central bank to keep financing the fiscal needs
puts downward pressure on the domestic interest rate, which, in turn, puts upward
pressure on the exchange rate. In order to prevent depreciation, the central bank has to
intervene by reducing the inventory of foreign reserves. Overall, ̅
same amount as

,

,

decreases by the

increases, so the monetary base remains the same.

The problem is that this process cannot continue forever, since the reserves of
foreign currency have a lower bound. Eventually, the central bank will have to abandon
the current solution of the trilemma – fixed exchange rate regime and perfect capital
mobility – to another solution – flexible exchange rate with flexible monetary policy (i.e.,
flexible monetary base or equivalently flexible domestic interest rate) and perfect capital
mobility.
The question is what the critical level of domestic assets

,

*
H ,T

is and what

the corresponding period of time T is, at which the fixed-exchange rate regime collapses.
As pointed out by Flood and Garber (1984), this happens when the shadow exchange rate
– defined as the flexible exchange rate under the assumption that the central bank’s
foreign reserves reached their lower bound while the central bank keeps increasing the
domestic assets to accommodate the fiscal needs – is equal to the pegged exchange rate.
47

At this point, there will be a speculative attack on the currency, depleting the central
bank’s foreign reserves and forcing an immediate devaluation of the domestic currency.
This is depicted in Figure 4. The upper panel depicts the shadow exchange rate
schedule and the pegged rate schedule as functions of domestic assets. Their intersection
determines the level of domestic asset where the regimes switch occurs. The switch will
not occur at a lower level of domestic assets because at that point there is no incentive to
launch the speculative attack (it will yield a trading loss to the speculators). The switch
will not occur at a higher level either because there is gain to be made at the intersection
point, leading all speculators to attack at that point. The lower panel describes the path of
foreign assets, which are quickly depleted at the point of the attack.
[ Insert Figure 4 Here ]

4.2

Second-Generation Models of Currency Crises
Following the collapse of the European Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) in the

early 1990s, the so-called first-generation model of currency attacks did not seem suitable
anymore to explain the ongoing crisis phenomenon. The events in Europe at that time
featured governments actively making decisions between fighting the declining economic
activity level and remaining in the exchange rate management system. Hence, there was a
need for a model where the government’s choice is endogenized, rather than the firstgeneration models where the exchange rate regime is essentially on ‘automatic pilot’.
This led to the development of the so-called ‘second generation model of currency
attacks,’ pioneered by Obstfeld (1994, 1996).

48

Hence, in this line of models, the government/central bank is setting the policy
endogenously, trying to maximize a well-specified objective function, without being able
to fully commit to a given policy. An outcome of these models is that there are usually
self-fulfilling multiple equilibria, where the expectation of a collapse of the fixed
exchange rate regime leads the government to abandon the regime. This feature seemed
attractive to many commentators as they thought it captured well the fact that crises
where unexpected in many cases. This is related to the Diamond and Dybvig (1983)
model of bank runs described in Section 2, creating a link between these two literatures.
Obstfeld (1996) discusses various mechanisms that can create the multiplicity of
equilibria in a currency-crisis model. Let us describe one mechanism, which is inspired
by Barro and Gordon (1983). Suppose that the government minimizes a loss function of
the following type:
y

Here,

is the level of output,

y∗
∗

βε

cI

.

is the target level of output, and

is the rate of

depreciation, which in the model is equal to the inflation rate. Hence, the government
wants to minimize some combination of the rate of inflation and the distance from the
target level of output. In addition, the third term is an index function, which says that
there is a fixed cost in case the government deviates from the existing exchange rate. The
interpretation is that the government is in a regime of zero depreciation (a fixed exchange
rate regime), and deviating from it is costly.
Overall, when deciding on the rate of depreciation, the government has to weigh the
costs against the benefit of depreciation. The costs are coming from the second and third
terms above: There is a cost in operating the economy under inflation and there is a cost
49

in deviating from the promise of a fixed exchange rate regime. The benefit in
depreciation is that it enables reduction in the deviations from the target level of output.
More precisely, creating inflation (which is equivalent to depreciation here) above the
expected level serves to boost output.
This effect of inflation on output is coming from the Philips Curve. It is
demonstrated in the following expression, specifying how output is determined:
y
Here,

is the natural output (

y

α ε
∗

ε

u.

, i.e., the government sets an ambitious output target

level to overcome distortions in the economy), u is a random shock, and

is the

expected level of depreciation/inflation that is set endogenously in the model by wage
setters based on rational expectations. The idea is that an unexpected inflationary shock
(ε

ε ) boosts output by reducing real wages and increasing production.
Importantly, the government cannot commit to a fixed exchange rate. Otherwise, it

would achieve minimum loss by committing to

0. However, due to lack of

commitment, a sizable shock u will lead the government to depreciate and achieve the
increase in output bearing the loss of credibility. Going back to the trilemma discussed
above, a fixed exchange rate regime prevents the government from using monetary policy
to boost output, and a large enough shock will cause the government to deviate from the
fixed exchange rate regime.
It can be shown that the above model generates multiplicity of equilibria. If wage
setters coordinate on a high level of expected depreciation/inflation, then the government
will validate this expectation with its policy by depreciating more often. If they
coordinate on a low level of expected depreciation, then the government will have a

50

weaker incentive to deviate from the fixed exchange rate regime. Hence, the expectation
of depreciation becomes self-fulfilling.
Similarly, closer to the spirit of the Krugman (1979) model, one can describe
mechanisms where speculators can force the government to abandon an existing fixedexchange rate regime by attacking its reserves and making the maintenance of the regime
too costly. If many speculators attack, the government will lose significant amount of
reserves and will be more likely to abandon the regime. A self-fulfilling speculative
attack is profitable only if many speculators join it. Consequently, there is one
equilibrium with a speculative attack and a collapse of the regime, and there is another
equilibrium where these things do not happen.18
This issue is also strongly related to sovereign debt crises and in particular those
currently experienced in Europe. Speculators can attack government bonds demanding
higher rates due to expected sovereign-debt default, creating an incentive for the central
bank to abandon a currency regime and reduce the value of the debt or alternatively to
default. This justifies the initial high rates. In the sovereign-debt literature, authors have
studied self-fulfilling debt crises of this kind. For example, Cole and Kehoe (2000)
analyze the debt maturity structure under financial crises brought on by a loss of
confidence in a government, which can arise within a dynamic, stochastic general
equilibrium model.
As we discussed in Section 2, having a model of multiple equilibria creates an
obstacle for policy analysis. Morris and Shin (1998) were the first to tackle the problem
of multiplicity in the second-generation models of speculative attacks. They first express
18

Note that self-fulfilling speculative attacks can arise naturally from a first-generation model as
demonstrated by Obstfeld (1986). Hence, this is not the distinguishing feature of the second-generation
models. Rather, the optimizing government is the distinguishing feature of the second-generation models.

51

this model in an explicit game theoretic market framework, where speculators are players
having to make a decision whether to attack the currency or not. Then, using the globalgames methodology, pioneered by Carlsson and van Damme (1993), they are able to
derive a unique equilibrium, where the fundamentals of the economy uniquely determine
whether a crisis occurs or not. This is important since it enables one to ask questions as to
the effect of policy tools on the probability of a currency attack. The global-games
methodology, relying on heterogeneous information across speculators, also brought to
the forefront the issue of information in currency-attack episodes, leading to analysis of
the effect that transparency, signaling, and learning can have on such episodes (e.g.,
Angeletos, Hellwig, and Pavan (2006) and Goldstein, Ozdenoren, and Yuan (2011)). 19

4.3

Third-Generation Models of Currency Crises
In the late 1990s, a wave of crises hit the emerging economies in Asia, including

Thailand, South Korea, Indonesia, Philippines, and Malaysia. A clear feature of these
crises was the combination of the collapse of fixed exchange rate regimes, capital flows,
financial institutions, and credit.20 As a result, many researchers felt that the first two
generations of models of currency crises, which were described in the previous two
subsections, were not sufficient for analyzing the events in Asia. There was a strong need
to incorporate banking panics and credit frictions into these models. This led to extensive
research on the interplay between currency crises and banking crises, sometimes referred

19

For a broad review of the global–games methodology and its various applications, see Morris and Shin
(2003). There is also a large literature that followed the original developments, analyzing conditions under
which the unique-equilibrium result fails to hold. See, e.g., Angeletos and Werning (2006) and Hellwig,
Mukherji, and Tsyvinski (2006).
20
For a broad description of the events around the Asian Crisis and the importance of capital flows in
conjunction with the collapse of the exchange rate see Radelet and Sachs (1998) and Calvo (1998).

52

to as the twin crises, and between currency crises and credit frictions.21 Such models are
often referred to as the ‘third-generation models of currency crises’. In the context of this
survey, it is important to note that such models bring together elements from the early
currency crises literature described in Subsections 4.1 and 4.2 with elements from the
vast literatures on banking panics and credit frictions described in Sections 2 and 3,
respectively.
One of the first models to capture this joint problem was presented in Krugman
(1999). In his model, firms suffer from a currency mismatch between their assets and
liabilities: their assets are denominated in domestic goods and their liabilities are
denominated in foreign goods. Then, a real exchange rate depreciation increases the value
of liabilities relative to assets, leading to deterioration in firms’ balance sheets. Because
of credit frictions as in Holmstrom and Tirole (1997), described in Section 3, this
deterioration in firms’ balance sheets implies that they can borrow less and invest less.
The novelty of Krugman’s paper is that the decrease in investment validates the
depreciation in a general equilibrium setup. This is because the decreased investment by
foreigners in the domestic market implies that there will be a decrease in the aggregate
demand for the local goods, relative to foreign goods (the Keynes-Ohlin “transfer
problem” in international trade), leading to real depreciation. Hence, the system has
multiple equilibria with high economic activity, appreciated exchange rate, and strong
balance sheets in one equilibrium, and low economic activity, depreciated exchange rate,
and weak balance sheets in the other equilibrium. Other models that extended and
continued this line of research include: Aghion, Bacchetta, and Banerjee (2001),
Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2001), and Schneider and Tornell (2004). The latter
21

For empirical evidence on the twin crises, see Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999).

53

provides a unique contribution by fully endogenizing the ex-ante currency mismatch
between firms’ assets and liabilities.
A different line of research links currency problems with the bank runs described in
Section 2. Chang and Velasco (2001) and Goldstein (2005) model the vicious circle
between bank runs and speculative attacks on the currency. On the one hand, the
expected collapse of the currency worsens banks’ prospects, as they have foreign
liabilities and domestic assets, and thus generates bank runs. On the other hand, the
collapse of the banks leads to capital outflows that deplete the reserves of the
government, encouraging speculative attacks against the currency.
Accounting for the circular relationship between currency crises and banking crises
is important for policy analysis, as it makes some well-received conclusions much less
appealing. For example, traditional banking models may advocate a lender-of-last-resort
policy or other expansionary policies during a banking crisis to mitigate the bank-run
problem. However, accounting for the circularity between bank runs and currency
attacks, it is shown that such policies might backfire as they deplete the reserves available
to the government, making a currency crisis more likely, which in turn might further hurt
the banking sector that is subject to a currency mismatch problem.
As we mentioned in Section 4.2, there is a strong link between currency-crises
models and sovereign-debt models, exemplified by the Cole and Kehoe (2000)
framework. Hence, the models reviewed in this subsection, tying banking and credit
problems with currency crises, can be very helpful in analyzing the connection between
banking crises and sovereign-debt crises. This seems to be a very relevant and timely
avenue for research given the current situation in Europe, where the faith of governments

54

is intertwined with that of banks due to the various connections between banks’ balance
sheets and governments’ balance sheets.
An interesting review of the current problems in Europe is provided by Shambaugh
(2012). He argues that Europe suffers from three types of crises that reinforce and
amplify each other: Banking crisis, sovereign debt crisis, and real crisis due to decline in
growth and competitiveness. Concerning the banking crisis, banks in Europe faced
similar problems to those of banks in the US since the beginning of the financial crisis.
Deterioration in the value of their assets and the mismatch between the maturity of assets
and liabilities made them fragile and led to failures and to government intervention. One
problem in Europe, however, is that despite the monetary union, bank supervision and
intervention is still performed mostly at the national level, which severely limits the
effectiveness of government intervention to alleviate problems in the banking sector.
Concerning the sovereign debt crisis, several countries in Europe – in particular, Greece,
Portugal, Ireland, Italy, and Spain – face high yields on their sovereign debt reflecting the
expectation that they are in high risk of defaulting on their debt.
As shambaugh (2012) emphasizes, the problems in Europe are amplified by the
linkages between the different types of crisis. This is a theme that we emphasized
throughout this article. In Europe, weaknesses in the banking sector increase doubts about
the ability of governments to pay back their debt. This is because governments will
attempt to support banks in order to prevent their collapse, but on the way they might
harm their own ability to pay back the debt, making the sovereign debt crisis more
severe. Similarly, as the sovereign-debt problems become more severe, banks are also
becoming weaker. This is because banks are holding a lot of government bonds and rely

55

on government guarantees. Hence, there is a feedback loop between banking crises and
sovereign debt crises, whereby they reinforce each other and make the overall problem
more severe. This is very similar to the feedback loop between banking crises and
currency crises, analyzed in the twin-crises literature described above. More research is
needed to fully understand the amplification mechanisms operating between banking and
sovereign debt crises, and this is necessary for the analysis of the European crisis. Such
research should link to earlier works on the twin crises, inspired by the Asian crises of the
late 1990s.
The problems in Europe are getting even more severe due to the connections to the
real economy. The fact that growth and competitiveness are in decline makes the
problems for banks and sovereign debt even more severe because firms are less
profitable, governments collect less taxes, and so on. Moreover, the problems in the
financial sector and the austerity measures taken to help the government budget are
making the recovery in the real economy more difficult. This is also where the fact that
the European countries are in a monetary union plays a crucial role. Without a monetary
union, individual countries could use monetary policy to address the problems, but now
they cannot. Given that other mechanisms for absorbing shocks that are present in other
monetary unions are not very strong in Europe – e.g., labor mobility, fiscal transfers, and
a unified financial system – the existence of the monetary union may be making the
problems a lot more severe.
Hence, over time, it seems more likely that some members of the European
Monetary Union will leave the common currency and return to their old national
currency. While this possibility seemed remote a few years ago, it is now mentioned

56

more and more often. As the economic problems are becoming more severe, and the
measures to address them are getting costlier, the monetary union may not be sustained in
its current form. This is where the current banking and sovereign debt crisis may turn into
a currency crisis, which looks very similar to the currency crises discussed in the
beginning of the section. Again, the interconnectedness between different problems and
crises is very clear and needs to be addressed in research on financial crises and in
policies to address them.

4.4

Contagion of Currency Crises
Finally, in Section 2.5, we reviewed theories of contagion focused on the contagion

of crises across different banks. The forceful transmission of crises across countries
generated a large literature of international financial contagion, which is very strongly
related to the literature reviewed in Section 2.6. Kaminsky, Reinhart, and Vegh (2003)
provide a review of the theories behind such contagion.22 They define contagion as an
immediate reaction in one country to a crisis in another country.
As we wrote in Section 2.6, there are several theories that link such contagion to
fundamental explanations. The clearest one would be that there is common information
about the different countries, and so the collapse in one country leads investors to
withdraw out of other countries, see e.g. Calvo and Mendoza (2000). Models of the
connections of portfolios across different countries, e.g., Allen and Gale (2000b), Kodres
and Pritsker (2002), Dasgupta (2004), and Goldstein and Pauzner (2004) also shed light
on such international contagion. An explanation that is more directly related to currency
depreciation is proposed by Gerlach and Smets (1995). If two countries compete in
22

For a broader review, see the collection of articles in Claessens and Forbes (2001).

57

export markets, the devaluation of one’s currency hurts the competitiveness of the other,
leading it to devalue the currency as well.
Empirical evidence has followed the above theories of contagion. The common
information explanation has vast support in the data. Several of the clearest examples of
contagion involve countries that appear very similar. Examples include the contagion that
spread across East Asia in the late 1990s and the one in Latin America in the early 1980s.
A vast empirical literature provides evidence that trade links can account for contagion to
some extent. These include Eichengreen, Rose, and Wyplosz (1996) and Glick and Rose
(1999). Others have shown that financial linkages are also empirically important in
explaining contagion. For example, Kaminsky, Lyons, and Schmukler (2004) have shown
that US-based mutual funds contribute to contagion by selling shares in one country
when prices of shares decrease in another country. Caramazza, Ricci, and Salgado
(2004), Kaminsky and Reinhart (2000) and Van Rijckeghem and Weder (2001) show
similar results for common commercial banks.

5.

Concluding Remarks

The global financial crisis that started in 2007 and has not been resolved yet took
much of the economic profession by surprise. Explaining the forces behind the crisis and
coming up with suggestions for policymakers on how to solve it and fix the system going
forward have become top priorities for many economists, some of whom are new to the
topic of financial crises.
As we argue in this paper, many of the forces in play in the current and recent
turmoil have been featured in the literature on financial crises for more than three decades

58

now. Hence, it is important to go back to the main streams of this literature and
summarize them to better understand the main forces behind crises, how they interact,
how they apply to current and recent events, and what they imply for future policy. In this
paper, we attempted to achieve these goals.
The paper covers three main streams of models of financial crises: 1. Banking crises
and panics; 2. Credit frictions and market freezes; 3. Currency crises. The studies of these
topics, as they are reviewed here, evolved almost in parallel for many years, until more
recently, they have been integrated to account for the connections between the different
types of crises in real-world events. For each one of these topics, we introduced a simple
analytical framework that provides a formal description of the forces at work. We then
reviewed the developments in the literature, describing the interactions between the
forces, the implications for policy, and the connection to empirical evidence from the
recent turmoil and before it.
While the survey presented in this paper is extensive, it should not be viewed as a
comprehensive survey of research on financial crises. The theoretical literature on
financial crises is simply too large for such a comprehensive survey. Hence, we focused
on identifying three main streams and describing the insights they generate. We provide
many references along the way that the interested reader can use to deepen his/her
understanding of financial crises. In addition, we did not cover all types of theories on
crises; while we mention sovereign debt crises and asset-market bubbles and crashes,
there is certainly room to elaborate more on them.
As we mention above, a main benefit of this survey is that it puts together some of
the basic insights on financial crises from a literature of more than three-decades old, so

59

that people interested in studying the topic in light of recent events will have easier
access to it and will know how current events are already reflected in existing literature.
However, while we believe that existing literature does cover a lot of ground, there are
still many open questions that leave room for a lot of future research. Along the way in
this survey, we pointed out some of these open questions. In particular, regarding policy
issues, we pointed out several times how the tools reviewed here can be expanded and
used to analyze optimal policies to avoid and solve crises. While there is research in this
direction in the literature, it is still mostly in its early stages.
A major challenge in policy analysis going forward is to incorporate the frictions
highlighted in this survey – coordination failures, incentive problems, and asymmetric
information – into a macroeconomic model that can be calibrated and provide
quantitative output as to the optimal mix and magnitudes of policies. Some interesting
work is being done in this direction in the context of credit frictions, which we review
here, but much less in different contexts. Developing such models is an important
challenge for future research.
In addition, as the reader can observe, while there are many models discussing
different forces, integrative models that combine the various forces together are still in
their early stages (although some exceptions have been reviewed here). This remains a
major challenge to researchers going forward, since only with an integrative model, one
can understand the relative contribution of different forces and the interaction between
them, and this is crucial for empirical work and for the design of policy to move forward.
After all, as we pointed out many times in this article, the enormous force of financial

60

crises seems to be coming from the interaction between different types of frictions that
feed back into each other and reinforce each other.

61

REFERENCES
Acharya, Viral, and Tanju Yorulmazer, 2007, Too many to fail—An analysis of
time-inconsistency in bank closure policies, Journal of Financial Intermediation 16, 131.
Admati, Anat, and Martin Hellwig, 2013, The Bankers' New Clothes: What's
Wrong with Banking and What to Do about It, Princeton University Press.
Adrian, Tobias, Paolo Colla, and Hyun Song Shin, 2012, Which financial
frictions? Parsing the evidence from the financial crisis of 2007-09, NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 2012, forthcoming.
Adrian, Tobias, Erkko Etula, and Tyler Muir, 2013, Financial intermediaries and
the cross-section of asset returns, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Aghion, Philippe, Philippe Bacchetta, and Abhijit Banerjee, 2001, Currency crises
and monetary policy in an economy with credit constraints, European Economic Review
45, 1121-1150.
Akerlof, George A, 1970, The market for lemons: Quality uncertainty and the
market mechanism, Quarterly Journal of Economics 84, 488-500.
Allen, Franklin, Elena Carletti, Itay Goldstein, and Agnese Leonello, 2013,
Government guarantees and financial stability, Working Paper.
Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, 1998, Optimal financial crises, Journal of
Finance 53, 1245-1284.
Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, 2000a, Bubbles and crises, Economic Journal
110, 236-255.
Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, 2000b, Financial contagion, Journal of
Political Economy 108, 1-33.

62

Angeletos, George-Marios, Christian Hellwig, and Alessandro Pavan, 2006,
Signaling in a global game: coordination and policy traps, Journal of Political Economy
114, 452-484.
Angeletos, George-Marios, and Ivan Werning, 2006, Crises and prices:
information aggregation, multiplicity, and volatility, American Economic Review 96,
1720-1736.
Barro, Robert., and D. Gordon, 1983, Rules, discretion and reputation in a model
of monetary policy, Journal of Monetary Economics 12, 101-121.
Bebchuk, Lucian, and Itay Goldstein, 2011, Self-fulfilling credit market freezes,
Review of Financial Studies 24, 3519-3555.
Benmelech, Efraim, and Nittai Bergman, 2012, Credit Traps, American Economic
Review 104, 3004-3032.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler, 1989, Agency costs, net worth, and business
fluctuations, American Economic Review 79, 14–31.
Brunnermeier, Markus, 2009, Deciphering the liquidity and credit crunch 20072008, Journal of Economic Perspectives 23, 77-100.
Brunnermeier, Markus, Thomas M. Eisenbach, and Yuliy Sannikov, 2012,
Macroeconomics with financial frictions: a survey, NBER Working Paper 18102.
Brunnermeier, Markus, and Lasse Pedersen, 2009, Market liquidity and funding
liquidity, Review of Financial Studies 22, 2201-2238.
Brunnermeier, Markus, and Yuliy Sannikov, 2010, A macroeconomic model with
a financial sector, Working Paper.
Bryant, John, 1980, A model of reserves, bank runs, and deposit insurance,
Journal of Banking and Finance 4, 335-344.

63

Caballero, Ricardo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2001, International and domestic
collateral constraints in a model of emerging market crises, Journal of Monetary
Economics 48, 513–548.
Calomiris, Charles, 1990, Is deposit insurance necessary? A historical
perspective, Journal of Economic History 50, 283-295.
Calomiris, Charles, and Gary Gorton, 1991, The origins of banking panics:
models, facts, and bank regulation, in: Glenn Hubbard (ed.) Financial Markets and
Financial Crises, University of Chicago Press.
Calomiris, Charles, and Charles Kahn, 1991, The role of demandable debt in
structuring optimal banking arrangements, American Economic Review 81, 497-513.
Calomiris, Charles, and Joseph R. Mason, 2003, Fundamentals, panics, and bank
distress during the depression, American Economic Review 93, 1615—1647.
Calvo, Guillermo, 1998, Capital flows and capital-market crises: the simple
economics of sudden stops, Journal of Applied Economics 1, 35-54.
Calvo, Guillermo, and Enrique Mendoza, 2000, Rational contagion and the
globalization of securities markets, Journal of International Economics 51, 79-113.
Caramazza, Francesco, Luca Ricci, and Ranil Salgado, 2004, International
financial contagion in currency crises, Journal of International Money and Finance 23,
51-70.
Carlsson, Hans, and Eric van Damme, 1993, Global games and equilibrium
selection, Econometrica 61, 989-1018.
Chaney, Thomas, David Sraer, and David Thesmar, 2012, The collateral channel:
how real estate shocks affect corporate investment, American Economic Review 102,
2381-24-9.

64

Chang, Roberto, and Andres Velasco, 2001, A model of financial crises in
emerging markets, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 489-517.
Chari, V. V., and Ravi Jagannathan, 1988, Banking panics, information, and
rational expectations equilibrium, Journal of Finance 43, 749-760.
Chen, Yehning, 1999, Banking panics: The role of the first-come, first-served rule
and information externalities, Journal of Political Economy 107, 946-968.
Chen, Qi, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang, 2010, Payoff complementarities and
financial fragility: evidence from mutual fund outflows, Journal of Financial Economics
97, 239-262.
Claessens, Stijn, and Kristin Forbes, eds., 2001, International Financial
Contagion (Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell, MA).
Cole, Harold L., and Timothy Kehoe, 2000, Self-fulfilling debt crises, Review of
Economic Studies 67, 91-116.
Cooper, Russell, and Thomas W. Ross, 1998, Bank runs: Liquidity costs and
investment distortions, Journal of Monetary Economics 41, 27-38.
Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, and Bengt Holmstrom, 2012, Ignorance and the
optimality of debt, Working Paper.
Dasgupta, Amil, 2004, Financial contagion through capital connections: a model
of the origin and spread of bank panics, Journal of the European Economic Association
2, 1049-1084.
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, and Enrica Detragiache, 1998, The determinants of banking
crises: Evidence from developed and developing countries, IMF Staff Papers 45, 81-109.
Diamond, Douglas W., 1997, Liquidity, banks, and markets, Journal of Political
Economy 105, 928-956.

65

Diamond, Douglas W., and Philip H. Dybvig, 1983, Bank runs, deposit insurance,
and liquidity, Journal of Political Economy 91, 401-419.
Diamond, Douglas W., and Raghuram Rajan, 2001, Liquidity risk, liquidity
creation and financial fragility: a theory of banking, Journal of Political Economy 109,
2431-2465.
Dow, James, 2004, Is liquidity self-fulfilling?, Journal of Business 77, 895-908.
Eggertsson, Gauty., and P Krugman, 2012, Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity
Trap: A Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach, Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 1469-1513.
Eichengreen, Barry, Andrew Rose, and Charles Wyplosz, 1996, Contagious
speculative attacks: first tests, Scandinavian Journal of Economics 98, 463-484.
Eisfeldt, Andrea L., and Adriano Rampini, 2006, Capital reallocation and
liquidity, Journal of Monetary Economics 53, 369-399.
Ennis, Huberto, and Todd Keister, 2009, Run equilibria in the Green-Lin model of
financial intermediation, Journal of Economic Theory 144, 1996-2020.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Jean Tirole, 2012, Collective moral hazard, maturity
mismatch and systemic bailouts, American Economic Review 102, 60-93.
Flood, Robert, and Peter Garber, 1984, Collapsing exchange-rate regimes, some
linear examples, Journal of International Economics 17, 1-13.
Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz, 1963, A Monetary History of the United
States: 1867-1960, Princeton University Press.
Gan, Jie, 2007a, Collateral, debt capacity, and corporate investment: evidence
from a natural experiment, Journal of Financial Economics 85, 709-734.
Gan, Jie, 2007b, The real effects of asset market bubbles: loan- and firm-level
evidence of a lending channel, Review of Financial Studies 21, 2677-2703.

66

Gerlach, Stefan, and Frank Smets, 1995, Contagious speculative attacks,
European Journal of Political Economy 11, 45-63.
Gertler, Mark, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, 2011, Financial Intermediation and Credit
Policy, Handbook of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.
Gertler, Mark, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, 2013, Banking, liquidity and bank runs in
an infinite horizon economy, Working Paper.
Glick, Reuven, and Andrew Rose, 1999, Contagion and trade: why are currency
crises regional?, Journal of International Money and Finance 18, 603-617.
Goldstein, Itay, 2005, Strategic complementarities and the twin crises, Economic
Journal 115, 368-390.
Goldstein, Itay, 2012, Empirical literature on financial crises: fundamentals vs.
panic, in G. Caprio (ed.) The Evidence and Impact of Financial Globalization, Elsevier.
Goldstein, Itay, and Ady Pauzner, 2004, Contagion of self-fulfilling financial
crises due to diversification of investment portfolios, Journal of Economic Theory 119,
151-183.
Goldstein, Itay, and Ady Pauzner, 2005, Demand deposit contracts and the
probability of bank runs, Journal of Finance 60, 1293-1328.
Goldstein, Itay, Emre Ozdenoren, and Kathy Yuan, 2011, Learning and
complementarities in speculative attacks, Review of Economic Studies 78, 263-292.
Gorton, Gary, 1988, Banking panics and business cycles, Oxford Economic
Papers 40, 751-781.
Gorton, Gary, 2010, Slapped by the Invisible Hand The Panic of 2007, Oxford
University Press.

67

Gorton, Gary, 2013, Some reflections on the recent financial crisis, in: Sugata
Marjit and Rajat Acharya (eds.) Trade, Globalization and Development: Essays in Honor
of Kalyan Sanyal, Springer Verlag.
Gorton, Gary, and Andrew Metrick, 2012, Securitized banking and the run on
repo, Journal of Financial Economics 104, 425-451.
Gorton, Gary, and George Pennacchi, 1990, Financial intermediaries and liquidity
creation, Journal of Finance 45, 49-71.
Gorton, Gary, and Guillermo Ordonez, 2013, Collateral crises, American
Economic Review, forthcoming.
Green, Edward, and Ping Lin, 2003, Implementing efficient allocations in a model
of financial intermediation, Journal of Economic Theory 109, 1-23.
He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2012, A model of capital and crises,
Review of Economic Studies 79, 735-777.
He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2013, Intermediary asset pricing,
American Economic Review 103, 732-770.
Hellwig, Christian, Arijit Mukherji, and Aleh Tsyvinski, 2006, Self-fulfilling
currency crises: the role of interest rates, American Economic Review 96, 1769-1787.
Hertzberg, Andrew, Jose M. Liberti, and Daniel Paravisini, 2012, Public
information and coordination: evidence from a credit registry expansion, Journal of
Finance 66: 379-412.
Holmstrom, Bengt, and Jean Tirole, 1997, Financial intermediation, loanable
funds, and the real sector, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 663-691.
Holmstrom, Bengt, and Jean Tirole, 1998, Private and public supply of liquidity,
Journal of Political Economy 106, 1-40.

68

Iacoviello, Matteo, 2005, House price, borrowing constraints, and monetary
policy in the business cycle, American Economic Review 95, 739-764.
Ivashina, Victoria, and David Scharfstein, 2010, Bank lending during the financial
crisis of 2008, Journal of Financial Economics 97, 319-338.
Jacklin, Charles, 1987, Demand deposits, trading restrictions, and risk-sharing, in:
Ed Prescott and Neil Wallace (eds.) Contractual Arrangements for Intertemporal Trade,
University of Minneapolis Press.
Jacklin, Charles J., and Sudipto Bhattacharya, 1988, Distinguishing panics and
information-based bank runs: Welfare and policy implications, Journal of Political
Economy 96, 568-592.
Kaminsky, Garciela L., Richard Lyons, and Sergio L. Schmukler, 2004,
Managers, investors, and crises: mutual fund strategies in emerging markets, Journal of
International Economics 64, 113-134.
Kaminsky, Garciela, and Carmen Reinhart, 1999, The twin crises: the causes of
banking and balance-of-payments problems, American Economic Review 89, 473-500.
Kaminsky, Garciela, and Carmen Reinhart, 2000, On crises, contagion, and
confusion, Journal of International Economics 51, 145-168.
Kaminsky, Garciela L., Carmen M. Reinhart, and Carlos A. Vegh, 2003, The
unholy trinity of financial contagion, Journal of Economic Perspectives 17, 51-74.
Keister, Todd., 2012, Bailouts and financial fragility, Working Paper.
Kindleberger, Charles P., 1978, Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of
Financial Crises, Basic Books.
King, Mervyn A., and Sushil Wadhwani, 1990, Transmission of volatility
between stock markets, Review of Financial Studies 3, 5–33.

69

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, 1997, Credit cycles, Journal of Political
Economy 105, 211-248.
Kocherlakota, Narayana R., 2000, Creating business cycles through credit
constraints, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 24, 2-10.
Kodres, Laura, and Matthew Pritsker, 2002, A rational expectations model of
financial contagion, Journal of Finance 57, 769-799.
Krugman, Paul R., 1979, A model of balance-of-payments crises, Journal of
Money, Credit, and Banking 11, 311-325.
Krugman, Paul R., 1999, Balance sheets, the transfer problem, and financial
crises, International Tax and Public Finance 6, 459-472.
Kyle, Albert S., and Wei Xiong, 2001, Contagion as a wealth effect, Journal of
Finance 56, 1401-1440.
Lagunoff, Roger, and Stacey Schreft, 2001, A model of financial fragility,
Journal of Economic Theory 99, 220–264.
Levine, Ross, 1997, Financial development and economic growth: views and
agenda, Journal of Economic Literature 35, 688-726.
Lorenzoni, Guido, 2008, Inefficient credit booms, Review of Economic Studies
75, 809-833.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, 2010, The trilemma of international finance, The New York
Times, July 10. http://www.nytimes.com/2010/07/11/business/economy/11view.html.
Martin, Antoine, David Skeie, and Ernst-Ludwig von Thadden, 2012, Repo runs,
Working Paper.
Martinez-Peria, Maria S., and Sergio L. Schmukler, 2001, Do depositors punish
banks for bad behavior? Market discipline, deposit Insurance, and banking crises, Journal
of Finance 56, 1029-1051.
70

Mendoza, Enrique G., 2010, Sudden stops, financial crises and leverage,
American Economic Review 100, 1941-1966.
Morris, Stephen, and Hyun S. Shin, 1998, Unique equilibrium in a model of selffulfilling currency attacks, American Economic Review 88, 587-597.
Morris, Stephen, and Hyun S. Shin, 2003, Global games: theory and applications,
in: M. Dewatripont, L.P. Hansen, S.J. Turnovsky (Eds.), Advances in Economics and
Econometrics, Cambridge University Press.
Morris, Stephen, and Hyun S. Shin, 2012, Contagious adverse selection,
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4, 1-21.
Obstfeld, Maurice, 1986, Rational and self-fulfilling balance of payments crises,
American Economic Review 76, 72-81.
Obstfeld, Maurice, 1994, The logic of currency crises, Cahiers Economiques et
Monetaires 43, 189-213.
Obstfeld, Maurice, 1996, Models of Currency Crises with Self-Fulfilling Features,
European Economic Review 40, 1037-1047.
Oh, Frederick D., 2012, Contagion of a liquidity crisis between two firms,
Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Pagano, Marco, 1989, Trading volume and asset liquidity, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 104, 255-274.
Peck, James, and Karl Shell, 2003, Equilibrium bank runs, Journal of Political
Economy 111, 103-123.
Philippon, Thomas, and Vasiliki Skreta, 2012, Optimal interventions in markets
with adverse selection, American Economic Review 102, 1-30.
Radelet, Steven, and Jeffrey Sachs, 1998, The East Asian financial crisis:
diagnosis, remedies, prospects, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 1-74.

71

Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales, 1998, Financial dependence and growth,
American Economic Review 88, 559-586.
Rampini, Adriano, and S. Viswanathan, 2011, Financial intermediary capital,
Working Paper.
Salant, Stephen, and Dale Henderson, 1978, Market anticipation of government
policies and the price of gold, Journal of Political Economy 86, 627-648.
Schmidt, Lawrence, Allan Timmermann, and Russ Wermers, 2012, Runs on
money market mutual funds, Working Paper.
Schneider, Martin, and Aaron Tornell, 2004, Balance sheet effects, bailout
guarantees and financial crises, Review of Economic Studies 71, 883-913.
Schroth, Enrique, Gustavo Suarez, and Lucian Taylor, 2012, Dynamic debt runs
and financial fragility: evidence from the 2007 ABCP crisis, Working Paper.
Schumacher, Liliana, 2000, Bank runs and currency run in a system without a
safety net: Argentina and the ’tequila’ shock, Journal of Monetary Economics 46, 257—
277.
Shambaugh, Jay C., 2012, The Euro’s three crises, Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, Spring 2012, 157-231.
Shin, Hyun S., 2009, Reflections on Northern Rock: the bank run that heralded
the global financial crisis, Journal of Economic Perspectives 23, 101-119.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., and Andrew Weiss, 1981, Credit rationing in markets with
imperfect information, American Economic Review 71, 393-410.
Tirole, Jean, 2012, Overcoming Adverse Selection: How Public Intervention Can
Restore Market Functioning, American Economic Review 102, 29-59.
Van Rijckeghem, Caroline, and Beatrice Weder, 2001, Sources of contagion: is it
finance or trade, Journal of International Economics 54, 293-308.

72

TABLE 1
Ex-post payments to agents in a model of bank runs: The table is based on
Goldstein and Pauzner (2005) and describes the payments agents expect to get when
demanding their money at Period 1 vs. Period 2. Here, n is the proportion of agents who
demand their money at Period 1;

is the promised return to agents at Period 1; R is the

return that the bank’s asset yields at Period 2 in case it is successful, and
probability it will be successful.
1⁄

Period

1⁄
1

1

2

0

1
1
0

1

73

1

0

1

is the

TABLE 2
Project outcomes in a model of moral hazard in the credit market: The table is
based on Holmstrom and Tirole (1997). An entrepreneur can choose among three
projects. The good project yields no private benefits and succeeds (i.e., yields R) with
probability p (otherwise, it fails and yields 0). There are two bad projects that succeed
with probability p . They differ in the amount of private benefits they generate to the
entrepreneur which can be either b or B.

74

Bank Run

No Bank Run

Multiple
Equilibria

̅
FIGURE 1: BANK RUNS WITH COMMON KNOWLEDGE: TRIPARTITE CLASSIFICATION OF THE
FUNDAMENTALS (FROM GOLDSTEIN (2012), BASED ON MORRIS AND SHIN (1998) AND

GOLDSTEIN AND PAUZNER (2005)).

75

Fundamentals
-Based Bank
Run

No Bank Run

Panic-Based
Bank Run

∗

̅

FIGURE 2: EQUILIBRIUM OUTCOMES IN A BANK-RUN MODEL WITH NON-COMMON
KNOWLEDGE (FROM GOLDSTEIN (2012), BASED ON MORRIS AND SHIN (1998) AND

GOLDSTEIN AND PAUZNER (2005)).

76

FIGURE 3: DIRECT AND INDIRECT FINANCING OF INVESTMENT (FROM HOLMSTROM AND
TIROLE (1997)).

77

FIGURE 4: CURRENCY-REGIME SWITCH (BASED ON KRUGMAN (1979) AND FLOOD AND
GARBER (1984)).

78

