                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         COORDINATION IN THE EUROPEAN UNION

                                            Martin Feldstein

                                         Working Paper 18672
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18672


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2013




The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Martin Feldstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Coordination in the European Union
Martin Feldstein
NBER Working Paper No. 18672
January 2013
JEL No. F0,F02,F15,F3,F4,F5

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper examines the sources of current conflict within the EU and the EMU. The topics discussed
include the recent ECB policy of bond buying (the OMT policy), the attempts to advance the "European
Project" of stronger political union (the fiscal compact, the banking union, and the proposals for budget
supervision). Contrary to the claims of the European leadership, the progress that has been made has
been by individual countries and not by coordinated action. The special problems of France and Britain
are also discussed.


Martin Feldstein
Professor of Economics,
Harvard University

and

NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138-5398
msfeldst@nber.org
                      Coordination in the European Union

                                Martin Feldstein



       The European Union recently received the Nobel Peace Prize for achieving

“peace and cooperation” in Europe. In accepting the prize, Jose Manuel Barroso, the

President of the European Commission, said that the European Union is “more than

an association of states. It is a new legal order, which is not based on the balance of

power between nations but on the free consent of states that share sovereignty.”


       This should be a framework within which there would be cooperation and

the coordination of economic policies. But anyone following the events in Europe

during the past two years recognizes that the Nobel Peace Prize came at a time

when acrimony among the European Union’s members has not been greater since

the Union began.


       The conflict is greatest at the core of the EU, in the Economic and Monetary

Union whose 17 members use the euro as their single currency. That conflict now

focuses on the willingness of Germany to provide aid to Greece and potentially to

Spain and Italy, and on the conditions that Germany would demand in exchange for

that aid.

       Greece is small and the provision of aid through the forgiveness of debt and

the support of Greek banks is an irritant to Germany rather than a substantial


 Professor of Economics, Harvard University. These remarks were prepared for
presentation on January 5, 2013 at the meeting of the American Economic
Association. For earlier and more general discussion of the European Union and the
Economic and Monetary Union see Feldstein (1992, 1997a, b and 2011a).


                                           1
burden. But Spain and Italy are large, with a combined GDP that exceeds that of

Germany.

       Anyone who talks with personal friends or government officials in Greece,

Italy or Spain hears their bitter complaints that Germany is seeking to impose its

will and its values on its Latin neighbors. Germany is criticized as a hegemonic

power that is trying to achieve through political and financial means what it failed to

achieve in World War II. And conversations in Germany turn quickly to the failure

of the Latin countries to fix their economies and reform their lifestyles.



The ECB and the OMT Policy

       Despite this bickering, there have been policy changes. The European Central

Bank recently voted to buy short-term government bonds of both Spain and Italy if

they apply for aid and agree to conditions worked out with the European

Commission and the IMF. This policy was enigmatically dubbed the Outright

Monetary Transactions programme, or OMT, perhaps to counter the more obvious

interpretation that the combination of budget conditionality and government bond

buying is really a fiscal policy program. OMT has already reduced the long-term

interest rates in both Spain and Italy even before any of the contemplated actions

have occurred.

       Nothing more may happen under OMT unless there is a renewed financial

crisis. The governments in Spain and Italy are reluctant to accept imposed

conditionality in exchange for financial help. And the German public is unhappy




                                           2
about transferring funds to these neighbors since, in the case of a default, some 40

percent of the losses incurred by the ECB would be born by Germany.

       So although a lending mechanism is in place, neither the potential borrowers

nor the German public want to see loans beginning to flow. So much for the most

recent attempt at coordination of fiscal policy and Central Bank support.1



Coping with the Eurozone Crisis

       The Eurozone crisis began in the spring of 2010 when the Greek government

revealed that its national debt and deficits were much larger than they had

previously admitted. That raised the possibility that Greece might default on its debt

or that it might even leave the EMU.

       The thought that an EMU country could default on its debt or might leave the

EMU frightened international lenders who had previously believed that neither

default nor exit was a possibility. They responded by refusing to buy Greek debt or

indicating that they would do so only at extremely high interest rates. The result

was a sharp rise in the interest rates on Greek government and private debt.

       Investors then focused on the situation in Italy and Spain. The Italian

government debt was more than 100 percent of Italy’s GDP. Spanish sovereign debt

was relatively less than that of Italy but was expected to rise as the Spanish

government came to the rescue of its banks that had lent unwisely during the recent

housing boom. Interest rates in Italy and Spain rose sharply to levels that caused

large fiscal deficits and rising ratios of debt to GDP.

1For further comments on this action by the European Central Bank see Feldstein
(2012a,b).


                                             3
         Germany’s Chancellor Angela Merkel and the EU officials in Brussels saw this

crisis as an opportunity to advance the so-called “European project,” i.e. an

opportunity to move toward a tighter political union. They claimed, incorrectly, that

the problems of these high debt countries could only be solved at the European level

and not by each country acting alone.2

         The European leaders saw the move toward political union in three steps: a

fiscal compact to limit deficits and debt; a banking union to coordinate banking

supervision and create a European program of deposit insurance; and finally a

budget plan that would provide for greater transfers among countries and a greater

control by the European Commission (under Germany’s watchful eye) of the details

of each country’s budget.

         Some called this a greater coordination of economic policies. Others

criticized it as an attempt by Germany to impose its standards on the other

countries. In practice, very little was achieved.

         A Fiscal Compact was drafted and agreed to by the heads of the EU

governments. It provides for annual limits on budget deficits and mandatory annual

reductions in the ratio of national debt to GDP. There are potential penalties for

countries that do not meet these standards. Angela Merkel and the Brussels officials

declared that an important milestone toward political union had thus been

achieved.




2   For my contrary view at the time, see Feldstein (2011b).


                                            4
       In practice, however, fiscal deficits in the member countries continue to

exceed the specified limits and national debt ratios continue to rise. No penalties

have been imposed. The exercise is reminiscent of the old Stability and Growth pact

that was violated by Germany and France almost immediately after it had been

agreed. That pact was then rewritten to make it totally ineffective. 3

       Although the Banking Union that was recently created provided political

leaders with a new opportunity to say that Europe is moving closer to political

union, its content is very limited. The European Central Bank will establish

standards for Eurozone banks and can in principle supervise very large ones. In

practice, however, even those large ones will be supervised as they are now by

national central banks like the Bank of Italy and the German Bundesbank. Germany

and others rejected the French proposal for a Eurozone system of deposit insurance

because it would have caused the countries with strong banks to insure deposits in

the countries with weak banks.

       More recently, the officials in Brussels prepared an elaborate plan for

controlling the content of the budgets of the member countries. There were

however strong objections among EMU member countries to this loss of individual

country sovereignty over national budgets. Discussion of the Brussels’ plan was

therefore postponed until future meetings.




3For comments on the fiscal compact, see Feldstein (2012c). I discussed the
experience with the Stability and Growth Pact in Feldstein (2005).



                                           5
       In short, the political leaders in Europe have talked about moving to political

union and coordinating policies more closely but have done very little.



Progress Country by Country

       The progress that has been made in dealing with the Eurozone’s fiscal

problems has been achieved country by country and not as a result of Eurozone

coordination. The new Italian government under Mario Monti reduced current and

future fiscal deficits by changing the retirement rules for the Social Security pension

system and raising taxes on residential real estate. The IMF predicts that these

actions mean that Italy will have a cyclically adjusted budget surplus in 2013.

Unfortunately, though, Italy is in recession and the actual budget will be in deficit.

       Although Spain has made important improvements in the condition of its

banks, the Spanish economy remains in very bad shape. The fiscal deficit is more

than 7 percent of GDP and the unemployment rate exceeds 25 percent. Spain has a

larger current account deficit than Italy. A critical problem is the constitutionally

established relative autonomy of Spain’s individual regions.

       Greece, Ireland, and Portugal were forced to accept IMF programs. In the

context of the IMF programs, those countries have taken actions to shrink their

fiscal deficits. Once again, those actions were done unilaterally and not as the result

of coordination within the Eurozone.




                                           6
The Problem of France

       The French situation is unusual. France is on the edge of recession if not

already in recession. Its fiscal deficit and its current account deficit are larger as

shares of GDP than in Italy, its double-digit unemployment rate is similar to Italy’s,

and its major banks are believed to be undercapitalized and weighed down with bad

assets. But despite all of this, the interest rate on French 10-year government debt

is only about 60 basis points above Germany’s while the interest rates on Italian and

Spanish bonds exceed that on German bonds by 300 basis points for Italy and 400

basis points for Spain. The willingness of the international financial market to

provide funds to France at relatively low interest rates may reflect France’s

relatively low debt to GDP ratio of about 80 percent or it may be a temporary

situation that the markets will soon correct.

       France has been more enthusiastic about the European project than any

other country. The idea was initiated just after World War II by two French officials,

Jean Monnet and Robert Schuman, who advocated the creation of a United States of

Europe. French officials saw this as a way to make Europe a political power

comparable to the United States and thereby to give France, with its sophisticated

foreign service, an important role in European and world affairs.

       French Finance Minister Jacques Delors successfully led the campaign for a

single currency with a famous report based on the specious argument that the single

European market for goods and services required a single currency (“One Market,

One Money”).




                                            7
         One of the real reasons for wanting the common currency was the idea that it

would cause individuals to identify themselves more strongly as Europeans,

providing support for the project of political integration.

         Substituting the euro for national currencies would also require Germany to

give up the Deutche Mark and to allow a European Central Bank to substitute for the

dominant role of the Bundesbank. President Mitterand forced Germany to accept

the euro by making that a condition for French support of German reunification.

         The French pursuit of the European project has clearly failed to achieve what

French political leaders wanted from the beginning. Instead of the amity and sense

of purpose of which Monnet and Schuman dreamed, there is conflict and disarray.

Europe’s international role is shrinking, with the old G5 group having evolved into

the G20. And with Germany’s Chancellor Angela Merkel setting conditions for the

Eurozone, France’s ambition to dominate European policy has been thwarted.4



Britain’s Independent Role

         Britain is a special case of disharmony and of a desire to avoid the rules of

the European Union and the Eurozone. Britain is a member of the European Union

but not of the single currency. But even without the problems of the euro, there is

widespread discontent in Britain with its membership in the European Union.

         Part of Britain’s unhappiness with its EU membership is a concern that

France and others will try to use EU rules to undermine Britain’s role as the leading

financial center in Europe. But there is also a general feeling in Britain that the


4   For a further discussion of this, see Feldstein (1997 and 2012d)


                                             8
British people are fundamentally different from continental Europeans in history,

culture, religion, and other ways.

       Prime Minister David Cameron has indicated that the Conservative party is

likely to promise to hold a referendum on the nature of Britain’s EU membership

after the next election. He argues that, as other countries in the EU come closer

together because of the single currency, Britain needs a more distant relation.

       It is not clear that there can be a meaningful referendum on the ambiguous

issue of changing Britain’s role in Europe. Polls show that a majority of the British

electorate would now choose to leave the European Union. The public support for

leaving the EU is so strong that the Labor party is also expected to promise such a

referendum if the election looks close. And if Britain does leave the EU, other

countries including Finland and the Netherlands may follow.



Is the European Union Different?

       As a general rule, attempts at policy coordination among countries have not

succeeded. The exception is coordination of trade policies where there are clear

gains and where the required action can be stated as a “Thou shall not.”

       But macroeconomic coordination through the G5 or G20 only appears to

work when it is clearly in the self-interest of each country taken individually to do

what is also good for the group as a whole. Although the G20 leaders proclaimed

that the common response to the global downturn after 2007 was an example of

successful coordination, there is no evidence that countries took monetary or fiscal

actions that they would otherwise not have done in their own separate interest.



                                           9
       The Eurozone countries have clearly gone further than policy coordination in

giving up their individual currencies and their national central banks, accepting the

ECB as the maker of a common monetary policy and accepting the common

exchange rate. However, this is not a coordination of policy but a transfer of policy

authority to a single supranational institution.



A Euro Devaluation?

       A major challenge that could be dealt with by coordinated action in the

Eurozone is the large and persistent current account deficits of most Eurozone

members. The obvious solution for any country in that situation, if it is not bound

by a single currency, would be to devalue its currency, thus encouraging exports and

the substitution of domestic goods and services for imported products.

       Although the countries of the Eurozone cannot devalue individually, a

coordinated strategy to reduce the value of the euro through statements and actions

of the ECB would achieve that goal. A lower Euro would make each of the Eurozone

countries more competitive relative to the countries outside the Eurozone.

       While reducing fiscal deficits and improving labor and product markets must

be done by each individual country, a currency realignment is a challenge that calls

for coordinated action. It is interesting to ask why that has not occurred.

Cambridge, MA

December 2012




                                          10
                                    References

Feldstein, Martin “The Case Against the Euro,” The Economist, 1992

__________ “EMU and International Conflict, Foreign Affairs, 1997a

__________ “The Political Economy of the European Economic and Monetary Union,”

Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1997b

__________ “The Euro and the Stability Pact,” The Journal of Policy Modeling, 2005

__________ “The Failure of the Euro,” Foreign Affairs, 2011a

__________ “Italy Can Save Itself and the Euro,” Financial Times, November 30, 2011b

__________ “A Weaker Europe Will Help Solve Europe’s Deficit Woes,” Financial Times,

December 19, 2011c

__________ “Fed Joins ECB in High Risk Move,” Financial Times, September 27, 2012a

___________ “An Optimistic Case for the Euro,” Project Syndicate, October 30, 2012b

__________ “Europe’s Empty Fiscal Compact,”Project Syndicate, February 27, 2012c

__________ “France’s Broken Dream,” Project Syndicate, May 21, 2012d

__________ “ A Weaker Euro Could Rescue Europe,” Wall Street Journal, January 27,

2012e




                                          11
