                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   MACROPRUDENTIAL REGULATION VERSUS MOPPING UP AFTER THE CRASH

                                           Olivier Jeanne
                                           Anton Korinek

                                        Working Paper 18675
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18675


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2013




The authors would like to thank the Fondation Banque de France for financial support. We would
like to thank Philippe Bacchetta, Arnoud Boot, Allan Drazen, Emmanuel Farhi, Thomas Hintermaier,
Alberto Martin, Guillermo Ordoñez, Enrico Perotti, Alessandro Rebucci, Alp Simsek, Jeremy Stein,
Javier Suarez, Lars Svensson and Iván Werning as well as participants of the NBER Summer Institute,
the Banco de Portugal Conference on Financial Intermediation, the 2nd Conference of the ECB MaRs
Network, the 2nd INET Conference on Macroeconomic Externalities, the International Conference
on Macroeconomics and Monetary Policy at NES/HSE and of seminars˛at the Banque de France, Bocconi,
CEU and Konstanz for helpful comments and discussions. We acknowledge excellent research assistance
provided by Jonathan Kreamer, Chang Ma, and Elif Ture. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Olivier Jeanne and Anton Korinek. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Macroprudential Regulation Versus Mopping Up After the Crash
Olivier Jeanne and Anton Korinek
NBER Working Paper No. 18675
January 2013, Revised February 2016
JEL No. E44,G18,H23

                                            ABSTRACT

We study the interplay of optimal ex-ante (macroprudential) and ex-post (monetary or fiscal stimulus)
measures to respond to systemic financial crises in a tractable model of fire sales. We find that it is
generally optimal to use both, rejecting the Greenspan doctrine to only intervene ex post. Optimal
macroprudential policy resolves the time consistency problems associated with stimulus measures.
However, if macroprudential policy is suboptimal, for example because of circumvention, only monetary
stimulus should be used, and it is desirable to commit to smaller stimulus. Furthermore, accumulating
macroprudential tax revenue in a bailout fund used for stimulus measures is undesirable.


Olivier Jeanne
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
454 Mergenthaler Hall
3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER
ojeanne@jhu.edu

Anton Korinek
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
440 Mergenthaler Hall
3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER
akorinek@jhu.edu
1       Introduction
Views about the appropriate policy interventions to respond to booms and busts in
credit and asset prices have changed with the 2008-09 global …nancial crisis. The
dominant view before the crisis was that the best time to intervene was ex post, at
the time of the crisis, rather than ex ante, when fragilities build up in the …nancial
system. This so-called “Greenspan doctrine” held that it was preferable to “mop
up” after a …nancial crisis had materialized, since ex-ante interventions tended to
be too blunt, unpredictable in their e¤ects or too costly.1 By contrast, there is
now wide agreement that policymakers should try to contain the buildup in risks ex
ante through macroprudential interventions. Ex-post crisis interventions have been
criticized for being counter-productive in various ways, in particular for creating moral
hazard and inducing excessive risk-taking ex ante. This shift in the policy debate is
re‡ected in the …nancial reforms that were implemented in response to the crisis.
For example, the Dodd-Frank reform gives the US Federal Reserve new powers in
designing prudential capital and liquidity requirements at the same time as it curtails
its ability to support individual institutions in a crisis.2 The pendulum has swung
away from ex-post interventions towards ex-ante interventions.
     This policy debate has been accompanied, on the theoretical side, by a new strand
of literature that analyzes the desirability of ex-ante macroprudential interventions.3
Another line of literature has focused on ex-post interventions.4 However there is
little work attempting to systematically study the interactions and the optimal bal-
ance between the two types (ex-ante and ex-post) of policy intervention. Our paper
attempts to …ll this gap.
     Our model is generic in its representation of ex-ante and ex-post interventions.
It features a collateral constraint that depends on asset prices, which may lead to
…nancial ampli…cation and systemic risk ex post and to overborrowing ex ante, fol-
lowing the logic of …re-sale models (Shleifer and Vishny, 1992; Davila, 2014). In spite
    1
      See Greenspan (2002, 2011) and Blinder and Reis (2005). Some economists, especially at the
Bank for International Settlements (BIS), were early defenders of the view that policymakers should
intervene ex ante (see, e.g., Borio, 2003; Bordo and Jeanne, 2002).
    2
      Before Dodd-Frank the Federal Reserve was allowed to lend to a wide range of entities "in
unusual and exigent circumstances" by Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act. This disposition
was limited in numerous ways by Dodd-Frank, including the fact that Fed loans can no longer be
targeted to individual …rms. This would have made many of the Fed’s interventions in the 2008-09
crisis impossible.
    3
      See for example Gromb and Vayanos (2002), Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2003), Lorenzoni
(2008), Jeanne and Korinek (2010), Korinek (2010), Stein (2012) and Davila (2014) for papers
that motivate macroprudential intervention on the basis of pecuniary externalities, or Farhi and
Werning (2013) and Korinek and Simsek (2016) for a motivation on the basis of aggregate demand
externalities. There is also a related quantitative literature – see Korinek and Mendoza (2014) for
an overview.
    4
      Acharya and Yorulmazer (2008) and Philippon and Schnabl (2012) compare the e¢ ciency of dif-
ferent types of ex-post policy measures. Benigno et al. (2012, 2014) show that ex-post interventions
reduce the excessive borrowing that arises from pecuniary externalities.

                                                 2
of its simplicity the model lends itself to the analysis of a range of policies. The ex-
ante policies can take the form of a debt cap as in quantity-based regulation such as
maximum loan-to-value ratios, or a tax on borrowing which could be interpreted as
…nancial regulation or restrictive monetary policy. The ex-post policies can take the
form of a subsidy on the debt accumulated ex ante, which can be interpreted as "…scal
bailouts", or of a subsidy on new borrowing, which can be interpreted as “monetary
stimulus” as in Farhi and Tirole (2012). One of our contributions is to show that
…scal bailouts and monetary stimulus are equivalent from an ex-post perspective but
di¤er in their ex-ante incentive e¤ects.
    Our …rst result is that it is generally optimal to use both ex-ante and ex-post
interventions, contradicting the Greenspan doctrine that crisis management should
focus exclusively on ex-post interventions. Since ex-post policies generally impose
deadweight losses and may distort borrowing incentives, it is optimal to combine
their use with ex-ante policies. Conversely, ex-ante interventions do not obviate the
desirability of ex-post interventions –in accordance with the theory of the second best,
the social planner uses all the available instruments. The Greenpan doctrine is only
valid in the knife-edge case where ex-post intervention takes the form of monetary
stimulus and such stimulus is completely undistortive.
    Second, we show that there is no time consistency problem in the use of ex-
post interventions as long as ex-ante macroprudential policy is set optimally. This
result holds no matter if ex-post interventions take the form of monetary stimulus or
…scal bailouts. Optimal ex-ante interventions ensure that the borrowing incentives of
private agents are corrected given the anticipated ex-post intervention. As a result,
there is no bene…t to commitment, and it is optimal to exercise complete discretion
in the use of ex-post interventions. By contrast, if ex-ante interventions are not
at their optimal level – for example, because of legal restrictions or concerns about
circumvention –a time consistency problem arises and there is a role for commitment:
the planner can reduce the overborrowing of private agents by committing to conduct
less generous ex-post interventions. In other words, commitment is a second-best
substitute for macropudential regulation when macroprudential regulation cannot be
set to its optimal level.
    Third, we clarify the interplay between ex-ante and ex-post interventions by in-
vestigating whether better capacity to implement one type of policy should reduce or
increase the use of the other type of policy. In particular, should greater capacity to
implement ex-ante macroprudential policy reduce the use of ex-post interventions?
We show that the answer depends on the social planner’s ability to commit. Under
discretion, better macroprudential instruments imply that less ex-post intervention is
used –because macroprudential instruments reduce the risk and severity of …nancial
crises. Conversely, better ex-post instruments imply that less macroprudential inter-
vention is needed –because the social cost of crises is reduced. However, commitment
introduces a force that works in the opposite direction: if macroprudential policy is
not at its optimum level, then an improvement in macroprudential instruments allows


                                           3
the policymaker to worry less about the incentive e¤ects of ex-post intervention and
to use ex-post interventions more aggressively.
    Fourth, our model yields insights about what type of ex-ante and ex-post policies
should be used to maximize welfare. We show that if there is uncertainty about the
extent to which ex-post policies will rely on …scal bailouts rather than monetary stim-
ulus, it is desirable to use debt caps rather than macroprudential taxes. Furthermore,
if ex-ante policies are at a suboptimal level, then it is desirable to use only monetary
stimulus rather than …scal bailouts ex post.
    Finally, we show that it is ine¢ cient to …nance ex-post stimulus policies with an
ex-ante macroprudential tax, e.g. by accumulating a “bailout fund.” It is optimal to
inject fresh resources coming from outside of the borrowing sector in the event of a
crisis, even if these resources are obtained through a distortionary tax. The reason
is a form of Ricardian equivalence: borrowers respond to the creation of the bailout
fund by borrowing more. However, such a fund may ine¢ ciently limit the size of
a stimulus policies in the event of a severe crisis if not resources from outside the
borrowing sector are tapped.
    The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In the following section, we
introduce the baseline model, characterize the …rst best and introduce the …nancial
constraint that lies at the heart of our analysis. Section 3 introduces the ex-ante and
ex-post policy instruments at the disposal of the social planner. Section 4 analyzes
the optimal policy mix. Section 5 presents a numerical illustration and section 6
concludes.


2     Model
2.1    Assumptions
We consider an economy with three time periods t = 0; 1; 2, and one homogeneous
good. There are two classes of atomistic agents in the economy: borrowers and
lenders. For simplicity we assume that there is a mass 1 of each type of agents.
Periods 0 and 1 are the lending periods and repayment takes place in period 2.
   The utility of the representative borrower and of the representative lender in period
0 are respectively given by,
                           U b = E0 [u(c0 ) + u (c1 ) + c2 ] ;                      (1)
                           U ` = E0 c`2 ;                                           (2)
where ct is the agent’s level of consumption in period t (with the consumption of
lenders superscripted by `) and needs to be non-negative. We assume that the utility
function u( ) is increasing, strictly concave, and satis…es the Inada conditions. Our
baseline analysis considers the case,
                                     u(c) = log c;

                                            4
to allow for well-behaved closed-form solutions. More general preferences are consid-
ered in Appendix A.1.
    The borrowers borrow in period 0 because they have no income in that period.
They receive a stochastic income in period 1. The exogenous stochastic parameter
  is the only source of uncertainty in our model. In the initial period borrowers are
endowed with one unit of an asset that pays o¤ 1 unit of good in the …nal period
2. The borrowers issue one-period debt. We denote by d and d0 the debts issued by
the borrowers in periods 0 and 1 respectively. The resulting budget constraints for
borrowers are,

                                       c0 = d;
                                   c1 + d =   + d0 ;
                                  c2 + d0 = 1:

    Lenders are endowed with y > 1 units of consumption good in periods t = 0; 1.
They can lend these to the borrowers or save in a storage technology with gross return
1, wthich pins down the interest rate at which lenders are willing to lend.

    Remark 1 (Debt Contracts) We assume one-period debt contracts in our
model since these constitute the simplest …nancial instrument possible. Our results
are unchanged if borrowers can issue two-period debt in period 0 as long as this
gives rise to the same incentives to renege as one-period debt (see, for example, our
earlier working paper version, Jeanne and Korinek, 2013). Furthermore, we show
in Appendix A.2 that our main results are unchanged if a complete set of state-
contingent …nancial contracts is available.

2.2    Financial Imperfections
In period 1 the borrowers want to borrow more when their income is low. We
assume that their borrowing is constrained by a …nancial friction which we write in
reduced form as,
                                     d0    p;                                   (3)
where p is the period-1 price of the borrowers’asset and is a parameter between
zero and one. Constraints of this type have been used in the recent literature on
systemic risk and can be microfounded as follows by limited commitment. Assume
that a borrower can make a take-it-or-leave-it o¤er to reduce the value of his debt
at any time. If creditors reject this o¤er, they can seize units of the borrower’s
assets which they can then sell at price p, the competitive price that other borrowers
are ready to pay for the asset. The creditor, thus, will accept the borrower’s o¤er as
long as the o¤ered repayment is at least p, the amount that she would obtain by
foreclosing on the capital. Without loss of generality we assume that debt is default-
free, i.e., it is not renegotiated in equilibrium. At the end of period 1, the threat of

                                           5
renegotiation implies that the debt outstanding must be lower or equal to the value
of the seizable collateral.
    If the constraint (3) is satis…ed in period 1, it is easy to show that the borrower
will not renegotiate in period 2 since the price of the asset never decreases between
period 1 and period 2. As we will see, the period-1 price satis…es p 1 whereas the
period-2 price of the asset is 1. There could also be a risk of renegotiation over d at
the end of period 0 and at the beginning of period 1, but we assume that the resulting
constraints are never binding to simplify the analysis. (The formal condition for this
is given in Appendix A.3, which also analyzes the general case where that constraint
may be binding.)
    We also impose segmentation in the asset market – otherwise borrowers could
just circumvent the constraint by selling the asset. We assume that the asset must
be held by borrowers to yield a payo¤ in period 2 and would lose all its value if it
was held by lenders. Lenders thus will not trade the asset at positive prices. This
captures in reduced form that borrowers may be more productive in operating assets
–an assumption that underlies much of the literature on …re sales following Shleifer
and Vishny (1992) and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997). As a result, assets may trade at
a …re-sale discount, giving rise to what the literature has called “systemic risk.”

2.3     First-Best Allocation
We characterize …rst-best allocations without …nancial imperfections as a benchmark
for the ensuing analysis.
     We de…ne a …rst-best allocation as a set of allocations (c0 ) and functions
(c1 ( ); c1 ( ); c`2 ( )), with the latter depending on the realization of the productiv-
ity shock , that maximize aggregate surplus E0 U b + U ` and satisfy the resource
constraints of the economy. It is easy to see that all …rst-best allocations satisfy
u0 (c0 ) = u0 (c1 ) = 1. We denote by cF B the level of borrower consumption satisfying
this condition – cF B is equal to 1 with logarithmic utility. The total welfare of the
representative borrower and lender in a …rst-best allocation is then given by5

                            E U b;F B + U `;F B = E0 [ ] + 2y       1:


3       Policies
A systemic …nancial crisis is an equilibrium in which a low realization of the liquidity
shock leads to a binding …nancial constraint. This section introduces the policy
instruments that a social planner can use to mitigate the welfare cost of a systemic
…nancial crisis. The main distinction that we focus on in this paper is between ex-
ante interventions and ex-post interventions. Broadly speaking, the purpose of ex-ante
    5
    The allocation of period-2 consumption between the two agents is indeterminate in the …rst-best
since both value consumption equally.

                                                6
interventions is to mitigate over-borrowing in period 0 whereas ex-post interventions
mitigate …nancial ampli…cation if there is a crisis in period 1. These interventions
can take various forms in practice but for the purpose of our analysis it is convenient
to model them as taxes and subsidies on borrowing. We discuss in the following how
these interventions can be interpreted in terms of macroprudential policy, monetary
policy, …scal policy, or …nancial safety nets.

3.1     Ex-ante Interventions
The …rst category of policy instruments target the decision variables of borrowers in
period 0, before binding …nancial constraints materialize. In our simple framework,
there is just a single decision margin for borrowers in period 0, which is how much
to borrow and consume. Policy can a¤ect this decision variable using price-based or
quantity-based intervention. The …rst category would be a macroprudential tax on
period-0 borrowing. Assume that the social planner makes each borrower i pay
for every unit of debt issued in period 0 and leaves him the net proceeds (1     )di ,
                                                         i           i
with the tax revenue rebated to all borrowers so that c0 = (1      )d + d = d in a
symmetric equilibrium. Such a macroprudential tax modi…es the Euler equation of
the representative borrower to
                                  (1     ) u0 (d) = E [u0 (c1 )] :
One interpretation of this macroprudential tax on borrowing, following the spirit of
Stein (2012), is contractionary monetary policy, which makes it more expensive for
borrowers to take on debt.6
   Alternatively, the planner could introduce macroprudential quantity restrictions
by imposing a ceiling on borrowing such that
                                              d       d:
In our framework, a given debt allocation d can be equivalently implemented using
ex-ante price and quantity interventions. Most real-word macroprudential policy
interventions involve quantity restrictions, such as minimum requirements for bank
capital or maximum loan-to-value ratios for bank lending. However, one reason why
we may be interested in the optimal price intervention that corresponds to a given
quantity intervention d is that it re‡ects the wedge introduced in the optimality
condition of borrowers, which is a good indicator for the regulatory burden and for
the incentive to circumvent regulation.

3.2     Ex-post Interventions
During a …nancial crisis, policymakers in the real world have a variety of policies
at their disposal, ranging from from monetary relaxation to …scal bailouts and debt
   6
     Note, however, that raising the interest rate would also entail a redistribution from borrowers
to lenders.

                                                  7
relief. We show in this section that these three interventions can all be modeled as
subsidies on borrowing. It matters, however, whether the subsidy is on new borrowing
or on old outstanding debt. We interpret a subsidy on new borrowing as a "monetary
stimulus" and a subsidy on outstanding debt as"…scal bailouts".
    First, the social planner can pay each borrower for every unit of outstanding
debt d. This is a natural assumption if the ex-post intervention takes the form of a
…scal bailout or of debt relief that is proportional to the outstanding stock of debt, as
would be the case for example under the typical …nancial safety nets. In the following,
we will refer to this type of policy as a “…scal bailout."
    Second, the social planner could pay each borrower 0 for each unit of new debt
d0 issued in period 1. The di¤erence with the previous kind of intervention is that
it involves a subsidy on new borrowing rather than outstanding debt. Such an in-
tervention could be interpreted as a monetary relaxation that lowers the real interest
rate as in Farhi and Tirole (2012). A subsidy on the collateral asset has the same
e¤ect as lowering the interest rate. Finally, the subsidy could also be interpreted as
a …scal transfer that is proportional to new borrowing, for example in the form of an
investment tax credit. Because the most natural interpretation of the interest rate
subsidy is in terms of monetary policy, we will refer to this policy as a "monetary
stimulus" in the following.
    The period-1 budget constraint for borrowers under the two subsidy measures is

                                ci1 + (1     )di =    + (1 +    0
                                                                    )d0i :

    There is one important di¤erence with the case of ex-ante interventions: we can
no longer assume that the subsidy is …nanced by a tax on borrowers since transferring
the borrowers’resources to themselves does not relax their credit constraints. Hence
we assume that the subsidy is …nanced by a tax on other agents in the economy,
which means, in our simple model, on lenders. The total amount of the tax is,
                                                       0 0
                                           s= d+        d:                                        (4)

      We assume that imposing such a tax on lenders may introduce distortions into the
economy, which we formally describe as a deadweight cost g(s) that satis…es g(0) = 0,
g 0 (s) 0 and g 00 (s) 0, 8s > 0. It is not di¢ cult to provide microfoundations for this
reduced form.7 The reduced form can also be generalized without a¤ecting the essence
of our results. If ex-post interventions take the form of a monetary stimulus, the
distortionary cost can be interpreted as the cost of setting the interest rate "too low"
from the point of view of the macroeconomic objectives of monetary policy (see Farhi
   7
      For example, assume that the period-1 income of lenders comes from an activity that allows
lenders to produce a quantity of good q at cost C(q) where C ( ) is an increasing and convex function,
and de…ne net income as y(q) = q C(q). Assume that the bailout is …nanced by a tax on this
activity, s = q. Then the deadweight cost g(s) is implicitly de…ned by, g(s) = y y(q) where y is
the maximum level of net income and y 0 (q)q = s. It is easy to see that g(s) increases with s and
g 0 (0) = 0.

                                                  8
and Tirole, 2012, for an elaboration of this point). We assume that the deadweight
cost of taxation is borne by the lenders but this assumption is not important for our
analysis.8
   The period-1 budget constraint of the representative lender then takes the form,

                                 c`1 + d0 = y + d    s   g(s):

    An alternative interpretation of the deadweight cost g(s) is that the social planner
cares about the distributive e¤ects of bailouts: if the planner evaluates the expected
consumption of lenders according to a concave social welfare function w(U ` ) that
satis…es w0 (2y) = 1 and w00 < 0, then we can de…ne g(s) = w(U ` ) s w(U ` s) to
capture the planner’s losses arising from redistribution.


4       Optimal Policy Mix
The core question of this paper is to characterize the optimal mix of ex-ante versus
ex-post policy interventions that would be chosen by a benevolent social planner to
maximize welfare in the economy. We will …rst focus on the optimal policy problem
of a discretionary planner, since excessive discretion in the use of ex-post policy
interventions is frequently cited as a reason to engage in macroprudential policies.
Then we will compare the optimal policy mix under discretion with the solution
under commitment. Finally, we will analyze the complementarity or substitutability
between the di¤erent types of policy intervention.

4.1     Ex post policy
We start with an analysis of the equilibrium in period 1 after all uncertainty has
been realized. Borrowers are identical and make the same decision in equilibrium.
However, it will be important in some of our derivations to di¤erentiate between
variables related to an individual atomistic borrower and variables related to the
representative borrower. We denote the variables related to an individual borrower
with a superscript i when this is necessary for clarity.

Period-1 Problem of Borrowers An individual borrower i enters period 1 with
a debt level di from the previous period and obtains the endowment income that
depends on the shock realization, resulting in an amount of liquid net worth mi =
    di . Furthermore, he obtains the subsidy rates and 0 on his old and new debt
levels, providing subsidy revenue si = di + 0 di0 .
    8
    In an earlier version of this paper (Jeanne and Korinek, 2013), for example, we assumed that
the borrowers combined capital with labor provided by the lenders to produce output in period 2.
In that model the deadweight cost of taxation was born by the borrowers (through higher wages).
These features complicated the model but did not a¤ect the results in any essential way.


                                               9
   As we will show formally below, the planner will only provide positive subsidies
when the constraint on borrowers is binding. The borrower’s consumption is thus de-
termined by his private liquid net worth mi , his subsidy income si , and his borrowing
capacity,

                         ci1 mi + si ; p = min cF B ; mi + si + p ;                              (5)
    In general equilibrium, the asset price is such that the marginal disutility of sac-
ri…cing p units of period-1 consumption of the representative borrower to purchase
one unit of the asset equals the marginal gain from receiving a unit payo¤ from the
asset in period 2, that is,9

                           pu0 (c1 ) = 1 or, equivalently, p = c1 :                              (6)

In equilibrium, no borrower defaults and no collateral asset is sold, but all agents in the
economy know that the price of collateral is determined by this equation conditional
on a default.
    Using equation (6) to substitute out p from (5), we obtain a …xed-point equation
for the period-1 consumption of the representative borrower,
                                                                      m+s
                   c1 = min cF B ; m + s + c1 = min cF B ;                      ;                (7)
                                                                      1
where we have solved for c1 to derive the second equality. This equation de-
…nes equilibrium consumption c1 (m + s) as an increasing function of the repre-
sentative borrower’s total liquid wealth. If liquid wealth is above the threshold
m+s m    ^ = cF B    , then consumption is at its …rst-best level. For m+s < m,
                                                                             ^ equi-
librium consumption is constrained and the asset price declines, leading to …nancial
ampli…cation. This mechanism is well-known from the literature. However, what is
important to emphasize is that subsidies to constrained borrowers lead to a virtuous
circle: Suppose that net liquidity m + s < m ^ so the …nancial constraint is binding,
and assume that the policymaker provides a marginal unit extra liquidity subsidies.
The impact on consumption can be obtained from implicitly di¤erentiating (7),
                                                          1
                                    c01 (m + s) =             > 1:
                                                      1
Intuitively, the ampli…cation arises because borrowers push up the price of collateral
when they have more liquidity, which relaxes the …nancial constraint and allows them
to obtain further liquidity from borrowing. The term 1=(1     ) can be viewed as the
   9
    This …rst-order condition holds whether or not borrowers are …nancially constrained. Note that
a borrower does not relax his credit constraint by purchasing the asset because creditors can seize a
…xed quantity of asset in a default (rather than a fraction of the borrower’s assets). This is why
the asset price in equation (6) does not involve any collateral premium. This setup simpli…es our
analysis without a¤ecting our qualitative results.

                                                 10
sum of the geometric series 1 + + 2 + ::: that captures the initial liquidity injection
plus round after round of relaxation of the …nancial constraint.
   Overall, the period-1 utility of borrowers (dropping constant terms) is given by

                  V (m + s) = m + s + u (c1 (m + s))           c1 (m + s) ;           (8)

and is strictly increasing in m + s. Its derivative V 0 (m + s) is strictly decreasing for
m+s<m     ^ and satis…es V 0 = 1 for m m.  ^

Period-1 Problem of Policymaker For given private liquid net worth m, the
policymaker chooses subsidies and 0 to maximize aggregate welfare in the econ-
omy. From the perspective of period 1, both subsidy measures enter the expressions
for welfare of the two agents always through the sum s = d + 0 d0 . Therefore,
the optimization problem of the planner (in which we drop constant terms) can be
expressed as

                W1 (m) = max u (c1 (m + s)) + m           c1 (m + s)   g (s) :        (9)
                            s

The planner’s objective function strictly increases with s for s = 0 and strictly de-
creases with s for s   m
                       ^    m. Thus we know that it is maximized for an interior
solution 0 < s(m) < m^ m which satis…es the …rst-order condition,

                            [u0 (c1 )   1 ] c01 (m + s) = g 0 (s):                   (10)
Intuitively, the planner equates the social marginal cost of liquidity and the social
marginal bene…t of liquidity for borrowers, which is to increase their period-1 con-
sumption by c01 = 1=(1      ) and bridge the gap between marginal utility in periods
1 and 2, [u0 (c1 ) 1]. The optimality condition de…nes an optimal subsidy s(m) that
is positive for m < m^ and is zero for m m.   ^ If raising …scal revenue is distortionary
(g (s) > 0), then the optimal subsidy is declining in m at rate 1 < s0 (m) < 0; if
   0

raising …scal revenue is costless (g 0 (s) = 0), then the optimal subsidy for m < m  ^ is
s(m) = m ^ m.

   We summarize our results on the optimal ex-post intervention in the following
proposition.

Proposition 1 (Ex-Post Interventions) Assume that ex-post interventions are
distortionary (g( ) > 0). Then:
    (i) The planner provides stimulus s > 0 to borrowers if and only if their liquidity
m is strictly below the threshold m
                                  ^ at which the credit constraint becomes binding.
    (ii) The planner mitigates the credit constraint only partially.
    (iii) It does not matter for period-1 allocations and period-1 welfare whether the
stimulus is provided in the form of a debt bailout or a monetary stimulus.


                                             11
Proof. For point (i), the result follows immediately from equation (10): the equilib-
rium s is strictly positive if and only if the l.h.s. is strictly larger than the r.h.s. for
s = 0, that is, if and only if m is strictly lower than m. ^ To prove point (ii), observe
that if the subsidy were to completely relax the credit constraint when m < m,      ^ then
the l.h.s of equation (10) would be equal to zero whereas the r.h.s. would be strictly
positive, a contradiction. To prove point (iii), observe that the two subsidies , 0
enter condition (10) only via s. Therefore any combination of , 0 that satis…es
s = d + 0 d0 implements the optimal allocation from the perspective of period 1.

4.2    Ex ante policy
We start with the optimal period-0 policy problem when the planner’s instrument is
a macroprudential tax on borrowing; then we focus on how to implement the same
allocation using a debt cap d.

Macroprudential tax The problem of an individual borrower i who faces a macro-
prudential tax and anticipates the period-1 interventions and 0 is to choose di
to maximize expected utility. Since the macroprudential tax is rebated to borrowers,
c0 = (1    ) di + d and the borrower solves

           U i = max
                  i
                     u((1      ) di + d) + E V i         (1       ) di +    0
                                                                                p   :   (11)
                   d

The simpli…cation 0 p = 0 di0 follows from Proposition 1 since the subsidy 0 is
nonzero only when the borrowing constraint is binding.
   Using the envelope condition V i0 ( ) = u0 (ci1 ), the optimality condition of individual
borrowers is,
                        (1    ) u0 di = E u0 ci1 (1            ) :                      (12)
   By contrast, a social planner sets d to maximize social welfare in period 0,

                              max u(d) + E [W1 (        d) ] ;
                                d

with optimality condition

                                                    E [u0 (c1 )    1]
                       u0 (d) = E [W10 (m)] = 1 +                       :               (13)
                                                        1
   This condition equates the marginal bene…t of consumption in period 0 to the
marginal bene…t of funds in period 1, which includes the ampli…cation e¤ects cap-
tured by the derivative c01 = 1=(1    ). Comparing the …rst-order conditions (12)
and (13) shows that there is overborrowing under laissez-faire. In the absence of
macroprudential intervention, equation (12) implies that private agents would pick a



                                            12
higher level of debt than the planner since the right-hand side of the Euler equation
of private agents satis…es

        0                                                                  E [u0 (c1 )   1]
    E[u     ci1   (1   )]     0
                            E[u   ci1                  0
                                        ] = 1 + E [u (c1 )      1]      1+                    ,   (14)
                                                                               1
which equals the right-hand side of the planner’s Euler equation.
   Using (10) and (13) to substitute out u0 (c1 ) and u0 (d) from the private Euler
equation (12), we obtain the optimal macroprudential tax rate,

                                        E [ u0 (c1 )] + E [g 0 (s)]
                                  =                                 :                             (15)
                                             1 + E [g 0 (s)]
The two terms in the numerator re‡ect the two causes of overborrowing in this model.
The …rst term re‡ects the overborrowing induced by the expectation of the subsidy
whereas the second term re‡ects that private agents do not internalize their contri-
bution to …nancial ampli…cation in a crisis.

Debt cap The planner can equivalently implement the optimal allocation by im-
posing a debt cap d that prevents borrowers from issuing more than the optimal level
of debt. The …rst-order condition for the optimal debt cap is equation (13). Observe
that the equation only depends on s not the components ( ; 0 ), therefore the debt
cap is independent of the composition ( ; 0 ).
    We summarize our …ndings in the following proposition:

Proposition 2 (Ex-Ante Interventions) The planner implements the optimal
policy mix by following the optimal ex-post policy described in Proposition 1 and im-
posing
    (i) either a debt cap di d as de…ned by equation (13), which is independent of
the composition of ex-post policy interventions ( ; 0 ),
    (ii) or a macroprudential tax on borrowing given by (15). The optimal macropru-
dential tax is higher the more of the ex-post intervention is provided in the form of
…scal bailouts rather than monetary stimulus 0 .

Proof. See discussion above.

    The planner’s optimal debt level d is independent of the composition ( ; 0 ) in
which ex-post interventions are provided for a given total level of s. By contrast,
the macroprudential tax has to account for any distortions to borrowing incentives
created by the subsidy . This points to an important practical bene…t of debt caps:
they are more robust since they need to be less responsive to the incentive e¤ects
of ex-post stimulus interventions. The optimal debt cap does not depend on private
sector expectations (whether rational or not) about the form of future stimulus. As
we will analyze in further detail below, this also provides the policymaker with the

                                                  13
freedom to choose an ex-post policy instrument at her discretion without a¤ecting
the level of borrowing.

   One of the motivations of this paper was to evaluate the conditions under which
the “Greenspan doctrine” holds, according to which policymakers should intervene
only ex post and not ex ante. The Greenspan doctrine is not true in general in
our model, but it is interesting to delineate the assumptions that are necessary and
su¢ cient to make it true.

Proposition 3 (Greenspan Doctrine) Macroprudential regulation is super‡uous
in the following two cases and only in these two cases:
    (i) the ex-post intervention does not involve a …scal stimulus (E [ u0 (c1 )] = 0) and
has no distortionary cost (E[g 0 (s)] = 0), or
    (ii) the ex-post intervention does not involve a …scal stimulus (E [ u0 (c1 )] = 0)
and there is no …nancial ampli…cation ( = 0).

Proof. Using equation (15) it is easy to see that = 0 if (i) or (ii) is true. Conversely
if = 0 it must be that the two terms in the numerator are equal to zero, which
requires (i) or (ii).10

    A necessary condition for the Greenspan doctrine to hold and macropruden-
tial regulation to be super‡uous is that the ex-post subsidy be exclusively on new
borrowing— otherwise the expectation of ex-post intervention is su¢ cient to generate
overborrowing which must be o¤set by ex-ante interventions.
    Conditional on this, there are two di¤erent scenarios under which the Greenspan
doctrine holds. Case (i) represents an economy in which ex-post policy interventions
are costless – therefore the planner relies 100% on “mopping up after the crash.”
The economy never experiences binding constraints and so there is no systemic risk–
and therefore there is no need to impose costly macroprudential regulation. This
argument has been developed in greater detail in Benigno et al. (2012).
    Case (ii) captures an economy in which government revenue is costly but there
is no other distortion such as systemic risk in …nancial markets. The planner …nds
it optimal to distribute resources to constrained borrowers in period 1 until their
marginal valuation of wealth equals the resource cost plus the deadweight cost of
transferring. However, this transfer is e¢ cient, and since there is no systemic risk
and ampli…cation, there is no reason for macroprudential intervention in period 0.

    Summarizing Propositions 1 and 2, except in the knife-edge cases of Proposition
3, the social planner uses both ex-ante and ex-post interventions because neither type
of intervention fully alleviates the …nancial friction. Ex-ante intervention reduces the
risk and severity of …nancial crises, but crises still occur. When they do, it is optimal
for the social planner to resort to ex-post interventions. This result is consistent with
 10
      This also encompasses the trivial case that the probability for the constraint to bind is zero.

                                                   14
the theory of second-best taxation. Both macroprudential regulation and the bailout
introduce a second-order distortion into the economy but achieve a …rst-order bene…t
from mitigating binding constraints through two alternative channels.

4.3     Commitment vs. discretion
One question that arises when studying the optimal policy mix is that of
commitment— whether or not the social planner can commit in period 0 to her future
policy interventions. An important theme in the literature on …nancial crises is that
policymakers tend to be excessively interventionist ex post because they ignore the
implications of their policies for ex-ante private risk taking. A related theme is that it
is important to set ex-ante limits and constraints on the use of ex post interventions.
    In our initial anaysis, we stacked the deck against ex-post interventions by assum-
ing that the social planner cannot commit. We now compare the optimal policy mix
under discretion to the one under commitment.

Proposition 4 (Commitment Vs. Discretion) The optimal allocation obtained
under discretion coincides with the optimal allocation under commitment.

Proof. The behavior of private agents is described by their period-0 Euler equation
(12) and the consumption rule (7). Given this and omitting constant terms, a planner
under commitment in period 0 chooses a debt level d and state-contingent subsidy
s( ) to solve

      max u(d) + E [u (c1 (    d + s( ))) +      d   c1 (    d + s( ))   g (s( )) ] :
      d;s( )


The optimality conditions are identical to equations (10) and (13) of the problem
under discretion. As a result, the planner chooses the same allocation under commit-
ment as under discretion.

    It turns out that commitment does not allow the planner to improve on the alloca-
tion obtained under discretion. Intuitively, the bene…t of committing to a lower level
of bailouts in models of …nancial constraints is that it induces borrowers to borrow
less. In our framework, macroprudential policy already reduces borrowing directly
without ancillary distortions. This enables the planner to provide the socially e¢ -
cient level of bailouts when necessary ex post. In other words, macroprudential policy
enables the planner not to worry about “moral hazard” in providing ex-post policy
interventions such as bailouts. In particular, Proposition 4 holds even if the period-1
intervention is provided in the form of distortionary debt relief > 0 –in that case,
the optimal macroprudential tax (15) rises, but the real allocation in the economy is
unchanged and remains optimal. As a result, the planner is indi¤erent about which
ex-post policy instruments is used.


                                           15
    One corollary of the proposition is that –if the tasks of imposing optimal macro-
prudential regulation and of conducting optimal ex-post interventions are performed
by separate entities of government –the entities performing ex-post interventions do
not need to take into account their e¤ects on ex-ante borrowing incentives and the
related time consistency problems –they can simply focus on implementing an opti-
mal stimulus policy s(m) as described in Proposition 2. The institution conducting
macroprudential policy could simply take s(m) as given and would face the task of
imposing optimal ex-ante regulation as described in Proposition 2.
    In the next section, we will investigate the importance of macroprudential policy
being at its optimal level for the result of Proposition 4 by considering the case in
which macroprudential interventions are suboptimal.

4.4    Suboptimal Macroprudential Policy under Commitment
In practice, macroprudential policy may not implement the optimal allocation de-
scribed above. One reason is that policymakers have only recently started to explic-
itly consider macroprudential motives in setting …nancial regulation and that many
…nancial regulators even lack a macroprudential mandate. Another reason is that
…nancial regulation in general gives rise to circumvention by the private sector. This
section considers macroprudential policy that is restricted. For example, a social
planner may be restricted to impose a debt cap that is larger than the optimal level
or a tax that is smaller than the optimal level.
    Restrictions on macroprudential policy create a role for commitment that was
absent when macroprudential policy is optimal as in Proposition 4. We study the dif-
ference between commitment and discretion by introducing the following notations.
Let us denote by sc (m) the stimulus policy under commitment, when the social plan-
ner can decide her period-1 interventions in period 0, and by sd (m) the stimulus policy
under discretion. The stimulus policy under discretion was described in Proposition
1 and we now denote it with the subscript d for clarity.
    We then have the following result:

Proposition 5 Consider an economy in which the macroprudential tax is below the
optimal level. Then a planner who has the power to commit will commit to
   (i) provide a lower stimulus sc (m) < sd (m) for given m compared to discretion,
   (ii) use only monetary stimulus ( 0 > 0) rather than …scal bailouts (so = 0).

Proof. Given the tax , the planner chooses d and the state-contingent subsidies sc
and c to maximize the Lagrangian

u (d)+E fu (c (m + sc )) + m    c (m + sc )        g (sc )   [(1   ) u0 (d)   Eu0 (c (m + sc )) (1   c
                                                                                                         )] +   c
                                                                                                                    g;

where m =       d and sc = c d + c0 d0 is satis…ed. We denote by the shadow
cost on the implementability constraint (12), which re‡ects the choice of debt by

                                              16
                                                                                                      c
private agents, and by the shadow price on the non-negativity constraint on                               .
The optimality conditions with respect to d, sc and c are

 F OC (d) : u0 (d) = 1 + E f[u0 (c1 ) 1] c01 g + [(1               ) u00 (d) + Eu00 (c1 ) (1   c
                                                                                                   ) c01 ] ;
F OC (sc ) : g 0 (sc ) = [u0 (c1 ) 1] c01 + u00 (c1 ) (1       c
                                                                 ) c01 ;
F OC ( c ) : u0 (c1 ) = :

       According to the …rst condition, the shadow price          satis…es

                                 u0 (d) 1 E f[u0 (c1 ) 1] c01 g
                            =                                   c ) c0
                                                                       :
                              (1      ) u00 (d) + Eu00 (c1 ) (1      1

Comparing the numerator with (13), the shadow price is positive > 0 if there is
overborrowing, i.e., if the tax rate is too low. The second optimality condition then
reveals that the planner reduces the subsidy sc compared to the optimal policy mix
described in Proposition 1, proving point (i).
     The shadow price is positive by the third optimality condition, proving point
(ii).

    If the macroprudential tax is too low, then ex-post policy interventions are ex-
cessive under discretion because they do not take into account their impact on the
incentives to borrow ex ante. At the margin, a small reduction in the size of the
“mopping up”interventions has a second-order welfare cost ex post but a …rst-order
welfare gain by reducing borrowing ex ante. Suboptimal macroprudential policy thus
makes it optimal to commit to ex-post interventions that are less generous than under
discretion (sc < sd ).11
    Commitment is an inferior substitute to optimal macroprudential policy: if it is
set to its optimal level, macroprudential policy can take care of the overborrowing
problem that commitment is trying to solve without having to distort the optimal
ex-post intervention. Macroprudential policy is strictly superior to commitment—
when macroprudential policy is at its optimal level, we know from Proposition 4
that there is no residual role left for commitment. Ex-post interventions can then be
used with complete discretion. Although one might have expected macroprudential
policy to be caught in a trade-o¤ between two objectives (mitigating the pecuniary
externality and mitigating the time-consistency problem) there is actually no tension
between these two objectives. This is because both concerns are fully addressed
by setting borrowing, d, at the appropriate level. It is more e¢ cient to change d
through macroprudential policy than by committing to ine¢ ciently stringent ex-post
policies.12
  11
     Under additional regularity conditions, it can also be shown that the the optimal subsidy under
commitment increases the closer the macroprudential instrument is to its optimum level.
  12
     This result re‡ects a more general insight about time consistency in optimal policy problems:
time consistency problems re‡ect a lack of policy instruments and can be solved if a planner has


                                                17
    Point (ii) of the proposition highlights that, since …scal bailouts increase bor-
rowing incentives in period 0, the planner …nds it desirable to commit to monetary
stimulus when his macroprudential toolkit is imperfect. This overturns the indi¤er-
ence result under the optimal policy mix, i.e., that the planner does not care which
ex-post instrument he uses when macroprudential policy can optimally correct ex-ante
incentives.

    Proposition 5 looks into the implications of having a macroprudential tax that
is too low. If instead the problem is a debt cap that is too high, then the result
depends on the level of the cap. For example, if the debt cap is su¢ ciently high that
it is non-binding under the optimal stimulus policy, then it is equivalent to a zero
macroprudential tax and the results of Proposition 5.apply, i.e. the planner commits
to lower stimulus that is provided in monetary form. By contrast, if the debt cap is
su¢ ciently close to the optimal level, then the costs of committing to a lower level
of stimulus outweigh the bene…ts. Borrowing is determined by the binding cap, and
policymakers do not need to be concerned with the incentive e¤ects of stimulus policy.
This points to an important practical bene…t of su¢ ciently tight debt caps: they solve
the time consistency problem that arises under suboptimal macroprudential taxation.

4.5     Suboptimal Ex-Post Interventions
It is natural to analyze restrictions on ex-post stimulus measures next. Just like in
the case of macroprudential instruments, policymakers frequently face restrictions on
the set of ex-post instruments and 0 that prevent them from implementing the
optimal policy mix. In our setting, we capture such restrictions by assuming that
there is an upper limit s such that the total stimulus provided satis…es

                                            s(m)     s:                                        (16)

If s is equal to zero, the economy has no access to ex-post interventions (e.g. no
…scal space and no independent monetary policy), whereas it has unrestricted access
to such interventions if s is large enough. When constraint (16) is binding in some
states, an increase in s can be interpreted as a marginal extension of the …scal or
monetary policy space. Macroprudential policy is unrestricted.

Proposition 6 (Restricted Ex-Post Interventions) A policymaker who faces
restrictions on ex-post policy measures s s will
    (i) relax the debt cap the less restricted the ex-post measures, i.e. the higher s,
su¢ cient (unrestricted) instruments available. Time inconsistency arises when the expectation of a
planner’s optimal actions a¤ects the behavior of private agents in earlier periods in an undesirable
way. In our setup, if the planner can control borrowing in period 0 directly via a macroprudential
policy instrument , then there is no more reason to deviate from the ex-post optimal level of debt,
and the time consistency problem disappears.


                                                18
   (ii) lower the macroprudential tax the less restricted the ex-post measures (assum-
ing ex-post measures take the form of monetary stimulus 0 ).

Proof. For part (i) of the proof, replace the stimulus s on the right-hand side of the
planner’s Euler equation (13) by minfs; sg and the result follows. For part (ii) of the
proof, observe that for = 0, the optimal tax formula (15) implies
                                                       1
                               =1                                          :
                                       1     =E   [u0   (c1 (   d + s))]
Better ex-post measures reduce marginal utility and therefore lower the optimal tax
rate.

    The results of the Proposition run counter to the intuition of some policymakers
who worry about greater moral hazard when more stimulus is available. However, the
increase in borrowing in response to greater availability of ex-post stimulus is e¢ cient
– the stimulus measures reduce the social costs of systemic debt crises ex post.13
Conversely, the more di¢ cult it is to provide bailouts, the less the planner mitigates
the …nancial constraints and the more macroprudential regulation is indicated.
    Observe, however, that result (ii) no longer holds if the ex-post stimulus takes
the form of distortionary …scal bailouts –in that case, the numerator of the optimal
tax formula (15) implies that the macroprudential tax has to be increased to o¤set
the distortions created by the expectation of …scal stimulus E[ u0 (c1 )]. This case
seems to be the presumption of policymakers who argue that more reliance on ex-
post interventions warrants higher macroprudential regulation.

4.6     Bailout Fund
Since it is optimal to impose macroprudential restrictions in period 0 and to provide
stimulus transfers in period 1, one might be tempted to combine the two policy
measures and use the proceeds of a macroprudential tax to …nance the stimulus. This
can be done by accumulating the macroprudential tax proceeds in a “bailout fund”
that is distributed in the future if borrowers experience binding …nancial constraints.14
It would seem much preferable to …nance the bailouts with a corrective tax than by
a tax that introduces new distortions in the economy.
    We analyze this policy proposal
                                 R i by assuming that the planner stores the proceeds
of the macroprudential tax          d di = d in a bailout fund. The fund is used to
make transfers to constrained borrowers in period 1. Using the bailout fund does not
entail any deadweight cost ex post, so that the funds are transferred to constrained
  13
     Jeanne and Zettelmeyer (2005) emphasize that an increase in borrowing in response to better
…nancial safety nets does not in general re‡ect true moral hazard. Stavrakeva (2015) …nds that better
…nancial safety nets – as enabled by greater …scal capacity – reduce the need for macroprudential
regulation.
  14
     This is common practice for most deposit insurance systems (see Garcia, 1999).

                                                  19
borrowers until the constraint is completely alleviated or the bailout fund is exhausted.
The funds that are left after borrowers are no longer …nancially constrained, if any,
are rebated in a lump-sum way to borrowers or lenders (it does not matter which for
total welfare). We assume, without restriction of generality, that the excess funds are
redistributed to the borrowers so that we do not have to look at the welfare of the
lenders, and that the funds are distributed as a subsidy to new borrowing 0 , which
does not distort borrowing in period 0.
    The welfare properties of a bailout fund are described in the following.

Proposition 7 (Bailout Fund) A bailout fund …nanced by a macroprudential tax
(i) leads to the same allocation as if no ex-post stimulus is available s = 0 and (ii)
unambiguously reduces welfare relative to the equilibrium where ex-post inteventions
are …nanced by a distortive tax on lenders.

Proof. The ex-ante welfare of borrower i is given by

                                                                     i
u((1        )di ) + E max
                       i
                          u(ci1 ) + 1 +            di    ci1 + d +          di + d + p       ci1   :
                          c1

The …rst-order condition is,

    (1       )u0 ((1      )di ) = E u0 ci1         where ci1 = min(cF B ;        di + p + d):

Without a bailout fund –if the macroprudential tax proceeds d are rebated in period
0 or if a debt cap is used instead –and with ex-post stimulus restricted to s = 0, the
…rst-order condition is,

       (1     )u0 ((1      )di + d) = E [u0 (c1 )]       where ci1 = min(cF B ;        di + p).

    In both cases the …rst-order condition can be written in terms if the consumption
levels as,
                                                                                  c0
               (1       )u0 (c0 ) = E [u0 (c1 )]   where c1 = min cF B ;               .
                                                                             1
    This problem is solved by a unique allocation (c0 ; c1 ( )). Thus the allocation is the
same whether there is a bailout fund or not. The real allocation is unchanged because
the representative consumer borrows more to o¤set the saving invested by the social
planner in the bailout fund. Hence welfare is the same as without bailout fund when
ex-post stimulus policies are restricted s = 0, proving point (i) of the proposition. If
we remove the restriction s = 0, Proposition 1 implies that welfare is unambiguously
increased whenever there are states in which borrowers are constrained, proving point
(ii) of the proposition.

   This results re‡ects a form of Ricardian equivalence. Introducing a bailout fund
does not yield any e¢ ciency bene…ts — the planner has no comparative advantage in

                                                    20
holding precautionary savings against systemic risk compared to borrowers, as long as
she can determine the correct level of private savings via macroprudential regulation.
The tax that is used to …nance the bailout fund achieves its intended macroprudential
bene…t. The bailout fund, however, not does not achieve the same gains as a bailout
policy that is …nanced by ex-post taxation because private borrowers …nance their
contribution to the fund by issuing more debt.
    Our result that a bailout fund is undesirable as a precautionary instrument against
aggregate risk contrasts with the desirability of funds that are used to share uninsur-
able idiosyncratic risk: if a planner can pool the idiosyncratic risks of heterogeneous
borrowers in a common fund, then she can reduce the total amount of savings held
and thereby improve e¢ ciency. We conclude that accumulating bailout funds only
helps with idiosyncratic risk, not aggregate or systemic risk.


5    Numerical Illustration
We now present a numerical illustration of our results to provide additional intuition.
Given the logarithmic utility u(c) = log c, the …rst-best level of consumption is cF B =
1 and the threshold for binding constraints is m^ =1       . The consumption and asset
price functions are,

                                                        m+s
                     c1 (m + s) = p (m + s) = min 1;             :                 (17)
                                                        1

We assume g(s) = s2 =2. Furthermore, we assume that is distributed uniformly
over an interval [ ; + ]. The numerical values of the parameters are given below
in Table 1.


                                   .9 20 1.5 .75
                Table 1: Parameter values for numerical illustration

    In Figure 1 we vary the dispersion of the shock from 0 to and illustrate the
e¤ects on the equilibrium across …ve di¤erent policy regimes: the …rst-best (F B),
the laissez faire equilibrium without intervention (LF ), the optimal policy mix (Opt),
optimal macroprudential policy without ex-post intervention (s = 0), and optimal ex-
post stimulus policy without macroprudential policy ( = 0). As the shock dispersion
  increases beyond ^ = +           2 = :4, the economy starts to experience binding
constraints for low realizations of , and the probability of binding constraints rises
in .
    The top-left panel shows initial consumption c0 . Since c0 = d, the level of con-
sumption is the level of the debt cap that a planner imposes if this instrument is
available. Consumption and the debt cap are a declining function of the dispersion

                                          21
                     Period 0 borrowing d                           Optimal macroprudential tax τ
                                                          0.3
      1                                                                s=0
                                                         0.25          Opt
   0.95                                                                Opt’
                                                          0.2
    0.9
                    FB                                   0.15
   0.85
                    LF
    0.8                                                   0.1
                    Opt
   0.75             s=0                                  0.05
                    τ=0(d)
    0.7             τ=0(c)                                 0

          0         0.2        0.4          0.6                 0      0.2          0.4        0.6


              Optimal stimulus measure s for ρmin                               Welfare W

                    τ=0(d)                                0.5
   0.25
                    τ=0(c)
    0.2             Opt                                  0.48

   0.15                                                  0.46
                                                                       FB
    0.1                                                  0.44          LF
                                                                       Opt
   0.05                                                  0.42          s=0
                                                                       τ=0(d)
      0                                                   0.4          τ=0(c)

          0         0.2         0.4         0.6                 0      0.2         0.4         0.6
                       Shock dispersion δ                                 Shock dispersion δ

                          Figure 1: Numerical illustration of policy regimes


of the shock. The planner implements the tightest debt level when ex-post stimulus
measures are restricted (s = 0). Under the optimal policy mix (Opt), the debt level is
lower than under laissez-faire (LF ) for small shock dispersion but higher than laissez-
faire for a larger dispersion of shocks. This illustrates that equilibrium debt is a¤ected
by two opposing forces – macroprudential policy reduces debt but ex-post stimulus
measures make it optimal to increase debt compared to laissez-faire, as emphasized
by Benigno et al. (2012). When macroprudential policy is not available ( = 0),
debt is naturally higher since ex-post stimulus measures (which are provided as mon-
etary stimulus when = 0) increase borrowing incentives compared to laissez-faire.
Under commitment ( = 0(c)), stimulus is lower and therefore borrowing is reduced
compared to discretion ( = 0(d)).
    The top-right panel shows the macroprudential tax required to achieve the
optimal level of borrowing in panel 1. When ex-post stimulus measures are unavailable
(s = 0), the planner uses a greater macroprudential tax than in the optimal policy
mix since …nancial crises are more costly without stimulus measures. The panel also
illustrates that a higher macroprudential tax is necessary to implement the same real


                                                    22
         Policy functions sd (m) and sc (m)     Optimal stimulus measures s for ρmin     Period 0 consumption c0 = debt d0
                                  d
                                 s (m)                                    τ (d)                                  FB
                                               0.26                                      1                       τ (d)
       0.25                      sc (m)                                   τ (c)
                                                                                                                 τ (c)
                                               0.24
        0.2
                                                                                       0.95
                                               0.22
       0.15
                                                0.2                                     0.9
        0.1
                                               0.18
       0.05                                                                            0.85
                                               0.16
         0
                                               0.14
                                           m                                            0.8
               0           0.5            1        0                        τ* = 16%      0                        τ* = 16%
                Liquid net worth m                Restricted macroprudential tax τ       Restricted macroprudential tax τ

                  Figure 2: Ex-post stimulus under commitment versus discretion


allocation if ex-post stimulus measures in the optimal policy mix take the form of
distortionary …scal bailouts (Opt) rather than monetary stimulus (Opt0 ).
    The bottom-left panel illustrates the optimal stimulus measure s for the lowest
return realization min . Under the optimal policy mix (Opt), the planner relies less
on ex-post stimulus measures than when macroprudential policy is restricted ( = 0).
Furthermore, under restricted macroprudential policy and commitment ( = 0(c)),
the planner reduces her ex-post stimulus e¤orts compared to discretion ( = 0(d)) in
order to provide incentives for lower borrowing, partially making up for the absence
of macroprudential instruments.
    Finally, the bottom-right panel shows the impact of uncertainty on welfare under
the di¤erent regimes. Under all …ve regimes, welfare is a strictly declining function
of the shock dispersion . The welfare losses are minimized under the optimal policy
(Opt) mix but maximal under laissez-faire (LF ). In our simulation, about one third
of the welfare gains of optimal policy come from macroprudential regulation whether
or not ex-post stimulus policies are used. The remaining two-thirds come from ex-
post policy intervention. When macroprudential policy is not used, it can be seen
that committing to less generous ex-post policies provides moderate welfare gains.15

    Figure 2 shows optimal ex-post stimulus measures and the resulting debt levels
under commitment and discretion if macroprudential policy is subject to varying
degrees of restrictions. The …gure considers the case with shock dispersion = 0:75.
The left panel shows the policy functions sc (m) and sd (m) if macroprudential policy
is absent, i.e. = 0 or equivalently d = 1. For a given level of period-1 liquid
net worth, the planner provides less ex-post stimulus under commitment than under
  15
    If macroprudential policy is absent and ex-post stimulus is provided in the form of distortionary
…scal bailouts ( > 0), then welfare may well be lower than in the laissez-faire equilibrium, since …scal
bailouts create moral hazard. In our simulations, we found that this may occur if the probability of
being constrained is high and ampli…cation e¤ects are strong, i.e., is close to 1.


                                                                23
discretion in order to induce greater precautionary behavior and less borrowing in
period 0.
     The middle and right panels show the e¤ects of improving macroprudential policy,
i.e. of increasing the macroprudential tax along the horizontal axis from zero to
its optimal level ( = 16% under the given parameterization). The middle panel
depicts the optimal ex-post stimulus measure for the lowest realization of the shock
  min
      . If macroprudential policy is restricted to < , borrowers carry more debt
and experience more severe …nancial crises in the low state min . The optimal ex-post
stimulus is thus higher than under the optimal policy mix and is a declining function
of the macroprudential tax . Under discretion, the ex-post stimulus is even higher
than under commitment since the planner does not internalize the adverse e¤ects of
the ex-post stimulus on ex-ante borrowing incentives. When the macroprudential tax
   reaches its optimal level   at the right end of the panel, the stimulus under both
discretion and commitment converges to the level in the optimal policy mix. The right
panel shows the e¤ects on period-0 consumption and debt: as long as macroprudential
policy is restricted ( < ), debt is above the level in the optimal policy mix, and
more so under discretion than under commitment.


6     Conclusions
This paper develops a simple framework to analyze optimal policies in an environment
where collateral-dependent borrowing constraints lead to …nancial ampli…cation. Ex-
cept in knife-edge cases, all policies fall into the category of second-best interventions,
i.e., they achieve …rst-order welfare gains by mitigating binding borrowing constraints
in the economy, but at the expense of introducing second-order distortions. In ac-
cordance with the theory of the second-best (see Lipsey and Lancaster, 1956), it is
optimal to use all second-best instruments available in such a setting. In particular,
we show that it is optimal to both restrict borrowing ex-ante via macroprudential
regulation and to relax borrowing constraints ex-post by providing bailouts or other
transfers. This implies that policymakers should both “lean against the wind” and
“mop up after the crash.”
     The two policies are substitutes for each other since they address the same goal
from di¤erent angles, implying that in equilibrium, macroprudential policy is used
more when stimulus measures are restricted and vice versa. We also show that there is
no time consistency problem if the optimal mix of ex-ante macroprudential regulation
and ex-post stimulus measures is implemented. However, if macroprudential policy
is restricted, then committing to less ex-post policy and to providing it exclusively in
the form of monetary stimulus serves as a second-best device for reducing excessive
borrowing.
     There are a number of important questions that we leave for future analysis. First,
…nancial policies such as macroprudential regulation and stimulus have distributive
implications. Although we noted that the cost of raising funds g(s) can be inter-

                                            24
preted as the planner’s penalty for redistributing funds, we have not paid attention
to the political economy aspects of the choice between macroprudential regulation
and mopping up after the crash. It is clear in our setup that borrowers will dislike
the former and greatly value the latter. This creates an important role for special in-
terests and lobbying. Secondly, we have modeled ex-post stimulus policies in reduced
form, but the administration of stimulus policies in practice give rise to a number of
di¢ culties that arise from asymmetric information or budgetary limitations (see e.g.
Philippon and Schnabl, 2013). This calls for more detailed analysis in an integrated
framework of macroprudential regulation and ex-post interventions. Third, it would
be interesting to investigate the role for monetary policy in a more comprehensive
New Keynesian framework of …re sale externalities with nominal stickiness. Finally,
it is desirable to consider the interactions with further externalities that are relevant
during …nancial crises and that create a role for macroprudential regulation, in ad-
dition to the pecuniary externalities and bailout distortions that we consider in the
current paper. Examples include irrationality and aggregate demand externalities
(see e.g. Farhi and Werning, 2013, and Korinek and Simsek, 2016).




                                           25
References
Acharya, Viral V. and Tanju Yorulmazer, 2008, “Cash-in-the-Market Pricing and
Optimal Resolution of Bank Failures,” Review of Financial Studies 21(6), pp. 2705-
2742.
Benigno, Gianluca, Huigang Chen, Christopher Otrok, Alessandro Rebucci and Eric
R. Young, 2012, “Optimal Policy for Macroprudential Stability,” manuscript, Uni-
versity of Virginia.
Benigno, Gianluca, Huigang Chen, Christopher Otrok, Alessandro Rebucci and Eric
R. Young, 2014, “Optimal Capital Controls and Real Exchange Rate Policies: A
Pecuniary Externality Perspective,”manuscript, LSE
Blinder, Alan S., and Ricardo Reis, 2005, "Understanding the Greenspan Standard,"
in The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future, Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank
of Kansas City, pp. 11-96.
Bordo, Michael and Olivier Jeanne, 2002, "Monetary Policy And Asset Prices: Does
’Benign Neglect’Make Sense?" International Finance 5(2), pp. 139-164.
Borio, Claudio, 2003, “Towards a Macroprudential Framework for Financial Supervi-
sion and Regulation?”CESifo Economics Studies 49(2), pp. 181-215.
Caballero, Ricardo and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2003, “Excessive Dollar Borrowing:
Financial Development and Underinsurance,”Journal of Finance 58(2), pp. 867-894.
Davila, Eduardo, 2014, “Dissecting Fire-Sale Externalities,”manuscript, Harvard.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Jean Tirole, 2012, “Collective Moral Hazard, Maturity Mis-
match and Systemic Bailouts,”American Economic Review, 102(1), pp. 60-93.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Ivan Werning, 2013, “A Theory of Macroprudential Policies
in the Presence of Nominal Rigidities,”NBER Working Paper w19313.
Garcia, Gillian G., 1999, “Deposit Insurance - A Survey of Actual and Best Practices,”
IMF Working Paper 99/54.
Greenspan, Alan, 2002, “Opening Remarks,” in Economic Volatility, Kansas City:
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 1-10.
Greenspan, Alan, 2011, “Dodd-Frank fails to meet test of our times,” Op-ed in the
Financial Times, March 29 2011.
Gromb, Denis and Dimitri Vayanos, 2002, “Equilibrium and welfare in markets
with …nancially constrained arbitrageurs,” Journal of Financial Economics 66(2-3),
pp. 361-407.
Jeanne, Olivier and Anton Korinek, 2010, "Excessive Volatility in Capital Flows: A
Pigouvian Taxation Approach”, American Economic Review, pp. 403-407.


                                         26
Jeanne, Olivier and Anton Korinek, 2013, "Macroprudential Regulation Versus Mop-
ping Up After the Crash,”NBER Working Paper 18675.
Jeanne, Olivier and Jeromin Zettelmeyer, 2005, "“The Mussa Theorem (and other
results on IMF induced moral hazard)”, IMF Sta¤ Papers 52, pp. 64-84.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John H. Moore, 1997, “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political
Economy 105(2), pp. 211-248.
Korinek, Anton, 2010, “Regulating Capital Flows to Emerging Markets: An Exter-
nality View,”manuscript, University of Maryland.
Korinek, Anton, 2012, “Systemic Risk-Taking: Ampli…cation E¤ects, Externalities,
and Regulatory Responses,”ECB Working Paper 1345.
Korinek, Anton and Enrique Mendoza, 2014, “From sudden stops to Fisherian de‡a-
tion: Quantitative theory and policy implications,” Annual Review of Economics 6,
pp. 299-332.
Korinek, Anton and Alp Simsek, 2016, “Liquidity Trap and Excessive Leverage,”
American Economic Review 106(3).
Lipsey, Richard and Kelvin Lancaster, 1956, “The General Theory of Second Best,”
Review of Economic Studies 24(1), pp. 11-32.
Lorenzoni, Guido, 2008, "Ine¢ cient Credit Booms," Review of Economic Studies
75(3), pp. 809-833.
Philippon, Thomas and Philipp Schnabl, 2013. "E¢ cient Recapitalization," Journal
of Finance 68(1), pp. 1-42.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny, 1992, “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity:
A Market Equilibrium Approach,”Journal of Finance 47(4), pp. 1343-1366.
Stavrakeva, Vania, 2013, “Optimal Bank Regulation and Fiscal Capacity,” manu-
script, Harvard.
Stein, Jeremy, 2012, “Monetary Policy as Financial-Stability Regulation,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 127(1), pp. 57-95.


A      Further Results [Online Appendix]
A.1     General utility function
This appendix considers more general utility functions and shows that our results continue
to hold under appropriate assumptions. First, observe that the asset pricing equation (6)
implies
                                               1
                                      p= 0
                                            u (c1 )


                                           27
   Substituting this into the consumption function of individual agents yields a …xed-point
equation for the period-1 consumption of the representative borrower,

                                c1 = min cF B ; m + s +                :                          (18)
                                                            u0 (c1 )

In order to ensure that this equation has a unique solution for c1 we impose the following
restriction.16

Assumption 1 The utility function satis…es             u00 (c)=u0 (c)2 < 1 for 0    c    cF B .

    This assumption is satis…ed for example for CRRA utility functions with coe¢ cient of
relative risk aversion if the pledgeability parameter satis…es < 1= .
    The assumption ensures that the right-hand side of equation (18) rises more slowly
than the left-hand side, guaranteeing a unique intersection of the two. The equation then
implicitly de…nes equilibrium consumption c1 (m + s) as an increasing function of the rep-
resentative borrower’s total liquid wealth, m + s. The derivative of the function is given
by
                                                    u00 (c1 )
                         c01 (m + s) = 1   1                  > 1:
                                                   u0 (c1 )2
The period 1 utility of borrowers and welfare from the perspective of the policymaker
continue to be given by (8) and (9), and the optimal ex-post stimulus is determined as the
solution to equation (10), which has an interior solution that satis…es 0 < s(m) < m  ^ m.
The results of Propositions 1, 2, 4 and Proposition 3 readily follow.
    If condition (10) has a unique solution, then it is not only necessary but also su¢ cient
for the optimum. However uniqueness is not guaranteed in general because function c1 ( )
could be convex. Thus there is no guarantee that s( ) is a continuous function of m, and
the sign of the variations of s with m is a priori ambiguous, as can be seen from implicitly
di¤erentiating (10),

                               [u00 (c1 ) 1] c01 (m + s)2 + [u0 (c1 ) 1] c001 (m + s)
             s0 (m) =                                                                    :
                         [u00 (c1 ) 1] c01 (m + s)2 + [u0 (c1 ) 1] c001 (m + s) g 00 (s)

    One can ensure that function s( ) is well-behaved by imposing conditions that guar-
antee that the numerator of this expression is negative. For CRRA utility functions, the
                                                          2
consumption function satis…es c001 (m + s) = (1 ( 1)c
                                                  c   1 ) 3 and is non-positive if   1. This is a
                                                                                   0
su¢ cient condition to guarantee that s(m) is continuous and decreasing with s (m) 2 [0; 1).
Given these properties of the function s(m), Propositions 5 and 6 readily follow.
  16
    If this regularity condition was violated, then the left-hand side and the right-hand side of equa-
tion (18) may intersect in several points, leading to multiple equilibria: an unconstrained equilibrium
with a high collateral price and a high level of consumption may coexist with a constrained equilib-
rium where both variables are lower. Equilibrium multiplicity raises issues that are not essentially
related to the core question in this paper. See for example the appendix of Jeanne and Korinek
(2010b).



                                                  28
A.2     Complete Markets
This appendix replicates the analysis of the period-0 problem for the case of complete
markets. The period-1 problem is unchanged from our earlier analysis in Section 4.2 and
continues to be described by the same value functions V ( ) and W ( ). For clarity of notation,
we add a superscript denoting the state of nature ! 2 to all state-contingent variables.
In period 0, borrowers are free to issue di¤erent amounts of securities d! contingent on the
state of nature !. Given the risk-neutrality of lenders, the budget constraint of borrowers
is c0 = E [d! ], and the optimization problem of private borrowers as well as the planner is,

        max
         !
            u (E[d! ]) + E [V (   !
                                      d! )]    and     max
                                                        !
                                                           u (E[d! ]) + E [W (   !
                                                                                     d! )] :
         d                                              d

The optimality conditions for the security issuance in each state of nature are

                    u0 (c0 ) = V 0 (m! ) 8!    and u0 (c0 ) = W 0 (m! ) 8!:

The term u0 (c0 ) is constant so borrowers and the planner choose to fully insure the period-
1 shock and enter period 1 with the same liquid net worth m! = E[ ! ] c0 8! in all
states of nature. This is unsurprising since lenders are risk-neutral and o¤er actuarially fair
insurance. If m! m,   ^ then borrowers can insure away the binding constraints and attain a
…rst-best allocation in which c0 = cF B and there is no role for policy allocation. Otherwise,
constraints are equally binding in all states of nature. The optimal cap on security issuance
in state ! is d! = c0 + ! E[ ! ] where c0 is given by an Euler equation analogous to
equation (13),
                                                  u0 (c1 ) 1
                                   u0 (c0 ) = 1 +            :
                                                     1
Period-1 consumption c1 is the same in all states of nature so we omitted the expectations
operator. The optimal tax on securities issued against any state of nature ! 2 is constant
and is analogous to equation (15),

                                      !       u0 (c1 ) + g 0 (s)
                                          =
                                                 1 + g 0 (s)

where we omitted expectations and the superscript ! for period 1 variables since they are
constant across states of nature. It is straightforward to obtain analogons to Propositions
3, 2, 4 and 5 as well as our remaining results.


A.3     Collateral constraint in Period 0
This appendix analyzes the conditions under which the borrower will be tempted to renego-
tiate the debt issued in period 0. We assume that borrowers can make a take-it-or-leave-it
o¤er to renegotiate their debt at any time. If creditors reject this o¤er, they can seize units
of the borrower’s assets and sell them to other borrowers at the prevailing market price.
The incentive compatibility constraints that induce borrowers to refrain from reneging at
all time periods are as follows:


                                                 29
                (C#) Period                      Debt   Collateral    h           i
                (C1) end of period 0             d          p 0 = c0 E 1 +   c1
                (C2) beginning of period 1       d          ( + p1 ) =   ( + c1 )
                (C3) end of period 1             d0         p 1 = c1
                (C4) beginning of period 2       d0


    In the main text we have considered the collateral constraints for the debt issued in
period 1, (C3) and (C4). Here we focus on the collateral constraints for the debt issued in
period 0, (C1) and (C2).
    For constraint (C1), observe that we can substitute c0 = d and simplify the constraint
to
                                       E        +1      1:
                                           c1
This constraint is satis…ed as long as both and the weighted average shock realization
are su¢ ciently high. The numerical illustration in Section 5 provides an example.
    Constraint (C2) requires that d      ( + c1 ). If the constraint (C3) is loose then c1 = 1
and (C2) can be transformed to
                                       d     (1 + ) :
Otherwise and assuming the laissez faire equilibrium with s = 0, observe that c1 =
(d   ) =(1   ), and (C2) can be transformed to

                                       d        (2    ) :

In both cases, the constraint (C2) is satis…ed for all states of nature as long as both and
the lowest shock realization min are su¢ ciently high. Again, the numerical illustration in
Section 5 provides an example.
    If one of the constraints (C1) or (C2) was binding, then debt issuance in period 0 would
be a corner solution that is determined by the binding constraint, and there is nothing
the social planner can do using ex-ante interventions. The period-1 decisions would be
unchanged from our analysis in Section 4.1 and Proposition 1.




                                                30
