                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          THE PRODUCTION OF AND MARKET FOR NEW PHYSICIANS' SKILL

                                         Andrew J. Epstein
                                          Sean Nicholson
                                          David A. Asch

                                       Working Paper 18678
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18678


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2013




This paper benefited greatly from input from Jeph Herrin, Jason Hockenberry, David Howard, Suhui
Li, Sindhu Srinivas, and comments from participants in the 2012 American Society for Health Economists
conference, the 2012 Annual Health Economics Conference, and the 2012 Southeastern Health Economics
Study Group meeting, the Penn Health Economics Workshop, and other seminars at the University
of Pennsylvania. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Andrew J. Epstein, Sean Nicholson, and David A. Asch. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Production of and Market for New Physicians' Skill
Andrew J. Epstein, Sean Nicholson, and David A. Asch
NBER Working Paper No. 18678
January 2013
JEL No. D83,I11,J24,L15

                                               ABSTRACT

Our understanding of the determinants of physician skill and the extent to which skill is valued in the
marketplace is superficial. Using a large, detailed panel of new obstetricians, we find that, even though
physicians’ maternal complication rates improve steadily with years of practice, initial skill (as measured
by performance in a physician’s first year of practice) explains most of the variation in physician performance
over time. At the same time, we find that the trajectories of new physicians’ delivery volume develop
in a way partially consistent with Bayesian learning about physician quality. In particular, as physicians
gain experience, their volume becomes increasingly sensitive to the information in their accumulated
prior.


Andrew J. Epstein                                               David A. Asch
Division of General Internal Medicine                           Perelman School of Medicine
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine                   423 Guardian Drive
423 Guardian Dr                                                 Philadelphia, PA 19104
1001 Blockley Hall                                              asch@wharton.upenn.edu
Philadelphia, PA 19104
eandrew@mail.med.upenn.edu

Sean Nicholson
Professor
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
Cornell University
102 Martha Van Rensselaer Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
sn243@cornell.edu
1. Introduction

       Although physicians have long been recognized for the essential role they play in the

delivery of medical care, our current understanding of the formation and trajectory of their

human capital development is superficial. This is captured in the literature on the “volume-

outcomes relationship,” which Luft (1980) described over 30 years ago as consisting of two

simultaneous processes: learning by doing (in which physician skill improves with repetition)

and selective referral (in which the market rewards better physicians with more patients). Owing

to a lack of available data and endogeneity between volume and outcomes, prior work has been

unable to reach firm conclusions about the determinants of physician skill and the extent to

which skill is valued in the marketplace.

       The need for a better understanding of physician skill is increasing as medical care

systems transition toward an emphasis on provider quality and value. A number of strategies

have been developed to motivate providers to improve the quality of their care, including public

reporting and pay for performance. It would seem difficult to evaluate the success of these

efforts or even gauge their potential for improvement without first appreciating how provider

performance naturally evolves in their absence. Similarly, evaluation of efforts that are premised

on steering consumers to better-performing providers, such as public reporting, depends on

comparison to a baseline of consumers’ ability to observe provider quality without additional

guidance. There is scant evidence on the performance trajectories of individual physicians over

time, however, and on consumers’ ability to observe them.

       We analyze these issues in a large sample of new obstetricians, whom we observe

immediately after residency completion. Obstetrics is an attractive setting for a number of

reasons. First, labor and delivery is one of the most common inpatient medical procedures in the



                                                1
United States; in 2009, over 4 million women gave birth in hospitals.1 As the number of

deliveries per physician is large (120 per year on average in our sample), it is possible to measure

physician performance relatively precisely. Second, delivery complications are commonplace.

Approximately 11% of inpatient deliveries in 2006 resulted in a maternal complication (Srinivas

et al., 2010), and there is significant variation across physicians (Asch et al., 2009). Thus, choice

of provider for delivery matters for patient outcomes, which could be improved by better

matching between patients and providers. Third, given the extended duration of pregnancy,

patients have ample time and motivation to research provider choices and then choose the

provider that best suits their needs (although the availability and use of external physician report

cards in obstetrics have been minimal). Fourth, concerns about physician-induced demand of

child births are unimportant (Dranove and Wehner, 1994), and the number of deliveries in the

aggregate is presumably unrelated to the distribution of skill across practicing obstetricians. For

these reasons, obstetrics offers a reasonably uncontaminated venue in which to study physician

skill trajectories and as such represents an upper bound on unassisted market learning about

physician skill.

          We seek to answer three questions here. First, what is the trajectory of performance

among new physicians? Second, which factors explain variation in performance across

physicians over time? Specifically, how important are initial skill, economies of scale (i.e.,

contemporaneous volume), learning by doing (i.e., cumulative volume), and years of experience?

Third, do physicians with better outcomes subsequently perform more deliveries? If so, is their

volume more or less responsive to recent performance than to cumulative performance?

          The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we describe our data and methodology for

constructing annual measures of physician skill. Section 3 contains an analysis of the
1
    http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhds/7femalesdelivery/2009fem7_numberpercent

                                                       2
determinants of physician performance over time, while in Section 4 we examine the market

response to physician performance. Section 5 concludes.



2. Data and measurement of physician skill

2.1 Data and sample

       We used data from Florida and New York all-payer hospital discharge databases for 1992

through 2010, covering all deliveries at all nonfederal acute care hospitals. These states were

selected because their data contain physician identifiers in addition to information typically

found in discharge databases, such as patient demographics, and diagnosis and procedure codes.

Cesarean deliveries were identified with an International Classification of Diseases, Ninth

Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM) procedure code of 74 in any procedure field.

Vaginal deliveries were identified with ICD-9-CM diagnosis codes of 650 or 640.0x through

676.9x (where x is 1 or 2) in the principal diagnosis field and no indication of a cesarean

delivery. The discharge data were augmented with physician information from the American

Medical Association’s Physician Masterfile, including demographics, specialty and medical

school and residency program locations and graduation years. We also used the American

Medical Association’s FREIDA Online graduate medical education website to identify hospitals

that sponsored OB residency training programs or that hosted rotations.

       There were 8,500,303 deliveries in the 1992-2010 hospital discharge data, of which

7,337,250 deliveries (86.3%) were performed by a physician with a valid state license number

who completed an OB residency. Because physicians typically graduate from residency

programs around July 1, we measured time according to an academic year calendar (starting July

1 and ending June 30); there were 6,968,506 deliveries (82.0%) performed in the 18 years



                                                 3
between July 1, 1992 and June 30, 2010. As our focus is on new obstetricians, we identified

1,864 physicians who completed OB residency between 1992 and 2009 and appeared in the

hospital discharge data in the same year (1,260 in New York and 604 in Florida); they

collectively performed 2,004,903 deliveries over 15,673 physician-years. Sample descriptive

statistics are shown in Table 1.

2.2 Measuring physician skill

       Following our prior work (Asch, et al., 2009; Epstein, Ketcham and Nicholson, 2010;

Srinivas, et al., 2010), we quantify skill based on physicians’ annual rate of maternal

complications of infection, hemorrhage, severe laceration, and other major operative and

thrombotic complications. For vaginal deliveries we created a dichotomous composite variable

that includes hemorrhage, severe laceration, infection and thrombotic complication. For

cesarean deliveries we created a dichotomous composite variable that includes infection,

hemorrhage, and other major operative and thrombotic complications. In addition to the two

mode-specific complication rates, we constructed an overall complication rate that combined

vaginal and cesarean deliveries. Maternal complications of these types are not uncommon; the

unadjusted rate for any major maternal complication among deliveries in our sample was 15.0%

in 1992 and 11.7% in 2010.

       There are two analytic concerns related to measuring physician performance. First,

maternal complications are determined in part by patient characteristics, and, second, there has

been a secular trend in maternal complications (Srinivas, et al., 2010). Because patients are

nested within physicians, we deal with these issues in a two-stage regression framework (Angrist

and Pischke, 2009, pp. 313-315). In the first stage, we calculate a measure of each new




                                                 4
obstetrician’s annual performance based on the following linear probability model, which is

estimated separately for each academic year during 1992-2009:

(1)

where Cijt equals one if patient i treated by physician j in year t experienced a maternal

complication and is zero otherwise. New physicians are denoted by jn. By including deliveries

performed by both “ever-new” and “never-new”2 obstetricians in the estimation sample, the

coefficients on the new physicians’ fixed effects (             ) are interpreted relative to the mean risk-

adjusted complication rate of the established physicians3 ( ) in year t. We thus refer to                       as

physician j’s normalized, risk-adjusted maternal complication rate for year t. The model controls

for a vector of patient-level characteristics (Xijt): age, race/ethnicity, having Medicaid or no

insurance, weekend admission, and 34 maternal comorbidities.4 Although we also control for

delivery mode when the sample includes all deliveries, the results are not sensitive to doing so;

the correlation between           with and without controlling for delivery mode is over 0.99.

         Even though the outcome is dichotomous, we chose to estimate these models via OLS

primarily because doing so avoids the incidental parameters problem resulting from including

unconditional fixed effects in nonlinear models such as probit and logit. Johnson (2011) recently

developed an approach to estimate              from nonlinear models in a correlated random effects

framework, but the approach is computationally expensive. In comparison, OLS estimates are

consistent, easily interpretable, and quickly estimated. Regardless, both approaches are designed

to measure physician performance net of patient observables. Controlling for observable patient
2
  By “ever-new” we mean the set of those physicians whom we observe in our data immediately upon residency
completion, while “never-new” physicians comprise the remainder.
3
  Note that by “established physicians” we mean those who completed OB residency prior to 1992 or practiced
elsewhere before moving to Florida or New York.
4
  These include: prior cesarean delivery, fetal malpresentation, severe hypertension, multiple gestation, antepartum
bleeding, herpes, macrosomia, unengaged head, maternal soft tissue disorder, preterm labor, congenital anomalies,
oligohydramnios, and polyhydramnios.

                                                          5
characteristics does not affect the physician-specific maternal complication rate estimates much

in the setting of obstetrics, because women delivering children are generally healthy. In our

sample the correlations between              with and without controlling for Xijt are over 0.98. Neither

approach accounts for possible sorting between patients and physicians based on unobservables,

which have been shown to be relevant in obstetrics (Epstein, Ketcham and Nicholson, 2010). As

a result, our measures of physician performance should be interpreted as reflecting “observed”

physician performance and not necessarily “true” physician performance.

         In the second stage, we pool the estimates of                to create a panel dataset of 15,673

physician-year observations. We rescale t to represent the number of years since residency

completion; e.g., t=0 indicates a physician’s first year of practice. In analyses of the

determinants of physician performance, we estimate linear models of the form:

(2)

where         is a vector of possibly-time-varying physician-level covariates. Because of the

heteroskedasticity resulting from unequal numbers of patients per physician-year in equation (1),

equation (2) is estimated most efficiently by WLS, where the weights are the reciprocal of the

variance of εjt. We use the formula for the weights developed by Borjas (1987), which is specific

to situations in which the dependent variable in the second-stage model is a coefficient from a

first-stage model. As WLS does not address the potential lack of independence among annual

observations for a given physician or any residual heteroskedasticity, we also use robust,

clustered standard errors.5



3. The production of physician skill

5
  Note that in models with physician fixed effects, robust standard errors are identical to standard errors that account
for clustering of multiple physician-years per physician (Stock and Watson, 2008).

                                                           6
       One of our main objectives is to identify the determinants of physician performance.

Prior work on this topic has centered on the relationship between physician performance and

experience, which may be measured in a variety of ways. One way is cumulative time spent in

practice, via age or years of experience, for example. The standard model of human capital

development is inverse-U-shaped and holds that human capital increases with age initially,

before plateauing and eventually declining. Choudhry et al. (2005) reviewed the literature

through 2004 and found weak evidence for a negative association between experience and

physician performance, but noted that comparability across studies was limited and that most of

the literature on physician age/experience focused on older surgeons and decrements in skill.

       Another way to measure experience is in terms of numbers of cases treated or procedures

performed. Underlying this approach is a learning-by-doing model, possibly with “forgetting”

effects and scale effects (Huesch and Sakakibara, 2008). Although most volume-outcomes

studies have analyzed data at the hospital level (Luft 1980), studies of physician volume and

outcomes have become more common (e.g., Birkmeyer et al., 2003, and Janakiraman et al.,

2011). These studies typically consider contemporaneous volume only (which is a measure of

scale and not necessarily experience), employ a cross-sectional design, and fail to consider

possible endogeneity. The few well-designed longitudinal studies at the physician level of which

we are aware (Bridgewater et al., 2004; Vickers et al., 2007; Huesch, 2009; Ramanarayan, 2008)

are split in terms of finding evidence of learning curves and are based on comparatively small

samples of physicians (n=15, 72, 57 and 313 respectively).

       To explore the relationship between experience and performance in our data, we first plot

the association between years of experience and normalized, risk-adjusted maternal complication

rates. We then fit simple models of



                                                7
(3)                                                 and

(4)                                                       ,

where tj is the number of years elapsed since new physician j completed OB residency and μj

represents a vector of physician fixed effects. Thus, Eq. (4) is identified off of within-physician

changes in performance over time. Years of experience and cumulative volume have a naturally

high correlation. We chose to focus here on years of experience rather than cumulative volume

because of possible endogeneity between volume and performance and the difficulty of

identifying a credible instrument for volume. Nonetheless, there is potential endogeneity

between years of experience and performance in the form of survivor bias; poorly-performing

physicians might be more likely to stop performing deliveries as they practiced longer, making it

appear that more experience leads to better outcomes when in fact having worse outcomes leads

to less experience. To address this concern, we repeated the analyses on the subset of “stayer”

physicians—those who performed deliveries at the end of the study period and hence did not exit

the sample.6

         Figure 1 shows trends in mean, annual, physician-level normalized risk-adjusted maternal

complication rates separately for all, cesarean, and vaginal deliveries. As physicians gained

experience, performance improved for all three outcomes for about the first decade of practice.

The estimation results for Eqs. (3) and (4) also indicate that average physician performance

improved steadily (Table 2). Based on the unadjusted, weighted linear regressions (Eq. [3]),

outcomes for all, cesarean and vaginal deliveries each improved by 0.18 percentage points per

year over the study period. In the physician fixed effects models (Eq. [4]), the effects were

attenuated slightly for all and vaginal deliveries and attenuated substantially for cesarean
6
 Approaches like this one using an unbalanced panel of physician-years might still be biased if physicians’ start of
practice (i.e., year of graduation) varies systematically with unobservables, such as innate ability. Our results were
robust in sub-analyses using balanced panels of physicians with at least 5, 10 and 15 years of experience.

                                                           8
deliveries. For all three delivery samples, the results from the subset of “stayer” physicians were

similar to the results from the full sample, suggesting that survivor bias is not a problem here.

        While existing work has tested the influences of experience, age, volume and learning

curves on physician performance, virtually no attention has been paid to the possible role of

physicians’ aptitude—some physicians may be innately better at performing some tasks than

other physicians. We can explore this in a crude way by examining the correlation between a

physician’s risk-adjusted complication rate in year t and t-k. If aptitude plays a role, we would

expect the correlations to be positive and significant. As shown in Table 3, these correlations are

positive and significant through k=14. They range between 0.42 and 0.49 for k=1 and decrease

steadily as the time lag increases (and the number of observations in our sample drops),

suggesting that aptitude plays a role in extended performance.

        Unlike years of experience and volume, we cannot measure innate aptitude directly. We

therefore use physicians’ normalized, risk-adjusted maternal complication rates in their first year

of practice (i.e., t=0), which we refer to here as initial skill, as a proxy for innate ability. Figure 2

compares the performance-by-experience curves (starting from the second year of practice) for

physicians in the first and fourth quartiles of initial skill. To test whether the differences

between the first and fourth quartiles are significant, we calculated their difference and 95%

confidence interval by year of experience using our WLS framework (Figure 3). For all,

cesarean and vaginal deliveries, physicians who were in the best quartile of initial skill continued

to have significantly better performance than their peers in the worst quartile of initial skill

through at least the 15th year of practice. In other words, even as absolute performance steadily

improves with years of experience, relative performance appears persistent.7


7
 As an alternative, we calculated the yearly proportion of physicians initially in the best or worst quartile who
subsequently remained in that quartile. If assignment to performance quartile were random, we would expect 25%

                                                        9
        One potential concern is regression to the mean. Intuitively it looks as though there is

regression to the mean; performance between the two quartiles converges as physicians advance

in their careers. In fact, regression to the mean is a feature intrinsic to any situation in which one

follows subsequent performance conditional on initial performance (Nesselroade, Stigler and

Baltes, 1980; Smith and Smith, 2005). Under the assumption that the relationship between latent

physician aptitude and realized performance is time-invariant, we could quantify the magnitude

of the regression to the mean as one minus the correlation coefficient. Data from Table 3 suggest

that the size of year-to-year regression to the mean would be just over 50%. But, the aptitude-

performance relationship almost surely changes as physicians gain experience, and our interest

here is in determining how much it changes. That is, the point of our exercise is not to establish

whether or not regression to the mean is present (it is by construction) or to measure its

magnitude (which is sizeable), but to investigate how long it takes for the performance

differences identified in the first year to dissipate (at least 15 years).

        Given this evidence that experience and initial skill both affect physician performance,

we would like to develop a production function for physician skill. The existing work on

production functions for physician practices (e.g., Reinhardt, 1972; Thurston and Libby, 2002)

focuses exclusively on quantities of services provided (e.g., numbers of office visits) as a

function of physician labor and other inputs. In contrast, we seek to model physicians’ average

quality level conditional on their quantity of deliveries performed in a given year. We are

interested in quantifying the relative contributions of four potential determinants of physician

performance: (1) aptitude (i.e., initial skill), (2) scale (i.e., contemporaneous volume), (3)



to remain in the same quartile between any pair of years. For the all deliveries outcome measure, the proportion
declined from 51% in the second year of practice to 37% in the sixth year of practice before stabilizing between
32% and 39% through the 18th year of practice. Patterns for the cesarean and vaginal delivery measures were
similar.

                                                        10
learning by doing (i.e., cumulative volume), and (4) years of experience. However, as noted,

cumulative volume and years of experience are highly correlated. Thus we either consider their

joint contribution to performance, or control for it implicitly by looking only at physicians with

the same amount of experience. Our simple linear model of performance is

(5)

where     is initial skill,        is lagged contemporaneous volume, and                 is lagged

cumulative volume for t > 0. We lag contemporaneous volume one year to help attenuate

reverse causality concerns, and compute cumulative volume only through year t-2 to prevent a

mechanical correlation with contemporaneous volume. Of course, volume and outcomes may

still be endogeneous. Assuming more volume accrues to better performers, as is consistent with

theory and prior literature (e.g., Luft, 1980), our estimate of the contribution of volume to

performance is an upper bound.

        We use Theil’s (1972) incremental R2 method to decompose the total explained variation

into components uniquely attributable to each factor. As described above, these models will be

heteroskedastic because the dependent variables are physician-specific fixed effect coefficients

estimated in the first-stage, patient-level regressions (Eq. [1]). We nevertheless estimate these

models with OLS, because WLS transforms the regressand and regressors and so the R2 obtained

from WLS is not applicable to the study question (Wooldridge, 2006, p. 286). To check this, we

estimate one set of models on a sample limited to physician-year observations in which

physicians performed at least 30 deliveries of the relevant type.

        The incremental R2 method consists of two steps. The first step is to calculate how much

of the variation in the dependent variable can be explained in total by all of the available

explanatory variables. We thus estimate Eq. (5). The R2 value from this regression is reported in


                                                 11
Table 4 in the “Total R2” rows. The second step is to calculate how much of the variation in the

dependent variable can be explained by the other explanatory variables except for the one(s) of

interest. We thus re-estimate Eq. (5), omitting each of the explanatory variables one at a time.

The unique contribution of each explanatory variable to the variation in physician performance is

calculated as the simple arithmetic difference between the R2 from the full model and the R2

from the model omitting that explanatory variable. These are displayed in Table 4 in the same

rows next to the particular explanatory variable. We do not report the overall R2 values from

these regressions, but they can be calculated straightforwardly from Table 4.

         Table 4 shows the results of the decomposition exercise for a number of distinct samples

of physicians. The first three columns are based on analyses of all years of physician experience

except the first, which was omitted to avoid the reflection with our measure of initial skill. The

first column includes all physician-year observations, the second includes physician-year

observations where mode-specific delivery volume was at least 30 (as a way to check the effects

of heteroskedasticity without resorting to WLS), and the third is like the first but includes

observations from “stayer” physicians only. The second three columns are based on analyses in

which physician experience is held fixed, at 5 years, 10 years and 15 years of experience

respectively.

         The results are notably stable across samples. Initial skill contributes around 80% of the

explained variation in annual physician performance for all, cesarean and vaginal deliveries in

the “all years” samples (the first three columns).8 In contrast, for all three delivery types,

contemporaneous volume contributes less than 5%, and cumulative volume and years of


8
 We also estimated models in the “all years” samples that controlled only for physician fixed effects to gauge the
amount of variation in    explained by time-invariant physician attributes all together. The R2 values from these
models were 48.16 for all deliveries, 42.81 for cesarean deliveries and 45.02 for vaginal deliveries—all notably
higher than the Total R2 values reported in Table 4, which were between 4 and 9.

                                                         12
experience together contribute no more than 10%. Initial skill continues to explain more of the

variation in performance than the combination of contemporaneous and cumulative volume

when holding years of experience fixed, even as the absolute amount of explained variation (and

the number of physicians in the sample) declines with years of experience. After five years of

experience (i.e., in the sixth year of practice), initial skill is responsible for 85% of the explained

variation in performance among all deliveries, 96% among cesarean deliveries, and 75% among

vaginal deliveries. Even after 15 years of experience, the contribution of initial skill remains at

38%, 69% and 56% respectively. Interestingly, the relative importance of contemporaneous

volume increases as physicians practice longer, accounting for less than 2% of explained

variation in the sixth year of practice to between 13% and 20% in the 16th year. This may be

evidence of “forgetting” effects in the obstetrics learning curve or of delayed specialization by

physicians. Lagged cumulative volume is responsible for no more than 5% of explained

variation for all and cesarean deliveries in any single year. For vaginal deliveries, however, it

contributes 11% after five years of experience before declining to 1% after 15 years of

experience. Similarly, in the “all years” samples, cumulative volume and years of experience

jointly contribute more to explained variation for vaginal deliveries than for cesarean deliveries.

           To help put these findings in perspective, we can treat Eq. (5) as a causal model and

compare the expected impact of physician attributes on complication rates. Suppose a

hypothetical consumer could observe information about quartile of initial skill, cumulative

volume and years of experience for a pair of prospective obstetricians.9 Still taking the results of

Eq. (5) as causal, we would expect that an obstetrician with 17 years of experience (and average

cumulative volume among physicians with 17 years of experience) would have a 2.9 percentage

point lower normalized, risk-adjusted complication rate for all deliveries compared with a peer
9
    We ignore contemporaneous volume here, as its estimated impact is minimal.

                                                         13
with only one year of experience (and average cumulative volume among physicians with one

year of experience). In contrast, a physician in the best quartile of initial skill would have a 5.4

percentage point lower complication rate for all deliveries on average than an otherwise-identical

peer in the worst quartile. In other words, a consumer could improve her expected outcome by

2.5 percentage points (p<0.001) by selecting an obstetrician based on quartile of initial skill

instead of the combination of cumulative volume and years of experience.10 Further, note that

this hypothetical scenario was constructed in a way to favor information on cumulative volume

and years of experience (by selecting the extreme ends of experience and by assuming there is no

reverse causality between outcomes and volume) over initial skill. One important caveat,

however, is that the size of the absolute advantage of selecting based on initial skill applies only

to physicians with no more than 17 years of experience (i.e., physicians in our sample). The

results in Table 4 suggest that initial skill is relatively more informative even 15 years into a

physician’s career, but its absolute predictive power declines with experience.

         An important caveat here is that initial skill may be determined by more than just a

physician’s innate aptitude. Contextual factors, such as the resources of the hospital in which the

physician works and the skill of complementary labor inputs, likely matter as well. This has

been recognized in the labor literature on the impact of graduates’ initial job placement on

subsequent career trajectories (e.g., Oyer, 2006). A basic way to address this concern is to

expand Eq. (5) to include fixed effects for the hospitals at which physicians practiced in their

first years after residency training. Results from these expanded models, which are shown in

Table 5, indicate that the hospitals at which obstetricians begin their careers have a sizeable

downstream impact on their later performance. Given that most new obstetricians in our sample

10
  The results are similar for the cesarean delivery and vaginal delivery samples. The expected net benefit of
choosing an obstetrician based on initial skill is a 3.3 percentage point lower complication rate for cesarean
deliveries and a 3.0 percentage point lower complication rate for vaginal delivery (p<0.001 for each).

                                                         14
do not change hospitals during the study period, these initial hospital fixed effects are also

capturing environmental factors in year t as well. At the same time, the relative importance of

physicians’ initial skill diminishes considerably. When controlling for initial hospital fixed

effects, initial skill contributes between 2% and 11% of explained variation, still more than

volume or experience, but less than the 58% to 76% from the initial hospital fixed effects.11

         Taken as a whole, our analyses suggest that, while obstetricians’ performance continues

to improve with years of experience, their relative positions are fairly stable over time and are

reflected in a composite measure of their performance in their first years of practice. This

composite measure in turn reflects components that are specific to physicians and components

that are specific to practice settings. Because the selection of physicians into practice settings is

endogenous, we cannot easily disentangle the relative importance of each component.

Nevertheless, the measure of physicians’ initial skill retains considerable predictive power years

later, implying that physician ability, regardless of its determinants, is preserved over time, at

least during the first portion of a physician’s career.



4. The market for physician skill

         A small number of studies find that market share responds to provider quality. Early

studies focused primarily on hospital quality (e.g., Luft et al., 1990), while more recent efforts

also look at physicians. Consistent with the hospital studies, two studies on the selection of

cardiac surgeons (Mukamel et al., 2004/2005; Epstein, 2010) found that patients were more



11
  We also estimated models that replaced the initial hospital fixed effects with “traditional” hospital fixed effects
and physician j’s initial hospital’s mode-specific crude performance in their year prior to physician j’s start.
Physician initial skill and initial hospital (lagged) performance contributed roughly the same amount to explained
variation in subsequent physician performance. Initial hospital performance is slightly more important in cesarean
deliveries, while physician initial skill is more important for vaginal deliveries. Moreover, the correlation between
the two is large (e.g., 0.50 for all deliveries).

                                                          15
likely to be treated by better-rated surgeons and less likely to be treated by worse-rated ones

during periods when provider report cards were not available. These studies all cover narrow

time periods and thus offer a limited view of the relationship between prior performance and

current volume.

       Two recent studies seek to overcome these limitations by using panels of physicians.

Navathe and David (2009) explore the market volume response to physician performance in the

prior year while controlling for physician fixed effects and other time-varying characteristics

over a 15-year period. Johnson (2011) uses an initial cross-section of data to measure physician

quality and looks at responses to the quality during the following six. An important feature of

both is their inclusion of all physicians—both new and established—in their analytic samples.

Under certain conditions, however, recent performance may not influence market participants’

beliefs about the quality of established physicians. By limiting our study to new physicians and

following them from residency completion, we hope to expand the understanding of how

participants in the market form and then update their expectations of physician quality.

       In the setting of obstetrics services, where patients have adequate time and incentive to

search for providers, the aggregate market response will be driven by a combination of patient

demand, peer and referring physician demand, and obstetrician supply. It is entirely possible that

any group may not respond at all to obstetricians’ performance, perhaps because it is not

observable to them or because it is not trusted or deemed relevant. We posit that patients obtain

their information primarily from word of mouth around the time of their pregnancies (Hoerger

and Howard, 1995). Thus, we would expect the information signal to decay quickly, and if

patients respond, it would be primarily in reaction to obstetricians’ recent performance. In

contrast, physicians (peer/referring and obstetricians themselves) could develop the capacity to



                                                16
track obstetricians over time as their careers unfold. This would allow for the accumulation of

information about a physician’s performance and would enable long-run learning. It is an

empirical question as to whether physicians accumulate performance information and respond to

it; alternatively, like patients, they might respond principally to obstetricians’ recent performance

if at all.12

           Like Navathe and David (2009) and Johnson (2011), we specify a simple Bayesian model

of learning about physician quality over time in which the expectation of quality is the weighted

average of a recent quality signal and an accumulated prior belief about physician j’s quality.

That is,

(6)

where E(Qjt) is the market’s expectation of quality for physician j in time t. We further assume

that                                        for t ≥ 0. The market prior about a physician’s quality is

initially flat                                and is updated dynamically as

for t > 0. Thus, the market’s expectation of physician quality becomes

(7)                                                                             ,

which simplifies to

(8)

when physician j’s volume is constant over time. So, if there is learning in a Bayesian fashion,

we would expect that the response to a physician’s recent performance is strongest when the

physician is at the start of his career (i.e., when t = 1, E(Qjt) = Signaljt). As the physician gains




12
  There are other stakeholders who might accumulate information about physician performance over time, such as
patient groups or payers, although we suspect these are less likely mechanisms.

                                                      17
experience, however, market participants would increasingly rely on the information in the

accumulated prior (i.e., as         ,                    ) if they are Bayesian learners.

        We then test the predictions from the learning model in the following four empirical

specifications.

      (9)




      (10)




     (11)




    (12)



In these models, Voljt represents physician j’s delivery volume in academic year t, Docj is a

vector of time-invariant physician characteristics (i.e., sex, maternal fetal medicine specialist,

international medical graduate status, whether the obstetrician practiced in multiple hospitals,

and indicators for the year of OB residency completion), Hospj is a vector of time-invariant

characteristics of physician j’s main hospital (i.e., the average number of annual deliveries and

indicators for whether the hospital sponsored an OB residency program or whether the hospital

hosted OB residency rotations), ζt is vector of indicators for the number of years since residency

completion, Sigjt is the signal, Prijt is the prior, ηs is an indicator for state, θm represents market

fixed effects, κh represents hospital fixed effects, and λj represents physician fixed effects. Note

that observations from t = 0 are dropped from the estimation sample because the signal is not



                                                   18
defined in the first year of practice. When t = 1, the prior is set to 0 according to the assumption

of a flat initial prior (and 0 is the normalized mean performance from established physicians in

each calendar year).

        Our principal interest is in the net effects of each of the signal and prior across the values

of t. Because the available sample decreases as t grows, in the interactions with ζt we collapse

categories of t into                                              , where t = 1 is the omitted referent.

Thus, to obtain the net effect of, for example, the signal in a given year, we sum γ0 and the

appropriate member of γ. These net effects based on OLS models with robust, clustered standard

errors13 are presented for all deliveries (Table 6), cesarean deliveries (Table 7) and vaginal

deliveries (Table 8). To ease interpretation, we present the net effects of a one standard

deviation increase in the prior or signal on annual delivery volume.

        The estimated net effects of the information on recent performance contained in the

signal on physician volume do not follow an obvious pattern. For all and vaginal deliveries, the

signal effect is generally negative and largest in the third year of practice—at least for Eqs. 9, 10

and 11. The physician fixed effects models (Eq. 12) for all and vaginal deliveries and all four

models for cesarean deliveries reveal no reliable relationships between the signal and current

volume. At most, we could say that there is occasional evidence that delivery volume responds

to physicians’ recent performance.

        In contrast, the market appears to respond to the performance information accumulated in

the prior. For all, cesarean and vaginal deliveries, across nearly all model specifications, the

association between the prior and volume is small after a physician completes residency and

starts practice, and it grows nearly monotonically in the right direction (i.e., the net effects

13
  Note that we do not use WLS here, as the dependent variable is volume and not physician performance. Because
volume is skewed, however, we also estimated quasi-maximum likelihood Poisson models. The patterns of
coefficients from these models are the same, so we report only the OLS models.

                                                      19
become more negative, as expected given that the prior and signal are measured in terms of

maternal complication rates, for which higher scores are worse). By the eighth year of practice,

the response to the prior is nominally larger than the response to the signal. The one exception to

this pattern is the physician fixed effects model (Eq. 12) for vaginal deliveries, in which the prior

shows no consistent pattern over time.

         So far, our analyses have shed no light on the extent to which the volume response to

quality information is driven by consumers or suppliers (or both). To test whether consumers

respond, we follow others in exploring whether the volume response varies by patients’

insurance type (Fournier and McInnes, 2002; Dranove, Ramayanaran and Watanabe, 2012),

specifically comparing mothers with Medicaid or no insurance to those with commercial

insurance.14 Our identifying assumptions here are that obstetricians cannot induce demand for

delivery (Dranove and Wehner, 1994); that obstetricians do not face capacity constraints; and

that, as obstetricians learn about their own relative performance, they do not reduce their own

volume differentially by patient insurance status. Thus, finding that commercially-insured

patients were more responsive would suggest that at least some of the response was consumer-

based.

         We test this empirically by re-estimating Eqs. 9-12 after limiting Voljt to the relevant

group of patients based on their insurance type. The all delivery results for commercial patients

are shown in Table 9 and for Medicaid/uninsured patients in Table 10. As with the overall

results, while we would expect the effect of the signal to be large and negative for obstetricians

early in their careers and then attenuate for obstetricians with more years of experience, there is

no clear pattern between the quality signal and delivery volume for either patient group. If

14
  Fournier and McInnes (2002) and Dranove, Ramayanaran and Watanabe (2012) both use data from Florida which
code HMOs and PPOs separately. We combine all commercial patients because the New York data do not indicate
type of plan.

                                                    20
consumers learn in a Bayesian fashion, their response to the prior should be small for the newest

physicians and grow more negative for more experienced physicians. The response pattern

among commercial patients appears consistent with this; the magnitude of the effect of the prior

grows from the 3rd year to the 6th-7th year period to the 8th-12th year period, and stays larges in

the 13th-18th year period. The response to the prior among Medicaid and uninsured patients stays

largely flat through the 8th-12th year period before becoming large and negative in the 13th-18th

year period. Thus our results offer mild support for the hypothesis that commercially insured

patients are more responsive to the physician performance information contained in the prior, but

there is no substantive difference between the groups in their response to the signal.

       We can study whether obstetricians are responding to their own performance information

by examining whether they increase their volume of substitute procedures. If so, we would

expect that the gynecology procedure volume of poorly-performing obstetricians would increase

relatively more. Alternatively, if physicians with better gynecology procedure outcomes also

attract more volume and obstetrics and gynecology procedure skill are positively related, then

physicians who perform poorly at obstetrics procedures might lose more gynecology procedure

volume too. We thus re-estimate Eqs. 9-12 where the outcome is measured as annual number of

common inpatient gynecological procedures (oophorectomies and hysterectomies); the results

are shown in Table 11. If obstetricians learn about their own performance in a Bayesian fashion

and substitute toward gynecology, we would expect their response to the signal to be large and

positive early in their careers and attenuate over time, while their response to the prior should be

close to zero early on before growing large and positive with years of experience. However, the

effect of the prior starts small but grows increasingly negative with years of experience (except

for the physician fixed effects model, in which the response is close to zero throughout),



                                                  21
suggesting if anything that physicians who establish themselves as performing better in obstetrics

also attract more gynecological volume.

        Another possibility is that physicians react to learning that their obstetrics performance is

poor by exiting obstetrics entirely.15 We adapted the specification in Eq. 9 to model the hazard

of physician exit from obstetrics in year t (i.e., t is the first year with zero deliveries, and there

are no deliveries thereafter) using a discrete-time implementation of a survival model based on

conditional-log-log regression. Results, which are shown in Table 12, do not indicate that

physicians were basing their exit decisions on revelations about their obstetrics performance as

measured in the signal or prior. These stand in contrast to Johnson’s (2011) findings that worse-

performing cardiac specialists were more likely to exit practice and to change geographic

markets.



5. Conclusions

        Our empirical analyses indicate that, in the setting of obstetrics, average physician skill

improves steadily in an almost linear fashion over the first decade of a new obstetrician’s

practice. At the same time, the importance of any experience-based learning curve is dominated

by physicians’ initial skill, which reflects some combination of innate ability and practice setting

characteristics. Compared with physicians in the worst quartile of initial skill, those in the best

quartile remain significantly better for more than a decade after. Moreover, initial skill has far

more power in predicting physician performance than contemporaneous volume, cumulative

volume and years of experience; it contributes around 80% of the explained variation in models

using our full sample. Perhaps most importantly, consumers could substantially improve their


15
  We cannot determine from our data whether an exiting physician has moved another state or why the physician
stopped performing deliveries.

                                                      22
expected reduction in complications by selecting prospective obstetrician candidates based on

their initial skill rather than their cumulative delivery volume and years of experience if this

information were known.

       We find evidence partially consistent with Bayesian learning by the market, most likely

involving peer and referring physicians. Response to the information contained in the

accumulated prior is minimal at the start of a physician’s career and increases steadily in the

expected direction going forward. By the eighth year of practice, response to the prior is

nominally but consistently larger than response to the signal of recent performance. Response to

the signal is somewhat unstable, however. If learning were strictly Bayesian, we would expect

the signal response to be largest for recently-graduated physicians and attenuated with

experience. For all and vaginal deliveries, response to the signal is large in the third year of

practice, but it is large and in the right direction in some later years as well. For cesarean

deliveries, the response is in the right direction but the magnitudes follow no obvious pattern.

These results may reflect a distinct, non-Bayesian process in which patients and/or other

physicians respond to recent performance, or they may reflect coincidence.

       There are a number of potential limitations to this work. One category is generalizability.

We examine data on physicians from one specialty and two states. The patterns found here may

not apply beyond obstetrics. Another category of limitations is measurement error. We use

administrative data to identify maternal complications and attribute them, possibly inaccurately,

to individual physicians. These data do not allow attribution of neonatal outcomes, which are

also important, to obstetricians. These data are also incomplete in measuring potentially relevant

patient characteristics that might be related to patient selection and sorting. More broadly, we do

not observe details about physicians’ practice environments, including group structure, call



                                                  23
schedules and other factors that might relate to patient and treatment selection. Finally, we do

not observe the physician job selection process, which might be endogenous with subsequent

performance if, for example, physicians match to jobs for which they are well-suited.




                                                24
                                           References

Angrist, J.D., Pischke, J.S., 2009. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s Companion.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Asch, D.A., Nicholson, S., Srinivas. S., Herrin. J., Epstein, A.J., 2009. Evaluating obstetrical
residency programs using patient outcomes. Journal of the American Medical Association 302
(12), 1277-1283.

Birkmeyer, J.D., Stukel, T.A., Siewers, A.E., Goodney, P.P., Wennberg, D.E., Lucas, F.L., 2003.
Surgeon volume and operative mortality in the United States. New England Journal of Medicine
349, 2117-2127.

Borjas, G.J.,1987. Self-selection and the earnings of immigrants. American Economic Review
77 (4), 531-553.

Bridgewater, B., Grayson, A.D., Au, J., Hasan, R., Dihmis, W.C., Munsch, C., Waterworth, P.,
2004. Improving mortality of coronary surgery over first four years of independent practice:
retrospective examination of prospectively collected data from 15 surgeons. British Medical
Journal 329 (7463), 421.

Dranove, D., Ramanarayanan, S., Watanabe, Y., in press. Delivering bad news: market
responses to negligence. Journal of Law and Economics.

Dranove, D., Wehner, P., 1994. Physician-induced demand for childbirths. Journal of Health
Economics 13 (1), 61-73.

Epstein, A.J., 2010. Effects of report cards on referral patterns to cardiac surgeons. Journal of
Health Economics 29, 718-731.

Epstein, A.J., Ketcham, J.D., Nicholson, S., 2010. Specialization and matching in professional
services firms. RAND Journal of Economics 41 (4), 811-834.

Epstein, A.J., Nicholson, S.S., 2009. The formation and evolution of physician treatment styles:
an application to cesarean sections. Journal of Health Economics 28 (6), 1126-1140.

Fournier, G.M., McInnes, M.M., 2002. The effects of managed care on medical referrals and the
quality of specialty care. Journal of Industrial Economics 50 (4), 457-473.

Hoerger, T.J., Howard, L.Z., 1995. Search behavior and choice of physician in the market for
prenatal care. Medical Care 33 (4), 332-349.

Huesch, M.D., 2009. Learning by doing, scale effects, or neither? Cardiac surgeons after
residency. Health Services Research 44 (6), 1960-1982.




                                                25
Huesch, M.D., Sakakibara, M., 2008. Forgetting the learning curve for a moment: how much
performance is unrelated to own experience? Health Economics 18 (7), 855-862.

Janakiraman, V., Lazar, J., Joynt, K.E., Jha, A.K., 2011. Hospital volume, provider volume, and
complications after childbirth in U.S. hospitals. Obstetrics & Gynecology 118 (3), 521-527.

Johnson, E.M., 2011. Ability, learning and the career path of cardiac specialists. Massachusetts
Institute of Technology working paper.

Luft, H.S., 1980. The relation between surgical volume and mortality: an exploration of causal
factors and alternative models. Medical Care 18 (9), 940-959.

Luft, H.S., Garnick, D.W., Mark, D.H., Peltzman, D.J., Phibbs, C.S., Lichtenberg, E., McPhee,
S.J., 1990. Does quality influence choice of hospital? Journal of the American Medical
Association 263 (21), 2899-2906.

Mukamel, D.B., Weimer, D.L., Zwanziger, J., Gorthy, S.H., Mushlin, A.L., 2004/2005. Quality
report cards, selection of cardiac surgeons, and racial disparities: a study of the publication of the
New York state cardiac surgery reports. Inquiry 41 (4), 435-446.

Navath, A., David, G., 2009. The formation of peer reputation among physicians and its effect
on technology adoption. Journal of Human Capital 3 (4), 289-322.

Nesselroade, J.R., Stigler, S.M., Baltes, P.B., 1980. Regression toward the mean and the study
of change. Psychological Bulletin 88 (3), 622-637.

Oyer P. 2006. Initial labor market conditions and long-term outcomes for economists. Journal
of Economic Perspectives 20(3):143-160.

Ramanarayanan, S., 2008. Does practice make perfect: an empirical analysis of learning-by-
doing in cardiac surgery. University of California, Los Angeles working paper.

Reinhardt, U., 1972. A production function for physician services. Review of Economics and
Statistics 54 (1), 55-66.

Smith, G., Smith, J., 2005. Regression to the mean in average test scores. Educational
Assessment 10 (4), 377-399.

Srinivas, S.K., Epstein, A.J., Nicholson, S., Herrin, J., Asch, D.A., 2010. Improvements in US
maternal obstetrical outcomes from 1992 to 2006. Medical Care 48 (5), 487-493.

Stock, J.H., Watson, M.W., 2008. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors for fixed effects
panel data regression. Econometrica 76, 155-174.

Theil, H., 1971. Principles of Econometrics. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.: New York, NY.



                                                 26
Thurston, N.K., Libby, A.M., 2002. A production function for physician services revisited.
Review of Economics and Statistics 84 (1), 184-191.

Vickers, A.J., Bianco, F.J., Serio, A.M., Eastham, J.A., Schrag, D., Klein, E.A., Reuther, A.M.,
Kattan, M.W., Pontes, J.E., Scardino, P.T., 2007. The surgical learning curve for prostate cancer
control after radial prostatectomy. Journal of the National Cancer Institute 99, 1171-1177.

Wooldridge, J.M., 2006. Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach, 3rd Ed. Thomson-
SouthWestern: Mason, OH.




                                               27
Table 1. Sample descriptive statistics at the physician-year and physician levels

                                            Physician-Years        Physicians
                                              N          %        N           %
Total                                       15,673       --     1,864         --
State
 Florida                                    4,864       31.0     604        32.4
 New York                                   10,809      69.0    1,260       67.6
Sex
 Male                                       7,351       46.9     732        39.3
 Female                                     8,322       53.1    1,132       60.7
Specialty
  Obstetrics-Gynecology                     15,232      97.2    1,818       97.5
  Maternal-Fetal Medicine                    441         2.8      46         2.5
Medical School Location
 United States or Canada                    39,177      71.6    1,535       82.4
 Other                                      15,559      28.4     329        17.6
Practice Duration
 No Deliveries in AY 2009                   3,228       20.6     532        28.5
 ≥ 1 Delivery in AY 2009                    12,445      79.4    1,332       71.5
Time Since OB-Gyn Residency Completion
 0-4 Years                                  7,979       50.9      --          --
 5-9 Years                                  4,874       31.1      --          --
 10-14 Years                                2,414       15.4      --          --
 15-17 Years                                 406         2.6      --          --
Duration in Sample
 1-5 Years                                    --         --      646        34.7
 6-10 Years                                   --         --      549        29.5
 11-15 Years                                  --         --      480        25.7
 16-18 Years                                  --         --      189        10.1

AY = Academic Year




                                                   28
Figure 1. Physician performance trajectories by delivery mode


                                              All Deliveries                                                              Cesarean Deliveries
                     5.0
                                                                                                    5.0
                     4.0
                                                                                                    4.0
                     3.0
   Norm Comp Rate




                                                                                  Norm Comp Rate
                                                                                                    3.0
                     2.0
                                                                                                    2.0
                     1.0                                                                            1.0
                     0.0                                                                            0.0
                    -1.0                                                                           -1.0
                    -2.0                                                                           -2.0
                    -3.0                                                                           -3.0
                    -4.0                                                                           -4.0
                    -5.0                                                                           -5.0

                           0   1   2   3    4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17                           0   1   2   3    4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
                                           Elapsed Years Since OB Residency                                               Elapsed Years Since OB Residency



                                            Vaginal Deliveries
                     5.0
                     4.0
                     3.0
   Norm Comp Rate




                     2.0
                     1.0
                     0.0
                    -1.0
                    -2.0
                    -3.0
                    -4.0
                    -5.0

                           0   1   2   3    4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
                                           Elapsed Years Since OB Residency




Each graph shows annual mean physician-level normalized risk-adjusted complication rates and
95% confidence intervals by elapsed years of experience since OB residency completion, as
estimated by weighted least squares regression.




                                                                                  29
Table 2. Effects of years since residency on normalized risk-adjusted maternal complication rates


                                              WLS, All Docs             WLS, Stayer Docs
                                               (1)             (2)       (3)              (4)
                  Fixed effects              None             Doc       None             Doc


                  All Deliveries
                  Years since residency     -0.18***      -0.13***     -0.15***     -0.13***
                                             [0.023]      [0.025]      [0.024]       [0.026]
                  Constant                  2.65***       2.05***      2.38***       1.92***
                                             [0.15]           [0.13]    [0.17]           [0.15]


                  R2                         0.012            0.575     0.009            0.566
                  N Doc-years                        15,673                    12,445
                  N Docs                              1,864                      1,332
                  Cesarean Deliveries
                  Years since residency     -0.18***      -0.068*      -0.16***      -0.066*
                                             [0.030]      [0.036]      [0.032]       [0.038]
                  Constant                  2.92***       1.90***      2.71***       1.70***
                                             [0.21]           [0.21]    [0.24]           [0.24]


                  R2                         0.006            0.513     0.005            0.511
                  N Doc-years                        15,445                    12,373
                  N Docs                              1,863                      1,332
                  Vaginal Deliveries
                  Years since residency     -0.18***      -0.16***     -0.15***     -0.16***
                                             [0.024]      [0.025]      [0.025]       [0.026]
                  Constant                  2.56***       2.07***      2.27***       1.95***
                                             [0.16]           [0.13]    [0.18]           [0.15]


                  R2                         0.010            0.549     0.007            0.540
                  N Doc-years                        15,548                    12,396
                  N Docs                          1,864                  1,332
                  WLS weights based on Borjas (1987). Robust standard errors clustered
                  by physician in brackets.
                  *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                     30
Table 3. Correlation of physicians’ risk-adjusted complication rates over time

                                                      Deliveries
                               Lag           All       Cesarean     Vaginal
                                 1        0.49***      0.42***      0.48***
                                           13,647       13,424       13,537
                                 2        0.42***      0.35***      0.39***
                                           11,888       11,672       11,784
                                 3        0.35***      0.27***      0.34***
                                           10,284       10,092       10,184
                                 4        0.31***      0.25***      0.31***
                                            8,859        8,674        8,765
                                 5        0.27***      0.21***      0.29***
                                            7,567        7,406        7,482
                                 6        0.25***      0.19***      0.27***
                                            6,389        6,242        6,311
                                 7        0.25***      0.17***      0.25***
                                            5,323        5,193        5,255
                                 8        0.21***      0.16***      0.23***
                                            4,380        4,263        4,315
                                 9        0.19***      0.14***      0.21***
                                            3,539        3,442        3,485
                                10        0.18***      0.15***      0.20***
                                            2,788        2,712        2,738
                                11        0.17***      0.11***      0.18***
                                            2,111        2,057        2,077
                                12        0.19***      0.13***      0.18***
                                            1,547        1,514        1,518
                                13        0.12***      0.14***      0.15***
                                            1,081        1,053        1,056
                                14        0.14***      0.16***      0.17***
                                             696          679          679
                                15           0.06         0.08      0.14***
                                             406          394          393
                                16           0.02        -0.03        0.13*
                                             202          197          193
                                17           0.03         0.14        -0.05
                                              64           62           62
                             Each cell displays product-moment
                             correlation coefficient, significance and
                             sample size, where the correlation is
                             computed between current and lagged
                             performance.
                             *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                  31
Figure 2. Performance trajectories by delivery mode for physicians in the 1st and 4th quartiles of
initial performance


                                      All Deliveries                                                        Cesarean Deliveries
               10                                                                     10


                5                                                                      5
   Q4 vs. Q1




                                                                          Q4 vs. Q1
                0                                                                      0


                -5                                                                     -5


               -10                                                                    -10

                     0 1   2   3    4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17                     0   1   2   3    4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
                                   Elapsed Years Since OB Residency                                         Elapsed Years Since OB Residency



                                    Vaginal Deliveries
               10


                5
   Q4 vs. Q1




                0


                -5


               -10

                     0 1   2   3    4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
                                   Elapsed Years Since OB Residency




Each graph shows annual mean physician-level normalized risk-adjusted complication rates by
elapsed years of experience since OB residency completion for physicians in the 1st and 4th
quartiles of performance in the first year after residency completion, as estimated by weighted
least squares regression.




                                                                          32
Figure 3. Differences in performance trajectories by delivery mode for physicians in the 1st and
4th quartiles of initial performance



                                      All Deliveries                                                        Cesarean Deliveries
               20                                                                     20


               10                                                                     10
   Q4 vs. Q1




                                                                          Q4 vs. Q1
                0                                                                      0


               -10                                                                    -10


               -20                                                                    -20

                     0 1   2   3    4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17                     0   1   2   3    4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
                                   Elapsed Years Since OB Residency                                         Elapsed Years Since OB Residency



                                    Vaginal Deliveries
               20


               10
   Q4 vs. Q1




                0


               -10


               -20

                     0 1   2   3    4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
                                   Elapsed Years Since OB Residency




Each graph shows arithmetic differences in annual mean physician-level normalized risk-
adjusted complication rates and their 95% confidence intervals by elapsed years of experience
since OB residency completion for physicians in the 1st and 4th quartiles of performance in the
first year after residency completion, as estimated by weighted least squares regression with
robust standard error clustered for multiple observations per physician.




                                                                          33
Table 4. Sources of variation in physician performance

                                                  All Years
                                                   Annual      Stayer
                                       All Docs    Vol ≥ 30    Docs       Year 6     Year 11    Year 16
              All Deliveries
 Total R2                                8.93       13.31       10.31       5.19       4.81      4.03
 Skill                                   7.28       11.08        8.59       4.39       3.27      1.55
 Contemporaneous volume                  0.26        0.34        0.30       0.04       0.43      0.65
 Lagged cum volume & experience          0.79        1.00        0.76        --         --        --
 Cumulative volume                        --          --          --        0.24       0.12      0.09
 N Doc-Years                            13,292     12,387      10,807      1,169       630       179

           Cesarean Deliveries
       2
 Total R                                 4.85        8.51       5.03        2.47       4.18      1.52
 Skill                                   3.84        7.18       3.85        2.38       2.75      1.05
 Contemporaneous volume                  0.22        0.23       0.28        0.04       0.94      0.19
 Lagged cum volume & experience          0.23        0.54       0.17         --         --        --
 Cumulative volume                        --          --         --         0.01       0.09      0.01
 N Doc-Years                            13,090      7,719      10,717      1,154       621       176

           Vaginal Deliveries
       2
 Total R                                 8.31       12.95       9.28        6.70       3.62      4.86
 Skill                                   6.71       10.79       7.78        5.02       1.98      2.72
 Contemporaneous volume                  0.23        0.27       0.23        0.00       0.40      0.96
 Lagged cum volume & experience          0.87        1.22       0.82         --         --        --
 Cumulative volume                        --          --         --         0.74       0.22      0.03
 N Doc-Years                            13,210     11,737      10,772      1,161       624       176

R2 reported in units from 0 to 100 to enhance readability.
Cells indicate either total R2 from model or unique contribution of specific factor(s) to R2.
Each column × delivery mode block represents a distinct regression model.



                                                                    34
Table 5. Sources of variation in physician performance

                                            All Years, All Docs
                                     All        Cesarean      Vaginal
                                  Deliveries    Deliveries   Deliveries
 Total R2                           21.66         20.36           19.63
 Skill                              1.95            0.5           2.17
 Contemporaneous volume             0.13           0.02           0.14
 Lagged cum volume & experience     0.55           0.13           0.69
 Initial hospital fixed effects     12.73         15.51           11.32
 N Doc-Years                       13,292         13,090      13,210

R2 reported in units from 0 to 100 to enhance readability.
Cells indicate either total R2 from model or unique contribution of specific factor(s) to R2.
Each column represents a distinct regression model.




                                                    35
Table 6. Effects of performance signal and prior on all delivery volume by years of physician
experience

                                                                                                OLS, All Docs
                                                                                      (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)
                                                               Fixed effects         None     Market    Hospital     Doc
                                                               2nd year              -1.87     -1.58      -2.46      0.072
                                                                                    [1.73]    [3.21]     [2.22]     [3.15]
                      Net effect of Performance SIGNAL in...


                                                               3rd year            -5.99***   -5.96**   -6.17***     -0.95
                                                                                    [2.21]    [2.09]     [2.05]     [2.05]
                                                               4th year              -0.24     -0.60      -0.61      1.46
                                                                                    [6.00]    [3.86]     [5.00]     [3.85]
                                                               5th year              -3.50     -4.17    -5.30**      0.077
                                                                                    [2.90]    [3.29]     [2.66]     [2.71]
                                                               6th and 7th years     -1.06     -2.64      -4.02      -0.63
                                                                                    [2.41]    [1.81]     [2.45]     [2.10]
                                                               8th-12th years        -3.15     -4.77     -4.65*    -4.04***
                                                                                    [2.37]    [2.82]     [2.44]     [1.54]
                                                               13th-18th years       0.97      -1.66      -0.66      -0.22
                                                                                    [4.04]    [3.28]     [4.01]     [2.89]
                                                               2nd year               --         --        --         --

                                                                                   1.31       1.37      0.84       -0.062
                      Net effect of Performance PRIOR in…




                                                               3rd year
                                                                                   [1.52]     [1.98]    [1.35]     [2.04]
                                                               4th year            -2.66      -2.07     -3.22      -1.53
                                                                                   [3.04]     [3.42]    [2.58]     [2.84]
                                                               5th year            -2.86      -1.91     -1.95      -1.33
                                                                                   [2.38]     [2.14]    [2.52]     [2.90]
                                                               6th and 7th years   -3.03      -1.92     -0.88      0.87
                                                                                   [2.67]     [1.91]    [3.05]     [3.00]
                                                               8th-12th years      -8.56**    -8.74*    -7.06*     -2.43
                                                                                   [3.63]     [4.38]    [4.10]     [3.81]
                                                               13th-18th years     -17.2**    -18.1**   -15.9**    -7.38
                                                                                   [7.51]     [5.95]    [7.40]     [6.51]

N=13,292 doc-years and 1,750 docs
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Coefficients reflect the impact on annual all delivery volume of a one standard deviation increase in the signal or
prior. OLS models control for physician characteristics (sex, maternal fetal medicine specialty, international
medical graduate status, practice at multiple hospitals, year of OB residency completion), hospital characteristics
(annual average number of deliveries, OB residency sponsorship, OB residency affiliation), state, and academic
year, except where collinear with fixed effects. Robust standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the physician
level (models 1 and 4), market level (model 2), or hospital level (model 3).



                                                                                       36
Table 7. Effects of performance signal and prior on Cesarean delivery volume by years of
physician experience

                                                                                               OLS, All Docs
                                                                                    (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)
                                                              Fixed effects        None      Market     Hospital     Doc
                                                              2nd year             0.86*       0.29       0.60       1.37
                                                                                   [0.47]     [0.48]     [0.60]     [0.88]
                     Net effect of Performance SIGNAL in...


                                                              3rd year             -0.15      -0.42      -0.54      0.015
                                                                                   [0.54]     [0.50]     [0.56]     [0.54]
                                                              4th year            -1.31**    -1.40***   -1.31**    -1.15**
                                                                                   [0.62]     [0.37]     [0.63]     [0.48]
                                                              5th year             -1.26*    -1.46**    -1.49**     -0.67
                                                                                   [0.68]     [0.50]     [0.60]     [0.52]
                                                              6th and 7th years     0.20      0.055      0.047      -0.40
                                                                                   [0.65]     [0.56]     [0.64]     [0.47]
                                                              8th-12th years      -2.10***   -2.32**    -2.09***   -2.31***
                                                                                   [0.76]     [0.90]     [0.71]     [0.56]
                                                              13th-18th years      -2.33      -2.72      -2.05      -0.79
                                                                                   [1.81]     [2.24]     [1.61]     [1.10]
                                                              2nd year               --         --         --         --
                     Net effect of Performance PRIOR in…




                                                              3rd year              0.36      0.052       0.28       0.47
                                                                                   [0.37]     [0.32]     [0.40]     [0.58]
                                                              4th year              0.67       0.23       0.36       0.59
                                                                                   [0.48]     [0.53]     [0.51]     [0.72]
                                                              5th year              0.13      -0.43      0.057      -0.065
                                                                                   [0.72]     [0.63]     [0.71]     [0.83]
                                                              6th and 7th years    -1.49*    -2.16***    -1.21      -1.59*
                                                                                   [0.77]     [0.62]     [0.80]     [0.84]
                                                              8th-12th years      -3.49***   -4.67***   -3.46***   -4.28***
                                                                                   [1.34]     [1.32]     [1.18]     [1.28]
                                                              13th-18th years      -4.16      -5.82*     -4.19     -5.92**
                                                                                   [3.52]     [2.85]     [3.19]     [2.61]

N=13,101 doc-years and 1,744 docs
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Coefficients reflect the impact on annual Cesarean delivery volume of a one standard deviation increase in the signal
or prior. OLS models control for physician characteristics (sex, maternal fetal medicine specialty, international
medical graduate status, practice at multiple hospitals, year of OB residency completion), hospital characteristics
(annual average number of deliveries, OB residency sponsorship, OB residency affiliation), state, and academic
year, except where collinear with fixed effects. Robust standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the physician
level (models 1 and 4), market level (model 2), or hospital level (model 3).



                                                                                     37
Table 8. Effects of performance signal and prior on vaginal delivery volume by years of
physician experience

                                                                                              OLS, All Docs
                                                                                    (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)
                                                              Fixed effects        None      Market     Hospital   Doc
                                                              2nd year            -3.56***    -2.61      -3.00*    -1.81
                                                                                   [1.29]     [2.38]     [1.54]    [2.21]
                     Net effect of Performance SIGNAL in...


                                                              3rd year            -4.00***    -3.65*    -3.82***   -0.68
                                                                                   [1.38]     [1.73]     [1.38]    [1.38]
                                                              4th year             -0.60      -0.45      0.038     2.66
                                                                                   [4.41]     [2.93]     [3.52]    [2.82]
                                                              5th year             -1.04      -1.08      -1.21     1.29
                                                                                   [2.10]     [2.98]     [2.17]    [2.12]
                                                              6th and 7th years    -1.40      -2.42*     -2.84*    0.63
                                                                                   [1.66]     [1.18]     [1.71]    [1.56]
                                                              8th-12th years       -2.64*    -3.39**     -2.43     -1.31
                                                                                   [1.48]     [1.28]     [1.56]    [1.02]
                                                              13th-18th years      0.020      -0.55      -1.36     -0.68
                                                                                   [2.50]     [1.66]     [2.59]    [1.99]
                                                              2nd year               --         --            --     --
                     Net effect of Performance PRIOR in…




                                                              3rd year             -0.40      0.014      -0.31     -0.78
                                                                                   [1.03]     [1.43]     [0.96]    [1.39]
                                                              4th year             -2.71      -1.77      -2.51     -2.04
                                                                                   [2.39]     [2.88]     [2.02]    [2.08]
                                                              5th year            -3.68**     -2.33      -2.22     -1.08
                                                                                   [1.74]     [1.93]     [1.84]    [2.05]
                                                              6th and 7th years    -1.22       0.35       0.72     2.30
                                                                                   [2.03]     [1.43]     [2.20]    [2.29]
                                                              8th-12th years       -3.87      -3.21      -2.34     1.93
                                                                                   [2.39]     [2.43]     [2.58]    [2.69]
                                                              13th-18th years     -10.0**    -10.3***    -7.46*    -0.12
                                                                                   [4.49]     [3.18]     [4.12]    [4.42]

N=13,216 doc-years and 1,749 docs
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Coefficients reflect the impact on annual vaginal delivery volume of a one standard deviation increase in the signal
or prior. OLS models control for physician characteristics (sex, maternal fetal medicine specialty, international
medical graduate status, practice at multiple hospitals, year of OB residency completion), hospital characteristics
(annual average number of deliveries, OB residency sponsorship, OB residency affiliation), state, and academic
year, except where collinear with fixed effects. Robust standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the physician
level (models 1 and 4), market level (model 2), or hospital level (model 3).



                                                                                     38
Table 9. Effects of performance signal and prior on all delivery volume for patients with
commercial insurance by years of physician experience

                                                                                                 OLS, All Docs
                                                                                    (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)
                                                             Fixed effects          None       Market     Hospital     Doc
                                                             2nd year            -1.30        -2.92***   -3.09***    -0.62
                                                                                 [0.90]       [0.69]     [1.17]      [1.78]
                    Net effect of Performance SIGNAL in...


                                                             3rd year            -2.46*       -3.74**    -2.97**     -0.20
                                                                                 [1.26]       [1.18]     [1.37]      [1.18]
                                                             4th year            -3.79***     -4.16***   -1.79       -1.06
                                                                                 [1.21]       [0.88]     [1.16]      [0.85]
                                                             5th year            -2.49        -3.10*     -4.69***    -0.24
                                                                                 [1.57]       [1.42]     [1.46]      [1.14]
                                                             6th and 7th years   -4.78***     -5.50***   -4.48***    -1.60**
                                                                                 [1.35]       [1.50]     [1.21]      [0.77]
                                                             8th-12th years      -3.32**      -4.63***   -3.04**     -2.20**
                                                                                 [1.48]       [0.88]     [1.25]      [0.92]
                                                             13th-18th years     -0.22        -1.50      -0.10       -0.98
                                                                                 [2.64]       [1.86]     [2.41]      [1.72]
                                                             2nd year                   --       --          --         --

                                                                                 0.54         0.015      -0.66       0.011
                    Net effect of Performance PRIOR in…




                                                             3rd year
                                                                                 [0.87]       [0.81]     [0.86]      [1.15]
                                                             4th year            0.36         -0.97      -1.82*      -0.36
                                                                                 [1.03]       [0.74]     [1.03]      [1.47]
                                                             5th year            -1.10        -2.55**    -0.98       -1.43
                                                                                 [1.46]       [1.02]     [1.47]      [1.56]
                                                             6th and 7th years   -1.01        -2.68      -2.49       -0.84
                                                                                 [1.57]       [1.67]     [1.57]      [1.60]
                                                             8th-12th years      -5.49**      -7.11***   -7.21***    -3.24*
                                                                                 [2.16]       [2.16]     [1.91]      [1.85]
                                                             13th-18th years     -5.34        -7.18      -8.47**     -3.49
                                                                                 [3.99]       [4.10]     [3.57]      [3.34]

N=13,292 doc-years and 1,750 docs
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Coefficients reflect the impact on annual delivery volume among patients with non-Medicaid insurance of a one
standard deviation increase in the all-delivery signal or prior. OLS models control for physician characteristics (sex,
maternal fetal medicine specialty, international medical graduate status, practice at multiple hospitals, year of OB
residency completion), hospital characteristics (annual average number of deliveries, OB residency sponsorship, OB
residency affiliation), state, and academic year, except where collinear with fixed effects. Robust standard errors are
adjusted for clustering at the physician level (models 1 and 4), market level (model 2), or hospital level (model 3).



                                                                                         39
Table 10. Effects of performance signal and prior on all delivery volume for patients with
Medicaid or no insurance by years of physician experience

                                                                                                 OLS, All Docs
                                                                                    (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)
                                                             Fixed effects          None       Market     Hospital     Doc
                                                             2nd year            -0.57        1.33       0.62        0.69
                                                                                 [1.60]       [3.12]     [1.78]      [2.49]
                    Net effect of Performance SIGNAL in...


                                                             3rd year            -3.53*       -2.22      -3.20**     -0.75
                                                                                 [1.83]       [1.99]     [1.43]      [1.60]
                                                             4th year            3.55         3.56       1.18        2.53
                                                                                 [6.04]       [3.36]     [4.46]      [3.47]
                                                             5th year            -1.01        -1.07      -0.60       0.31
                                                                                 [2.45]       [2.52]     [2.01]      [2.17]
                                                             6th and 7th years   3.72*        2.85       0.46        0.97
                                                                                 [2.02]       [2.10]     [2.40]      [1.98]
                                                             8th-12th years      0.18         -0.14      -1.61       -1.85
                                                                                 [1.87]       [2.72]     [1.98]      [1.26]
                                                             13th-18th years     1.19         -0.16      -0.56       0.75
                                                                                 [3.14]       [2.58]     [2.77]      [2.74]
                                                             2nd year                   --       --             --      --

                                                                                 0.77         1.36       1.50        -0.073
                    Net effect of Performance PRIOR in…




                                                             3rd year
                                                                                 [1.24]       [1.38]     [1.03]      [1.56]
                                                             4th year            -3.01        -1.10      -1.40       -1.18
                                                                                 [2.96]       [3.00]     [2.29]      [2.22]
                                                             5th year            -1.76        0.64       -0.97       0.10
                                                                                 [2.13]       [1.79]     [2.05]      [2.31]
                                                             6th and 7th years   -2.02        0.75       1.61        1.72
                                                                                 [2.39]       [1.82]     [2.66]      [2.49]
                                                             8th-12th years      -3.07        -1.63      0.15        0.82
                                                                                 [3.24]       [3.37]     [3.46]      [3.23]
                                                             13th-18th years     -11.9**      -11.0**    -7.40       -3.89
                                                                                 [5.93]       [4.91]     [5.24]      [5.57]

N=13,292 doc-years and 1,750 docs
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Coefficients reflect the impact on annual delivery volume among patients with Medicaid or no insurance of a one
standard deviation increase in the all-delivery signal or prior. OLS models control for physician characteristics (sex,
maternal fetal medicine specialty, international medical graduate status, practice at multiple hospitals, year of OB
residency completion), hospital characteristics (annual average number of deliveries, OB residency sponsorship, OB
residency affiliation), state, and academic year, except where collinear with fixed effects. Robust standard errors are
adjusted for clustering at the physician level (models 1 and 4), market level (model 2), or hospital level (model 3).



                                                                                         40
Table 11. Effects of performance signal and prior on gynecological volume by years of physician
experience

                                                                                                OLS, All Docs
                                                                                      (1)         (2)       (3)       (4)
                                                               Fixed effects          None      Market    Hospital    Doc
                                                               2nd year            0.15        -0.64     -0.56*      0.23
                                                                                   [0.25]      [0.45]    [0.29]      [0.40]
                      Net effect of Performance SIGNAL in...


                                                               3rd year            0.39        -0.28     0.20        0.48*
                                                                                   [0.31]      [0.31]    [0.30]      [0.28]
                                                               4th year            -0.0046     -0.36     0.059       0.31
                                                                                   [0.35]      [0.37]    [0.32]      [0.25]
                                                               5th year            -0.0058     -0.68     -0.28       -0.15
                                                                                   [0.47]      [0.45]    [0.40]      [0.28]
                                                               6th and 7th years   0.18        -0.40     0.051       0.30
                                                                                   [0.34]      [0.33]    [0.26]      [0.21]
                                                               8th-12th years      0.62*       -0.23     0.14        -0.07
                                                                                   [0.34]      [0.23]    [0.28]      [0.17]
                                                               13th-18th years     0.90        -0.45     0.057       0.55*
                                                                                   [0.71]      [0.51]    [0.56]      [0.32]
                                                               2nd year                   --      --            --     --

                                                                                   0.070       -0.23     -0.39*      -0.03
                      Net effect of Performance PRIOR in…




                                                               3rd year
                                                                                   [0.22]      [0.39]    [0.20]      [0.28]
                                                               4th year            0.24        -0.39     -0.42       0.046
                                                                                   [0.36]      [0.50]    [0.36]      [0.36]
                                                               5th year            -0.088      -0.63     -0.56       0.050
                                                                                   [0.41]      [0.56]    [0.34]      [0.37]
                                                               6th and 7th years   -0.11       -0.96     -0.71*      -0.05
                                                                                   [0.41]      [0.58]    [0.43]      [0.39]
                                                               8th-12th years      -1.08*      -2.05**   -1.27**     -0.17
                                                                                   [0.57]      [0.75]    [0.54]      [0.47]
                                                               13th-18th years     -1.46*      -2.25**   -1.05       -0.10
                                                                                   [0.87]      [0.99]    [0.69]      [0.74]

N=13,292 doc-years and 1,750 docs
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Coefficients reflect the impact on annual gynecological procedure volume (oophorectomies and hysterectomies) of a
one standard deviation increase in the all-delivery signal or prior. OLS models control for physician characteristics
(sex, maternal fetal medicine specialty, international medical graduate status, practice at multiple hospitals, year of
OB residency completion), hospital characteristics (annual average number of deliveries, OB residency sponsorship,
OB residency affiliation), state, and academic year, except where collinear with fixed effects. Robust standard
errors are adjusted for clustering at the physician level (models 1 and 4), market level (model 2), or hospital level
(model 3).


                                                                                       41
Table 12. Effects of performance signal and prior on hazard of exit by years of physician
experience

                                                            Signal         Prior
                                     3rd year               1.10*          0.13
                                                            [0.66]        [0.33]
                                     4th year                -0.39         0.17
                                                            [1.06]        [0.57]
                                     5th year                -0.40         0.71
                                                            [1.49]        [0.86]
                                     6th and 7th years       0.57          0.38
                                                            [0.65]        [0.55]
                                     8th-12th years          0.72          0.24
                                                            [0.63]        [0.59]
                                     13th-18th years         0.43          -0.41
                                                            [1.47]        [1.32]

N=11,982 doc-years and 1,670 docs
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Average marginal effects reflect the impact on the hazard of exit (shown in percentage point terms) of a one
standard deviation increase in the all-delivery signal or prior. Complementary log-log models control for physician
characteristics (sex, maternal fetal medicine specialty and international medical graduate status), state and academic
year. Standard errors are robust and clustered at the physician level.




                                                          42
