                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             FINANCING THROUGH ASSET SALES

                                            Alex Edmans
                                            William Mann

                                        Working Paper 18677
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18677


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2013




We thank Zehao Hu and Devin Reilly for excellent research assistance and Ilona Babenko, Ginka
Borisova, Xavier Gabaix, Larry Lang, Gustavo Manso, Chris Mayer, Erwan Morellec, Stew Myers,
Julio Riutort, Lynn Selhat, Myron Slovin, Marie Sushka, James Thompson, Neng Wang, Jun Yang,
and conference/seminar participants at Columbia, HBS, Houston, Lausanne, Philadelphia Fed, Utah,
Wharton, Arizona State Winter Finance Conference, Chile Corporate Finance Conference, Florida
State/Sun Trust Conference, and the UBC Summer Conference Early Ideas Session for helpful comments.
AE gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Goldman Sachs Research Fellowship from
the Rodney L. White Center for Financial Research, the Wharton Dean's Research Fund, and the Dorinda
and Mark Winkelman Distinguished Scholar award. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Alex Edmans and William Mann. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Financing Through Asset Sales
Alex Edmans and William Mann
NBER Working Paper No. 18677
January 2013
JEL No. G32,G34

                                              ABSTRACT

Most research on firm financing studies the choice between debt and equity. We model an alternative
source – non-core asset sales – and allow asset sales to occur for operational as well as financing motives.
We identify three new factors that drive a firm's choice between selling assets and equity. First, equity
investors own a claim to the cash raised. Since cash is certain, this mitigates the information asymmetry
of equity (the "certainty effect"). In contrast to Myers and Majluf (1984), even if assets exhibit less
information asymmetry, the firm issues equity if the financing need is high. This result is robust to
using the cash for an uncertain investment. Second, firms can disguise the sale of a low-quality asset
as instead being motivated by operational reasons (dissynergies), and thus receive a high price (the
"camouflage effect"). Third, selling equity implies a "lemons" discount for not only the equity issued
but also the rest of the firm, since its value is perfectly correlated. In contrast, a "lemons" discount
on assets need not lead to a low stock price, as the asset is not a carbon copy of the firm (the "correlation
effect").


Alex Edmans
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
2318 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
aedmans@wharton.upenn.edu

William Mann
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
wmann@wharton.upenn.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18677
    One of the most important decisions that a firm faces is how to raise financing.
Most existing research focuses on the choice between debt and equity, with various
theories identifying diﬀerent factors that drive a firm’s security issuance decision. The
pecking-order theory of Myers (1984), motivated by the model of Myers and Majluf
(1984, “MM”), posits that managers issue securities that exhibit least information
asymmetry. The trade-oﬀ theory argues that managers compare the benefits of debt
(tax shields and a reduction in the agency costs of equity) with its costs (bankruptcy
costs and the agency costs of debt). The market timing theory of Baker and Wurgler
(2002) suggests that managers sell securities that are most mispriced.
    While there is substantial research on financing through security issuance, another
major source of financing is relatively unexplored — selling non-core assets such as a
division or a plant. Asset sales are substantial in reality: Securities Data Corporation
reports U.S. asset sales of $133bn in 2010, versus $130bn in seasoned equity issuance.
While some of these sales may have been motivated by operational reasons, capital
raising is a key driver of many others. In 2010-1, major oil and gas firms (e.g. Chevron,
Shell, and Conoco) sold non-core divisions to raise capital for liquidity and debt service.
Most notably, BP targeted $45bn in asset sales to cover the costs of the Deepwater
Horizon disaster. Over the same period, banks worldwide raised billions of dollars via
asset sales to replenish depleted capital.1 More broadly, Hite, Owers, and Rogers (1987)
examine the stated motives for asset sales and note that “in several cases, management
indicated that assets were being sold to raise capital for expansion of existing lines of
business or to reduce high levels of debt. In other words, selling assets was viewed as an
alternative to the sale of new securities.” Borisova, John, and Salotti (2011) find that
over half of asset sellers state financing motives, and Hovakimian and Titman (2006)
and Borisova and Brown (2012) show that asset sales lead to increases in investment and
R&D, respectively, suggesting that they were undertaken to raise capital. Campello,
Graham, and Harvey (2010) report that 70% of financially constrained firms increased
asset sales in the financial crisis, versus 37% of unconstrained firms. Ofek (1993),
Asquith, Gertner, and Scharfstein (1994), and Maksimovic and Phillips (1998) also
find that firms sell assets in response to financial constraints.
    This paper analyzes the role of asset sales in financing, in a model that allows
for them to be undertaken not only to raise capital, but also for operational reasons
(dissynergies). It studies the conditions under which asset sales are preferable to equity
   1
    In September 2011, BNP Paribas and Société Générale announced plans to raise $96 billion and
$5.4 billion respectively through asset sales, to create a financial buﬀer against contagion from other
French banks. Bank of America raised $3.6 billion in August 2011 by selling a stake in a Chinese
construction bank, and $755 million in November 2011 from selling its stake in Pizza Hut.


                                                  2
issuance and vice-versa, how financing and operational motives interact, and how firm
boundaries are aﬀected by financial constraints. We build a deliberately parsimonious
model to maximize tractability; this allows for the key expressions to be solved in
closed form and the economic forces to be transparent. The firm comprises a core asset
and a non-core asset. The firm must raise financing to meet a liquidity need, and can
sell either equity or part of the non-core asset. Following MM, we model information
asymmetry as the principal driver of this choice. The firm’s type is privately known
to its manager and comprises two dimensions. The first is quality, which determines
the assets’ standalone (common) values. The value of the core asset is higher for high-
quality firms. The value of the non-core asset depends on how we specify the correlation
between the core and non-core assets. With a positive (negative) correlation, the value
of the non-core asset is higher (lower) for high-quality firms. The second dimension is
synergy: the additional value that the non-core asset is worth to its current owner.
    It may seem that asset sales can already be analyzed by applying the general prin-
ciples of MM’s security issuance model to assets, removing the need for a new theory
specific to asset sales. Such an extension would suggest that assets are preferred to
equity if they exhibit less information asymmetry. While information asymmetry is in-
deed an important consideration, our model identifies three new forces that also drive
the financing choice and may outweigh information asymmetry considerations.
    First, an advantage of equity is that new shareholders obtain a stake in the en-
tire firm. This includes not just the core and non-core assets in place (whose value is
unknown), but also the cash raised (whose value is known). This mitigates the infor-
mation asymmetry of the assets in place: the certainty eﬀect. In contrast, an asset
purchaser does not share in the cash raised, and thus bears the full information asym-
metry associated with the asset’s value. Hence, contrary to MM, even if equity exhibits
more information asymmetry than the non-core asset, the manager may sell equity if
enough cash is raised that the certainty eﬀect dominates. Contrary to conventional
wisdom, equity is not always the riskiest claim: if a large amount of financing is raised,
equity becomes relatively safe.
    Formally, a pooling equilibrium is sustainable where all firms sell assets (equity)
if the financing need is suﬃciently low (high). The choice of financing thus depends
on the amount required. This dependence contrasts standard financing models, where
the choice depends only on the inherent characteristics of the claim being issued (such
as its information asymmetry (MM) or misvaluation (Baker and Wurgler (2002)) and
not the amount required — unless one assumes exogenous limits such as notions of
debt capacity. This result also has implications for the investment literature, in which


                                            3
disinvestment occurs due to financial constraints and so a greater financing need leads
to more assets being sold. We show that a greater financial shock may reduce asset
sales, as firms substitute into equity. Thus, such a shock can improve real eﬃciency,
as firms hold onto synergistic assets and instead sell equity.
    The certainty eﬀect applies to any use of cash whose expected value is uncorrelated
with firm quality: retaining it on the balance sheet to replenish capital, repaying
debt, paying dividends, or financing an uncertain investment whose expected payoﬀ is
independent of firm quality. We also analyze the case in which the investment return is
correlated with firm quality, and thus exhibits information asymmetry. It may appear
that the certainty eﬀect should weaken, since the funds raised are no longer held as
certain cash. This intuition turns out to be incomplete, because there is a second eﬀect.
Since investment is positive-NPV, it increases the value of the capital that investors are
injecting. If the desirability of investment (for firms of both quality) is high compared
to the additional return generated by the high-quality firm over the low-quality firm,
the second eﬀect dominates — somewhat surprisingly, the certainty eﬀect can strengthen
when cash is used to finance an uncertain investment. This eﬀect makes equity easier
to sustain. In contrast, if the additional return generated by the high-quality firm is
suﬃciently large, then asset sales become preferable. Due to the role of the investment
return, the source of financing depends on the use of financing. In almost all cases, it
remains robust that asset (equity) sales are used for low (high) financing needs.
    A second driver of the financing decision is the level of synergies between the non-
core asset and the firm. This consideration leads to “threshold” semi-separating equi-
libria, in which a firm sells assets if synergies are below a cutoﬀ and equity otherwise.
While models of firm boundaries also predict that firms will sell dissynergistic assets,
here these operational motives interact with financing / market timing reasons. Some
high-quality firms sell assets not because they are low-quality, but because they are
dissynergistic, allowing low-quality firms to pool with them. They can disguise an asset
sale driven by overvaluation (the asset is of low quality and has a low common value)
as instead being driven by operational reasons (it is dissynergistic and only has a low
private value): the camouflage eﬀect. Low-quality asset sellers can make greater profits
than in the pooling equilibria, where the financing choice does not depend on synergies
and so no disguise is possible. A market in which firms are selling assets for operational
reasons is “deep” and allows other firms to exploit their private information by selling
overvalued assets. This notion of “market depth” is similar to the Kyle (1985) model
of securities trading, where a deep market arises when liquidity traders are selling their
securities for reasons other than a low common value. Such depth allows informed


                                            4
traders to profit from selling securities that do have a low common value.
    The threshold synergy level is diﬀerent for high- and low-quality firms, due to the
certainty eﬀect. If the amount of financing required increases, this reduces the infor-
mation asymmetry of equity, making it more (less) attractive to high (low) quality
firms. Thus, higher financing needs have real eﬀects. First, they aﬀect firm boundaries
by causing some firms to switch into or away from asset sales. In standard models
without financial constraints, firm boundaries depend only on synergies.2 Intuitively,
adding financial constraints might suggest that divisions will be sold even if they are
synergistic, due to capital needs. Our model allows firms to raise capital also through
equity, and so greater capital needs may reduce asset sales as firms substitute into eq-
uity. Second, greater financing needs reduce the quality of assets traded in equilibrium
(and thus their price), and increase the quality and price of equity. Thus, the market
reaction to equity (asset) sales should be more (less) positive for a larger sale.
    The camouflage eﬀect continues to hold if firms have the option not to raise financ-
ing. If low-quality firms must raise financing (because their internal cash generation
is low, as in Miller and Rock (1985)), but high-quality firms have a choice, we have a
semi-separating equilibrium where high-quality firms with synergistic assets do nothing,
and those with dissynergistic assets sell them. Low-quality firms prefer to meet their
financing needs through asset sales. Issuing equity would reveal them as low-quality,
since no high-quality firms do so, but asset sales allow them to disguise their financing
need as being motivated by operational reasons (dissynergies) rather than desperation
(low cash generation). Thus, only low-quality firms with the most synergistic assets
issue equity; all others, including some with strictly positive synergies, sell assets.
    A third driver is the correlation eﬀect, which represents an advantage to selling
assets. When a firm issues equity, it suﬀers an Akerlof (1970) “lemons” discount — the
market infers that the equity is low-quality from the firm’s decision to issue it. Not
only does the market pay a low price for the equity issued, but also it attaches a low
valuation to the rest of the firm, because it is perfectly correlated with the issued equity.
When a firm sells non-core assets, it also receives a low price, but critically this need
not imply a low valuation for the firm as the asset sold may not be a carbon copy. Thus,
firms can sell poorly performing assets without sending a negative signal. Formally, in
the negative correlation model, the parameter values that support the equity-pooling
equilibrium are a strict subset of those that support the asset-pooling equilibrium.
   2
    Synergies arise when assets are worth more together under joint ownership than separately. They
may stem from transactions costs being lower within a firm than in a market (Coase (1937)), moni-
toring advantages (Alchian and Demsetz (1972)), economies of scope (Panzar and Willig (1981)), or
addressing hold-up problems (Grossman and Hart (1986), Hart and Moore (1990)).


                                                5
An implication is that conglomerates issue equity less often than firms with closely
related divisions. In addition, asset sales (equity issuance) should lead to positive
market reactions, as found empirically. The analysis also highlights a new benefit
of diversification: a non-core asset is a form of financial slack. While the literature
on investment reversibility (e.g. Abel and Eberly (1996)) models reversibility as an
inherent feature of the asset’s technology, here an investment that is not a carbon copy
of the firm is “reversible” in that it can be sold without negative inferences.
    Our paper can be interpreted more broadly as studying at what level to issue
claims: the firm level (equity issuance) or the asset level (asset sales). Many of the
eﬀects also apply to other types of claim that the firm can issue at each level. All three
eﬀects apply to parent-company risky debt in the same way as parent-company equity:
since debt is also a claim to the entire firm, it benefits from the certainty eﬀect and is
positively correlated with firm value; issuing debt does not involve the loss of synergies.
Similarly, if a firm issues collateralized debt at the asset/division level or engages in an
equity carve-out of a division, this need not imply low quality for the firm as a whole
(correlation eﬀect), and investors do not own a claim to the cash they invest, which
resides at the parent company level (certainty eﬀect).
    Most existing literature on asset sales is empirical. Jain (1985), Klein (1986), Hite,
Owers, and Rogers (1987), and Slovin, Sushka, and Ferraro (1995) find positive market
reactions to asset sales. Lang, Poulsen, and Stulz (1995) show that this positive reaction
stems from financing rather than operational reasons. Brown, James, and Mooradian
(1994) and Bates (2006) examine the use of proceeds. Maksimovic and Phillips (2001)
and Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006) analyze operational rather than financing motives.
    Existing theories consider asset sales as the only source of financing and do not
compare them to equity, e.g. Shleifer and Vishny (1992), DeMarzo (2005), He (2009),
and Kurlat (2010). Milbradt (2012) and Bond and Leitner (2011) show that selling
an asset will aﬀect the market price of the seller’s remaining portfolio under mark-to-
market accounting. We show that such correlation eﬀects are stronger for equity: while
a partial asset sale may imply a negative valuation of the remaining unsold non-core
assets, it need not imply a negative valuation of the firm. Nanda and Narayanan (1999)
also consider both asset sales and equity issuance under information asymmetry, but
do not feature the certainty, camouflage, or correlation eﬀects.3
   3
    Leland (1994) allows firms to finance cash outflows either by equity issuance (in the core analysis)
or by asset sales (in an extension), but not to choose between the two. In Strebulaev (2007), asset sales
are assumed to be always preferred to equity issuance, which is a last resort. Other papers model asset
sales as a business decision (equivalent to disinvestment) and do not feature information asymmetry.
In Morellec (2001), asset sales occur if the marginal product of the asset is less than its (exogenous)



                                                   6
    Since a partial asset sale can be interpreted as a carve-out, our paper is also re-
lated to the carve-out literature. Nanda (1991) also notes that non-core assets may be
uncorrelated with the core business and that this may motivate a firm to issue sub-
sidiary equity. In his model, correlation is always zero and the information asymmetry
of core and non-core assets is identical. Our model allows for general correlations and
information asymmetries, as well as synergies, enabling us to generate the three eﬀects.4
    This paper is organized as follows. Section 1 outlines the general model. Sections 2
and 3 study the positive and negative correlation cases respectively. Section 4 analyzes
extensions, Section 5 discusses empirical implications, and Section 6 concludes. The
Appendix contains proofs and other peripheral material.


1     The Model
The model consists of two types of risk-neutral agent: firms, which raise financing, and
investors, who provide financing and set prices. The firm is run by a manager, who has
private information about the firm’s type  = ( ). If a firm is of type , we also say
that the manager is of type .5 The type  consists of two dimensions. The first is the
firm’s quality  ∈ { }, which measures the standalone (common) value of its assets.
The prior probability that  =  is  ∈ ( 12  1). The second dimension is a synergy
                   £    ¤
parameter  ∼    , where −1   ≤ 0,  ≥ 0, and  and  are uncorrelated. This
parameter measures the additional (private) value created by the existing owner.
    The firm comprises two assets. The core business has value  , where    ,
and the non-core business has value  .6 Where there is no ambiguity, we use the term
“assets” to refer to the non-core business. We consider two specifications of the model.
The first is  ≥  , so that the two assets are positively correlated. The second is
resale value. In Bolton, Chen, and Wang (2011), disinvestment occurs if the cost of external finance
is high relative to the marginal productivity of capital. While those papers take the cost of financing
as given, this paper microfounds the determinants of the cost of equity finance versus asset sales.
    4
      Empirically, Allen and McConnell (1998) study how the market reaction to carve-outs depends on
the use of proceeds. Schipper and Smith (1986) show that equity issuance leads to negative abnormal
returns, but carve-outs lead to positive returns. Slovin, Sushka, and Ferraro (1995) find positive
market reactions to carve-outs, and Slovin and Sushka (1997) study the implications of parent and
subsidiary equity issuance on the stock prices of both the parent and the subsidiary.
    5
      Since the manager and firm are interchangeable, we use both the personal pronoun “he” and the
impersonal pronoun “its” to refer to the firm.
    6
      The values  and  represent asset values net of liabilities, and so our model also incorporates
information asymmetry about a firm’s liabilities. For example, if a firm has unknown litigation
liabilities at the parent company level, a purchaser of one of its factories is not exposed to them.




                                                   7
   , so the assets are negatively correlated. In both cases, we assume:

                                         +    +  ,                                            (1)

i.e.  has a higher total value even if    . In MM, the key driver of financing
is information asymmetry. The distinction between the two cases of  ≥  and
   shows that it is not only the information asymmetry of the non-core asset
that matters (| −  |), but also its correlation with the core asset ( ( −  )).
    We consider an individual firm, which must raise financing of  .7 The cash raised
remains on the firm’s balance sheet. This modeling treatment nests any financing need
that increases equity value by an amount  in expectation, independent of , such
as replenishing capital, repaying debt, paying dividends, or financing an uncertain
investment whose expected value is uncorrelated with . In Section 4.1, the investment
return is correlated with firm quality and thus exhibits information asymmetry.
    We currently treat the financing need  as exogenous. In MM, the firm has the
option not to raise financing and instead to forgo investment; their goal was to show
that information asymmetry can deter investment by hindering financing. Since this
eﬀect is already well-known, our focus instead is the choice between asset sales and
equity to meet a given financing need. In Section 4.2, we give firms the choice of
whether to raise financing and allow financing needs to be privately known.
    The firm can raise  by selling either non-core assets or equity; it cannot sell the
core asset as it is essential to the firm. (In Appendix B, we relax this assumption.) We
specify  ≤ min (   ), so that the financing can be raised entirely through either
source.8 We assume that the firm uses a single source. This can be motivated by the
transactions costs of using multiple sources. There are no taxes, and any transactions
costs are the same for both sources. Firms cannot raise financing in excess of the
requirement  ; this assumption can be justified by forces outside the model such as
agency costs of free cash flow.
    The non-core asset is perfectly divisible so partial asset sales are possible. We do not
feature nonlinearities as they will mechanically lead to the source of financing depending
on the amount required. If a firm sells non-core assets worth  , its fundamental value
   7
     The amount of financing  does not depend on the source of financing:  must be raised regardless
of whether the firm sells assets or equity. In bank capital regulation, equity issuance leads to a superior
improvement in capital ratios than asset sales and so  does depend on the source of financing. We
do not consider this eﬀect here as the eﬀect will be straightforward: it will encourage  towards the
source that reduces the amount of financing required, and thus force  to follow in order to pool.
   8
     Some of the analysis in the paper will derive bounds on  for various equilibria to be satisfied.
We have verified that none of these bounds are inconsistent with   min (   ).



                                                    8
falls by  (1 + ). Thus, the case of   () 0 represents synergies (dissynergies),
where the asset is worth more (less) to the current owner than a potential purchaser.
That  ≤ 0 allows for asset sales to be motivated by operational reasons (dissynergies)
rather than only financing reasons.9 In addition to synergies,   0 can also arise if
investment in assets is costly to reverse (e.g. Abel and Eberly (1996)).
    Formally, a firm of type  issues a claim  ∈ { }, where  =  represents
equity and  =  assets. Investors infer  based on . These inferences aﬀect
both the firm’s stock price and the terms of financing (and thus fundamental value).
Investors are perfectly competitive and price both the claim being sold and the firm’s
stock at their expected values conditional upon .10 The manager maximizes firm
value; in the negative correlation case of Section 3, he also cares about the stock price.
    A useful feature of the framework is that only quality , and not synergy , directly
aﬀects the investor’s valuation of a claim and thus the price paid. This allows our model
to incorporate two dimensions of firm type — quality and synergy — while retaining
tractability. We sometimes use the term “” or “-firm” to refer to a high-quality
firm regardless of its synergy parameter, and similarly for “” or “-firm”. “Capital
gain/loss” refers to the gain/loss resulting from the common value component of the
asset value only, and “fundamental gain/loss” refers to the change in the firm’s overall
value, which consists of both the capital gain/loss and any loss of (dis)synergies. For
equity issuance, the capital gain/loss equals the fundamental gain/loss.
    We solve for pure strategy equilibria.11 We use the Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium
(“PBE”) solution concept, where: (i) Investors have a belief about which types issue
which claim ; (ii) The price of the claim being issued equals its expected value,
conditional on investors’ beliefs in (i); (iii) Each manager type chooses to issue the
claim  that maximizes his objective function, given investors’ beliefs; (iv) Investors’
beliefs satisfy Bayes’ rule. In addition to the PBE, beliefs on claims  issued oﬀ the
equilibrium path satisfy the Cho and Kreps (1987) Intuitive Criterion (“IC”).
   9
     One may wonder why the firm will have dissynergistic assets to begin with. Firms may acquire
assets when they are synergistic, but they may become dissynergistic over time. One may still wonder
why the firm has not yet disposed of the dissynergistic asset. First, the firm may retain it due to the
transactions costs of asset sales: only if it is forced to raise financing and so would have to bear the
transactions costs of equity issuance otherwise, would it consider selling assets. Second, the market
for assets is not perfectly frictionless, and so not all assets are owned by the best owner at all times.
Our model allows for  = 0 in which case there are no dissynergies; more generally, our model specifies
that synergies are not so strong as to overwhelm the other forces in the model.
  10
     Sicherman and Pettway (1987), John and Ofek (1995), and Datta, Iskandar-Datta, and Raman
(2003) find insignificant returns to purchasers in asset sales.
  11
     Mixed strategy equilibria only exist for the type that is exactly indiﬀerent between the two claims.
Since synergies are continuous, this type is atomistic and so it does not matter for posterior beliefs
whether we specify this cutoﬀ type as mixing or playing a pure strategy.


                                                   9
  We first analyze the positive correlation version of the model ( ≥  ) and then
move to negative correlation (   ).


2      Positive Correlation
We first consider pooling equilibria ( ), which are of two types: an asset-pooling
equilibrium ( ) and an equity-pooling equilibrium ( ). We then move to semi-
separating equilibria (). The analysis studies the conditions under which the diﬀer-
ent equilibria are sustainable, to predict when firms will use each financing channel.


2.1     Pooling Equilibrium, All Firms Sell Assets
We consider a   in which all firms sell assets, supported by the oﬀ-equilibrium path
                                                ¡    ¢
belief (OEPB) that an equity issuer is of type   . Assets are valued at

                                   E [] =  + (1 − )                                        (2)

If equity is sold (oﬀ the equilibrium path), it is valued at  , where

                                         =  +  + 

is the value of equity for a firm of quality . The  term arises because the cash raised
enters the balance sheet, and so new shareholders own a claim to it.12
    The fundamental values of  and  are respectively given by:

                                       (1 − ) ( −  ) + 
                           +  −                                                              (3)
                                                 E []
                                      ( −  ) − 
                           +  +                                                              (4)
                                             E []

An -firm enjoys a capital gain of  (E[]
                                          − )
                                                 by selling low-quality assets at a pooled
price. However, it loses the synergies from the asset. If

                                                       E[]
                                           1+ ≤            ,                                      (5)
                                                        
                                                      ¡    ¢
then even the -firm with the greatest synergies, type   , is willing to sell assets,
  12
     This is consistent with the treatment of financing in MM, although the level of financing plays no
role in their analysis since both equity and debt are claims on the entire balance sheet.


                                                  10
since the capital gain exceeds the synergy loss. If (5) is violated, synergies are suf-
                    ¡    ¢
ficiently high that   will not sell assets, despite the capital gain, and so  
cannot hold. Equation (5) is necessary and suﬃcient for all -firms not to deviate.
     -firms suﬀer a capital loss of  (1−)( − )
                                            E[]
                                                      in addition to any loss of synergies,
and thus may deviate to equity. If they do so, fundamental value becomes:

                                           −  +  − 
                            +  −                                                    (6)
                                              +  + 

The no-deviation (“ND”) condition is that (6) ≤ (3). This condition is most stringent
        ¡    ¢
for type   . Thus, no -firms will deviate if:

                                   E[]( +  ) −  ( +  )(1 + )
               ≤    =                                                          (7)
                                             (1 + ) − E[]

Condition (7) is equivalent to the “unit cost of financing” being lower for assets, i.e.
                                ¡      ¢
                               1 +       +  + 
                                         ≤             ,                                  (8)
                                E[]        +  + 

where the numerator on each side is the value of the claim being sold to the firm, and
the denominator is the price that investors pay for that claim.
                                              ¡    ¢
    There are three forces that determine   ’s incentives to deviate. The first is
                                                                     
whether assets or equity exhibit greater information asymmetry ( E[]      versus  +
                                                                                       +
                                                                                           ).
This eﬀect is a natural extension of the MM principle that high-quality firms wish to
                                                                
issue safe claims. Indeed, without synergies ( = 0), then if E[]    +
                                                                           +
                                                                               , i.e. assets
exhibit suﬃciently greater information asymmetry,  will deviate to equity: for any
 , (8) is violated and so   is unsustainable.
    The second force is synergies, which are absent in MM. For   to hold, firms must
be willing to sell assets despite the loss of synergies. Thus, we require not only assets
to be safe, but also the maximum synergy level to be small. If 1 +   (         + )E[]
                                                                               ( + )
                                                                                             ,
then again (8) is violated and so   is unsustainable for any  .
    The third force is the amount of financing  . This is unique to a model of asset
sales and arises because an equity investor has a claim to the cash raised but an asset
purchaser does not. Since the value of cash is certain, it mitigates the information
asymmetry of equity: the right-hand side (“RHS”) of (8) becomes dominated by the
term  , which is the same in the numerator and the denominator as it is known, and
less dominated by the unknown assets-in-place terms  and  . Thus, there is an
upper bound on  to prevent deviation, given by (7). If  exceeds this bound, this

                                             11
                                             ¡     ¢
“certainty eﬀect” is suﬃciently strong that   deviates to equity. In particular,
        
even if E[]   +
                    +
                        and  = 0, i.e. assets are safer than equity and there are no
synergies, a high  can lead to (8) being violated. Thus, the MM result that firms
issue the claim with the least information asymmetry does not hold. Similarly, the
analysis contradicts the conventional wisdom that equity is the riskiest claim. If the
amount of financing raised is suﬃciently large, equity is relatively safe.
                                                                          ¡ ¢
    We now verify whether the OEPB, that an equity issuer is of type   , satisfies
                           ¡    ¢
the IC. This is the case if   would issue equity if inferred as , which occurs if:

                                       ( +  )(1 + ) − E [] ( +  )
                    ≤    =                                                                   (9)
                                                E[] −  (1 + )

It may seem that the IC should be trivial, since deviation leads to a high price for
selling equity rather than a pooled price for selling assets. However, if  is large,
selling equity is less attractive since the certainty eﬀect reduces the gains from being
inferred as . Thus, we have another upper bound on  . If 1 +   (     + )E[]
                                                                       ( + ) ¡
                                                                                     , assets
                                                                                            ¢
exhibit relatively high information asymmetry and synergies are small. Thus,  
enjoys such a large fundamental gain from asset sales that he will not deviate to equity
even if revealed as : the RHS of (9) is negative and so the IC is violated for any  .13
    Lemma 1 below summarizes the equilibrium. The proof shows that, if and only if
1 +   √E[]
             
                 ( 1), the IC condition is stronger than the ND condition and thus is
the relevant condition for   to hold. (All proofs are in Appendix A).
Lemma 1. (Positive correlation, pooling equilibrium, all firms sell assets.) Consider
a pooling equilibrium where all firms sell assets ( = ) and a firm that issues equity
                     ¡    ¢
is inferred as type   . The prices of assets and equity are  + (1 − ) and
 +  +  respectively. The equilibrium is sustainable if the following conditions
hold:
    (i) 1 +  ≤ E[]
                 
                     
                
    (ii)  ≤       , where
                  ⎧
                  ⎨    ≡  ( + )(1+)−E[]( + ) if 1 +  ≤ √ E[]
                                          E[]− (1+)                         
            =                                                                                   (10)
                  ⎩   
                                ≡   E[]( +  )− ( + )(1+)
                                                                     if 1 +  ≥ √E[]  
                                              (1+)−E[]
                                                                                   

  13
    To eliminate an equilibrium with      via the IC, we need to show that the only
reasonable OEPB is that a deviator is of quality , which also requires us to show that some firm of
quality  will deviate if revealed good. This will automatically be the case, as ( 0) will break even
rather than suﬀering a capital loss and losing synergies. In all of the other equilibria that we consider,
it will similarly be automatic that ( 0) will deviate if he is revealed good, so we will not need to
show this mathematically.

                                                    12
2.2    Pooling Equilibrium, All Firms Sell Equity
We now consider the alternative   in which all firms issue equity, supported by the
OEPB that an asset seller is of type ( ). Equity is valued at

                    E [] =  ( +  ) + (1 − ) ( +  ) + 

and if assets are sold (oﬀ the equilibrium path), they are valued at  .
   As in  ,  makes a capital gain; however, he will deviate to assets if they are
suﬃciently dissynergistic. Type ( ) has the greatest incentive to deviate. His ND
                                
condition is given by 1 +  ≥ E[] , which can be rewritten

                                       E[ + ](1 + ) − ( +  )
                    ≤    =                                               (11)
                                                   −

-firms will not deviate if:
                                     ( +  ) −  E[ + ](1 + )
                ≥     =                                                   (12)
                                              (1 + ) − 

and 1 +    . If 1 +    , the inequality in (12) would change sign and  would
have to be less than a negative number. Intuitively, if dissynergies are too strong,
( ) will deviate to asset sales. In contrast to Section 2.1, ’s ND condition (12)
now imposes a lower bound on  . This also results from the certainty eﬀect. If  is
high,  suﬀers a small loss from equity issuance, and so will not deviate.
   The OEPB, that an asset seller is of type ( ), satisfies the IC if

                                    E[ + ](1 + ) −  ( +  )
                  ≥    =                                                   (13)
                                             −  (1 + )

The denominator is positive, and so the lower bound can always be satisfied for some
 : unlike in  , there is no necessary condition.
    Lemma 2 below summarizes the equilibrium.

Lemma 2. (Positive correlation, pooling equilibrium, all firms sell equity.) Consider
a pooling equilibrium where all firms sell equity ( = ) and a firm that sells assets
is inferred as type ( ). The prices of assets and equity are  and  ( +  ) +
(1 − ) ( +  ) +  respectively. This equilibrium is sustainable if the following
conditions hold:     ³          ´
    (i) 1 +   max   E[]
                            
                                  


                                           13
   (ii)  ≥    , where
                        (                E[+](1+)− ( + )
              
                               ≡          − (1+)
                                                                    if 1 +  ≥ E[
                                                                                  
                                                                                   2]
                   =                       ( + )− E[+](1+)                         (14)
                              
                                        ≡           (1+)−
                                                                        if 1 +  ≤ E[
                                                                                       
                                                                                        2] 




2.3     Semi-Separating Equilibria
In a , the financing choice depends on the synergy parameter : there is a cutoﬀ
∗ where any firm below (above) the cutoﬀ sells assets (equity). In this subsection we
thus assume that  is strictly greater than : in the limit case of  =  = 0, there
is no synergy parameter to separate along.  and  can use diﬀerent cutoﬀ rules, so
separation will be along both type dimensions.
    While investors do not directly care about  (as it only aﬀects private values), the
synergy cutoﬀs aﬀect the expected quality (common value) of the claims. Using Bayes’
rule, the prices paid for sold assets and issued equity are, respectively:
                  ∗
                    −                   ∗ − 
 E[| = ] =                + (1 − )                                       (15)
                E[∗ ] −                E[∗ ] − 
                Ã               !                          Ã           !
                            ∗
                      −                                      − ∗
 E[| = ] =            £ ¤ ( +  ) + (1 − )                 £ ¤ ( +  ) + 
                   − E ∗                                   − E ∗
                                                                                               (16)

where
                                       £ ¤
                                      E ∗ = 
                                                ∗
                                                  + (1 − ) ∗ .

A type ( ) will prefer equity if and only if its unit cost of financing is no greater:

                                      +  +      (1 + )
                                                 ≤                                            (17)
                                     E[| = ]    E[| = ]

The cutoﬀ ∗ is that which allows (17) to hold with equality. Thus, it is defined by:

                                          +  +  E[| = ]
                                 ∗ =                          − 1                           (18)
                                                   E[| = ]

Although ∗ is not attainable in closed form, we can study whether ∗
                                                                        ≶ ∗ . Since
only the  +
             
                +
                    term on the RHS depends on , the higher cutoﬀ ∗ will belong to




                                                    14
                                                    ∗
the quality  for which this term is higher. Thus,   ∗ if and only if

                         +  +    
                                                                                     (19)
                         +  +    
                                                   −  
                                       ∗ ≡                                        (20)
                                                    − 

    Condition (19) is intuitive. It requires the certainty eﬀect-adjusted information
asymmetry to be higher for equity, which in turn requires  to be low.  dislikes
information asymmetry as it increases his capital loss; conversely,  likes information
asymmetry. Thus, if  falls, equity becomes less (more) attractive to  (); therefore,
the threshold synergy below which  sells assets is higher.
                                                            ∗
    The diﬀerent cutoﬀs in turn aﬀect the valuations. If      ∗ ,  is more willing to
sell assets than . Thus, asset sales are a positive signal of quality, and so the asset
price (15) is higher than in the   (2). As a result, -firms who sell assets make an
even greater capital gain. Their sale of assets is motivated by overvaluation: the assets
are low-quality and have a low common value. However, they are able to disguise the
sale as instead being motivated by operational reasons, by pooling with -firms who
are indeed selling for operational reasons (the assets are dissynergistic and thus have
a low private value, but are high-quality and have a high common value). Thus, they
receive a higher price than under  , where financing choices are independent of
synergies and no such disguise is possible. We call this the “camouflage eﬀect”.
    The camouflage eﬀect interacts with the certainty eﬀect. The amount required
 changes the cutoﬀs and thus the quality of assets and equity sold in equilibrium,
in turn aﬀecting their prices. If    ∗ , (19) is violated: the certainty eﬀect is
                                                            ∗
suﬃciently strong that equity is more attractive to  (       ∗ ). More  firms sell
equity, increasing (decreasing) the quality and price of equity (assets) sold. Indeed,
when    ∗ , we have    ∗
                               0: since assets exhibit greater information asymmetry,
 will retain them even if they are mildly dissynergistic (and when    ∗ , we have
  ∗
   0, so  will sell assets even if they are mildly synergistic). Now, -firms achieve
camouflage by selling equity: they pool with -firms who issue equity not because it
is of low quality, but because they do not wish to part with synergistic assets.
    The above results are summarized in Lemma 3 below, which also gives necessary
and suﬃcient conditions for a  to hold.

Lemma 3. (Positive correlation, semi-separating equilibrium): Consider a semi-separating
equilibrium where quality  sells assets if  ≤ ∗ and sells equity if   ∗ , where ∗ is
defined by (18). We have the following cases:

                                            15
     (ia) If    ∗ , then  ∗
                                   0 and ∗
                                               ∗ 
     (ib) If    ∗ , then  ∗
                                   0 and ∗
                                               ∗ .
     (ic) If  =  ∗ , then ∗ =  ∗
                                       = 0
     The prices of assets and equity are given by (15) and (16) respectively.
     A full semi-separating equilibrium where both qualities  strictly separate (  ∗ 
 so that both cutoﬀs are interior) is sustainable under the following conditions:
                                                          []
     (iia) If    ∗ , a necessary condition is 1 +     []
                                                                  and a suﬃcient condition
              
is 1 +  ≥  .
                                                          []
     (iib) If    ∗ , a necessary condition is 1 +    []
                                                                  and a suﬃcient condition
              
is 1 +  ≤  .
     (iic) If  =  ∗ , this is suﬃcient for existence.
     A partial semi-separating equilibrium where ’s cutoﬀ is at a boundary is sustain-
able in the following cases:
     (iiia) If    ∗ , a  where all -firms sell assets ( ∗
                                                                  = ) and -firms strictly
                                                    E[]
separate (    ) is sustainable only if   1 +    and if  ≤ 1 +  ≤
                   ∗
E[] 
  
         . In this  we have ∗  0.
     (iiib) If    ∗ , a  where all -firms sell equity ( ∗
                                                                  = ) and -firms strictly
separate (    ) is sustainable only if   1 +   E[] and if  E[]
                  ∗                                                      
                                                                                 ≤ 1+ ≤
                              ∗

    . In this  we have   0.

    Lemma 3 shows that it is the relative importance of operational motives (determined
by the absolute values of  and ) compared to certainty eﬀect-adjusted information
asymmetry (determined by the distance of  from  ∗ ) that governs whether  is
sustainable. In a , both claims are issued and one claim will be associated more
with . If  is extreme (very low or very high), information asymmetry is strong, and
so issuing the claim associated with  leads to a large capital loss. If synergies are
too weak to oﬀset this loss, firms pool. In contrast, if  close to  ∗ and  or  is
extreme, synergy motives are strong relative to information asymmetry, and so firms
of the same quality issue diﬀerent claims depending on . We thus have a full semi-
separating equilibrium ( ), where firms of both quality separate. For example, if
                              E[]
   ∗ , we need 1 +        E[]
                                      , which requires high  (strong synergies) and high
                                                                
 (while still satisfying    ∗ , so  close to  ∗ ) so that E[] on the RHS is low via
the certainty eﬀect. In the intermediate case, where synergies are moderate relative to
information asymmetry, we have a partial semi-separating equilibrium ( ) where all
-firms issue the same claim, regardless of , and -firms strictly separate. Regardless
of whether we have a   or  , it remains the case that if    ∗ (the certainty
                             ∗               ∗
eﬀect is strong), we have       0 and       ∗ ( prefers equity); if    ∗ (the

                                            16
                                    ∗            ∗
certainty eﬀect is weak), we have     0 and    ∗ ( prefers assets).
    Appendix C shows that, if synergies are extreme, a   is sustainable where all
-firms issue the same claim and -firms strictly separate. This equilibrium requires
synergies to be so strong that they swamp information asymmetry, and so no -firm
deviates even though it would be inferred as . Since the paper considers the trade-oﬀ
between information asymmetry and synergies, and this case requires synergies to be
so strong that they dominate the trade-oﬀ, we defer the analysis to an Appendix. The
intuition behind these equilibria are similar to the  s considered in Lemma 3.


2.4      Comparing the Equilibria
We now compare the suﬃcient conditions for each equilibrium to be sustainable. The
results are given in Proposition 1 below:

Proposition 1. (Positive correlation, comparison
                                            ³         ´ of equilibria.)
                    E[]                        
   (i) If 1 +  ≤  or 1 +   max   E[] , at least one pooling equilibrium is
sustainable. If both inequalities hold:
   (ia) An asset-pooling equilibrium is sustainable if  ≤    .
   (ib) An equity-pooling equilibrium is sustainable if  ≥    .
   (ic)    ≥    . For    ≤  ≤    , both pooling equilibria are sustainable.
   (ii) If E[] 
             
                    ≥ 1 +  ≥  ( E[]
                                         
                                             ), a partial semi-separating equilibrium where
 pools on assets is sustainable. The upper bound E[]         
                                                             
                                                                   ≥ 1 +  is equivalent to
        
 ≤              .
   (iii) If  E[] ≤ 1 +  ≤  ( E[]
                                     
                                             ), a partial semi-separating equilibrium where
 pools on equity is sustainable. The lower bound  E[]    
                                                                   ≤ 1 +  is equivalent to
        
 ≥              .
   (iv) If 1 +  ≥  ( E[] 
                             
                                    ), a full semi-separating equilibrium where   ∗
                                                                                       0 is
                      ∗
sustainable if    .
   (v) If 1 +  ≤  (  E[]
                               
                                    ), a full semi-separating equilibrium where   ∗
                                                                                       0 is
sustainable if    ∗ .

   Part (i) of Proposition 1 states that pooling equilibria are sustainable if synergies
are weak. Intuitively, deviation from a   leads to being inferred as ; if synergies
are not strong enough to outweigh the capital loss, deviation is ruled out and so the
  holds. When the amount of financing required increases, firms switch from selling
assets ( ) to issuing equity ( ), since the certainty eﬀect strengthens.14 Thus,
 14                                                              
      When  becomes too high (     ), then 1 +     E[]   no longer holds and   is


                                              17
the type of claim issued depends not only on the inherent characteristics of the claim
(its information asymmetry and synergies) but also the amount of financing required.
In standard theories, the type of security issued only depends on its characteristics
(information asymmetry or overvaluation), unless one assumes nonlinearities such as
limited debt capacity. Here,  can be fully raised by either source.
    It may seem that, since financing is a motive for asset sales, greater financing needs
should lead to more asset sales. This result is also delivered by investment models where
financial constraints induce disinvestment or reduce investment. However, here, if 
rises suﬃciently, the firm may sell fewer assets, since it substitutes into an alternative
source of financing: equity. Surprisingly, greater financial constraints may improve real
eﬃciency as firms hold onto their synergistic assets.15
    One interesting case is a single-segment firm, which corresponds to  =  , i.e.
core and non-core assets are one and the same. Since the information asymmetry of
the firm equals that of the non-core asset, the certainty eﬀect will push the information
asymmetry of equity lower, and so lead to a preference for equity.
    Parts (ii) and (iii) show that, if synergies are moderate, partial semi-separating
equilibria may hold. Just as in the  s, all -firms sell assets (equity) for low (high)
 . The diﬀerence is that, now, some -firms are willing to deviate. Even though they
are revealed as low-quality, this is outweighed by the synergy motives.
    Parts (iv) and (v) show that full semi-separating equilibria may hold if synergies
are strong relative to information asymmetry. Even if the conditions in part (i) hold
(synergies are weak and so  s are sustainable), a   may also be sustainable if  is
close to  ∗ so that information asymmetry is also weak.16 Regardless of the equilibrium
( ,  , or  ), it remains robust that  prefers assets (equity) for low (high)
 , because the certainty eﬀect reduces the information asymmetry of equity.
    Combining all parts of Proposition 1 together, if we fix synergies such that 1 +  
E[]
 
     , as  rises, we move from an  , to a region in which both   hold, then to
 , and finally to a   where all -firms sell equity (when  becomes very high,
-firms make little capital gain from equity, and so those with highly dissynergistic
assets sell them). In addition, in a neighborhood around  ∗ we also have  , so
three equilibria ( ,  , and  ) can be sustained. If we fix synergies such
unsustainable. Due to the certainty eﬀect, the information asymmetry of equity becomes second-order,
and so ( ) will sell assets.
   15
      In particular, if  = 0, all asset sales reduce total surplus since there are no dissynergies. Equity
issuance does not aﬀect real eﬃciency as it leads to a pure wealth transfer between investors and firms;
asset sales aﬀect real eﬃciency due to the diﬀerence between common and private values.
   16
      Note that, when the conditions in part (i) are satisfied,   is unsustainable for any  .



                                                    18
that 1 +    , as  rises, we move from a   where all -firms sell assets, to a
 , then to  , and finally to a   where all -firms sell equity. The change
in equilibrium as  changes illustrates that  prefers assets (equity) if  is low (high).
In addition, it shows how firm boundaries are aﬀected by financing needs.
    If we fix  and increase synergies in absolute terms, we move from a   to a
  and finally to a  . Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006) present a model showing
that operational motives for asset sales are procyclical, and empirically find that asset
sales are indeed procyclical. This procyclicality may arise not only because operational
motives rise in booms, but also because  is able to camouflage asset sales as being
operationally-motivated in booms. In our model, an increase in operational motives
corresponds to  becoming more negative. Specifically, if  is high, with high  (weak
dissynergies) we have an   in which there is no camouflage eﬀect. As  falls, we
move to an  where camouflage is possible, since some -firms are selling assets due
to operational reasons. Markets in which  sells assets due to negative  are deep,
similar to the notion of “market depth” in Kyle (1985). The liquidity traders in Kyle
are analogous to high-quality asset sellers: they are selling assets for reasons other
than them having a low common value. The presence of such traders allows informed
speculators, who do have assets with a low common value, to profit by selling them.17
    Note that the regions in Proposition 1 do not overlap.18 This is because the Propo-
sition gives suﬃcient conditions for the equilibria to exist, which are not necessary.
The proof of Proposition 1 shows that the necessary conditions do overlap, i.e. there
is no set of parameters for which all necessary conditions are violated.


3      Negative Correlation
We now turn to the case of negative correlation. Since    , we now use the
term “high (low)-quality assets” to refer to the assets of  (). Note that negative
correlation is a mild condition: it only means that high-quality firms are not universally
high-quality, as they may have some low-quality assets. It does not require the values
of the divisions to covary negatively with each other (e.g. that a market upswing
  17
    Grenadier, Malenko, and Strebulaev (2012) have a similar notion of camouflage, which they dub
“blending in with the crowd,” in a diﬀerent setting. If an industry-wide shock forces good managers
to abandon their projects for exogenous reasons, bad managers take the opportunity to abandon their
bad projects without their low quality being revealed.
  18 E[]                                                    
      (the upper bound on 1 +  for  ) is less than  (the lower bound on 1 +  for  )
and E[] 
       (the upper bound on 1 +  for  ) is less than
                                                              
                                                                 (the lower bound on 1 +  for  ),
and similarly for the bound on 1 + .



                                                19
helps one division and hurts the other). It is reasonable for the market to know the
correlation of the asset with the core business (even if it does not observe quality)
simply by observing the type of asset traded. For example, the value of airplanes in
a bank’s leasing division is unlikely to be highly correlated with the bank as a whole,
but the value of mortgages will be.
    In this section, the manager’s objective function places weight  on the firm’s stock
price and 1 −  on fundamental value.19 We introduce stock price concerns because,
with negative correlation, there is now a trade-oﬀ involved in selling assets: being
inferred as  maximizes the market value, but being inferred as  maximizes proceeds
and thus fundamental value. Thus, without stock price concerns, no   is sustainable.


3.1     Pooling Equilibrium, All Firms Sell Assets
As in Section 2.1, we consider an  , supported by the OEPB that an equity issuer
           ¡     ¢
is of type   . As before, sold assets are valued at E [] =  + (1 − ) and
issued equity is valued at  . An asset seller has a stock price of E [ + ] −  × E []
and an equity issuer is priced at  +  . The stock price of an asset seller takes into
                                                                 ¡       ¢
account the expected loss of synergies from the sale, E[] = 12  +  .
    By deviating,  avoids the capital loss from selling highly-valued assets at a pooled
price as well as any loss of synergies, but suﬀers a low stock price. Thus, he will only
                                                                  ¡     ¢
cooperate if his concern for the stock price  is high. Since   is most likely to
deviate, all -firms will cooperate if:
                                                     ³                     ´
                                                         
                                                        E[]
                                                              (1   + ) − 1
   ≥   =                                                             ³         ´.
                                                                                   
                       (( −  ) − ( −  )) − 12  ( + ) +             + ) − 1
                                                                                   E[]
                                                                                        (1
                                                                                         (21)
If (21) holds, it is automatic that all -firms will not deviate: their incentives to deviate
are weaker as they are making a capital gain by selling low-quality assets. Thus, (21)
is necessary and suﬃcient for no firms to deviate.
    The lower bound given by (21) is relatively loose. It is easy to rule out a deviation
to equity. Issuing equity not only leads to a low price (of  +  ) on the equity being
sold (as in MM), but also implies a low valuation (of  +  ) for the rest of the firm.
This is because the equity being sold is necessarily perfectly correlated with the firm.
  19
     The manager’s stock price concerns can stem from a number of sources introduced in earlier
work, such as takeover threat (Stein (1988)), concern for managerial reputation (Narayanan (1985),
Scharfstein and Stein (1990)), or the manager expecting to sell his shares before fundamental value is
realized (Stein (1989)).


                                                 20
The second eﬀect is absent in MM, since the manager only cares about fundamental
value and not the stock price.
                                         ¡    ¢
    The IC is trivially satisfied. Type   will indeed deviate to equity if revealed
: his stock price will rise, he will receive a capital gain by selling equity for a high
price (compared to his current loss on assets) and he avoids the loss of synergies  ≥ 0.
    The results of this subsection are summarized in Lemma 4 below:

Lemma 4. (Negative correlation, pooling equilibrium, all firms sell assets.) Consider
a pooling equilibrium where all firms sell assets ( =  = ) and a firm that sells
                          ¡    ¢
equity is inferred as type   . The prices of assets and equity are  + (1 − )
and  respectively. The stock prices of asset sellers and equity issuers are E [ + ] −
 × E [] and  +  , respectively. This equilibrium is sustainable if
                                                      ³                     ´
                                                          
                                                         E[]
                                                               (1   + ) − 1
   ≥   =                                                              ³                     ´
                                                                                    
                        (( −  ) − ( −  )) − 12  ( + ) +                E[]
                                                                                         (1   + ) − 1

    The bound is increasing in  , so again the choice of financing depends on the amount
required. However,  plays a diﬀerent role here than in the positive correlation model,
where it drove the certainty eﬀect. Here, a greater  means that ’s capital loss from
pooling is sustained over a larger base, increasing the fundamental value motive and
requiring higher stock price concerns  to maintain indiﬀerence. Put diﬀerently, if 
is high,  suﬀers such a large capital loss from selling assets that it prefers to “bite the
bullet” and issue equity despite the low stock price.


3.2     Pooling Equilibrium, All Firms Sell Equity
We next consider a   in which all firms sell equity, supported by the OEPB that
an asset seller is of type ( ).20 As before, issued equity is valued at E[ + ] + 
  20
     For all equilibria, we specify the OEPB that a deviator is of quality , and are free to choose
 whichever  makes the equilibrium most likely to hold. In all equilibria considered thus far,  only
 aﬀected the IC and so the choice was straightforward: we choose the  that makes the IC easier
¡to satisfy.
      ¢      Thus, for example, the OEPB for   under positive correlation was that a deviator is
    rather than ( ). Here,  aﬀects both IC and ND and so the choice is not straightforward.
A lower  makes IC easier to satisfy (as ( ) is more willing to deviate to asset sales to get rid
of a dissynergistic asset) but increases the stock price of a deviator (as it is deemed to be losing a
dissynergistic asset) and makes ND harder to satisfy. We follow the earlier equilibria and choose the
 that makes the IC easiest to satisfy. This is because the goal of this section is to show that   is
sustainable for a greater range of parameters than  . In Section 3.3 we show that the IC condition
for   is tighter than the ND condition for  , so if we chose a diﬀerent  (which would make
 the IC condition for   harder to satisfy), this would still hold.


                                                  21
and sold assets are valued at  . The stock price is E [ + ] for an equity issuer and
 +  −   for an asset seller.
   By deviating,  avoids the capital loss from equity and gets rid of a dissynergistic
asset, but suﬀers a low stock price from being inferred as . Since ( ) is most likely
to deviate, all -firms will cooperate if:
                                             ³                             ´
                                                           (1+)
                                                E[]
                                                        −     
    ≥   =                                                            ³                         ´      (22)
                                                                                             (1+)
                       (( −  ) − ( −  )) +   +                         E[]
                                                                                          −     


    If (22) holds, it is automatic that all -firms will not deviate: their incentives to
deviate are weaker as they are making a capital gain by issuing equity. Thus, (22) is
necessary and suﬃcient for all firms not to deviate. Comparing (22) with (21), the
ND condition in  , the   condition is harder to satisfy. In  , deviation to
equity leads to a low price of  +  not only on the equity sold, but also on the rest
of the firm. Here, deviation to asset sales leads to a low price of  +  −   on
the firm, but a high price of  on the asset sold, since it is not a carbon copy: the
“correlation eﬀect.”
    Unlike in Section 3.1, the IC is non-trivial, since deviation to asset sales causes
( ) to suﬀer a capital loss. We require:
                                            ³                          ´
                                                 (1+)        
                                                 
                                                            −   E[]
   ≥   =                                                                   ³                         ´  (23)
                                                                                        (1+)       
                   (1 − )(( −  ) − ( −  )) −   +                             
                                                                                                  −   E[]


    This is also a lower bound. The numerator represents the fundamental loss that
 suﬀers from deviating to asset sales, which arises if the capital loss from selling
undervalued assets exceeds the gain from getting rid of a dissynergistic asset. If this
loss is positive, he will only deviate if  is suﬃciently high.
    The IC condition (23) is stronger than the ND condition (22) if and only if:

            (−)(1 + 2 )  [( −  ) − ( −  )][2 − (1 − )1 ],                                       (24)

where 1 and 2 are the parenthetical terms in the numerators of (23) and (22), i.e.:

                                   (1 + )    
                             1 ≡            −       0
                                             E[]
                                         (1 + )
                             2 ≡      −              0
                                  E[]       


                                            22
Lemma 5 below summarizes the equilibrium.
Lemma 5. (Negative correlation, pooling equilibrium, all firms sell equity.) Consider
a pooling equilibrium where all firms sell assets ( =  = ) and a firm that sells
assets is inferred as type ( ). The prices of assets and equity are given by  and
 ( +  ) + (1 − ) ( +  ) +  respectively. The stock prices of asset sellers
and equity issuers are  +  −   and E [ + ], respectively. This equilibrium is
sustainable if  ≥    , where
                ⎧                                  
                                                        (1+)   
                                                                         
                ⎪
                ⎪
                                                               − E[]
                ⎨    =
                                                         
                                                           
                                                                (1+)   
                                                                                 if (24) holds
                             (1−)( − −( − ))+ +        − E[]
           =                                                  
                                                      (1+)
                ⎪
                ⎪      
                                                E[] − 
                ⎩              =                         
                                                                  (1+)
                                                                                 if (24) does not hold.
                                   ( − −( − ))+ + E[] − 
                                                                             
                                                                                                     (25)
   There are two eﬀects of increasing  on the lower bounds. The base eﬀect makes
pooling harder to sustain: the capital loss is suﬀered oﬀ a higher base, and so increases
’s incentive to deviate. Thus, the lower bound tightens, i.e. increases. This is the
same eﬀect as in  . The second eﬀect is specific to  : increasing  reduces the
capital loss from pooling, due to the certainty eﬀect, making pooling easier to sustain.
The second eﬀect is always smaller, and so the bounds increase overall.


3.3         Comparing the Pooling Equilibria
We now study the conditions under which each   is sustainable. The goal of the
comparison is to show that the correlation eﬀect leads to asset sales being preferred
to equity. Since this correlation eﬀect does not depend on synergies, we undertake the
comparison for  =  = 0.21 The results are given in Proposition 2 below:
Proposition 2. (Negative correlation, comparison of pooling equilibria.) Set  =  =
0. An asset-pooling equilibrium is sustainable if  ≥    and an equity-pooling
equilibrium is sustainable if  ≥    , where    and    are given by (21)
and (25) respectively, and        . Thus, if:
    (i) 0       , neither pooling equilibrium is sustainable,
    (ii)   ≤  ≤   , only the asset-pooling equilibrium is sustainable,
    (iii)    ≤   1, both the asset-pooling and equity-pooling equilibria are sustain-
able.
    The thresholds    and   are both increasing in  .
  21
     In contrast, if   0, trivially   would be diﬃcult to sustain, despite the correlation eﬀect,
as firms will not wish to part with synergistic assets.

                                                           23
    Proposition 2 shows that, with negative correlation, asset sales are more common
than equity. The range of ’s over which   is sustainable is a strict subset of that
over which   is sustainable. This correlation eﬀect is absent in a standard financing
model of security issuance, because both debt and equity are positively correlated with
firm value. Thus, the issuance of debt may imply that debt is low-quality, and thus
the remainder of the firm is also low-quality.
    The preference for asset sales analysis points to an interesting benefit of diversifi-
cation. Stein (1997) notes that an advantage of holding assets that are not perfectly
correlated is “winner-picking”: a conglomerate can increase investment in the division
with the best investment opportunities at the time. Our model suggests that another
advantage is “loser-picking”: a firm can sell a low-quality asset without implying a low
value for the rest of the firm. Non-core assets are a form of financial slack and may
even be preferable to debt capacity: debt is typically positively correlated with firm
value, so a debt issue may lead the market to infer that both the debt being sold and
the remainder of the firm are low-quality.
    The analysis also points to a new notion of investment reversibility. Standard
theories (e.g. Abel and Eberly (1996)) model reversibility as the real value that can
be salvaged by undoing or selling an investment, which in turn depends on the asset’s
technology. Here, reversibility depends on the market’s inference of firm quality if an
investment is sold, and thus the correlation between the asset and the rest of the firm.


3.4    Semi-Separating Equilibrium
As in Section 2.3, we have a  characterized by a cutoﬀ ∗ . The prices paid for assets
and equity are again given by (15) and (16). Since the manager now places weight on
the firm’s stock price, we need to calculate the stock prices of asset sellers and equity
issuers. These are, respectively:
                    µ   ∗
                                  ¶                       µ ∗          ¶
                         −                                 − 
  E [ | = ] =                   ( +  ) + (1 − )                 ( +  )
                     E[∗ ] −                            E[∗ ] − 
                           Ã                    !
                      1       E[(∗ )2 ] −  2
                   −                                                                (26)
                      2          [∗ ] − 
                   Ã              !                       Ã             !
                              ∗                                     ∗
                       −                                   − 
  E [ | = ] =               ∗
                                     ( +  ) + (1 − )                 ( +  ) (27)
                      − E[ ]                              − E[∗ ]

     The
       ³ stock      price
                       ´ of an asset seller includes an additional term, − × E [| = ] =
        E[( ∗ )2 ]−2
− 12       
          [∗ ]−
                        , which reflects the expected synergy loss (which may be negative).
           



                                            24
Note that E [| = ]  E[], since the decision to sell assets suggests that syn-
ergies are low. The stock price is higher for an asset seller than an equity issuer
(E [ | = ]  E [ | = ]) if and only if:

[Pr ( = | = ) − Pr ( = | = )]×[( −  ) − ( −  )]   ×E [| = ] .
                                                                           (28)
            ∗
The cutoﬀ  for a particular quality  is defined by:
                                                     µ                                  ¶
                                                          (1 + ∗ )    +  + 
    (E[ | = ] − E[ | = ]) = (1 − )                            −                    .   (29)
                                                         E[| = ] E[| = ]

Only the parenthetical term on the RHS diﬀers by quality . Ignoring , this term
                                ∗
will be higher for , and so       ∗ . This is intuitive: since  has low-quality assets
but high-quality equity, he is more willing to sell assets. Under positive correlation,
  ∗
    ∗ only if assets exhibit less (certainty eﬀect-adjusted) information asymmetry
than equity, as then the capital loss from asset sales is lower. With negative correlation,
the capital loss from asset sales is always lower since it is negative (i.e., a capital gain),
                          ∗
and so we always have      ∗ . From (26) and (27),   ∗
                                                               ∗ implies that asset (equity)
sales lead to a positive (negative) inference about firm quality, i.e. Pr ( = | = ) 
Pr ( = | = ), and so the left-hand side (“LHS”) of (28) positive. Thus, in the
absence of the additional term  × E [| = ] on the RHS, (28) will hold: the stock
price is higher for an asset seller, since  is more likely to sell assets than . However,
if synergies become extremely strong so that  × E [| = ] is very large, this could
theoretically lead to a violation of (28): an asset seller is expected to lose very large
synergies, swamping the positive quality inference. Since this paper considers the trade-
oﬀ between information asymmetry and synergies, to ensure that synergies are not so
strong that they dominate the trade-oﬀ so that being revealed as low-quality increases
the stock price, we assume that (28) holds. A suﬃcient, but unnecessary, condition is
symmetric synergies ( = −).22 In turn, (28) implies that the LHS of (29) is positive.
                                        ∗
Setting  =  on the RHS yields            0 for the equality to hold. Intuitively,  will
sell assets even if they are moderately synergistic, as he benefits from both the capital
gain and the higher stock price.
    The amount of financing  has three eﬀects on the cutoﬀs in (29). To illustrate,
consider ’s decision. First, an increase in  augments the certainty eﬀect and makes
equity less attractive, because  enjoys a smaller capital gain. This tends to increase
  22
    In this case, we have E [] = 0 and so E [| = ]  E[] = 0; thus, the RHS of (28) is negative
and (28) holds.



                                                25
∗ . Second, an increase in  augments fundamental value considerations due to the
base eﬀect, decreasing ∗ . Third,  multiplies the expected synergy loss of an asset
seller. If the expected synergy loss E [| = ] is negative (on average, sold assets
are dissynergistic), a higher  magnifies this expected gain, increasing the stock price
reaction to selling assets and raising ∗ .
                      ∗
     In addition to    ∗ always holding, a second contrast with the positive correla-
tion case is that it is possible to have separation purely by quality and not by synergy,
       ∗
i.e.   =  and ∗ = , where all high (low)-quality firms sell assets (equity). We use
  to denote a  by quality only. Under positive correlation,   is unsustainable
as ( ) will deviate to assets and enjoy a capital gain plus a loss of dissynergies.
Here, such a deviation leads to a capital loss. Indeed,   is sustainable if both of the
following conditions hold:
                                                 ³                 ´
                                                              
                  
                                                 (1 + ) −   
        ≥           =                                             ³               ´          (30)
                          (( −  ) − ( −  )) − 12  ( + ) +  (1 + ) − 
                                               ³              ´
                  
                                               (1+)
                                                     
                                                          −  1
        ≤           =                                             ³            ´.            (31)
                                                       1                 (1+)
                          (( −  ) − ( −  )) − 2  ( + ) +      
                                                                                 −1

                                                                    ¡     ¢
    The lower bound on  ensures that stock price concerns deter   from deviating
to retain its synergistic assets.23 There are three eﬀects of changing  on the lower
bound, analogous to the three eﬀects on the cutoﬀs in (29). First, a rise in  increases
    
  due to the certainty eﬀect (reducing  ). Second, it reduces it due to the base
eﬀect. Third,  multiplies the expected synergy loss of an asset seller. If the expected
                                                                                      
synergy loss +
               2
                  is negative, a higher  magnifies this expected gain, reducing    .
The upper bound ensures that ( ) will not deviate. If 1 +  ≤  , i.e. the benefits
of getting rid of a dissynergistic asset exceed the capital loss from selling high-quality
assets, deviation to asset sales yields ( ) a fundamental gain and so   can never
hold. However, if 1 +    , deviation yields ( ) a fundamental loss. Since it also
leads to a stock price increase,  must be low to deter deviation. Unlike the lower
bound, there are only two eﬀects of changing  on the upper bound as there is no
certainty eﬀect. The range of ’s that satisfy (30) and (31) is increasing in  and
decreasing in : the weaker the synergy motive, the easier it is to sustain   .
                                                                                  ¡    ¢
  23
     If 1 +   
                 , then the loss of synergies is less than the capital loss that   would suﬀer by
                 

issuing equity. Thus, ’s fundamental value and stock price are both higher under asset sales, and
the lower bound on  is trivially satisfied.



                                                  26
    In   , assets are sold for the lowest possible price of  and equity is issued at the
lowest price of  +  , so there are no capital gains or losses. ’s assets are correctly
assessed as “lemons,” and so the market timing motive for financing (e.g. Baker and
Wurgler (2002)) does not exist. However,  is still willing to sell assets despite the lack
of a capital gain, due to the positive stock price reaction. Thus, the correlation eﬀect
— and its implications for the desirability of financing through asset sales — manifests
in two ways. First,   is sustainable over a greater range of parameters than  .
Second,   is sustainable, unlike in the positive-correlation model.24
    Finally, we may have  s where one quality pools and the other separates. As in
the positive correlation case, if  is low, we have a   where all -firms sell assets and
-firms strictly separate. Unlike the positive correlation case, we cannot have a  
where -firms issue equity and -firms strictly separate. Such an equilibrium would
require some -firms to be willing to sell assets but all -firms not to be. However,
since ’s assets are lower-quality under negative correlation,  is more willing to sell
assets than . Similarly, if  and  are high and  is low, we have a   where all
-firms issue equity and -firms strictly separate. We cannot have a   where all
-firms sell assets and -firms strictly separate: since some -firms are issuing equity,
-firms will enjoy both a capital gain and a stock price increase by deviating to equity.
Thus, the only feasible  s involve all -firms selling assets, or all -firms issuing
equity, which is intuitive since ’s assets and ’s equity are both low-quality.
    The results of this section are summarized in Lemma 6 below.

Lemma 6. (Negative correlation, semi-separating equilibrium.) Assume that (28)
holds.
    (i) A full semi-separating equilibrium is sustainable where quality  sells assets if
 ≤ ∗ and equity if   ∗ , where ∗ is defined by (29), if  is suﬃciently low and  is
                                ∗
suﬃciently high. We have         ∗ and  ∗
                                                   0; the sign of ∗ depends on parameter
values. The prices of assets and equity are given by (26) and (27) respectively.
    (ii) A partial semi-separating equilibrium in which all firms of quality  () sell
  24
       is also featured in the model of Nanda and Narayanan (1999), where core and non-core
assets are always negatively correlated and  = 0. (If these assets are positively correlated, there is
no information asymmetry in their model.) Thus, no pooling equilibria are sustainable in the absence
of transactions costs. They assume that the transactions costs of asset sales are higher than for equity
issuance, which sometimes supports an   but never an  : the opposite result to our paper.




                                                  27
assets (equity) is sustainable if the following two conditions hold:
                                               ³                    ´
                                                               
                 
                                               (1 + ) −      
      ≥            =                                              ³             ´
                                                      1                          
                         (( −  ) − ( −  )) −  2
                                                         (  + ) +  (1 + ) − 
                                              ³               ´
                 
                                              (1+)
                                                    
                                                          −  1
      ≤            =                                              ³           ´.
                         (( −  ) − ( −  )) − 12  ( + ) +  (1+)
                                                                          
                                                                               − 1

                                                                                ∗
   (iii) A partial semi-separating equilibrium where all -firms sell assets (   = )
                                     ∗
and -firms strictly separate (    ) is sustainable if  is suﬃciently low,  is
                               
suﬃciently high, and     .
   (iv) A partial semi-separating equilibrium where all -firms issue equity (∗ = )
                                     ∗
and -firms strictly separate (     ) is sustainable if  is suﬃciently high,  is
                               
                             
suﬃciently high, and           .


4     Extensions
This section analyzes extensions of the main model. In Section 4.1, the cash raised is
used to finance an investment whose expected value exhibits information asymmetry,
and Section 4.2 allows firms to have the choice over whether to raise capital.
     In addition, we have undertaken an extension in which firms may also sell the core
asset. Since the analysis mainly demonstrates the robustness of the core model, rather
than generating new results, we defer it to Appendix B. However, we discuss briefly
here two robustness results. First, one of the assets (core or non-core) will exhibit
more information asymmetry than the other; since equity is a mix of both assets, its
information asymmetry will lie in between. Even though equity is never the safest
claim, it may still be issued due to the certainty eﬀect. Second, if the core (non-core)
asset is positively (negatively) correlated with firm value, the firm is able to choose the
correlation of the asset that it sells, whereas the analysis thus far has considered either
the positive correlation case or the negative correlation case. Appendix B shows that
a   in which all firms sell the non-core asset is easier to sustain than one in which
all firms sell equity, and one in which all firms sell the core asset. Thus, the correlation
eﬀect continues to apply when firms can choose the correlation of the assets they sell.




                                               28
4.1     Cash Used For Investment
In this section, the cash raised is used to finance an investment whose expected value
exhibits information asymmetry. To make the eﬀects of investment as clear as possible,
we will focus on the no-synergies case of  =  = 0. We also assume that:

                                              + 
                                                                                                  (32)
                                             E [ + ]

Equation (32) states that the information asymmetry of assets is not too high compared
to equity. If (32) is violated, the information asymmetry of assets is so high that, in the
core model,   is always sustainable regardless of  (the RHS of (12) is negative).
We discuss the eﬀect of relaxing (32) at the end of this section.
    Since all agents are risk-neutral, only expected values matter. Thus, the model is
unchanged if we simply make the investment volatile, so that its payoﬀ is a random
variable with an expected value independent of .25 For the investment to aﬀect the
analysis, it must vary with  so that it exhibits information asymmetry — a critically
diﬀerent concept to volatility. We thus assume that  is used to finance an investment
with expected value  =  (1 +  ), where  ≥ 0 and  ≥ 0: since there are
no agency problems, only positive-NPV investments are undertaken (as in MM). We
allow for both  ≥  and    . The former is more common as high-quality firms
typically have superior investment opportunities, but    can occur as a firm that
is currently weak may have greater room for improvement.
    Intuitively, it would seem that, if  ≥  , the uncertainty of investment will
exacerbate the uncertainty of assets in place, weakening the certainty eﬀect and making
equity less desirable. However, we will show that this is not necessarily the case. We
consider the case of positive correlation here; the case of negative correlation is very
similar to the core model and is in Appendix D. Appendix D also allows for   0
and   0 and shows that the core intuitions are unchanged.
    We first consider  . The analog of (8), ’s ND condition, is now:

                                       +  +  (1 +  )
                                      ≤                       .                                     (33)
                                 E[]    +  +  (1 +  )

As is intuitive,  and  (=  (1 +  )) enter symmetrically in all expressions: an
equity investor receives a share of , , and , but an asset purchaser receives only a
  25
    If the expected value of the investment is  , all of the expressions remain the same. If the expected
value is ,  is simply replaced by  in all expressions: the relevant variable becomes the (common)
expected value of the investment instead of the amount of cash required to finance it.


                                                   29
share of . From (33),  will not deviate if:

         [ (1 +  ) − E [] (1 +  )] ≤ E [] ( +  ) −  ( +  )         (34)

                         
   Since (32) implies E[]     +
                                    +
                                        , the RHS of (34) is positive. We first consider the
             1+
case of E[]  1+ , i.e. the information asymmetry of investment is not too high. The
LHS of (34) is positive, and so we again have an upper bound on  , given by:

                              E [] ( +  ) −  ( +  )
                         ≤                                                           (35)
                                  (1 +  ) − E [] (1 +  )

     In the core model ((7)), and setting synergies to zero, the denominator is  −E [].
If    , the denominator of (35) is greater than in the core model, and so it is
harder to support  . This is intuitive: ’s superior growth options counterbalance
its inferior assets in place and reduce the information asymmetry of equity, encouraging
                                                                                    
deviation. One may think that the reverse intuition applies to  ≥  , but if E[]    

 
    , the denominator of (35) is still higher than in the core model. This intuition is
incomplete because financing investment has two eﬀects. They can be best seen by the
following decomposition of the investment returns:

                              =  (1 +  )
                             =  (1 +  ) +  ( −  ) 

    The first, intuitive eﬀect is the  ( −  ) term which appears in the  equation
only. The value of investment is greater for  and so it suﬀers a greater capital loss
from selling equity. However, there is a second eﬀect, captured by the  (1 +  )
term which is common to both qualities. This increases the certainty eﬀect: since the
investment is positive-NPV, an equity investor now has a claim to a larger certain
value:  (1 +  ) rather than  . Put diﬀerently, while investors do not know firm
quality, they do know that the funds they provide will increase in value, regardless
of quality. Note that equity does not become attractive to investors simply because
the firm is worth more due to its growth opportunities. The growth opportunities are
fully priced into the equity issue and are not a “freebie.” Instead, the attraction arises
because the certain component of the firm’s balance sheet is now greater. Due to this
                                                                                 
second eﬀect,  ≥  is not suﬃcient for the upper bound to relax. Only if E[]      
                                                                          
does the first eﬀect dominate, loosening the upper bound. Finally, if E[]    ≤ 1+ 
                                                                                 1+
                                                                                      , i.e.
investment exhibits high information asymmetry, then the LHS of (34) is non-positive
and so the ND condition holds for any  .

                                            30
    Another way to view the intuition is as follows. Equityholders obtain a portfolio of
assets in place ( + ) and the new investment ();  determines the weighting of
the new investment in this portfolio.  cooperates if his capital loss from asset sales,
 
E[]
     , is less than the weighted average loss on this overall portfolio. If both the assets
in place and the new investment exhibit higher information asymmetry than non-core
                
assets, i.e. E[]  ≤  +
                          +
                                   
                              and E[] ≤ 1+ 
                                          1+
                                               , then the loss on the portfolio is greater
regardless of the weights — hence,  cooperates holds regardless of  . Deviation is only
                                                                  
possible if the investment is safer than non-core assets, i.e. E[]    1+
                                                                        1+
                                                                             . In this case,
the weight placed on the new investment ( ) must be low for the weighted average loss
to remain higher for the portfolio, and so for deviation to be ruled out.
    Regardless of the specific values of  and  , in all cases we require  to be below
an upper bound.26 Thus, the result of the core model, that  must be low for   to
be sustainable, continues to hold when cash is used to finance an uncertain investment.
    The equilibrium is summarized in Lemma 7 below. The proof of the Lemma shows
that the eﬀect of uncertain investment on the IC condition is similar, and that the IC
is always stronger than the ND condition (34).

Lemma 7. (Positive correlation, pooling equilibrium, all firms sell assets, cash used
for investment.) Consider a pooling equilibrium where all firms sell assets ( = )
and a firm that issues equity is inferred as quality . The prices of assets and equity are
 + (1 − ) and  +  +  (1 +  ) respectively. The equilibrium is sustainable
if:
           (E[](1 +  ) −  (1 +  )) ≤  ( +  ) − E[]( +  )           (36)
                    E[]
      (i) If 1+
             1+
                   ≥ 
                         , the asset-pooling equilibrium is sustainable for all  .
              E[]  1+
      (ii) If    1+
                          , the asset-pooling equilibrium is sustainable if  ≤    =
 ( + )−E[]( + )
  E[](1+ )− (1+ )
                           . Compared to the case where cash remains on the balance sheet
(Lemma 1):
        (a) If   E[]
                      
                           , the upper bound on  is tighter and the asset-pooling equilib-
rium is sustainable across a smaller range of  ,
        (b) If   E[]
                       
                           , the upper bound on  is looser and the asset-pooling equilib-
rium is sustainable across a larger range of  .

   The eﬀect of using cash for investment is similar in  , so we defer the analysis
to Appendix D. The comparison of equilibria is summarized in Proposition 3:

 26                  1+
      For   E[]   ≤   1+ ,   the upper bound is infinite.




                                                           31
Proposition 3. (Positive correlation, cash used for investment, comparison of equilib-
ria.) An asset-pooling equilibrium is sustainable if  ≤    , and an equity-pooling
equilibrium is sustainable if  ≥    , where    and    are given by:
                 (    ( + )−E[]( + )
                  E[](1+ )− (1+ )
                                                  if E[]
                                                       
                                                            1+
                                                              1+
                                                                  
                                                                    ,
            =
                     ∞ if 1+  
                            1+
                                   ≥ E[]
                                      
                                          
                 ⎧    E[+]− ( + )
                 ⎪
                 ⎨    (1+ )− (1+E[ ])
                                               if 1+
                                                   1+
                                                       
                                                            −(1−)
                                                                 
                                                                      
                                                                           and   1+
                                                                                 1+
                                                                                          +
                                                                                            +
                                                                                                    ;
                      ( + )− E[+]
   =                                      if 1+  
                                                            −(1−) 
                                                                           and    1+
                                                                                         ≥  +
                                                                                                     ;
                 ⎪
                 ⎩
                       (1+E[ ])− (1+ )      1+                       1+          +
                     ∞ if 1+  
                            1+
                                   ≥  −(1−)
                                           
                                                   
                                                      ( E[]
                                                           
                                                              ).

The thresholds    and    are both increasing in  and decreasing in  . If
1+
1+
           
       E[]                                    
               we have        . If E[]  1+
                                                       1+
                                                             E[]
                                                               
                                                                   , we have    
   if and only if 1+
                        1+
                               +
                                    +
                                        .

    Proposition 3 demonstrates the core model’s results continue to hold when there is
information asymmetry over the use of the cash raised. Regardless of  and  ,  
( ) is sustainable for low (high)  . As in the core model, the source of financing
depends on the amount of financing required.
    In addition to demonstrating robustness, this extension also generates a new pre-
diction. As  falls and  rises (the information asymmetry of investment falls), the
upper bound on   tightens and the lower bound on   loosens. Thus, the source
of financing also depends on the use of financing: if the funds will be used for valuable
investment even if the firm is low-quality ( is high), they are more likely to be raised
from equity. The use of financing also matters in models of moral hazard (uses more
likely to be subject to agency problems will be financed by debt rather than equity)
or bankruptcy costs (purchases of tangible assets are more likely to financed by debt
rather than equity); here it matters in a model of pure adverse selection. In addition,
our predictions for the use of equity diﬀer from a moral hazard model. With moral
hazard, if cash is to remain on the balance sheet, equity is undesirable due to the
agency costs of free cash flow (Jensen (1986)). Here, equity is preferred due to the
certainty eﬀect.
    Appendix D also considers the case in which (32) does not hold. In this rare case,
assets exhibit such high information asymmetry that   holds in the core model
regardless of  . In this case, and if also the information asymmetry of the investment
is suﬃciently higher than assets, equity issuance is always possible unless the weight on
the investment is suﬃciently high that the weighted average information asymmetry
(of equity and the new investment) is greater than that of assets. Thus,   ( )

                                                       32
now holds for low (high)  . If either one of the above conditions is not met, we return
to the core model’s result that   holds for high  and   for low  .


4.2     Capital Raising is a Choice
In the core model, firms are forced to raise  . This section gives firms a choice over
whether to raise capital. We first allow all firms to have freedom to do nothing, or
instead raise capital of  for an investment that returns  (1 + ).27 We continue to
consider the case of positive correlation and reintroduce synergies into the model. The
possible equilibria are given in Proposition 4 below:

Proposition 4. (All firms have a choice on whether to raise capital.) If all firms can
either raise equity of  , sell assets of  , or do nothing, we have the following equilibria:
    (i) The equilibria in Section 2 continue to hold under the conditions in that Section
plus an additional lower bound on 1+. For example, a full semi-separating equilibrium
where quality  sells assets if  ≤ ∗ and equity if   ∗ holds under the conditions of
                                                           
Lemma 3 plus the additional condition 1 +   E[|=]          . The additional lower bounds
                                                        28
for the other equilibria are given in Appendix A.
    (ii) If 1 +  ≤  , we have a semi-separating equilibrium where quality  sells
                 ∗                                ∗
assets if  ≤    and does nothing if          , and quality  sells assets if  ≤ ∗ and
issues equity if   ∗ .
                                                                                       (1+
                                                                                             ∗
                                                                                               )
    (iia) If 1 +   (1+)
                           
                              , the cutoﬀ    ∗
                                                is interior and  defined by 1 +  =  E[|=]
                                                                                                 .
                                      (1+ )
                                             ∗
The cutoﬀ ∗ is defined by 1 = E[|=]        , where ∗  0. If 1 +   (≤)  , we have
  ∗
   (≤) ∗ .
    (iib) If 1 +  ≤ (1+)
                          
                              , then ∗
                                          = , i.e. all -firms do nothing, and ∗ = 0.
    (iii) If  = 0, we have the same semi-separating equilibria in part (ii) except that
-firms with   ∗ either issue equity or do nothing.

    Part (i) of Proposition 4 shows that the equilibria of the core model are sustainable
if the return on investment  is suﬃciently high. Intuitively,  is only willing to sustain
the losses from raising capital if the capital can be put to a suﬃciently productive use.
    Part (ii) shows that if  is low, high-quality firms with synergistic assets will not
raise capital at all, since the return on investment is insuﬃcient to outweigh the loss
of synergies from selling assets or the capital loss from issuing equity. However, high-
quality firms with dissynergistic assets will sell them for operational reasons. As before,
  27
     Since the implications of  6=  have been analyzed in the previous subsection, we set the return
on investment to be independent of firm quality here.
  28
     The additional lower bounds for the equilibria studied in Appendix C are given in that section.

                                                  33
low-quality firms sell either equity or assets, depending on their level of synergy. There
is no camouflage eﬀect with equity: unlike the  that exists if  is high (part (i)),
here equity automatically reveals the firm as  and leads to a price of  . In contrast,
asset sales may be undertaken either because the asset is low-quality, or because the
asset is dissynergistic. This camouflage eﬀect means that asset sales can stem from
high- as well as low-quality firms, and so the asset price exceeds  . We thus have
∗ ≥ 0: low-quality firms prefer assets to equity, due to the camouflage eﬀect.
    The  in part (i) exhibits greater real eﬃciency than that in part (ii) since all
firms are undertaking profitable investment. It is easier to satisfy the condition for part
                 
(i) (1 +   E[|=] ), and harder to satisfy the condition for part (ii) (1 +  ≤  ), if
 is high. A high  has beneficial real consequences: it encourages  to issue equity
and invest, because the certainty eﬀect reduces the capital loss from issuing equity.
    Part (iii) shows that, if  = 0, even low-quality firms have no reason to issue equity:
they cannot exploit overvaluation since there is no camouflage, and they are unable
to invest the cash raised. Thus, low-quality firms with suﬃciently synergistic assets
(  ∗ ) are indiﬀerent between selling equity and doing nothing. Indeed, there exists
an equilibrium where all -firms with   ∗ do nothing, and so the equity market
shuts down: absent an investment opportunity, the only reason to sell equity is if it
is low-quality, and so the “no-trade” theorem applies. In contrast, asset sales may be
motivated by operational reasons and so the market continues to function. 29
    We next consider the case in which high-quality firms can choose whether to raise
financing, but low-quality firms are forced to do so. This is similar to Miller and
Rock (1985), where the need to raise financing reveals that a firm’s operations are not
generating suﬃcient cash and thus are low-quality. Since some firms are now forced to
raise financing, we do not need a profitable investment opportunity to induce them to
do so, and so set  = 0. The equilibrium is given in Proposition 5 below:
Proposition 5. (High-quality firms have a choice on whether to raise capital, low-
quality firms must raise capital.) Assume  = 0. If -firms can either raise capital
of  or do nothing, and -firms must raise capital of  , we have a semi-separating
                                                    ∗                            ∗
equilibrium where quality  sells assets if  ≤      and does nothing if     , and
                                 ∗                         ∗               ∗
quality  sells assets if  ≤  and issues equity if    . The cutoﬀs  are defined
         (1+∗ )          ∗
by 1 = E[|=]     , where   0  ∗ .
  29
    Note that                                            
                  E[|=] , so for   1 +   E[|=] , the s in parts (i) and (ii) are
                 


both sustainable. The first equilibrium is sustainable: since some high-quality firms are selling equity,
the equity price is high, which underpins high-quality firms’ willingness to sell equity. The second
equilibrium is also sustainable: since no high-quality firms are selling equity, the equity price is low,
which underpins high-quality firms’ reluctance to sell equity.

                                                   34
                  (1+)      ∗
    (a) If 1      
                          ,     is interior.
                  (1+)            ∗
    (b) If 1 ≤     
                          ,   then    = , i.e. all -firms do nothing, and ∗ = 0.

   Proposition 5 shows that the equilibrium of Proposition 4, part (ii), holds in the
case in which only low-quality firms must raise capital. This result also illustrates
the camouflage eﬀect. Issuing equity immediately reveals a firm as low-quality, since
high-quality firms do not issue equity: they are not forced to do so (since they have no
capital needs) and will not voluntarily do so (since there is no investment opportunity).
By selling assets, low-quality firms can disguise a financing need that is motivated by
desperation (it needs to raise capital as it is low-quality) as instead being motivated
by operational reasons. Thus, we have ∗  0: low-quality firms prefer to raise capital
through selling assets, and will do so even if their assets are synergistic.


5     Implications
This section briefly discusses the main implications of the model. Some are empirically
testable; a subset have already been tested, while others are as yet unexplored and
would be interesting to study in future research. In addition, the model generates
other implications that may not be immediately linkable to an empirical test. Note that
empirical analysis should focus on asset sales that are primarily financing-motivated.
    The first set of empirical implications concerns the determinants of financing choice.
One determinant is the amount of financing required: Proposition 1 shows that equity
is preferred for high financing needs, because the certainty eﬀect reduces the infor-
mation asymmetry of equity, while asset sales are preferred for low financing needs.
Thus, equity issuances should be larger on average than financing-motivated asset
sales. Moreover, the link between the source of financing and the amount required will
be stronger where there is less scope for synergies. With low synergies, only pooling
equilibria are sustainable and we have the above link. With high synergies, we have
a separating equilibrium where some firms use assets (equity) for high (low) financing
amounts. Furthermore, with low synergies, firms will issue the same type of claim for
a given financing requirement; with high synergies, we should observe greater hetero-
geneity across firms in financing choices. Estimating the potential for (dis)synergies is
diﬃcult. One potential route is to look across the business cycle: Eisfeldt and Rampini
(2006) argue that operational motives are stronger in booms. An alternative direc-
tion is to compare across industries. For example, in the energy industry, asset sales
frequently involve self-contained plants which likely have little scope for synergies. In


                                                 35
consumer-facing industries with the potential for cross-selling multiple products to the
same customer base, operational motives should be stronger.
    A second determinant of financing choice is use of funds. Proposition 3 demon-
strates that equity is more likely in two cases. First, it will be used for purposes with
less information asymmetry, such as paying debt or dividends. Thus, a firm that is
raising financing due to distress (the need to repay debt) is more likely to issue eq-
uity. Second, it will be used to finance investment, if the investment will likely be
significantly positive-NPV even for low-quality firms (i.e.,  is high). Along the cross-
section, growth firms with good investment opportunities should raise equity. Over the
time series, in a strong macroeconomic environment, even low-quality firms will have
good investment projects and so equity is again preferred.
    A third determinant of financing choice is firm characteristics. Asset sales are
preferred for firms with negatively-correlated assets due to the correlation eﬀect. Thus,
conglomerates are more likely to sell assets than firms with closely-related divisions.
    A second set of empirical implications concerns the market reaction to financing.
    ∗
If    ∗ , which always holds in the negative correlation case, and in the positive
correlation case under low  , asset sales lead to a positive stock price reaction and
equity issuance leads to a negative stock price reaction. Indeed, Jain (1985), Klein
(1986), Hite, Owers, and Rogers (1987), and Slovin, Sushka, and Ferraro (1995), among
others, find evidence of the former; a long line of empirical research beginning with
Asquith and Mullins (1986) documents the latter.
    We now move to implications that may be less readily testable. Firms are more
willing to sell assets in deep markets where others are selling for operational reasons,
providing camouflage. This prediction is harder to test because it is diﬃcult to identify
the actual motive for a given asset sale. A more general implication is that there will
be multiplier eﬀects: changes in economic conditions that increase operational motives
for asset sales will also increase overvaluation-motivated asset sales. The model’s im-
plications regarding synergies are also harder to test given the diﬃculty in estimating
synergies. Equity issuers are likely to have synergistic assets, and asset sellers are likely
to be parting with dissynergistic ones. High-quality firms are more likely to sell syner-
gistic assets if their financing needs are low, whereas low-quality firms are more likely
to do so if their financing needs are high.




                                             36
6     Conclusion
This paper has studied a firm’s choice between financing through asset sales and equity
issuance. One relevant consideration is the relative information asymmetry of non-core
assets and equity, a natural extension of the MM insight. This paper introduces three
additional eﬀects that drive a firm’s financing decision. First, investors in an equity
issue share in the cash raised, but purchasers of non-core assets do not. Since the value
of cash is certain, this mitigates the information asymmetry of equity: the certainty
eﬀect. Thus, low (high) financing needs are met through asset (equity) sales. This
result is robust to allowing the cash to be used to finance an uncertain investment.
    Second, the choice of financing may also depend on operational motives (synergies).
A higher financing need pushes high-quality firms towards equity, due to the certainty
eﬀect, and reduces the quality and price of assets sold. The synergy motive also allows
firms to disguise an asset sale, that is in reality motivated by the asset’s low quality, as
instead being motivated by operational reasons (dissynergies): the camouflage eﬀect.
    Third, a disadvantage of equity issuance is that the market attaches a low valuation
not only to the equity being sold, but also to the remainder of the firm, since both are
perfectly correlated. This need not be the case for an asset sale, since the asset being
sold need not be a carbon copy of the firm. This correlation eﬀect can lead to asset
sales being strictly preferred to equity.
    The paper suggests a number of avenues for future research. On the empirical
side, it gives rise to a number of new predictions, particularly relating to the amount
of financing required and the purpose for which funds are raised. On the theoretical
side, a number of extensions are possible. One would be to allow for other sources of
asset-level capital raising, such as equity carve-outs. Since issuing asset-level debt or
equity does not involve a loss of (dis)synergies, a carve-out is equivalent to asset sales
in our model if synergies are zero, but it would be interesting to analyze the case in
which synergies are non-zero and the firm has a choice between asset sales, carve-outs,
and equity issuance. Another restriction is that, in Section 4.2, where firms can choose
whether to raise capital, they raise a fixed amount  (as in MM), since there is a single
investment opportunity with a known investment requirement of  . An additional
extension would be to allow for multiple investment opportunities of diﬀerent scale, in
which case a continuum of amounts will be raised in equilibrium.




                                            37
References
 [1] Abel, Andrew B. and Janice C. Eberly (1996): “Optimal Investment with Costly
     Reversibility.” Review of Economic Studies 63, 581—593

 [2] Akerlof, George A. (1970): “The Market for Lemons: Quality Uncertainty and the
     Market Mechanism.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 84, 488—500

 [3] Alchian, Armen A. and Harold Demsetz (1972): “Production, Information Costs,
     and Economic Organization.” American Economic Review 62, 777—795

 [4] Allen, Jeﬀrey and John McConnell (1998): “Equity Carve-Outs and Managerial
     Discretion.” Journal of Finance 53, 163—186

 [5] Asquith, Paul, Robert Gertner, and David Scharfstein (1994): “Anatomy of Fi-
     nancial Distress: An Examination of Junk-Bond Issuers.” Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 109, 625—658

 [6] Asquith, Paul and David Mullins (1986): “Equity Issues and Oﬀering Dilution.”
     Journal of Financial Economics 15, 61—89

 [7] Baker, Malcolm and Jeﬀrey Wurgler (2002): “Market Timing and Capital Struc-
     ture.” Journal of Finance 57, 1—32

 [8] Bates, Thomas W. (2006): “Asset Sales, Investment Opportunities, and the Use
     of Proceeds.” Journal of Finance 60, 105—135

 [9] Bolton, Patrick, Hui Chen and Neng Wang (2011): “A Unified Theory of Tobin’s
     Q, Corporate Investment, Financing, and Risk Management.” Journal of Finance
     56, 1545—1578

[10] Bond, Philip and Yaron Leitner (2011): “Market Run-Ups, Market Freezes, In-
     ventories, and Leverage.” Working Paper, University of Minnesota

[11] Borisova, Ginka and James R. Brown (2012): “R&D Sensitivity to Asset Sale
     Proceeds: New Evidence on Financing Constraints and Intangible Investment.”
     Working Paper, Iowa State University

[12] Borisova, Ginka, Kose John, and Valentina Salotti (2011): “Cross-Border Asset
     Sales: Shareholder Returns and Liquidity.” Working Paper, Iowa State University



                                        38
[13] Brown, David T., Christopher M. James, and Robert M. Mooradian (1994): “Asset
     Sales by Financially Distressed Firms.” Journal of Corporate Finance 1, 233—257

[14] Campello, Murillo, John R. Graham and Campbell R. Harvey (2010): “The Real
     Eﬀects of Financial Constraints: Evidence From a Financial Crisis.” Journal of
     Financial Economics 97, 470—487

[15] Cho, In-Koo and David M. Kreps (1987): “Signaling Games and Stable Equilib-
     ria.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 102, 179—221

[16] Coase, Ronald H. (1937). “The Nature of the Firm.” Economica 4, 386—405

[17] Datta, Sudip, Mai Iskandar-Datta, Kartik Raman (2003): “Value Creation in Cor-
     porate Asset Sales: The Role of Managerial Performance and Lender Monitoring.”
     Journal of Banking and Finance 27, 351—375

[18] DeMarzo, Peter M. (2005): “The Pooling and Tranching of Securities: A Model
     of Informed Intermediation.” Review of Financial Studies 18, 1—35

[19] Eisfeldt, Andrea L. and Adriano A. Rampini (2006): “Capital Reallocation and
     Liquidity.” Journal of Monetary Economics 53, 369—399.

[20] Grenadier, Steven R., Andrey Malenko and Ilya A. Strebulaev (2012): “Investment
     Busts, Reputation, and the Temptation to Blend in with the Crowd.” Working
     Paper, Stanford University

[21] Grossman, Sanford J. and Oliver D. Hart (1986): “The Costs and Benefits of
     Ownership: A Theory of Lateral and Vertical Integration.” Journal of Political
     Economy 94, 691—719.

[22] Hart, Oliver D. and John Moore (1990): “Property Rights and the Nature of the
     Firm.” Journal of Political Economy 98, 1119—1158

[23] He, Zhiguo (2009): “The Sale of Multiple Assets with Private Information.” Review
     of Financial Studies 22, 4787—4820

[24] Hite, Gailen L., James E. Owers and Ronald C. Rogers (1987): “The Market
     for Interfirm Asset Sales: Partial Sell-Oﬀs and Total Liquidations.” Journal of
     Financial Economics 18, 229—252




                                         39
[25] Hovakimian, Gayane and Sheridan Titman (2006): “Corporate Investment with
     Financial Constraints: Sensitivity of Investment to Funds from Voluntary Asset
     Sales.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 38, 357—374

[26] Jain, Prem C. (1985): “The Eﬀect of Voluntary Sell-Oﬀ Announcements on Share-
     holder Wealth.” Journal of Finance 40, 209—22

[27] Jensen, Michael C. (1986): “The Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow: Corporate
     Finance and Takeovers.” American Economic Review 76, 323—329

[28] John, Kose and Eli Ofek (1995): “Asset Sales and Increase in Focus.” Journal of
     Financial Economics 37, 105—126

[29] Klein, April (1986): “The Timing and Substance of Divestiture Announcements:
     Individual, Simultaneous and Cumulative Eﬀects.” Journal of Finance 41, 685—
     696

[30] Kurlat, Pablo (2010): “Lemons, Market Shutdowns, and Learning.” Working Pa-
     per, Stanford University

[31] Kyle, Albert S. (1985): “Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading.” Econometrica
     53, 1315—1336.

[32] Lang, Larry, Annette Poulsen and Rene Stulz (1995): “Asset Sales, Firm Per-
     formance, and the Agency Costs of Managerial Discretion.” Journal of Financial
     Economics 37, 3—37

[33] Leland, Hayne E. (1994): “Corporate Debt Value, Bond Covenants, and Optimal
     Capital Structure.” Journal of Finance 49, 1213—1252

[34] Maksimovic, Vojislav and Gordon M. Phillips (1998): “Asset Eﬃciency and Real-
     location Decisions of Bankrupt Firms.” Journal of Finance 53, 1495—1532

[35] Maksimovic, Vojislav and Gordon M. Phillips (2001): “The Market for Corporate
     Assets: Who Engages in Mergers and Asset Sales and Are There Eﬃciency Gains?”
     Journal of Finance 56, 2019—2065

[36] Milbradt, Konstantin (2012): “Level 3 Assets: Booking Profits and Concealing
     Losses.” Review of Financial Studies 25, 55—95

[37] Miller, Merton H. and Kevin Rock (1985): “Dividend Policy under Asymmetric
     Information.” Journal of Finance 40, 1031—1051

                                        40
[38] Morellec, Erwan (2001): “Asset Liquidity, Capital Structure, and Secured Debt.”
     Journal of Financial Economics 61, 173—206

[39] Myers, Stewart C. and Nicholas S. Majluf (1984): “Corporate Financing and
     Investment Decisions When Firms Have Information That Investors Do Not Have.”
     Journal of Financial Economics 13, 187—221

[40] Nanda, Vikram (1991): “On the Good News in Equity Carve-Outs.” Journal of
     Finance 46, 1717—1737

[41] Nanda, Vikram and M.P. Narayanan (1999): “Disentangling Value: Financing
     Needs, Firm Scope, and Divestitures.” Journal of Financial Intermediation 8,
     174—204

[42] Narayanan, M. P. (1985): “Managerial Incentives for Short-term Results.” Journal
     of Finance 40, 1469—1484.

[43] Ofek, Eli (1993): “Capital Structure and Firm Response to Poor Performance:
     An Empirical Analysis.” Journal of Financial Economics 34, 3-30

[44] Panzar, John C. and Robert D. Willig (1981). “Economies of Scope.” American
     Economic Review 71, 268—272

[45] Scharfstein, David S. and Jeremy C. Stein (1990): “Herd Behavior and Invest-
     ment.” American Economic Review 80, 465—479.

[46] Schipper, Katherine and Abbie Smith (1986): “A Comparison of Equity Carve-
     Outs and Seasoned Equity Oﬀerings: Share Price Eﬀects and Corporate Restruc-
     turing.” Journal of Financial Economics 15, 153—186

[47] Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny (1992): “Liquidation Values and Debt
     Capacity: A Market Equilibrium Approach.” Journal of Finance 47, 1343—1366

[48] Sicherman, Neil W. and Richard H. Pettway (1987): “Acquisition of Divested
     Assets and Shareholders’ Wealth.” Journal of Finance 42, 1261—1273

[49] Slovin, Myron B., Marie E. Sushka and Steven R. Ferraro (1995): “A Comparison
     of the Information Conveyed by Equity Carve-Outs, Spin-Oﬀs and Asset Sell-
     Oﬀs.” Journal of Financial Economics 37, 89—104




                                         41
[50] Slovin, Myron B. and Marie E. Sushka (1997): “The Implications of Equity Is-
     suance Decisions within a Parent-Subsidiary Governance Structure.” Journal of
     Finance 52, 841—857

[51] Stein, Jeremy C. (1988): “Takeover Threats and Managerial Myopia.” Journal of
     Political Economy 46, 61—80.

[52] Stein, Jeremy C. (1989): “Eﬃcient Capital Markets, Ineﬃcient Firms: A Model
     of Myopic Corporate Behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 104, 655—669.

[53] Stein, Jeremy C. (1997): “Internal Capital Markets and the Competition for Cor-
     porate Resources.” Journal of Finance 52, 111—133

[54] Strebulaev, Ilya A. (2007): “Do Tests of Capital Structure Theory Mean What
     They Say?” Journal of Finance 62, 1747—1787




                                        42
