                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE GENERAL THEORY
                          OF TAX AVOIDANCE




                        Joseph E. Stiglitz




                      Working Paper No. 1868




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                             March 1986




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation and projects in Government Budgets and Taxation and
Capital Formation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                       IBER Working Pacer   #1868
                                                       March 1986


                      The   General Theory of Tax Avoidance

                                     ABSTPPCT

        This   paper outlines a general set of principles for tax
avoidance. Most of at least the common tax avoidance schemes
can be reinterpreted as making use of one or more of these prin-
ciples. Four such methods are described.             In a perfect capital
market, these methods would enable the astute taxpayer to
eliminate all taxation on capital income. The fact that the tax
system raises revenue is attributed to lack of astuteness of the
taxpayer and/or lack of perfection of the capital market.
Accordingly, models which attempt to analyze the effects of
taxation assuming rational, maximizing taxpayers working within a
perfect capital market may give misleading results.
        A full analysis of tax avoidance cannot be conducted within
a partial equilibrium model; transactions which reduce one in-
dividual's tax liability may at the same time increase anoth-
er's.      We delineate tax avoidance schemes which reduce the
aggregate tax liabilities of the participants.                     Much of the

"general equilibrium" gain from tax avoidance                   arises from
differences in tax rates, both across individuals and across
classes of income. Our analysis is shown to have implications
both for patterns of ownership of assets and the timing of
transfers.
                                                       Joseph E. Stiglitz
                                                       Departrrent  of Economics
                                                       Dickinson   Hall
                                                       Princeton University
                                                       Princeton, NJ 08544
               The General Theory of Tax Avoidance1

                       Joseph E. Stiglitz
     It used to be said that there were two things that were
unavoidable:   death and taxes.     There is a widespread feeling

today that under our present tax code only one of these is
unavoidable. What I wish to discuss today is why this is so, and
how the extent of tax avoidance would be affected by some of the
major tax reforms presently being discussed.

     To do this, I shall first explain a general set of prin-
ciples for tax avoidance,2 Section I) and then present four
methods of implementing these principles (Section II).         In

Section III, I discussed what determines the limits on the extent
to which individuals can take advantage of tax avoidance—
schemes.

     Many transactions, while they seem to reduce the tax liabil—

     1
         Paper presented to the National Tax Association, Washington,
D.C., May 20, 1985. Financial support from the National Science
Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.
     2     focus on the individual income tax, and do not discuss
the role of the corporation tax in tax avoidance, or the methods
by which corporate tax liabilities may be reduced.
   In terms of the Cordes—Galper classification of tax shelters,
the tax avoidance schemes on which I focus are pure arbitrage
schemes ("pure tax shelters") as opposed to "tax—preferred activ-
ities" such as gas and oil.
   In my analysis, I do not discuss, moreover, the economic,
political, or social arguments behind those provisions of the
tax code which give rise to tax avoidance opportunities. My
concern is rather to describe the consequences of these provisions.
To the extent that these tax avoidance activities run counter
to the intent of these provisions, these consequences clearly
have to be borne in mind in evaluating their desirability.

                                2
ities to some parties to the transaction, increase those of
others.       Because "prices" (the terms of the transaction) adjust
to reflect these changed tax liabilities, it is often difficult
to ascertain who really benefits from many tax avoidance—
schemes. Moreover, the aggregate loss to the Treasury may be
much less than the seeming gain to the alleged beneficiaries
(when those calculations fail to take account of the general
equilibrium effects of tax avoidance schemes). Thus, we follow
our partial equilibrium analysis of tax avoidance (Sections
I—ITT) with an analysis of some of the more important general
equilibrium effects (Section IV).         Some   implications of our
analysis for tax reform are provided in Section V.
I.      Principles of Tax Avoidance
        Tax laws     constantly change the opportunities for tax
avoidance,
but underneath, there remain three basic principles of tax
avoidance within an income tax:3

        (1)    Postponement of taxes. The present discounted value
of a postponed tax is much less than that of a tax currently
paid.

        (2)     Tax arbitrage across individuals facing different
tax brackets (or the same individual facing different marginal
tax rates at different times). This is a particularly effective

       A fuller discussion of these tax avoidance principles is contained
in Stiglitz, [1986], Chapter 24, "A Student's Guide to Tax Avoidance".
     4Unless, of course, the tax liability is increased as a result
of postponement. We shall note instances of this below.
                                      3
method of reducing tax liabilities within a family; but differen-
tial tax rates may also induce transactions among individuals in
different brackets which substantially reduce the aggregate
tax liabilty; the availability of such opportunities leads to
what may be referred to as "tax induced transactions".

     (3)   Tax arbitrage across income streams facing different
tax treatment.      Under the current law, long term capital gains
are taxed at lower rates than are other forms of income from
capital. This provides an inducement to "convert" the returns
to capital (or to labor) into long term capital gains. Similar-
ly, special treatment is afforded to the return to capital in the
form of housing, pensions, IRA's, etc.
     Many tax avoidance devices involve a combination of these
three. IRA accounts can be thought of as postponing tax liabil-
ities until retirement; in effect, the interest earned on the IRA
account is tax exempt.5      On the other hand, if the individual
faces a lower tax rate at retirement than at the time he earns
his income, then the IRA can be viewed as tax arbitrage between
different rates.6     Finally,   if the individual can borrow to

       A fuller discussion of these tax avoidance principles is contained
in Stiglitz, [1986], Chapter 24, "A Student's Guide to Tax Avoidance".
     6Though the term "tax avoidance" suggests that individuals are
not paying taxes that they "should" this is not necessarily
the case:  even apart from the alleged beneficial incentive
arguements often raised in behalf of special tax provisions
by their advocates, there may be equity arguments as well.
For instance, lifetime income seems a more equitable tax base
than annual, income; but provisions for income averaging are
inadequate. Hence, "arbitrage" by individuals across different
marginal tax rates they face at different times of their lives
increases the equity of the tax system.

                                  4
deposit funds in the IRA, and interest is tax deductible, then
the THA is a tax arbtitrage between two forms of capital, one
of   which     is not taxed, and the other of which is (tax deduct-
ibile).7     Investing   in assets yielding capital gains involves a tax
postponement, since          taxes are paid only upon realization.
Borrowing to invest in assets yielding capital gains involves a
tax arbitrage: the interest is deductible at ordinary rates, the
gain is taxed at favorable capital gains rates.
       The tax savings from accelerated depreciation with recapture
result from postponement.           Without recapture, there is the
additional gain from the favorable treatment of capital gains.

       If depreciation allowances corresponded to true economic
depreciation, and capital gains were taxed on an accrual basis
at full rates, then there would be no tax advantages (or tax
induced distortions) from full expensing of maintenance ex-
penses. If capital gains are taxed only upon realization, then
full expensing of maintenance expenses (defined as those expendi-
tures required to maintain the value of the property) with
depreciation which is rule based (i.e. not directly related to
the change in the value of the property) has a tax advantage:
while the expenses are currently deductible, the increase in the
value (over what it otherwise would be) is only taxable upon
realization; there is a gain from postponement; if that gain is
taxed at favorable rates, there is a further gain from arbitrag—

     7For a fuller discussion of the incentive and equity effects
of IRA's, see Stiglitz, [1986), Chapters 22 and 23.

                                      5
ing across rates.

     Children's trusts involve tax arbitrage across units facing
different marginal tax rates.8       The trusts are often set up
so that their tax year does not coincide with that of the
child's; this enables a postponement of the tax liability by
almost a year.

     The tax advantages that deep discounted bonds previously
had arose more from the tax arbitrage across individuals facing
different rates and from the tax arbitrage from the differences
in the treatment of capital gains and interest income than from
the pure postponement effect.

     Tax reduction schemes which take advantage of the dif-
ferences between accrual and cash accounting are, in effect,
taking advantage of the gains from tax postponement.
     Note that the availability of these different tax reduction—

—tax avoidance opportunities depends on different aspects of the
tax system: tax arbitrage across individuals depends on the
progressivity of the tax system, or more accurately, on the
fact that marginal tax rates increase with income.9      Many of
the intra—family tax avoidance schemes entail capital transfers;
if capital were not taxed, it would be much more difficult to

     8Though the maximum tax savings from this kind of tax arbitrage
is limited. If a wealthy, married couple with four children
set up eight trusts, their maximum total tax savings in 1983
was $90,700. The minimum income required to achieve this is
$745,400.  Somebody with this income has his average tax rate
reduced from 47.9 to 35.7.
     9A flat rate tax with an exemption is progressive, in the sense
that the average tax rate increases with income.
                                6
engage in these tax avoidance schemes.

      The possibility of postponement is a concomitant of a tax
on a cash basis.-°     The effect of postponement is often to
eliminate (part of) the tax on interest income. Thus, in a flat
rate consumption tax, timing is not of importance.1'          The

possibilities of tax arbitrage across different levels of income
arise out of the attempts to use the tax system to encourage
particular kinds of activities (risky ventures, via capital
gains; savings for retirement, via pensions and IRA's.)
II.   Some Basic Methods of Tax Avoidance

      So potent are the opportunities for tax avoidance within
our current tax structure that, under the hypothesis that capital
markets are perfect (zero transactions costs, no restrictions
on borrowing or short sales, for every security there is a linear
combination of other securities which yields        an identical
return), individuals could riskiessly eliminate all taxes on
capital, and indeed, with a little additional effort, they may be
able to eliminate their tax liabilities altogether. There is not
just one way, but a multiplicity of ways by which taxes can
be avoided.    Let me briefly describe four modifications of what
are, in fact, familiar tax avoidance schemes. The modifications
arise because, under my assumptions of a perfect capital market,

      10Though under accrual, there are often opportunities for postponement,
taking advantage of particular rules which define when income
or expenses are accrued.

     'Later, we shall show that, at least for some versions of a pro-
gressive consumption tax, there may still be tax avoidance pos-
sibilities from postponement.
                                7
I   need not concern myself about transactions costs; I assume
that individuals can borrow against collateralizable assets;
if the probabiiity of default is zero, they pay the safe interest
rate; if not, they will have to pay a higher interest rate,
hut the interest rate will depend simply on the collateral
available to cover the debt in the event of a default. We also
assume that all securities can be sold short, and that there are
no transactions costs involved in doing so.12 Consider first how
an individual would have allocated his portfolio over his life
in the absence of taxes.   (For our purposes,   it makes no dif-
ference whether the individual has chosen his portfolio to
maximize his lifetime expected utility or not.) We construct tax
avoidance strategies which leave the individual's consumption and
bequests in each state of nature and at each date unchanged (and
correspondingly, raise no revenue); the individual faces no more
(or less) risk than he faced in the original situation. The tax
has no real effects on the economy. For simplicity, we assume a
given marginal tax rate; thus none of the procedures we describe
are based on taking advantage of the opportunities for tax
avoidance afforded by different individuals facing different tax
rates.

     Method 1:   Postponement of capital gains. The first method
is a modification of the familiar technique of postponing the

     12We ignore all the institutional details associated with short
sales.  If a security costs p and yields a stream of returns
of x(O,t), in state    at date t, then if an individual sells
the security short, he receives p, and must pay out —x(8,t)
in state 9 at date t.
                                8
realization of capital gains, which gives rise to the locked
in effect.   It is based on two aspects of the tax code: capital
gains are taxed only upon realization, and there is a step up
in basis at death.   The usual discussions err, however, in not
taking into account the fact that the riskiness of an individ-
ual's portfolio (and his consumption stream) will change if an
individual holds on to an asset longer than he otherwise would
simply to avoid taxes. To avoid taxes and any change in the
pattern of risk bearing or consumption, the individual sells
short a perfectly correlated security (or a set of securities,
the returns to which are perfectly correlated with his original
securities), at precisely the same moment that he would have, in
the absence of taxation, sold the given security. The individua-
l's (net) portfolio positions and income flows are then identical
to what they would have otherwise been; but because no capital
gain has been realized, no capital gain tax liability has been
incurred. It is thus apparent how an individual can riskiessly

avoid paying capital gains taxes.
     But he can do still better for himself. Assume that at
any date, the individual buys a security and sells a perfectly
correlated (set of) security (securities) short.       Again, the
individual's net portfolio position is unchanged. At the end
of the year, one asset will have increased in value, the other
decreased; the individual sells the latter, using the loss to
offset other income. At the same time, the individual finds
some other security (or linear combination of securities) which

                                9
is perfectly (positively or negatively) correlated, and takes
an offsetting position in that security.        Thus, again, the
individual has been able to avoid all risk (since throughout, his
net position in    the set of perfectly correlated securities
remains zero). But now he has succeeded in obtaining losses,
which he can use to offset against other income.13

     When the individual dies, his heirs close out his positions;
with the step up in basis, no tax liabilities become due.
     Two objections to this method that are commonly raised
are that it ignores the consequences of limitations on loss
offsets and wash sales. These are important questions, to which
I shall return later.

    Method 2.     Arbitraging between short term and long term
capital gains rates. The previous method of tax avoidance took
advantage of the fact that capital gains are only taxed upon
realization; it did not take advantage of the lower rates which
are afforded capital gains.    The second method does. But while
optimal portfolio strategies in the previous method exhibited
the "locked in effect", with this method they do not.

     Individuals again purchase and sell short two perfectly
correlated securities, so that the net position in the two assets
together remains zero; no risk has been incurred.'4 Just before

     33Note that in our perfect capital market world, the individual
needs no capital to engage in these transactions.
     '4Again, the individual could buy two perfectly negatively correlatec:
securities; or he could identify two perfectly correlated sets
of securities, buying one and selling the other short.

                               10
the end of the minimum holding period required for eligibility
for long term treatment, the individual will have made a capital
gain on one, a capital loss on the other; he realizes the capital
loss, then the next moment (when the security becomes eligible
for long term treatment) he realizes the capital gain. If the
change in price is p(t+l) —                p(t),   and long term capital gains
are taxed at 4O of full rates( ),                       then this tax arbitrage
generates a tax saving of
                                                   f....i—
                                            6 tLPIr1)
                                               r

The major objection to this method is that it ignores the special

provisions by which long term gains are used to offset short
term losses.          This objection can be overcome,                if there are
methods by which ordinary income (losses) can be converted into
(short term) capital gains.'5 There are several methods by which
his can be done. For instance, in the options market, some of
the capital gains that one attains may be an implicit interest
return; that is, one can (in principle, in the absence of
transactions costs) engage in a set of transactions which
involves borrowing and buying options, which                        is perfectly
riskiess, but which generates an interest deduction and a short
term capital gain. One can do this to the point that not only
are all capital gains offset, but all capital income, and a

     15Note that the objective in converting ordinary income losses
into short term capital gains is not to gain a direct tax savings—
the two are taxed at the same rate; but rather to overcome other
limitations within the tax code which might restrict the ability
to take advantage of the favorable treatment of long term capital
gains.


                                           11
limited amount of wage income (the limitation on interest
deductability plus the limitation on loss offsets.
     Method 3.     Indebtedness. The third method takes advantage
of the differential treatment afforded long term capital gains
and interest. From an economic point of view, interest and
capital gains are simply two alternative forms of return on
capital; there would be no reason to differentiate among them.
(Indeed, what appears to be a capital gain depends on the choice
of a numeraire; though money seems, for many purposes, a natural
numeraire, it has increasingly been recognized that for purposes
of taxation "consumption" provides a better numeraire;
   this   is what has given rise to the strong support for indexing
the tax system).      Assume that there were no uncertainty about
changes in the price of gold.        An exhaustible natural resource
like gold should have its price rise at the rate of interest.
All of the returns, however, are realized in the form of capital

gains.    If an individual borrows to purchase gold, then his
interest would be deductible against ordinary income, his capital
gains taxed at favorable rates. With a perfect capital market,
there would be no reason that the bank would not lend to the
individual:      he could simply put up the gold as collateral,
and there would thus be no risk to either party.
     Actually, to take advantage of this method, long term
capital gains need not even be taxed at lower rates:             the


     '6Elsewhere, I have argued that the main distortion to our economy
from inflation arises from the failure to appropriately index
the tax system. See Stiglitz [1981].
                                12
:individua] would gain simply from the postponement effect. And
if   there    is a step up of basis upon death, then the gains from
this method are all the greater.

       To implement this method, there need not exist a perfectly
sale asset;       all that is required is that there exists an asset
(or a linear combination of assets) which yield a strictly
positive return in all states of nature, and that one can issue
an option to divest oneself of all the risk associated with
returns in excess of the minimum return.

       In some sense, this method can be viewed as a special case
of   Method 1:        borrowing is nothing more than selling short a
safe bond.
       Method    4.     Rollovers.    This method takes advantage of the
arbitrariness of the unit of time over which taxes are levied.
It does not, however, require that there be differential tax
rates on long term and short term capital gains. As in Methods
1    and 2,      the individual purchases a security and sells short
a perfectly correlated security (linear combination of se-
curities), so that he incurs no risk. But now, on December 31,
on one part of his position he will have a capital gain, on the
other part a capital loss. He realizes his loss; on January 1,
he realizes his gain. The next year, of course, he must engage
in similar transactions to a greater extent, not only to wipe
out other forms of capital income, but also to eliminate the
January 1 capital gain.              Though the 1981 Act eliminated some
of the easy opportunities for these tax arbitrage activities,

                                       13
it by no means closed all of them.
      This   list     of tax avoidance procedures is not meant to be
exhaustive. The incentives for engaging in these activities
are sufficiently great that even fairly large transaction costs
should not have deterred them.           For most of the methods, no
capital is required:          the individual simply engages in two
offsetting actions. Where loans are required, the banks should
be willing to provide them, since there are always offsetting
assets; indeed, as we have emphasized, these activities are
really tax          arbitrage activities:    the individual needs to
undertake no additional risk, so the terms at which banks should
be willing to lend to the individual should be the same as they
were willing to lend in the absence of taxation.
III. Limits to Tax Avoidance

      I am not an empirical economist; but there are certain
conclusions that one can make about the so called real world
without a detailed econometric study.         One such conclusion is
that individuals do pay taxes, and that indeed, many individuals
seem to be paying taxes on their capital income.           There are
four possible conclusions one can reach from this empirical
observation:

(a)   I erred in proving my theorems:         the conclusions do not
follow from the assumptions.

(b)   I erred in failing to take into account certain detailed
provisions of the tax code.

(c)   I erred in assuming a perfect capital market.

                                    14
 d     I   erred   in   ascribing more   astuteness (understanding of
the   tax code and the economy) to the taxpayer than he has.

       In a talk like this, you will simply have to take my word
that the error does not lie in (a).'7

       In my analysis of the tax code, I have kept to the standard
textbook formulation.       To criticize (b) then is to suggest that
the effects of the tax system depend critically on provisions
which these treatments have ignored. Among the special prov-
isions, for instance, are those which restrict wash sales, the
limitations on the deductability of losses, and the limitations
on the deductability of interest.

       If, however, capital markets were perfect, then these
provisions would not be very restrictive. Consider, for in-
stance, the restrictions on wash sales,      the purpose of which is
to ensure that an individual does not sell and then buy back the
security, the only purpose of the transaction being to gain some

tax advantage. In a perfect capital market, however, no security
is unique: there are many securities (or linear combinations of
securities) which yield the identical pattern of returns. Thus,
to maintain a riskiess position, the individual does not have
to buy and sell the same security. Since what is relevant is
the individual's subjective judgements concerning the patterns
of returns, ascertaining whether the individual has engaged
in a riskless arbitrage is a virtual impossibility; and the
administrative burdens of attempting to do so, even if subjective

       17For sketches of proofs, see Stiglitz [1983].
                                   15
probabilities could be ascertained from previous returns, would
provide a nightmare of the courts, though possibly a boon to
litigation—minded econometricians.
       Part of the problem undoubtedly lies in the third as-
sumption: that of a perfect capital market' As an aside, I
find it remarkable how almost a whole sub—discipline has develop-
ed, analyzing the behavior of financial markets, attempting to
test with sophisticated econometric techniques whether capital
markets work perfectly and whether individuals "rationally"
allocate their portfolios, which at the same time ignores tax
considerations. Ignoring taxes is not ignoring something which
should be viewed as leading to a third order refinement of the
theory:    with wealthy individuals within recent history facing
nominal tax rates of 5O, 7O, or more, the tax effects are first
order effects, and any test of any attribute of financial markets

which ignores them needs, at best,    to be treated with skeptic-
ism.

Indeed, there is available a simple test of the perfect capital
model:    do individuals pay taxes, or pay taxes on their capital
income?    Moreover, the fact that individuals do not even take

     18The term "imperfect capital markets" is used to cover a whole
host of sins.     The imperfections with which we are concerned
here need not reflect "irrationalities" of the market. Rather,
they may be the consequence of real costs of transactions and
imperfect and costly information.     Simple transactions costs
(i.e., those not associated with imperfect information) probably
cannot account for the failure of individuals to take full advantage
of the available tax avoidance schemes. Imperfect information
can account both for credit rationing and the high costs of
raising funds by issuing new equity. See Stiglitz and Weiss
[1981,1983], and Greenwald, Stiglitz, and Weiss [1984].
                                16
full advantage of the limitations on interest deductability
provides further evidence that the perfect capital market/astute
investor model is inappropriate.'9        Whether this is because
of capital market imperfections, or because of lack of astuteness
on the part of taxpayers, is difficult to ascertain.20 Probably
both play an important role.     In either case, however, the conse-
quences of tax changes may be markedly different from those
that would be predicted by the conventional economist's model
assuming perfect capital markets and "rational" tax avoiding
firms and consumers.21         As an example, with imperfect capital
markets, an increase in the corporate tax rate might have a
deleterious effect on firm's investment because of a reduction
in the internal funds available for investment; a perfect market

marginal analysis might suggest (with true economic depreciation,
and interest deductability) no effect on investments, since
returns and costs of capital are reduced proportionally. (See
Stiglitz [1973, 1976].)
     IV. Tax Avoidance and General Equilibrium Analysis

     19See Feenberg [1981].
     20There are many other instances in which taxpayer behavior seems
inconsistent with perfect markets with perfectly rational in-
dividuals.   These include the "dividend paradox" [Stiglitz,
1973],  the "inventory valuation paradox", and the "managerial
compensation paradox". In each case, the behavior can be "explained"
by rational managers dealing with irrational shareholders or
by non—maximimizing (non—astute) managers.      See Stiglitz [1982b,
1985 or 1985b}.

     21Similarly, optimal portfolio behavior with taxes and imperfect
capital markets is markedly different from what it would be
without taxes and perfect capital markets. See Stiglitz [1983].

                                  17
     One of the important lessons to emerge from the analysis
of taxes during the past decade is that one cannot analyze the
effects of a single tax in isolation from other taxes; for
instance, the effects of the corporate income tax depend on the
structure of the individual income tax (including its provisions
for the taxation of capital gains [Stiglitz, 1973]).
     Similarly, the effects of a tax structure cannot be analyzed
by looking at its effects on a single individual. This is par-
ticularly true of the analysis of tax avoidance. Transactions
which reduce one individual's tax liability may increase the
tax liability of others.    The terms of the transaction will
reflect this.    Thus, looking at the first individual's tax
savings may give a wrong impression both concerning the total
cost to the government of the tax avoidance activity and the
incidence of the benefits from tax avoidance.

    This general principle has been recognized for a long time.
If all individuals faced the same marginal tax bracket, then
exempting state and local bond interest would simply reduce
the rate of return on these bonds to the point where it equalled
the after—tax return of taxed bonds (of equal risk). The
individual would be no better off than he would have been if he
had not bought the tax exempt bonds. The benefits all accrue to
the communities issuing them.22
     How does this general equilibrium perspective alter our

     220f course, if no restrictions are imposed on communities issuing
these bonds, they could engage in tax arbitrage, raising funds
by issuing tax exempt bonds and then lending out the money.
                                  18
analysis of the previous section?       Two questions need to be
posed.

     Consistenç of tax avoidance activities.          First, if all

individuals attempted to pursue the policies indicated, would
they be able to avoid taxes?
     At first blush, the answer seems to be no: Assume two
individuals A and B were pursuing tax avoidance method #2.
Assume security x and y are perfectly correlated. Individual
A buys a share of x and sells short a share of y; individual
B buys a share of y and sells short a share of x. Their actions
are offsetting: the net demand for shares in x and y are unaf-
fected. At the end of six months assume the price of x (and
y) has in fact decreased. Thus A sells x, and B sells y:      their
actions are not offsetting.         It appears as if markets do not
clear. But this ignores the fact that both A and B will want
to cover their exposed position for the moment from ,just before
six months to just after six months:    A will wish to buy y and
B will wish to buy x; hence the net demand remains zero.

         A similar analysis applies for the roll—over method.
Now, on December 31, A sells x and buys y, while B sells y and
buys x.

     These methods work even if the "asset't purchased is a
contract on the futures market. In such markets, whenever one
individual takes     a position, another individual takes the
opposite position. Thus, if A sells B       a contract for future
delivery of wheat at a fixed price, when the price of wheat goes

                               19
up, A is worse off, B is better off. Assume A sells B a contract
for wheat, and B sells A a contract for a perfectly correlated
commodity, which we all refer to as Commodity Z. The positions
are offsetting so neither individual is bearing any risk. Assume
just before the end of six months the price of wheat has risen.
A sells his contract for delivery of wheat to C, realizing a
short term capital loss; at the same time he buys from C a
contract for delivery of commodity Z; similarly C buys from B a
contract for the delivery of Z, and sells a contract for the
delivery of wheat.     At the end, A, B, and C remain perfectly
hedged. Then, just after six months has passed, all positions
are closed out: A realizes a long term gain on his commodity Z
contract, B a long term gain on his wheat contract, and C
realizes small, offsetting gains and losses.
     Note that this tax arbitrage possibility was not eliminated
by provisions for constructive realization on December 31.
These were aimed at our fourth method of tax avoidance, recording
losses in one year and gains the next.
     Note that tax avoidance schemes based on borrowing would
not be effective in an economy in which all individuals faced
the same marginal tax rate: any tax savings from an interest
deduction by one individual would give rise to an offsetting
tax liability by another.

     Though the general equilibrium perspective alters one's
views concerning the tax savings which can be achieved by purely
financial arbitrage activities, at least in a world in which

                               20
aU individuals face the same tax rate, the basic tax avoidance
principles we described earlier can be used to reduce, and
possibly eliminate, taxes on the return to real capital assets.

Thus,   the   present discounted value of tax liabilities are reduced

as a result of postponing the realization of gains and taking
losses as soon as possible23        and they are reduced by holding
on to assets which have increased in value at least to the time
at which they are eligible for long term treatment.
The relative importance of different tax avoidance devices.
        We have thus shown that some of the tax avoidance strategies
described earlier are effective, even in a world in which all
individuals faced the same tax rate, and even when the tax conse-

quences for all individuals were appropriately            taken into
account. But the aggregate tax savings associated with various
transactions may be far different from what appear24       to be the
tax savings to one individual.           As a result, the relative
importance of different tax avoidance schemes may look quite
different from a general equilibrium25 perspective than from a

        231n particular, even if there were not favorable treatment of
long term capital gains, losses should be recognized in the
year in which they occur. Assume there are two perfectly correlated
assets,   x and y,    which have decreased in price. If A owns
x and B owns y, they can achieve a tax savings by swapping on
December 31; this leaves unaltered their risk position.
     24The actual tax savings to the individual may also be quite different
from what they appear to be because the terms of the transaction
may be markedly different from what they would have been in
the absence of taxation.

        251t should be emphasized that our general equilibrium analysis
is still not completely general: we ignore effects on prices
and before—tax interest rates. These are crucial for assessing
                                   21
partial equilibrium perspective. In particular, many of the tax
savings which appear as arising from postponement are really tax
savings which arise from arbitraging across rates. We have noted
one example earlier:   the real tax savings (at least in a perfect
capital market) from IRA accounts arise not from the postponement
of taxes, but from arbitraging between the tax deductibility of
interest and the non—taxability of interest accruing in IRA
accounts.26

     Installment purchases.    As   another example consider the
tax consequences of a delay in the "official" transfer of the
ownership of an asset (for tax purposes.)       It appears as if
there has been a gain from postponement. Assume the two in-
dividuals involved in the transaction are in the same tax
bracket; A is selling the asset to B. Assume, moreover, that A
wishes to receive the cash today.     If the sale was completed
today, A would incur a tax liability of, say, tg, where g was the
capital gain on the asset. Assume, instead, that B lends him the
money at a zero interest rate27' A effectively turns over
control of the asset, but the sale is not officially      completed

the incidence of tax avoidance schemes such a real estate, and
gas and oil investments, as opposed to the pure tax arbitrage
schemes. See Stiglitz {1986J.
     261t obviously makes no difference whether individuals are restricted
from borrowing to deposit funds in IRA accounts. Individuals
simply borrow more for other reasons, leaving them more money
available for depositing in their IRA accounts. The only real
effects arise if IRA accounts are not collateralizable.
     27The interest rate charged makes no difference to aggregate tax
liabilities, since the tax liability of B is offset by the tax
deduction of A.
                               22
until the next period. Then the oniy implications for either
party is that the present discounted value of the tax liability
on the capital gains has been reduced. Since capital gains taxes
are paid only upon realization, there is a general equilibrium
tax savings from postponing realization.
      But if A and B are in different tax brackets, the tax
savings may be far larger:        If the gain is "recognized" today, A

has, after tax, (1 + g —   gtA),     where 1         is his basis; and if he
invests this, at the after tax return of r'A, he will have

 (14-g—gtA)(l + r'A).      On the other hand, if the trade is not
"consummated" until next period, B will have (l+g)(l+r's).
Assume B turns this over to A.        A will than have, after tax,

                     (l+g) (   l+r' B ) (l—tA   )   + tA

a gain of
                                     + g(l—tA)) + tAr'B;

the   first term represents the gain from tax arbitrage across
individuals; the second terms represents the gain from post-
ponement. As the limiting case, assume B has a zero marginal tax
bracket, and A is in the 5O tax bracket, with capital gains
taxed at 2O. Then the tax savings is .5r(l+.8g) + .2r; the tax
savings are largely due to arbitraging across individuals.
      Early recognition of gains. In the example we have just
described, we have shown how it may pay to delay the "official"
transfer of ownership (and thus the recognition of a capital
gain).      But this is not always the case. With depreciable
assets, there is a step up in basis upon the transfer of owner—

                                     23
ship, and the tax advantages of this may well outweigh the
disadvantages of paying the capital gains tax.
     Take, as an example, a machine which will last for one
more year.         It was expected to produce an output of $1; at
a lO? discount rate, its current value is approximately $.9.
Assume now that the (net) output that it is expected to produce
doubled; this would imply that its market price would double;
the owner would have a $.9 capital gain. But note that we will
tax the extra income as it accrues. To tax the capital gain,
representing the expectation of future income       and to tax the
extra future income seems to be taxing the same extra income
twice, and this seems unfair.          But, if we have true economic
depreciation, there is not any real "double" taxation; the new
owner will have higher depreciation allowances reflecting the
higher capital value. With true economic depreciation, full
taxation of (accrued) capital gains would be required in this
situation to avoid distortions within an income tax.         With a

flat rate tax, the difference between doing this, and simply
taxing the income as it accrued is the tax on the (implicit)
interest income.       In our example there will be a capital gain
of l/l+r.9, in the absence of taxation; with taxation, but
true economic depreciation, the present discounted value of
this increase is unchanged28           Hence, the increase in tax

     28The incremental value, with true economic depreciation, is
     V   [l—t(l—V)}/l+r(l—t)
     V =   (l—t)/[l+r—rt---t]
     V =   (l—t)/[(l+r)(l—t)]
       =   l/l+r
                                  24
liabilities is      t/[1--rj this period; next period net income is 1

    depreciation    1 -   i/[l+r]   r/[l+r] and the tax next period is

thus tr/{l+r].       The present discounted value of tax payments,

using the discount rate, r*, is just           t[(l/l+r)+(r/(l+r)(l+r*)]
=    t{1+(r/l+r*)]/l+r.      If there had been no tax on capital gain,
but no concurrent increase in the depreciation allowance, the
increase in tax liability (as a result of the increased product-
ivity of the asset), next period is just t.             Thus, the difference

in the present discounted value of tax liabilities is just
    t/[l+r] + t/[1+r][l—(l/[l+r])] —     t/{l+r*J   =   tr/(l+r)2   ÷

                      t(r*—r)/(l+r*)) (l+r)

        On the other hand, if the asset were sold, by individual
A to individual B, with true economic depreciation, the total
present discounted value of the difference in tax liabilities
(between what it would have been without the realization of
the capital gain and the corresponding step up in basis and
with it) 29
tA/l+r+(tB/1+r*B)[l—(l/1+r)] —           tA/l+rA*          [tA(r*A—r)(1+r*a)
+ tBr(l+r*A)}/(1+r)(l-fr*A)(l+r*B)

Thus, with a flat rate tax, with r<r*A, with full taxation of
capital gains, and with true economic depreciation, it would
always pay to postpone the realization of the gain. But if
r*A =    (l—tA)r, then early realization may be desirable. All
of this changes dramatically, however, when there is not true

     29This calculation discounts each individual's tax liabilities
at his own discount rate.

                                    25
economic depreciation and when capital gains are taxed at
favorable rates.              Consider first the consequences of taxing
capital gains at favorable rates, say .4 of ordinary rates. Then
the net change in aggregate tax liabilities from the transfer is

.4tA/l+r +(ts/l+r*B){l—l/l+r} —                tA/l+r*A   [—tAZ + rtB/l+r]/—
1+r*B, where z       = [(l+r*3)]/(1+r*A)—.4(l+r*B/l+r]     =   .6     if r*Br*A
=    r.     Thus, for short lived assets (low r) or highly taxed
individuals (high tA),             it pays to realize the capital gain
early. 3031

          The tax consequences of recognizing a capital gain are
somewhat different if there is accelerated depreciation. Consider
a two period asset, whose return at each date unexpectedly
increases by a dollar.              With straight line depreciation the
increment in value is given by the solution to

                           V=(l—tB) + tB V/2
where

                           b1/l+r*B + l/(l+r*s)2
Hence

                              V (l—ts ) c/ I 1—tB
                                               zS/2

Hence       the   change in tax liability from transferring ownership
is (using B's discount rate)

          30Remember these calcu1ations have nothing to do with the transfer
of "money", only with the transfer of ownership claims in the
asset.

          31The critical condition for the desirability of ownership transfer
is
          .6tA    rts/l+r.,
Thus, if tA =       tB,   asset   transfer is desirable if r        1.5.

                                          26
                   ( .4th à.5 tn )V      (ttA) .
The   accelerated depreciation presumably increases the value
of an asset. Notice, however, that with a flat rate tax, with
no favorable treatment of capital gains, the magnitude of the
tax change from transferring ownership is relatively small,
Thus, with a flat rate tax,           the distortions associated with

the failure to tax capital gains on depreciable assets upon
accrual may be relatively small.
      Our general equilibrium analysis of the tax consequences
of the realization of capital gains has thus uncovered a funda-
mental error in the standard partial equilibrium treatment. The
gains from the step—up in basis have to be contrasted with the
losses from the early recognition of a gain: though with true
economic depreciation and full taxation of capital gains, it
remains true that early recognition is undesirable, with favor-
able treatment of capital gains and with depreciation that is
faster than true economic depreciation, early recognition may
well be desirable; the gains become particularly significant,
however, when individuals are in markedly different tax brackets.

      Ownership of "capital gain assets".          Similarly, the tax

structure potentially has important implications for the pattern
of ownership of assets.    Assume, for instance, that A owns an
asset which naturally yields its return in the form of capital
gains (like gold). Assume that the real rate of capital gain
is g. If A lends B the money to buy the asset, charging an
interest rate equal to r*, where

                                27
                       r*I—tA)       g(i--.4tA)

then A is indifferent:       A has received the same after tax
return. But B's net income is


                   1÷g(l—.4tB) —    (l-f-r*(1—tB))   =


                   g[(l-.4tB) - (l—ts)(1-.4tA)/(l-tA)]       =

                   6g(tB—tA)/l—tA    >   0,
if   B faces a higher tax rate than A.            This suggests that al.l
of the capital gain yielding assets should be owned by in-
dividuals in the high tax brackets. High tax bracket individuals
should engage in this kind of arbitrage until either there are no
more such opportunities (and additional opportunities cannot
easily be created) or until tax brackets are equalized).
      These calculations suggest that much of the gain from tax
avoidance activities under our present tax structure arise from
arbitraging across rates, rather than from postponement. Indeed,
there is some question about the significance to be attached
to the postponement effect. Real rates of interest on government
securities32 have, from 1950 to 1984, averaged less than .75?.
Thus the loss to the government from a tax which is postponed
for five or ten or even twenty years is relatively small. Indi-
viduals' gains may be much higher:                they face higher real
interest rates33     Because of limitations on collateralizable

      32Three month Treasury bill rates minus the rate of inflation.

     33presumably, reflecting the greater risk to lending to them.
They may also face credit rationing.     See Stiglitz and Weiss
[1981].
                               29

assets, the government may be in a better position to serve as a
'1ender" (through the tax system) than are private lenders.

     (With a progressive tax system, the government may not
he in an advantageous position relative to a private lender.
While limited liability limits in general, what a private lender
can get back, a private lender can require the owner of a firm
to sign a personal note guaranteeing part or all of a loan.
The government cannot, and individuals thus can design contracts
under which losses accrue to those in high marginal tax rates,
gains to those in low marginal tax rates, in effect yielding
the government a negative return on its loan.)
    To the extent that the government can devise tax systems
which allow individuals discretion in the timing of their tax
liabilities, the government may be improving the efficiency
of the capital market and this in turn will have a beneficial
effect on the economy. But though there may be some beneficial
effects associated with "postponement" many of the tax avoidance
activities have a deleterious effect.

    Real resource allocation effects.     Most of this paper has
focused on how paper transactions can, without cost to society,34
enable the reduction in tax liabilities.      In the presence of
a perfect capital market, presumably all tax liabilities could
be eliminated. But we do not have a "perfect" capital market,
and all tax liabilities are not, therefore, eliminated simply
by means of "paper" transactions.       To reduce tax liabilities

    34Other than the direct trsactions costs.
dist:orting actIons are resorted to. Some of these are closely
linked to the very reason that capital markets are not perfect.

     Elsewhere, .1 have argued why imperfections (and, in parti—
cular, asymmetries) of information result in the capital market
being fundamentally different from how it    is envisaged in the
traditional neoclassical paradigm.35     In that model, ownership
makes no difference: the manager simply maximizes the market
value of the firm. But with imperfect information (or incomplete

markets), ownership is of importance.       And ownership entails
having the claim on residual income (and having other residual
rights not specificed in a contractual arrangement.)       Thus, in
our ear1ier discussion, we noted that there was an incentive to
delay the recognition of a capital gain, by delaying the com-
pletion of a transaction,    i.e. delaying the turning over of all
residua1 claims with respect to income and other rights.
      Similarly, we noted there was an incentive to have higher
income individuals receiving income in the form of capital gains,
lower income individuls in the form of interest; while the latter
are usually associated with debt, the former are associated
with "ownership"36     thus, our tax system encourages the perpet-
uation of control of productive assets by the wealthy.
     These are, by no means, the only real distortions associated
with our tax system:    since there are some sectors where it

     35See, for instance, Stiglitz [1982a and 1985a].
     °6There are some subtle and difficult questions associated with
why this is so, and whether it must necessarily be so.

                                30
scens easier to convert, ordinary income into capital gains (real
estate, in particular), investments in these sectors are en-
couraged, since they increase the opportunities for tax avoid-
ance.



                            V. Tax Reform
        This analysis of tax avoidance behavior has some striking
implications for tax reform. Many of the tax avoidance schemes
loose their force (within a general equilibrium context) with
a flat rate tax (or with greatly reduced differences in marginal

tax rates.)
        With a flat rate income tax, for instance, all interest
received could be made tax deductible (with interest payments
not tax deductible). In a closed economy, the only net interest
payments would be from the government.      Given the current tax
deductibility of state and local interest payments, the only
effect would be to decrease the interest rate the federal
government would have to pay (it would be as if the government
collected the tax on its interest payments at source.)37 (In an
open economy, the effect of making interest income non—taxable
would depend on the treatment of payments to and from foreign
sources.

        Similarly, as we have noted, some of the central problems

     37With a flat rate tax, interest rates on state and local bonds
would presumably fully reflect the tax exempt status; the only
inefficiency associated with the tax deductability of state
and local interest is the incentive that it would provide for
excessive capital expenditures.
                                  31
of capital gains taxation are reduced with a flat rate tax.
     We have emphasized so far the important role that dif—
ferences in   marginal tax rates play in tax avoidance under the
income tax. Similar problems might well arise in the consumption
tax. Consider, for instance, the Blueprints proposal to have
registered and unregistered assets. Assume A is in a higher tax
bracket than B.   Assume A and B swap registered for unregistered
assets, so that it appears as if A's consumption has decreased
and B's consumption has increased. Then current tax liabilities
would have been reduced (for A and B together) by tA —    tB.   To

avoid risk, A and B sign contracts promising to swap back again
next year.    It will then appear as if A's consumption has, at
that date increased, and B's consumption has decreased. Whether
the present discounted value of tax liabilities will have
increased or decreased (in the aggregate) as a result of this tax
swap depends on the relative valuation of the assets at the two
dates. If the values increase by the market rate of interest,
there will be no change in the present discounted value of
aggregate tax liabilities. But if the values increase less than
the rate of interest, then such a swap reduces the aggregate tax
liabilities, and if the values increase by more than the rate of
interest, then the reverse swap would reduce the aggregate tax
liabilities. One of the main arguments in favor of the consump-
tion tax, that it would avoid the difficult and arbitrary
valuation problems which are pervasive under the income tax,
seems less persuasive in the context of a consumption tax which

                               32
does not have a flat rate. And such tax avoidance activities may
have quite similar distortionary effects to the kinds of tax
avoidance activities currently observed under the income tax.

                            Conclusions

     We have outlined in this paper a general set of principles
for tax avoidance; most of at least the common tax avoidance
schemes can be reinterpreted as making use of one or more of
these principles.
     In a perfect capital market, these principles of tax
avoidance are so powerful as to enable the astute taxpayer to
eliminate all taxation on capital income, and possibily all
taxation on wage income as well.     The fact that the tax system
raises revenue is thus a tribute to the lack of astuteness of the

tax payer and/or the lack of perfection of the capital market.
     This in turn has an important implication:         one should

treat with some skepticism models which attempt to analyze the
effects of taxation assuming rational, maximizing taxpayers
working within a perfect capital market.
     Some (perhaps most) of the imperfections of the capital
market are attributable to imperfections (including asymmetries)
of information.     In economies with imperfect information owner—
ship/ control is important; many of the tax avoidance devices
necessitate altering patterns of ownership, and this may have
important implications for real resource allocation.
     A full analysis of tax avoidance cannot be conducted within
a partial equi1ibrium model; when one individual reduces a tax

                                33
liability through     some transaction, that transaction may at
the same time increase the tax liability incurred by another.
Tn that case, the terms at which the transaction are conducted
will reflect this "shifting't of tax liabilities. If the two
individuals are in the same tax bracket, no real tax avoidance
may have occurred. Such is the case when an individual borrows
from another; while the interest is deductible by one,          it is

taxable to the other.           We have delineated those tax avoidance
schemes which do indeed reduce the aggregate tax liabilities
of all those who participate in them.
     We have noted,       in particular, that much of the "general
equilibrium" gain from tax avoidance arises from differences
in tax rates, both across individuals and across classes of
income (rather than from "postponement").           If this is true,
then reforms aimed at reducing the differences in marginal tax
rates may be effective in reducing tax avoidance; there may
be significant gains to be had from going to a flat rate tax,
whether of the income or consumption variety.




                           34
                            References

Atkinson, A. and     J. E. Stiglitz [1980], Lectures in Public

     Economics, New York and London: McGraw—Hill Book Company.

Cordes, J. J. and H. Galper [1985],       "Tax Shelter Activity:

     Lessons From Twenty Years of Evidence", papers presented

     at a Symposium of the National Tax Association — Tax

     Institute of America, May 1985.

Feenberg, D., [1981], "Does the Investment Intez..st Limitation

     Explain the Existence of Dividends?", Journal of Financial

     Economics, pp. 265—269.

Greenwald, B., J. E. Stiglitz and A. Weiss, [1984], "Informa-

     tional Imperfections in the Capital Market and Macroeconomic

     Fluctuations", American      Economic Review, May, Vol. 17,

     pp. 194—199.

Stiglitz, J. E., [1973], "Taxation, Corporate Financial Policy

     and the Cost of Capital", Journal of Public Economics,

     Vol. 2, Febuary, pp. 1—34.

Stiglitz, J. E., [1976], "The Corporation Tax", Journal of Public

     Economics, April—May, pp. 303—311.

Stiglitz, J. F.,    [1981J, "On the Almost Neutrality of Inflation"

     in Development in an Inflationary World, eds, M. June

     Flanders and Assaf Razin, Academic Press.

Stiglitz, J. E.,    [l982a], "Information and Capital Markets"

     in Financial Economics: Essays in Honor of F9 Cootner,

    William Sharpe and Cathryn Cootner eds., (Englewood Cliffs,

     New Jersey: Prentice Hall).
Stiglitz, J. E.,      11982b1, "Ownership, Control and Efficient

     Markets: Some Paradoxes in the Theory of Captia1 Markets",

     in Economic    Regju1at ion:   Essas in Honor_ofJainesR.Nelson,

     Kenneth Boyer and William G. Shepherd eds., (Ann Arbor,

     Michigan: Michigan State University Press), pp. 311—341.

Stiglitz, J. E., [l983J, "Some Aspects of the Taxation of Capital

     Gains", Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, May, Vol. 17,

     pp. 133—152.

Stiglitz, J. E.,      [1985a], "Credit Markets and the Control of

     Capital", Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,              May,

     Vol. 17, pp. 133—152.

Stiglitz, J. E.,      [1985], "Information and Economic Analysis:

     A Perspective",        Economic    Journal    Supplement, Spring,

     Vol. 95, pp. 21—42.

Stiglitz, J. E.,     [1986], Economics of the Public Sector, Norton

     and Company, New York.

Stiglitz, J. E. and A. Weiss, [1981],             "Credit Rationing in

     Markets with        Imperfect Information", American Economic

     Review,   June, Vol. 71, No. 3, pp. 393—410.

Weiss, A. and J. E. Stiglitz, [1983], "Incentive Effects of

     Termination: Applications to the Credit and Labor Markets",

     American Economic Review, December, Vol. 73, pp. 912—927.
