                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               THE NEW SCIENCE OF PLEASURE

                                         Daniel L. McFadden

                                        Working Paper 18687
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18687


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2013




An initial version of this paper was presented as the Frisch Lecture, Econometric Society World Congress,
London, 2005. This research was supported by the E. Morris Cox endowment at the University of
California, Berkeley, and by the National Institute on Aging of the National Institutes of Health, grants
P01AG005842, P01AG033559, and RC4AG039036. I am indebted to Sam Bowles, Colin Camerer,
John Dagsvik, Ernst Fehr, Mogens Fosgerau, James Heckman, Danny Kahneman, David Laibson,
Charles Manski, Rosa Matzkin, and Joachim Winter for useful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Daniel L. McFadden. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The New Science of Pleasure
Daniel L. McFadden
NBER Working Paper No. 18687
January 2013, Revised February 2013
JEL No. D03,D1

                                           ABSTRACT

Economists since the days of Adam Smith and Jeremy Bentham have traditionally viewed consumers
as driven by relentless and consistent pursuit of self-interest, with their choices in the marketplace
providing all the measurements needed to reveal their preferences and assess their well-being. This
theory of consumer choice is empirically successful, and provides the foundation for most economic
policy. However, the traditional view is now being challenged by evidence from cognitive psychology,
anthropology, evolutionary biology, and neurology. This paper begins by surveying the origins of
neoclassical consumer choice theory and recent developments. Following this, it reviews the newer
evidence on consumer behavior, and what this implies for the measurement of consumer choice behavior
and well-being.


Daniel L. McFadden
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
mcfadden@econ.berkeley.edu
                                 Contents


 I     Introduction                                       1

 II    Pleasure, Pain, Utility                            2

III    First Measurements                                 9

IV     The Stone Age                                      9

 V     Measurement of Well-Being                          12

VI     Expansions                                         14

       VI.1    Preference Heterogeneity                   15

       VI.2    Nonlinear Budget Sets                      16

       VI.3    Hedonic Goods and Household Production     17

       VI.4    Consumer Dynamics                          20

VII    New Frontiers                                      23

       VII.1   Stated Preferences and Conjoint Analysis   24

       VII.2   Measurements from Cognitive Psychology     26

       VII.3   The Sociality of Choice                    29

       VII.4   Sensation and Neuroeconomics               32

VIII   The Future                                         37

       References                                         38

       Figures and Tables                                 45
                                         The New Science of Pleasure
                        Consumer Choice Behavior and the Measurement of Well-Being

                                                    Daniel McFadden

    “Illusion, Temperament, Succession, Surface, Surprise, Reality, Subjectiveness – there are threads on the loom of time,
    these are the threads of life.”
                                                                               Ralph Waldo Emerson, Experience, 1844


    “Let there be granted to the science of pleasure what is granted to the science of energy, to imagine an ideally perfect
    instrument, a psychophysical machine, continually registering the height of pleasure experienced by an individual, exactly
    according to the verdict of consciousness, or rather diverging therefrom according to a law of errors. From moment to
    moment the hedonimeter varies; the delicate index now flickering with the flutter of the passions, now steadied by
    intellectual activity, low sunk whole hours in the neighbourhood of zero, or momentarily springing up toward infinity.”

                                                                       Francis Y. Edgeworth, Mathematical Psychics, 1881


I. Introduction
    At the base of economic analysis is the consumer, whose behavior and well-being motivate a whole gauntlet of
questions spanning demand analysis, incentive theory and mechanism design, project evaluation, and the
introduction and marketing of private and public goods and services. Understanding and modeling consumer
welfare was central in early economics, and remains so, with a continuing tension between elements of illusion,
temperament, and subjectivity in consumer behavior, and the need for stable, predictive indicators for choice and
well-being. The neoclassical model of the individualistic utility-maximizing consumer that forms the basis of most
economic analysis is largely a finished subject, but new studies of consumer behavior and interesting new
measurements challenge this model. This behavioral revaluation suggests new directions for the continuing
development of choice theory.
    This paper surveys the history of the study of consumer behavior and well-being, with particular attention to the
lessons and opportunities afforded by new measurements coming into economics from cognitive psychology,
anthropology, market science, and neurology. This paper will focus on the perceptions, emotions, and behavior of
individual consumers, and touch only briefly on important related issues of interpersonal comparisons and
economic policy evaluation. I will start with the views of the classical economists on happiness and utility. I will
discuss first attempts at measurement, followed by the flowering of demand analysis in the age of Sir Richard Stone.
I will then turn to expansions of neoclassical demand measurement, particularly to the subjects of choice in
non-linear and discrete budget sets, and finally to the new frontiers of measurement shared by economics and other
disciplines.


                                                              1
II. Pleasure, Pain, Utility
    Systematic study of consumer motivation and well-being started with Jeremy Bentham, who still sits, stuffed, in
University College London, and to this day is reputed to be the life of any party of economists that he joins. In
Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation, published in 1789, Bentham laid out the concept of
consumers driven by self-interest to increase pleasure and reduce pain: “My notion of man is that ... he aims at
happiness ... in every thing he does.” Bentham and his successors explored the economic implications and moral
content of utilitarianism, but despite their quantitative rhetoric, they were not much concerned with the actual
measurement of happiness.          It is not that they considered utility unmeasurable.                Quite the opposite:        by
introspection utility existed, and its practical measurement was not needed for drawing out the broad principles of
utilitarianism. Choice was viewed as an automatic consequence of self-interest, not as behavior that could put
utilitarianism to test. Pursuit of happiness explained everything, and predicted nothing. A comment by Frank
Taussig (1912), at the end of the classical era, summarizes nicely the utilitarian attitude:


    “An article can have no value unless it has utility. No one will give anything for an article unless it yield him satisfaction.
    Doubtless people are sometimes foolish, and buy things, as children do, to please a moment’s fancy; but at least they think
    at the moment that there is a wish to be gratified. Doubtless, too, people often buy things which, though yielding pleasure
    for the moment, or postponing pain, are in the end harmful. But here ... we must accept the consumer as the final judge.
    The fact that he is willing to give up something in order to procure an article proves once for all that for him it has utility –
    it fills a want.”


   The writings of the utilitarians provide insight into the nature and dimensions of well-being, and the problem of
its measurement. Bentham thought about the pursuit of happiness in ways that did not fit into the later neoclassical
synthesis, but which resonate with contemporary behavioral studies. Bentham’s utility was attached to the
experience or sensation that objects and actions produced, their pleasure-increasing or pain-reducing effect. Later,
utility became identified with a state of being, with the consequences of actions rather than the processes producing
these consequences. The behavioral revaluation supports the earlier view that attaches utility to process rather than
to consequence. Bentham almost always distinguished increased pleasure and reduced pain as two distinct sources
of happiness. This may just have been his penchant to say anything worth saying more than once, but perhaps he
recognized that people respond differently to perceived gains and losses, a view supported by contemporary brain
science.
    Bentham laid out four critical dimensions that determine the utility of an experience: intensity, duration,
certainty or uncertainty, and propinquity or remoteness. Clearly, Bentham’s first two dimensions anticipated the
utility of an episode as an integral of intensities over some time interval, although formalization of that idea would
not come until Francis Edgeworth a century later. The third dimension anticipated a utility theory for risky
prospects, and the fourth, intertemporal preferences and discounting. Also clearly present in classical economics
                                                                 2
are allowances for reciprocity and altruism in the determination of happiness. Bentham (1789) stressed the role of
reciprocity:


    “By the self-regarding principle, the more urgent the need a man feels himself to have of the kindness and good will of
    others, the more strenuous and steady will be his exertion for the obtaining it. ... The stronger a man’s need of the effective
    benevolence of others, the stronger the inducement he has for the manifesting effective benevolence as towards them.”


Adam Smith (1753) noted the importance of altruism, particularly within families,


           “How selfish soever man may be supposed, there are evidently some principles in his nature, which interest him
           in the fortune of others, and render their happiness necessary to him, though he derives nothing from it, except
           the pleasure of seeing it.”

           "Every man feels [after himself, the pleasures and pains] of the members of his own family. Those who
           usually live in the same house with him, his parents, his children, his brothers and sisters, are naturally the
           objects of his warmest affections. "


    Edgeworth (1881) noted ways in which such altruism is reflected in behavior:


           "... efforts and sacrifices ... are often incurred for the sake of one’s family rather than oneself. The action of the
           family affections ‘has always been fully reckoned with by economists’, especially in relation to the distribution
           of the family income between its various members, the expenses of preparing children for their future career,
           and the accumulation of wealth to be enjoyed after the death of him by whom it has been earned."


        Classical economics came slowly to the problem of recovering utility from observed behavior, Adam
    Smith (1776) described how “haggling and bargaining in the market” would achieve “rough equality”
    between value in use and value in exchange. Working at the fringes of mainstream economics, Jules
    Dupuit (1844) and Hermann Gossen (1854) deduced that consumers exhibiting diminishing marginal utility
    would achieve maximum utility by equalizing the marginal utility per unit of expenditure across various
    goods. Dupuit was remarkably prescient, recognizing that an individual demand curve can be identified
    with a marginal utility curve for a good, provided the marginal utility of money remained constant, and
    showing that the area behind the demand curve then gave a measure of “relative utility”, or in Marshall’s
    later terminology, consumer surplus.
                                                  FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE
        Dupuit’s idea of solving the inverse problem, recovering utility from demand, was brought into the
    mainstream at the end of the 19th century by William Stanley Jevons (1871), Edgeworth (1881), Alfred
    Marshall (1895), and Vilfredo Pareto (1906). With the refinements introduced by John Hicks (1939) and

                                                                 3
Paul Samuelson (1947), it remains today the standard approach to measuring and predicting consumer
welfare. In this era, economists also began to step back from introspective explanations of utility, instead
treating it as a black box whose inner workings were not their concern. Irving Fisher (1892) makes the
argument:


    To fix the idea of utility, the economist should go no further than is serviceable in explaining economic facts. It
    is not his province to build a theory of psychology.

    Whether the necessary antecedent of desire is “pleasure”, or whether independently of pleasure it may sometimes
    be “duty” or “fear” concerns a phenomenon of the second remove from the economic act of choice.


    The emphasis on characterizing utility solely in terms of the demand behavior it produced became the
centerpiece of neoclassical consumer theory, perfected by Eugen Slutsky (1915), John Hicks (1939) and
Paul Samuelson (1947), and in its purest statement forming the theory of revealed preference. This was a
great logical achievement, but the demands of the analysis also narrowed and stiffened the way economists
thought about preferences. The cardinal, proto-physiological utility of Bentham and Edgeworth was
weakened to an ordinal index of preference. The domain of utility moved from activities or processes to
the commodity vectors that were the consequence of choice. Self-interest was defined narrowly to include
only personally purchased and consumed goods; reciprocity and altruism were ignored. No allowance was
made for ambiguities and uncertainties regarding tastes, budgets, the attributes of goods, or the reliability of
transactions. The Hicks-Samuelson formulation was fundamentally static, with the consumer making a
once-and-for-all utility-maximizing choice of market goods.               Utility in this formulation is usually
interpreted as the felicity produced by flows of non-durable goods and services from durable goods.
However, from the time of Fisher (1930), there were also neoclassical models of intertemporal utility and
the dynamics of choice. I will discuss these in more detail in Section VI.5.
    The remainder of this section sets notation with an abbreviated restatement of the core of neoclassical
demand analysis; introductory treatments are given in standard textbooks; e.g., Varian (1992, Chap. 7, 10),
Mas-Colell, Whinston, and Green (1995, Chap. 3E,F,G,I). I will use the theory of duality, with indirect
utility functions and expenditure functions linked to demands through Roy’s identity and Shephard’s
identity, respectively.    Major features of these dual functions follow from the envelope theorem,
developed by Rudolph Auspitz and Richard Lieben (1889), and applied to consumer theory first by Irving
Fisher (1892), and later by Harold Hotelling (1935), Rene Roy (1942), Paul Samuelson (1947), Lionel
McKenzie (1957), and Hirofumi Uzawa (1971). The full power of dual methods for derivation of demand
systems or recovery of utility in econometric applications was not realized until the end of the 1950's, after


                                                          4
the circulation of the unpublished lecture notes on convexity of Fenchel (1953), and the demonstration by
Ron Shephard (1953) of the formal duality of input requirement sets and cost functions.2
    Let p = (p1,…,pn) denote a market good price vector in a positive cone P f ún and x = (x1,…,xn) denote
a vector of goods and services in a closed, bounded-below consumption set X f ún.3 Let Z denote a
compact metric space of points z that are placeholders for later analysis of (1) attributes of market or
non-market goods, or (2) the consumer’s experience, information, social environment, and predetermined
choices. For example, z might characterize a state produced by learning and holdings of durables, or a
predetermined location choice that determines the markets that are open to the consumer.4 Let R denote a
compact metric space of points r interpreted as primitive characteristics of the individual (e.g., genetic
endowment) that shape tastes. The introduction of r will facilitate later analysis of unobserved taste
heterogeneity.
    Suppose a consumer has a continuous utility index U(x,z,r) defined on X×Z×R.5 The fundamental
consumer sovereignty assumption of neoclassical theory requires that r not depend on opportunities or
choice.    The arguments (z,r) are suppressed in most textbook treatments, but are implicit in the
neoclassical theory and can be developed to accommodate some important behavioral phenomena. In the
usual theory, the consumer seeks to maximize utility subject to a linear budget constraint y ≥ p⋅x, where y is
an income level higher than the minimum necessary to make some vector in X affordable and lower than the

2
  I first learned from John Chipman, Leonid Hurwicz, Marc Nerlove, and Hirofumi Uzawa how dual methods could
be used to develop demand systems and implement econometric models of production and utility; see Hurwicz and
Uzawa (1971) and Fuss and McFadden (1978).
3
  When it is useful to make X compact in the finite-dimensional case, this can be accomplished by imposing a bound
that is not economically restrictive. Most of the results of duality theory continue to hold when prices p are points in
a convex cone P in a locally convex linear topological space S, and X is a compact subset of the conjugate space S* of
S. This extension is useful for applications where the consumer is making choices over continuous time, over risky
prospects with a continuum of uncertain events, and/or over objects in physical or hedonic space.
4
   In the case of discrete or mutually exclusive alternatives, one can also write x = (x1,...,xJ), where xj is subvector of
commodities purchased under discrete choice j. If xj includes a dummy variable, its price is interpreted as the direct
cost of alternative j. Exclusivity of alternatives is specified through the consumption set X. In this setup, utility
maximization may be treated as a joint discrete-continuous decision, or the maximization can be done in stages,
typically with discrete choice in the first stage assuming optimal continuous conditional choice in the second stage.
5
   The existence of a continuous utility index is somewhat more than is needed for most duality and demand analysis
purposes, but is useful for welfare analysis. Consider the following preference continuity axiom: Suppose
consumers with tastes defined by points r in a compact metric space R have preferences over objects (x,z) in a
compact metric space X×Z, with (xʹ,zʹ) r (xʺ,zʺ) meaning (xʹ,zʹ) is at least as good as (xʺ,zʺ) for a consumer with
tastes r. Suppose r is a complete, transitive preorder on X×Z, and has the continuity property that if a sequence
(xʹk,zʹk,xʺk, zʺk,rk) converges to a limit (xʹ0, zʹ0,xʺ0, zʺ0,r0) and satisfies (x’k,z’k) rk x”k,z”k , then (x’0,z’0) r0
  x”0,z”0 . McFadden and Train (2000), Lemma 1, establishes that if this axiom holds, then there exists a utility
function U(x,z,r), continuous in its arguments, that represents r ∈ R; see also Bridges (1988).



                                                            5
expenditure needed to attain a bliss point in X. Make the standard assumption that in this range of income,
local non-satiation holds, so that all income is spent; e.g., at least one commodity is available in continuous
amounts and always desired. In general, we do not require that X be a convex set, or that preferences be
convex; i.e., we do not require that U be a quasi-concave function of x.                    Define the Hicksian
(compensated) demand function6


(1)      x = H(p,u,z,r) ≡ argminx∈X{p⋅x | U(x,z,r) ≥ u},


and expenditure function7


(2)      y = M(p,u,z,r) ≡ minx∈X{p⋅x | U(x,z,r) ≥ u}.


Income and prices in the expenditure function may be nominal values, or may be deflated to real values.
For much of the following development, it is unnecessary to distinguish between nominal and real income
and prices, but when the distinction matters, let (p,y) denote nominal values, A(p) denote a price deflator
that is a positive concave conical function of p, and let (p,y) = (p/A(p),y/A(p)) denote real values.
      Define the market demand function


(3)      x = D(p,y,z,r) / argmaxx∈X{U(x,z,r) | y ≥ p⋅x}


and the indirect utility function8


(4)      u = V(p,y,z,r) / maxx∈X{U(x,z,r) | y ≥ p⋅x}.


With local nonsatiation, the expenditure function and indirect utility function satisfy the identities




6
  H is a homogeneous of degree zero, upper hemicontinuous correspondence in p 0 P for each (z,r) 0 ZHR; see
McFadden (1966), Diewert (1974,1982).
7
  M is strictly increasing in u, and concave and conical (i.e., linear homogeneous) in p, and consequently when p is
finite-dimensional, almost everywhere twice continuously differentiable in p with symmetric second derivatives. The
epigraph {(p,y)∈ n+1 | y ≤ M(p,u,z,r)} is a closed cone, and a vector x is a support of this cone at p (i.e., q⋅x ≥
M(q,u,z,r) for all q ∈ P(u,z,r), with equality for q = p), if and only if x is in the convex hull of H(p,u,z,r).
8
  V is quasi-convex and homogeneous of degree zero in (p,y), and increasing in y, while D is a homogeneous of
degree zero, upper hemicontinuous correspondence in (p,y).
                                                         6
(5)      y ≡ M(p,V(p,y,z,r),z,r) ≡ p⋅H(p,V(p,y,z,r),z,r)

         D(p,y,z,r) ≡ H(p,V(p,y,z,r),z,r),

         H(p,u,z,r) ≡ D(p,M(p,u,z,r),z,r)

         V(p,y,z,r) ≡ U(D(p,y,z,r),z,r).


Shephard’s identity establishes that when M is differentiable in p,


(6)      H(p,u,z,r) ≡      pM(p,u,z,r),




while Roy’s identity establishes that when V is differentiable in p and in y,


(7)      D(p,y,z,r) yV(p,y,z,r) ≡ - pV(p,y,z,r).


When U(x,z,r) is quasi-concave and non-decreasing in x, the dual mappings


(8)      U(x,z,r) = minpV(p,p·x,z,r) = max{u | p·x ≥ M(p,u,z,r) for p 0 P}


recover the direct utility function; otherwise, they recover the closed quasi-concave free-disposal hull of the
direct utility function.
      Substituting the direct or indirect utility function into an expenditure function gives a monotone
increasing transformation that is again a utility function, now denominated in dollars and termed a
money-metric direct or indirect utility function,


(9)      u = 0(pʹ,zʹ;x,z,r) ≡ M(pʹ,U(x,z,r),zʹ,r),
         u = μ(pʹ,zʹ;p,y,z,r) ≡ M(pʹ,V(p,y,z,r),zʹ,r).


where (pʹ,zʹ) determine a benchmark metric and (x,z) or (p,y,z) determine the utility level. The function :
behaves like an expenditure function in pʹ and an indirect utility function in (p,y), and satisfies
μ(p,z;p,y,z,r) ≡ y; see Hurwicz and Uzawa (1971), Hammond (1994), McFadden (1999).
      A concern of neoclassical demand analysis, and a first question for measurement of well-being, is
whether preferences or an indirect utility function can be recovered from an individual’s observed market

                                                         7
demand function D(p,y,z,r), provided it satisfies the necessary conditions implied by utility maximization
subject to budgets y ≥ p·x. With qualifications, affirmative answers have been provided by two different
lines of argument. The first, originating in the integrability analysis of Antonelli (1886) and Samuelson
(1950), can be characterized as giving sufficient conditions under which Roy’s identity (9), treated as a
partial differential equation in V, has a solution. Hurwicz and Uzawa (1971) give local and global
sufficient conditions for recovery of money-metric indirect utility when market demand functions are
single-valued and smooth; a summary of their argument is given by Katzner (1970). The second,
originating in the revealed preference analysis of Samuelson (1948), Houthakker (1950), and Richter
(1966), gives necessary and sufficient conditions for recovery of a preference order whose maximization
yields the observed demand function; Afriat (1967) and Varian (2006) provide constructive methods for
recovery of utility under some conditions. Qualifications are required because quite strong smoothness
and curvature conditions on utility are needed to assure smoothness properties on market demand, and
preferences recovered from upper hemicontinuous demand functions are not necessarily continuous; see
Rader (1973), Peleg (1970), Conniffe (2007).
    An important caution is that even when consumer behavior is formulated in terms of money-metric
utility, and discussed using phrases like “marginal utility of money” and “diminishing marginal utility”, the
indices U(x,z,r) and V(p,y,z,r) that can be recovered from observed demand are purely ordinal. Suppose z
can be partitioned into z = (z1,z2), where z1 has a direct identifiable effect on market demand and z2 does not
influence market demand; i.e., D(p,y,z1,z2,r) is independent of z2, but if z1 … z1′, then there exist (p,y,r) such
that D(p,y,z1,z2,r) … D(p,y,z1′,z2,r). Let V(p,y,z1,r) denote an “economical” ordinal representation of
preferences for market goods that satisfies Roy’s identity but does not depend on z2. Suppose there exists
a true neurologically-determined hedonic index V*(p,y,z1,z2,r) that would be ideal for the assessment of
consumer welfare, and suppose that it does depend on z2. Because V and V* both represent the preferences
that determine market demand, they are linked by a transformation V*(p,y,z1,z2,r) ≡ f(V(p,y,z1,r),z1,z2,r),
where f(·,z,r) is a smooth function that is increasing in its first argument. Now, V and V* are equally
legitimate utility functions from the standpoint of economic demand analysis. However, even though the
variables z2 influence pleasure or pain, they have no influence on market demand behavior, and within
neoclassical demand analysis have no identifiable or econometrically recoverable effect on well-being.
Section VII discusses contemporary attempts to go outside the neoclassical model to measure such effects
by either “making a market” for z2 via incentive-compatible mechanisms for eliciting values, or by utilizing
biometric measures of hedonic state.




                                                        8
III. First Measurements
    In the days before digital computers, data on consumer behavior was limited and statistical computation
was laborious. Consequently, empirical measurement of utility came slowly. One of the first serious
attempts was made by Ragnar Frisch (1926, 1932), specializing a framework initially proposed by Irving
Fisher (1892, 1918, 1927). Frisch used 31 monthly observations from Paris starting in 1920 on income,
and the price and consumption of sugar. Frisch’s formulation now seems restrictive and a little awkward,
but it was suited to the computational limits of the day and contained the important ideas of separable utility
and composite commodities. In modern terminology, Frisch postulated that the demand for sugar could be
written as


(10)             x = D(p,y) ≡ fʹ(p)/gʹ(y),


where p was the real price of sugar and y was real income, with deflation to real values using a price index
for a composite of the remaining commodities, gʹ was a decreasing function interpreted as the marginal
utility of money, and fʹ was a decreasing function interpreted as the inverse of the marginal utility of sugar.
This demand function has an associated indirect utility function that is additively separable in real income
and the real price of sugar, so that the marginal utility of money is independent of the price of sugar,


(11)             u = V(y,p) = g(y) - f(p).


The quasi-convexity requirement for an indirect utility functions is met if g is convex and f is concave, but
somewhat weaker requirements suffice on a restricted (p,y) domain.9


IV. The Stone Age
    Econometric demand analysis flowered in the 1960's, as improved data and digital computers made
serious empirical work possible. The real starting point was the contribution of Richard Stone (1954), who
estimated expenditure systems linear in income that were derived from Cobb-Douglas demands, translated
to allow committed expenditures,


(12)              xi = ci + θi(y - p·c)/pi .


9
  When f and g are twice continuously differentiable, a necessary and sufficient condition for quasi-convexity is
f″(p)/f′(p)2 ≤ g″(y)/g′(y)2. For example, if g(y) = y1-α/(1-α) and f(p) = p1-β/(1-β), quasi-concavity holds for (p,y)
satisfying αyα-1 ≤ βpβ-1.
                                                         9
Here, i = 1,...,n indexes the commodities, y is income, p is a vector of commodity prices, c = (c1,…,cn) is a
vector of committed demands, and θ1,...,θn are positive parameters that sum to one. The Stone system is a
special case10 of the polar form of Terance Gorman (1953,1961),


(13)               xi = Ci(p,z,r) + (y - C(p,z,r))·Ai(p,z,r)/A(p,z,r),


where C and A are concave, non-decreasing, conical functions of prices that may depend on experience and
tastes through the arguments (z,r), derived from an indirect utility function


(14)               u = (y – C(p,z,r))/A(p,z,r),


and Ci and Ai denote derivatives with respect to pi. The Gorman polar form can be generalized to allow
more flexible Engle curves by introducing a monotone transformation of deflated income,


(15)               u = g(y/A(p,z,r)) - C(p,z,r)/A(p,z,r),


with quasi-convexity of the indirect utility function restricting the curvature of g and/or the domain of (p,y).
The corresponding demand function is


(16)               xi = Ci(p,z,r)/g′(y/A(p,z,r)) + (y – C(p,z,r)/g′(y/A(p,z,r)))Ai(p,z,r)/A(p,z,r).


Frisch’s original demand function for sugar is of this generalized Gorman polar form, with sugar excluded
from the price index A(p).
      In the 1960' and 1970's, a variety of econometric demand systems were proposed, many derived from
specifications of expenditure or indirect utility functions. Important early contributions were the direct
and indirect addilog systems of Houthakker (1960), and the CES form of Arrow-Chenery-Minhas-Solow
(1961). A number of econometric demand systems were developed at Berkeley by students working with
me and my colleagues Dale Jorgenson and Robert Hall. In 1963, Erwin Diewert proposed a Generalized
Leontief cost function that was quadratic in square roots of prices; see Diewert (1971), Blackorby and
Diewert (1979). I pointed out that this system could be interpreted as a second-order Taylor’s expansion


10
     The polar form reduces to the Stone form when C(p,z,r) = p·c and A(p,z,r) =      ∙. . .∙   .
                                                         10
of any smooth cost function, so that it had the nice property that at the approximation point it could
reproduce all the own and cross-price elasticities of the original. We named this the flexible functional
form property, and it became one of the criteria guiding subsequent developments. Dale Jorgenson and
Larry Lau devised the translog system, another flexible functional form that generalized the Houthakker
indirect addilog system; see Christensen-Jorgenson-Lau (1975).             Another major contribution to the
specification of demand systems, influenced by both the Berkeley tradition and by Terance Gorman, was
the Almost Ideal Demand System proposed by Angus Deaton and John Muellbauer (1980ab), with the
indirect utility function


(17)             u = [ln y – α0 - ∑       ln     –½ ∑       ∑      kj ln     ln   ]/β0∏              ,




and demand functions whose expenditure shares are linear in logs of income and prices. This is a Gorman
generalized polar form with translog committed expenditures and a Cobb-Douglas price index. Zero
degree homogeneity of (17) in income and prices requires the parameter restrictions                      =   ,
∑            1, ∑            1, and ∑              0, and quasi-convexity restricts the (p,y) domain. In
general, the parameters in (17) depend on r and can be functions of z.
    While the demand systems (12)-(17) were derived from the theory of the individual consumer, they
were typically applied to observations on cross-sections of individuals, or to market aggregates, by
assuming a representative consumer. Except under special circumstances (see for example John Chipman
and James Moore, 1980, 1990), this presumed homogeneous preferences, or in the later work of Dale
Jorgenson, Larry Lau, and Tom Stoker (1980, 1997) and Arthur Lewbel (1992), preference heterogeneity
parameterized as a function of observables.
    The utility-consistent demand systems mentioned above generally worked well to explain demand at
the market level despite the representative consumer restriction.            Lester Taylor (2005) estimates
neoclassical demand systems using U.S. Consumer Expenditure Survey quarterly expenditure data and
ACCRA Cost of Living indices across urban areas in six expenditure categories. Table 1 gives price and
expenditure elasticities for an Almost Ideal Demand System fitted to these data. An example of the use
these results is calculation of excise tax structures that maximize well-being subject to budget and
distributional constraints. Taylor points out that there are substantive aggregation, quality, and taste
heterogeneity issues in the use of such data, but his results are generally consistent with other studies. He
finds that Stone, indirect addilog, and direct addilog systems give qualitatively similar results.
                                         TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE

                                                      11
V. Consumer Well-Being
    How does a change in a consumer’s economic environment from (pʹ,yʹ,zʹ) to (pʺ,yʺ,zʺ) affect her
indirect utility, the neoclassical measure of well-being? The concept of consumer surplus from Dupuit,
Marshall, and Hicks can be interpreted as a money metric for changes in indirect utility, an adjustment to
income that equates indirect utilities before and after a change in the economic environment. The
Compensating Variation or Willingness-to-Pay (WTP) for this change is the net reduction in final income
that makes the consumer indifferent to the change, V(pʺ,yʺ - WTP,zʺ,r) = V(pʹ,yʹ,zʹ,r). Substituting these
values into the expenditure function gives the money-metric equality μ(pʺ,zʺ;pʹ,yʹ,zʹ,r) = μ(pʺ,zʺ;pʺ,yʺ -
WTP,zʺ,r) ≡ yʺ - WTP, or


(18)    WTP = μ(pʺ,zʺ;pʺ,yʺ,zʺ,r) - μ(pʺ,zʺ;pʹ,yʹ,zʹ,r) ≡ yʺ - μ(pʺ,zʺ;pʹ,yʹ,zʹ,r)
              ≡ {yʺ - yʹ} - {μ(pʹ,zʺ;pʹ,yʹ,zʹ,r) - μ(pʹ,zʹ;pʹ,yʹ,zʹ,r)} - {μ(pʺ,zʺ;pʹ,yʹ,zʹ,r) - μ(pʹ,zʺ;pʹ,yʹ,zʹ,r)}.


The last identity decomposes WTP into the observed net increase in money income, less the net increase in
income necessary at initial prices and utility level to offset the change in non-market attributes, less the net
increase in income necessary to offset the change in prices at the final non-market attributes and initial
utility level. The last bracketed term in (18) can be written


(19)    μ(pʺ,zʺ;pʹ,yʹ,zʹ,r) - μ(pʹ,zʺ;pʹ,yʹ,zʹ,r) = ∮         , uʹ, ʺ,   ⋅d ,


the Hicksian net consumer surplus from the price change from pʹ to pʺ, where uʹ = V(pʹ,yʹ,zʹ,r) is the initial
utility level. This integral is independent of path and can be taken over any rectifiable path from pʹ to pʺ.
Thus, when z″ = z′ and y″ = y′, so that only price changes, WTP equals the Hicksian consumer surplus.
    The Equivalent Variation or Willingness-to-Accept (WTA) the change is the net addition to initial
income that makes the consumer indifferent to the change, V(pʺ,yʺ,zʺ,r) = V(pʹ,yʹ + WTA,zʹ,r), or


(20)    WTA = μ(pʹ,zʹ;pʺ,yʺ,zʺ,r) - μ(pʹ,zʹ;pʹ,yʹ,zʹ,r) ≡ μ(pʹ,zʹ;pʺ,yʺ,zʺ,r) - yʹ


            ≡ {yʺ - yʹ} - {μ(pʺ,zʺ;pʺ,yʺ,zʺ,r) - μ(pʺ,zʹ;pʺ,yʺ,zʺ,r)} - {μ(pʺ,zʹ;pʺ,yʺ,zʹ,r) - μ(pʹ,zʹ;pʺ,yʺ,zʺ,r)}.


Again, the final decomposition is the observed net increase in money income, less the net increase in
income necessary at final prices and utility level to offset the change in non-market attributes, less the net


                                                         12
increase in income necessary to offset the change in prices at the initial non-market attributes and final
utility level, with the last term expressible as a Hicksian consumer surplus integral similar to (19), but with
Hicksian demand evaluated at the final utility level uʺ = V(pʺ,yʺ,zʺ,r).
    Putting income and prices in real terms and using the first identity in (5), the definition (9), and the
theorem of the mean, WTP and WTA can be written


(21)             WTP = [V(pʺ,yʺ,zʺ,r) - V (pʹ,yʹ,zʹ,r)]/ yV(pʺ,ya,zʺ,r)
                       ≈ MWTP ≡ [V(pʺ,yʺ,zʺ,r) - V (pʹ,yʹ,zʹ,r)]/ yV(pʺ,yʺ,zʺ,r),


                 WTA = [V(pʺ,yʺ,zʺ,r) - V(pʹ,yʹ,zʹ,r)]/ yV(pʹ,yb,zʹ,r)
                       ≈ MWTA ≡ [V(pʺ,yʺ,zʺ,r) - V(pʹ,yʹ,zʹ,r)]/ yV(pʹ,yʹ,zʹ,r),


where ya and yb are points in the line segment between yʹ and yʺ, marginal willingness-to-pay (MWTP)
approximates WTP when yʹ and yʺ are close, and marginal willingness to accept (MWTA) approximates
WTA when yʹ and yʺ are close. An implication of (21) is that WTP, MWTP, WTA, and MWTA all have
the same sign, and can be interpreted as alternative scalings of the indirect utility difference V(pʺ,yʺ,zʺ,r) -
V(pʹ,yʹ,zʹ,r). If before and after prices are scaled so that yʹ = yʺ, then WTP and MWTP coincide, as do
WTA and MWTA. This result also holds if the marginal utility of income is independent of y, a case that
corresponds, at least locally, to an indirect utility function V(p,y,z,r) = V1(p,z,r)·y + V2(p,z,r) that is linear
in real income. If the marginal utility of income is independent not only of y, but also of p and z, then WTP
and WTA coincide, and the indirect utility function reduces to V(p,y,z,r) = V1(r)·y + V2(p,z,r). The
Gorman polar form has this structure, and allows easy welfare calculations, with WTP and WTA differing
only by a scale factor, WTP/A(p″,z″,r) = WTA/A(p′,z′,r) = [y″ - y′ - C(p″,z″,r) + C(p′,z′,r)].
    Neoclassical measurement of well-being starts from the assumption that one can identify and recover
the market demand functions x = D(p,y,z,r) of individuals, and infer from these the features of
money-metric utility necessary to do the consumer surplus calculation. Examine this question in the
formula (18) for the WTP of an individual consumer. The first term in the final decomposition of (18) is
just an observed income difference. The last term, the Hicksian consumer surplus, can be recovered or
bounded by first recovering the demand function using observations on choice at different prices and
incomes from the same preferences, and it is well known that with sufficient variation in budgets, one can
bound or recover exactly the Hicksian net consumer surplus associated with price variations, the final term
in the decomposition of (18); see Henrick Houthakker (1950), Robert Willig (1976), Hal Varian (1982).


                                                       13
This leaves the middle term in (18) to be identified. McFadden (2008) argues that this requires either that
choice be observed in which the environment z is determinative at an active margin, for example because z
and p influence utility in a known interaction, or because discrete choices are made that select the
environment; or that some non-market information on well-being be collected and used. McFadden (1986,
1994, 1999, 2004) gives detailed discussions of identifying or bounding WTP and WTA using both
revealed and hypothetical choice data. In practice, the identification of demand for individual consumers
is a challenging task. The market rarely provides natural experiments in which the same individual reveals
demand in repeated choice situations that span a full domain (p,y) of prices and incomes, and a consumer’s
choice history modifies the experience vector z systematically, so that it will often be difficult to identify
the separate effects of (p,y) and z. Only components of z that have active margins, in the sense that
changing z changes market behavior, have neoclassically identifiable effects. Tacit in most applications of
neoclassical welfare analysis is an assumption that market good prices and non-market attributes interact in
such a way that changes in z can be translated into changes in effective market prices, and rolled into the
consumer surplus calculation. For example, suppose direct utility is U(x*,r), where x*j = xj·fj(z) is the
“quality-corrected” amount of good j, with an associated indirect utility function V(p*,y,r) of income and
effective prices p*j = pj/fj(z). Then z influences indirect utility only through effective prices, and the
contribution to WTP from changes in p and z is given by a consumer surplus integral of the form (19)
between initial and final effective prices, with a Hicksian demand integrand that also depends on z only
through the effective prices.
    The expressions (18)-(21) represent the full neoclassical elaboration of Dupuit’s characterization of
changes in well-being for consumers facing linear budget constraints, incorporating Hick’s refinement of
compensating for the effect of income on marginal utility. However, as noted at the end of Section II, the
effect on well-being of changes in non-market attributes z may not be identified from observable
neoclassical demand behavior.


VI. Expansions
    As microdata on individuals and computational capacity have expanded over the last half-century,
neoclassical econometric demand systems predicated on linear budget sets and representative consumers
have proven uncomfortably restrictive.         These systems could not deal easily with preference
heterogeneity, acquired tastes, shifting hedonic attributes of commodities, non-linear budget sets, time,
space, or uncertainty, and the frequent cases of zero and lumpy purchases. It was necessary to expand the
domain of the theory. This was done initially by retaining the central elements of standard neoclassical
consumer theory, and bringing forward some of the broader components of utilitarianism in a way that was
                                                     14
consistent with the neoclassical core, as illustrated in Figure 2. This meant preserving the tenets of
consumer sovereignty and preference maximization, but admitting the influence of (observed and
unobserved) experience and memory on perceptions and on current preferences, leading to heterogeneity
across consumers. These extensions also allowed household production, non-linear budget constraints,
and utility maximization with strategic optimization and recalculation as events unfold. The following
subsections describe each of these extensions.
                                            FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE


     VI.1. Preference Heterogeneity. The extension of neoclassical consumer theory to handle both tastes
acquired as the result of observable experience and history and unobserved preference heterogeneity is a
reaffirmation of circumstances allowed in the neoclassical model, but pushed aside to facilitate exposition
and econometric estimation. In the summary given in the previous sections, I wrote utility U(x,z,r) as a
function of observed experience z and unobserved tastes r, and these effects carried into the demand
functions as arguments. A family of utility functions U(·,·,r) on R is termed a preference field, and a
distribution on r determines a distribution of demands given z and market variables (p,y).11 Observed
demand distributions then restrict or identify the underlying distributions of unobserved tastes. The
primary problems in application are practical; how to measure and fold into the utility function all the
varied experiences of consumers, and how to embed within the system and characterize the distribution of
unobservable components of tastes. My original treatment of discrete choice as a result of random utility
maximization (McFadden, 1974; Domencich and McFadden, 1974) illustrates a parametric solution.
Modern developments allow both flexible parametric and nonparametric estimation; see, for example,
Horowitz and Savin (2001), Horowitz (1992), Huang and Nychka (2000), Ichimura and Lee (1991),
Ichimura and Thompson (1998), Matzkin (1992, 1993), Pagan and Ullah (1999), Signorini and Jones
(2004), Blundell et al (2008,2012).




11
   Realized distributions of demands are obtained with incomes drawn from a distribution that may be conditioned on
(z,r) through ecological correlation and the influence of tastes on work history. In some applications, z is exogenous to
the consumer, and thus independent of income and tastes. For example, a product attribute such as durability may be
uniform for all consumers. In other applications, the z are an endogenous part of consumer choice, such as
congestion levels, or residential location in response to air pollution levels, and thus have a distribution that is
dependent upon income and tastes. A satisfactory model for WTP in the presence of endogenously determined
environmental attributes requires specification of the structure of supply as well as demand, and determination of an
equilibrium allocation in both market goods and the non-market environments. WTP is then defined on an
equilibrium trajectory from old to new environmental, income, and market management policies. In the terminology
of the statistical and econometric literature on treatment effects, the final state in the welfare comparison is a fully
consistent equilibrium counterfactual.
                                                           15
     There are advantages to shifting the focus of consumer theory from individual preferences to
distributions of preferences. Both market demand and social welfare are functions of these distributions,
and do not require detailed preference information at the individual level. This can substantially reduce
the requirements for information and experimental variation relative to those needed to identify individual
utilities. Random and fixed effects panel data models in econometrics are an instructive analogy – random
effects models require much less data for identification, but also require independence assumptions that are
not needed in fixed-effects estimation. However, preference heterogeneity raises conceptual issues. Is
unobserved taste variation a permanent individual effect, or is there a component that varies with time or
choice opportunity? The neoclassical presumption is that tastes within an individual are fixed. This is the
setup of revealed preference theory, which envisions a sequence of budgets offered to an individual whose
tastes are uninfluenced by the experience of previous offers, or by whims. Alternately, individual tastes
may have an unobserved time-varying component.             This is in itself not inconsistent with classical
utilitarianism, which left room for utility to reflect “a moment’s fancy”. However, the presence of taste
variations or hysterisis across a revealed preference sequence undermines the main revealed preference
result that the convex hull of preferences can be recovered from observed demands. If instead preferences
are treated as stochastic, interesting possibilities open for models with both intra-individual and
cross-individual heterogeneity. Employing the theory of stochastic revealed preference (Marschak, 1960,
Block and Marschak, 1960, Luce and Supes, 1965, McFadden and Richter, 1990, McFadden, 2005,
Fosgerau and McFadden, 2012), and panel data on demand, one could ask for conditions under which the
distributions of the unobserved taste heterogeneity can be nonparametrically identified. Is it possible to
untangle state-dependence and unobserved individual effects in consumer panels, the Heckman
initial-values problem? Is it possible to separate heterogeneity in perceptions from heterogeneity in tastes
when choice alternatives are risky or ambiguous? Is it possible to identify the distribution of preferences
                                           14
from market-level demand observations?


     VI.2. Nonlinear Budget Sets. The neoclassical focus on linear budgets and convex preferences
neglected a range of consumer behavior that is apparent at the level of the individual, the lumpiness and
mutual exclusivity of many consumer choices such as school, job, and brand of automobile. It also
neglected the important economic area of nonlinear pricing, arising from two-part and nonlinear tariffs, and
progressive taxes. Extending econometric consumer theory to handle these applications required attention


14
  The answer to this question depends on what one knows about the resources available to individuals; see Debreu
(1974), McFadden-Mas Colell-Mantel-Richter (1974), Matzkin (2005).

                                                      16
to the role of taste heterogeneity, and to the characterization of budgets. The duality methods that are so
useful in linear budget problems are hampered here, but still valuable, for example in Hausman (1985) and
Dubin and McFadden (1984). One important observation for measurement of consumer well-being is that
non-linear budget sets can be helpful in identifying neoclassical preferences. For example, preferences are
recovered directly when budgets are restricted to binary comparisons.
    A useful tool for analyzing nonlinear budget sets within the framework of the neoclassical utility
model, introduced by Matzkin and McFadden (2011) and developed by Fosgerau and McFadden (2012),
considers a preference field formed by taking a base money-metric direct utility function 0(pʹ,zʹ;x,z,r) as in
(9) that is continuous in its arguments and embedding it in a family formed by additive linear perturbations
q of marginal utility, 0(pʹ,zʹ;x,z,r) + q·x. The perturbations introduced in this analysis can be treated as a
technical device and set to a fixed value at the end, but the full power of the approach is attained when these
are true unobserved preference perturbations q that have an absolutely continuous distribution in the
population. Fix the benchmark (pʹ,zʹ) and define the money-metric indirect utility function V(B,z,r,q) =
maxx∈B 0(pʹ,zʹ;x,z,r) + q·x} and demand function D(B,z,r,q) = argmaxx∈B 0(pʹ,zʹ;x,z,r) + q·x} for any
non-empty compact budget set B that intersects the consumption set X. Then, V is a convex function of q,
the convex hull of D(B,z,r,q) equals the subdifferential of V with respect to q, and for almost all q,
D(B,z,r,q) is a singleton. Thus, the perturbation vector q plays the same role for general budget sets that
prices play in a standard expenditure function for linear budget sets. Fosgerau and McFadden give
necessary and sufficient conditions for V to be a money metric indirect utility function for a family of
nonlinear budget sets. These conditions can be used in applications to generate generalizations of
neoclassical expenditure systems and construct WTP measures for nonlinear budget sets.


    VI.3. Hedonic Goods and Household Production. Economists moved in the 1970's from treating
commodities as objects with fixed attributes to hedonic models in which consumers care about generic
attributes that can be met through various quantities and combinations of market goods. The simplest
hedonic model, dating to Andrew Court (1939), Kevin Lancaster (1966), and John Muth (1998), allowed
the hedonic content of a unit of a market good to vary with the design of its manufacturer, and assumed in
implementation that these dimensions of content could be measured. Extending this approach, consumers
may be thought of as obtaining various observed and unobserved hedonic quantities through a combination
of the direct hedonic content of market goods and household production of hedonic content. For example,
an automobile contains as direct hedonic content “horsepower” and “cargo capacity”, and requires the
household production activities of driving and parking to facilitate foraging for food and satisfying hunger.


                                                      17
    Household production is a feature of economic life whose presence influences consumer’s economic
behavior, and enriches the interpretation but complicates the measurement of utility, and also offers
additional measurement opportunities. Economists invoke household production ideas to explain time
allocation, and facilitating activities like travel.    Nevertheless, household production is given little
attention in economics textbooks. I think one reason for this is that unless one has observations on
household production activities or hedonic products of the household production process, one cannot
distinguish household technology from tastes. To illustrate, let w = (w1,…,wK) denote hedonic quantities,
z denote the consumer’s environment, x = (x1,…,xN) denote market goods, y denote income, and p =
(p1,…,pN) denote market good prices. Let F(w,x,z) ≤ 0 denote the household technology, and U(w,z,r)
denote the direct utility function. Then, the consumer’s indirect utility satisfies


 (22)                    V(y,p,z,r) = maxz,x U(w,r) s.t. F(w,x,z) ≤ 0, pAx ≤ y.


 Given this indirect utility function, apply the duality mapping


 (23)                    U*(x,z,r) = minp V(pAx,p,z,r)


to obtain a reduced form utility function of the market goods. Then U* has the conventional properties of
a neoclassical utility function. This construction does not require convex preferences and household
production possibilities, and leaves household production implicit. Then, by Occam’s razor, if only market
purchases are observed, one might as well model only U*, and treat household production as outside the
province of economics. However, there is potentially a great deal to be learned when it is possible to
measure some post-household-production hedonic quantities. Variation in household technologies may be
a source of apparent taste variation in utility, or may attenuate the impact of taste variations on market
transactions. Structural models of household production and consumption can explain simply behavior
that may otherwise be difficult to interpret, such as demand for education, exercise, work, and household
durable equipment that has both consumption and production aspects. The hedonic measures w may be
conventional economic ones, like horsepower and cargo space, or may be proximate to the organism; e.g.,
calorie intake or alleostatic load. Careful analysis of household production, augmented by hedonic
measurements, is in my opinion one of the promising and relatively neglected frontiers in econometric
study of consumer behavior. The utility maximization (22) is a problem of utility maximization subject to
a non-linear budget constraint, as discussed in the previous section; in this case, the hedonic content of
market goods and the household technology define the nonlinear budget in w. Then, linear additive
                                                       18
perturbations in marginal utility and/or linear additive perturbations in the cost of meeting household output
requirements can be used in dual characterizations of production and utility.
     Hedonic regressions of product prices on attributes were introduced by Zvi Griliches and Irma
                                                                                             16
Adelman (1961) as a method of adjusting price indices to control for product quality.             These regressions
were later connected by Sherwin Rosen (1974) to the theory of utility maximization and market equilibrium
in hedonic space; see also Makoto Ohta (1971), Ohta and Griliches (1986), Ivar Ekeland (2010), Andreu
Mas-Colell (1996), McFadden (2008), and, and Heckman-Matzkin-Neshelm (2010). In summary, this
literature finds that existence of stable equilibrium in markets with differentiated hedonic commodities is
problematic, that structural identification is difficult even when equilibrium is well-defined, and that an
equilibrium mapping from hedonic content to price is in general a nonparametric reduced form that reflects
technology and market structure as well as consumer preferences. Nevertheless, both McFadden and
Heckman-Matzkin-Neshelm give conditions under which it is possible to recover the distribution of
hedonic preferences when consumers operate at active margins, locating at observable points in hedonic
space in response to tradeoffs between hedonic factors.
     I will give one example in which a linear regression of the log of market good price on a vector of
observed hedonic content identifies consumer tastes for hedonic attributes. Assume that consumers have
utility functions U(w,r) of a vector w = (w1,…,wK) of hedonic quantities, and associated indirect utility
functions V(p*,y,r) of the effective prices p* of hedonic units. Assume the first hedonic quantity is a sum
of quantities of m market goods, weighted by their hedonic content, w1 = x1exp(z1β+g1) + … +
xmexp(zmβ+gm), where β is a vector of taste weights, zj describes the measured hedonic content of good j,
and gj summarizes unmeasured hedonic attributes of good j. Note that the hedonic attributes enter in a
“factor augmenting” form, so that p*1 = min1#j#mpjexp(-zjβ-gj) is the effective price of good 1, and
V(min1#j#mpjexp(-zjβ-gj),p*2,…,p*K,y,r) is the consumer’s indirect utility expressed in terms of the market
prices and hedonic content of the market goods 1,…,m. Suppose the consumer faces a consumption set X
in which she can buy the market goods 1,…,m in continuous quantities. The optimizing consumer will
then purchase only market goods in argmin1#j#mpjexp(-zjβ-gj). If all consumers are identical in their
hedonic taste weights β and perceptions of the unobserved attributes gj, then all goods observed in the
market will have effective prices achieving the minimum, so that log pj = α + zjβ + gj for j = 1,…,m, where
α is a (random) value common to all the goods. Then with these strong assumptions on preferences,


16
  The typical hedonic regression for commodity like housing is log p = zβ + ε, where p is price, z includes observed
attributes such as square footage, age, number of baths, and proximity to schools, jobs, and environmental nuisances,
and unobserved attributes combine into a disturbance ε.

                                                         19
market prices for the goods 1,…,m are determined independently of production and market structure, and
the hedonic regression parameters are preference weights.
    A discrete choice variant on the setup above also allows econometric recovery of hedonic taste weights.
Suppose now that the consumption set X requires the consumer to choose a unit purchase from mutually
exclusive alternatives 1,…,m, and consumers have common taste weighs β but are heterogeneous in their
perceptions (g1,…,gm) of the unmeasured attributes. Then, the share of consumers choosing alternative j is
given by a discrete choice model,


(24)             Prob(j | p1,…,pm;z1,..,zm) = IFj((zj-z1)β-log(pj/p1)+gj,…, (zj-zm)β-log(pj/pm)+gj)dgj,


where F is the cumulative distribution function of (g1,…,gm) and Fj denotes its derivative with respect to its
jth argument. If, for example, F is i.i.d. extreme value, then (24) is multinomial logit, the specification used
in my initial formulation of discrete choice models (Domencich and McFadden, 1975; McFadden, 1974ab).
    Both hedonic regression and hedonic discrete choice have had wide application, and have been
generalized to nonlinear, semiparametric, and nonparametric specifications; see, for example, Anderson, de
Palma, and Thisse (1992), McFadden and Train (2000), Yatchew (1998, 2003), Heckman, Matzkin,
Neshelm (2010). An econometric issue, tacit in both hedonic regression and discrete choice models, is that
the orthogonality or independence of observed hedonic attributes and unobserved disturbances is
problematic. Traditional instrumental variables methods usually suffice for linear hedonic regression, but
nonlinear models are more challenging, and have been the subject of a large literature; see, for example,
Berry-Levinsohn-Pakes (1995, 2004), Berry-Linton-Pakes (2004), Blundell and Powell (2004), Matzkin
(2005,2008).


    VI.4. Consumer Dynamics. When consumer behvaior is considered over time, it is necessary to clarify
what utility and utility-maximization mean. One concept is that of instant utility or felicity, a hedonic
index of the sensation of well-being at a moment. Another is decision utility, an index of the desirability of
choices that may be available at the moment and that determine current consumption and future options. A
third is remembered utility, an index of current satisfaction with experiences in the past. Neoclassical
economics focuses on decision utility as the operative driver of market behavior, and emphasizes that only
its ordinal properties matter. In this view, instant utility and remembered utility are relevant to economic
behavior only through their influence on decision utility, even if they have independent psychological
content.


                                                      20
    The major issues in neoclassical modeling of consumer behavior over time were the intertemporal
structure of decision utility, and the event timing, information sets, and calculus involved in utility
maximization. Consumer theory has handled these in two ways. A framework introduced by Fisher
(1908, 1930), Edmund Malinvaud (1953), and Gerard Debreu (1959) dated commodities and made their
delivery contingent on uncertain events. In Debreu’s interpretation, utility spanned the lifetime of the
consumer, with a single decision-utility-maximizing choice specifying in advance the response to the
realization of each contingency, and determining the entire life course. This was a complete, logically
elegant, and instructive implementation of consumer theory, with utility incorporating a complete system of
perceptions and subjective probabilities, and including in the life plan of the consumer full allowance for
the strategic impact of choice on later options and preferences. Nevertheless, the approach has severe
limitations, first because its full articulation requires the existence of a spanning set of contingent markets
that in practice do not exist, but more fundamentally because it is clear from behavioral evidence that life
plans are “incomplete contracts” that ignore many contingencies and are subject to continual updating and
revision. The limits of the approach are obvious when one asks at what point in time the consumer’s
once-and-for-all life choice is made – at birth, the time of preparation for A-level exams, voting age?
    The second approach to handling time and uncertainty in neoclassical consumer theory was to treat the
utility of a life as the integral of discounted instant utilities, an idea that dates back to Bentham’s depiction
of utility as depending on intensity, duration, and propinquity or remoteness, and to Edgeworth’s
description in 1881 of the level of happiness associated with an experience as the integral of the intensity of
pleasure over the duration of the event:


    “The continually indicated height [of felicity] is registered by photographic or other frictionless apparatus upon a
    uniformly moving vertical plane. Then, the quantity of happiness between two epochs is represented by the area
    contained between the zero-line ... and the curve traced by the index.”


Edgeworth viewed felicity as a cardinal measure of sensation, with levels that were comparable across time
and allowed utility to be expressed as an integral. The later neoclassical formulation instead deduces
felicities as a feature induced by a separability property of preferences (see Debreu, 1986).                      The
formulation of decision utility as an integral of felicities is usually extended to decompose the utility of
uncertain prospects into the expected utility of their outcomes under the axioms of von
Neumann-Morgenstern (1953) and Savage (1954); see Arrow (1971). To complete the theory, it is
necessary to describe how the utility function depends on memory and learning, how perceptions and
subjective probabilities are formed and updated, and how choices are made and revised as time passes and
events unfold. A typical implementation assumes that the consumer solves a dynamic stochastic program

                                                          21
to maximize the expected present value of a discounted integral of future instant utilities, with subjective
probabilities that satisfy the Muth-Lucas axiom of rational expectations, requiring that subjective
probabilities of different consumers agree with objective frequencies, and hence with each other; see Muth
(1992, 1994), Lucas (1975). The approach can accommodate experience and learning through state
variables that enter instant utility, but often these effects are omitted or admitted in very restrictive form.
The dynamic stochastic programming approach is again an elegant and instructive logical solution to the
problem of consumer dynamics.               However, the strongest form of the model, with a representative
consumer and rational expectations, is vulnerable to behavioral rejection, because the solution of these
programs involve levels of complexity and computation that fairly clearly exceed human cognitive
capacity, because it is unrealistic to assume that historical experience and market information and discipline
are sufficient to homogenize subjective expectations, particularly for rare events, and because the axiomatic
foundations for utility jointly additively separable in time and uncertain outcomes are not persuasive; see
Pollack (1970).
    Intertemporally separable decision utility has difficulty explaining the smoothness of consumption in
the presence of observed income shocks; e.g., Hall (1978), Campbell and Deaton (1989), Sundaresan
(1989), Okubo (2002), Attanasio and Pavoni (2011). This is most easily addressed within the neoclassical
framework by letting felicity depend on state variables that summarize consumer history. In addition to
observed states, such as holdings of consumer durables, allow unobserved or hidden states that carry the
effects of intertemporal substitutability. By expanding the dimensionality of the state description, the
utility maximization model can be represented as a dynamic stochastic program with Markov dynamics.
    A final generalization would be to reintroduce the idea of Jevons and Edgeworth (1896) that the same
objective time may correspond to different rates of thought and feeling in different periods, so that two
dimensions are required to characterize the elements of the utility of an episode, its felicity and subjective
time. Then, decision utility at moment t would have the form

                                            4
(25)                     u = Et|z(t),s(t)       U(x(τ),z(τ),s(τ),r)δ(dτ,t,z(t)),


where x(τ) is the vector of market goods purchased at time τ, z(τ) is the consumer’s environment, s(τ) is a
vector of observed and hidden state variables, and r indexes tastes. The function U(x(t),z(t),s(t),r) is
felicity at t, and δ(dτ,t,z(t)) measures a subjective time interval at τ as viewed from the current moment t.
In this formulation, subjective time may depend on the environment of the consumer. The measure δ also
incorporates time and risk discounting, which arises in the utilitarian view because, in the words of


                                                             22
Edgeworth, “the bird in the bush may never come to hand”. The operator Et|z(t),s(t) denotes subjective
expectation at t, conditioned on the consumer’s environment and experience at that moment. The state s
has an equation of motion


(26)                     ds(t)/dt = h(x(t),z(t),s(t)).


This formulation of decision utility, embedded in a dynamic stochastic program, and allowing
heterogeneity in preferences and perceptions, and interactions between perceptions, tastes, and experience,
is an extension of the neoclassical consumer model that can accommodate phenomena such as
“time-inconsistent discounting”, “time-inconsistent perceptions”, and differences between a direct integral
of felicities and either remembered or decision utility. If the state s(t) includes time averages of x, and
these time averages establish reference points or aspiration levels for the consumer, then the utility function
can capture asymmetric hypersensitivity to gains and losses from these reference points. This setup risks
explaining too much, including Taussig’s purchases made on a whim, but it can be given content by
restricting the structure of felicity, subjective time, and subjective expectations.


VII. New Frontiers: A Behavioral Revaluation of Consumer Decision-Making
    Neoclassical consumer theory implies that with rational calculation, we cannot be harmed by choice
and trade. Then people should relish choice, and welcome all the alternatives offered by markets. Yet,
people are challenged by choice. In the words of a Dutch proverb, “He who has choice has trouble”. We
find choice uncomfortable, and often use procrastination, rules, pre-commitment, habit, suspicion, and
imitation to avoid “rational” decision-making and trade. The psychiatrists even have a word for it –
agoraphobia, or fear of the market. There are two possible reasons for this behavior. First, while trade is
calculated to advance our self-interest, the calculation may be burdensome, and the cost of mistakes
substantial. We may simply be too lazy or timid to trade. Second, trade involves social interaction and
the emotions that go with this. Choice alternatives and trades may be misrepresented in the market game,
and suspicions may be justified. As a result, we evaluate economic activities not only cognitively, but also
strategically and viscerally; see Mellers (2000), Lowenstein (2003), McFadden (2006). This emotional
aspect not only explains why economic choices can make us uncomfortable, but also why we sometimes
make systematic mistakes – we do not approach economic decisions with a single mind.
                                          FIGURE 3 ABOUT HERE
       A schematic for behavioral models of choice, given in Figure 3, differs from the neoclassical
schematic primarily by adding affect and motivation as factors in choice, relaxing the rigid requirement that
                                                         23
preferences are sovereign and king of the sentiments, and adding possible feedbacks. However, there is a
more fundamental difference. Neoclassically trained economists think of these behavioral elements as
arising from the limits of memory and cognitive capacity that bound rationality, slips or anomalies that the
individual will detect and correct if they become obvious. Many psychologists and biologists think of this
instead as a product of evolution, the result of a rough correspondence between generalized self-interest and
survival, a hodge-podge of rules, processes, and strategies that mimic rationality in circumstances where
rationality increases survival value. Day-to-day economic choices are explained by either paradigm, but
perception and choice in novel situations tests the neoclassical premise, and challenges easy transitions
between conventional demand analysis and the effect of novel economic policy on consumer well-being.
    Measurement of economic consumer behavior will continue to center on studies of revealed market
behavior, with traditional consumer expenditure surveys augmented by electronic tracking of consumer
purchases through scanner data, high frequency sampling through internet panels, and increasing
exploitation of natural experiments. These measurements will be supplemented by analysis of stated
choices in hypothetical markets, and a great deal more data from microeconomic surveys, experimental
economics, marketing science, and cognitive psychology. Perhaps the most interesting and challenging
new measurements come from fields not commonly allied with economics, sociology, anthropology,
evolutionary and cellular biology, and neurology.     I will give an overview of this research, starting with
more traditional psychological measurements and experiments in cognitive psychology, then
measurements and experiments in sociology and anthropology, and concluding with findings and
experiments in biology and neurology.


    VII.1. Stated Preferences and Conjoint Analysis. Lack of observed variation in attributes of market
goods, and issues of exogeneity, have led economists to consider information obtained from hedonic
preference experiments with hypothetical market choices. This is the method of conjoint analysis, adapted
in market research from its psychophysical roots (Thurstone, 1931; Luce and Tukey, 1964; Johnson, 1974;
Green et al, 1981; McFadden, 19986; Green et al, 2001), and tied to models of stochastic preferences as a
result of econometric work on discrete choice models (McFadden, 1986; Morikawa, Ben-Akiva,
McFadden, 2002). In a review of consumer demand experiments, Ivan Moscati (2007) gives a remarkable
bit of intellectual history. The first conjoint experiment on consumer demand was done by the iconic
psychologist Leon Thurstone at the urging of his University of Chicago colleague Henry Schultz.
Thurstone presented his paper at the 1932 meeting of the Econometric Society, with Ragnar Frisch and
Harold Hotelling commenting from the audience on the critical differences between hypothetical and real
choices. Thurstone’s method was noted and dismissed by Nicholas Georgescu-Rogen (1936) and by Allen
                                                     24
Wallis and Milton Friedman (1942) for three compelling reasons, the hypothetical nature of the offered
choices, the difficulty of detecting indifference, and the difficulty of controlling experimentally for the
effect of income and prices. Thurstone is not mentioned in the neoclassical treatises of Hicks and
Samuelson, and there were no economists involved in the initial applications of conjoint analysis in
marketing. However, abbreviated versions of conjoint analysis, termed contingent valuation, vignette
analysis, or self-reported preference, later became popular among some applied economists and political
scientists; see Rossi (1979), McFadden (1986,1994), Diamond and Hausman (1994), Green et al (1998),
Carson et al (2001), Frey et al (2002), King et al (2004). The use of hypothetical market choice data
remains controversial among economists, with some reason, as it is difficult to achieve the verisimilitude of
real markets in the laboratory, and cognitive inconsistencies that are not obvious in low-frequency real
market choices may be glaring in repeated laboratory choices.
    A number of mechanisms have been developed for incentive-compatible elicitation of preferences;
McFadden (2010) shows for example how the Clark-Groves mechanism can be used in an economic jury
drawn at random from the population to decide on public projects. However, in practice many stated
preference elicitations are either not formatted to be incentive-compatible, or fail to carry through to the
payoffs required in an incentive-compatible mechanism.             Consequently, responses are likely to be
distorted by inattention, risk preference, and careless opinion.
    Despite these weaknesses, stated preference methods have become a proven tool in marketing for
designing and positioning new products. For example, experiments on automobile brand choice can
determine with considerable predictive accuracy the distributions of preference weights that consumers
give to various vehicle features; see Urban et al (1990, 1997); Toubia et al (2003); Train and Winston,
(2005). In overview, experience seems to be that these methods work best when the task is choice among
a small number of realistic, relatively familiar, and fully described alternative products, ideally with the
incentive that with some probability the offered transaction will be executed and the stated choice
delivered. Stated preference methods are less reliable and less directly useful for predicting behavior when
the task is to rate products on some scale, or to adjust some attribute (e.g., price) to make alternatives
indifferent. They are also less reliable when the products are unfamiliar or incompletely described, or
involve public good aspects that induce respondents to make social welfare judgments. Methods that
require cardinal utility judgments, such as those of the Leiden school (van Praag and Kapteyn, 1994) and
Frey and Stutzer (2002), have intuitive validity, but require strong behavioral axioms to be consistently
predictive for choice; see Dagsvik (2005).
    A neglected area related to stated preferences are elicitations of stated perceptions.           Manski
(1991,2004) and others have developed elicitation methods that avoid some obvious distortions in stated
                                                     25
personal probabilities, and appear to explain some risk-taking behavior. A useful extension of current
conjoint methods would be to incorporate and measure subjective perceptions and other psychological
dimensions that appear to influence decision-making.


    VII.2. Measurements from Cognitive Psychology. There are now extensive experiments and insights
from cognitive psychology that contradict a narrowly defined neoclassical model of rational choice, many
originally conducted by Amos Tversky and Danny Kahneman. These suggest that preferences are
malleable and context-dependent, that memory and perceptions are often biased and statistically flawed,
and decision tasks are often neglected or misunderstood. Table 2 is a summary of major cognitive
anomalies that appear in psychological experiments and surveys; for more details, see Rabin (1998),
McFadden (1999). I will give four examples of anomalies that challenge the neoclassical model.
    VII.1.1. The endowment effect is consumer aversion to trade from any given status quo.                  The
endowment effect was beautifully illustrated in a classical experiment by Jack Knetsch (1989) in which a
random assignment of coffee cups produced a large gap between WTP and WTA, with far less trading than
should be needed to move from a random allocation to a Pareto efficient one; see also Kahneman, Knetsch,
Thaler (1990,1991), Camerer and Thaler (1995). I conducted a comparable experiment in an introductory
microeconomics course at Berkeley, using pencils embossed with the course name. About half of the 345
students, 172, were randomly endowed with a chit redeemable for a pencil. Then, a Vickery sealed-bid
uniform price double auction (Yoon, 2001) was held to reallocate the chits: If the participants had true
values v1 ≥ ... ≥ v345, then the optimal strategy for each player was to bid her true value, and chits awarded to
people with values less than v172 should trade, with buyers paying v173, sellers receiving v172, and the market
manager covering the difference. The income effect of being endowed with a pencil is negligible, so that
with random assignment the distributions of money marginal utilities of a pencil should be the same for
buyers and sellers. Then if there were no endowment effect, one would expect about one-half the pencils
to trade at a price close to the median values for both buyers and sellers. More precisely, the number of
chits awarded to the 173 students with the lowest value, which we expect to be traded, has a hypergeometric
distribution with mean 86.2 and standard deviation 4.6.
    The experimental results are summarized in Figure 4. The market cleared with 32 chits traded, at a
price of 35 cents. The median of the sealed bid prices was 10 cents, while the median of the sealed ask
prices was 100 cents, a gap between WTP and WTA similar to that found in the cup experiment. The
probability of 32 transactions or fewer when there is no endowment effect is on the order of 10-16. Further,
a runs test confirms (T-Stat = 12.5) that buyers and sellers do not have the same value distribution. Thus,
there is a strong, trade-suppressing endowment effect, generated instantaneously by a random allocation of
                                                       26
pencil chits. Either values are changing endogenously, with almost instantaneous habituation to the status
quo, or agoraphobia is real -- consumers find trade an edgy experience, instinctively mistrust the market,
and resist trading for small gains.


    VII.1.2. Choice among lotteries often deviates from rationality; see Gilovich et al (2002), Langer and
Weber (2001). A stylized summary is that consumers display (i) an endowment effect, evaluating lotteries
as changes from a reference point that may be sensitive to framing, (ii) an asymmetric loss aversion effect,
in which the consumer is more sensitive to losses than to gains, displaying risk aversion for small gains and
risk seeking for small losses, and (iii) a certainty effect in which sure outcomes are overvalued relative to
lotteries. In addition, there are (iv) an isolation or cancellation effect in which common aspects of
alternative lotteries are ignored when they are compared, (v) a segregation effect in which a riskless
component of a lottery is evaluated separately from the risky component, and (vi) a mode effect in which
pricing a lottery is treated as a qualitatively different task than choosing between lotteries. One of the
consequences of these effects is that consumers will often refuse to take any share of either side of an
offered lottery, a result consistent with the observed paucity of real-world wagers. Kahneman and Tversky
attribute these effects to an editing process that determines the reference point and the perception of lottery
outcomes as gains or losses, and to systematic misperception of probabilities. An additional reason that
individuals are ambiguous about lotteries, and often avoid them, is the superstitious belief that there are
hidden causal forces at work, interventions that place the lottery in ambiguous relationship to the rest of life.
People often have strong beliefs that they are lucky, or unlucky, or that their luck has to change. We have
selective memory for coincidences. You remember running into a friend at a surprising place, or a
particularly good night a poker; you forget all the times you did not encounter a friend or had an
unremarkable night. Chance jolts the harmony of conscious belief; relief from this dissonance is gained by
imposing an order over chaos, weaving a fabric of apparent cause and effect, out of jumbled coincidences.
The mind accepts and emphasizes those coincidences which reaffirm one’s perceived order of the universe,
ignores and forgets inconsistent data, and shrouds each offered lottery in ambiguity regarding hidden
effects. Superstition can arise and persist even when people are consistently Bayesian. Start with a prior
that admits the possibility of complex, hidden causal paths. The experiments that life offers, and selective
memory of outcomes, allows these cognitive castles in the air to survive; see McFadden, 1974c; Hastie and
Dawes, 2001.
    These is experimental evidence that endowment effects are attenuated when traders are experienced;
see Myagkov and Plott (1997), List (2004). Thus, the observed paucity of trades in lotteries may occur
primarily for novel events and inexperienced traders. These facts are consistent with a proposition that
                                                       27
learning by observing and by doing may be effective in selecting rational market behavior rules in arenas
with sufficient repetitiveness to allow these effects to operate.


    VII.1.3. Hyperbolic discounting occurs when individuals systematically underweight future
consequences relative to contemporaneous ones, and make choices that gratify now and leave lasting regret,
in patterns that cannot be explained by maximization of consistently discounted present value of
instantaneous utility. If one thinks of the current instance as a reference point in time, then this phenomena
resembles those surrounding the endowment effect, with the future neglected because it is ambiguous and
difficult to anticipate, and lacks saliency. As discussed in Section VI.4, a utilitarian rationalization of
hyperbolic discounting, dating back to Jevons, is that the experience of time is subjective, so that a
ten-minute interval now is subjectively longer than a ten-minute interval a week in the future.


    VII.1.4. A remembered utility effect occurs when memory of a painful or pleasurable episode is
dominated by sensation at the peak and the end of the episode, rather than being determined as an integral of
experienced intensities over the duration of the episode. A related phenomenon in psychology is labeled
the primacy/recency effect. We remember the first and last instances of some significant experience, less
well the intermediate and integrated experience. An implication of these features of recall is extension
neglect – the comparison of two episodes that differ in duration will tend to neglect duration.
    For example, a study by Donald Redelmeier and Kahneman (1996) of experienced pain during
colonoscopies, and recall of the episode, finds that adding pain of reduced intensity at the end of an episode
improves overall recall of the experience; see also Varey and Kahneman (1992), Huber et al (1997).
Kahneman, Wakker, and Sarin (1996) document in a number of experimental settings this phenomenon of
duration neglect and concentration on recent experience, what one might call hyperbolic memory.
    A deeper reason for the phenomena of hyperbolic discounting and remembered utility is given by the
psychologist George Lowenstein (1996) -- it is difficult to recall or anticipate affective or emotional state.
We may remember being in pain, and have a strong aversion to the antecedents of a painful experience, but
we cannot relive the experience itself.      Consequently, we may forget affective history, and fail to
adequately protect ourselves against repeating it. Duration neglect can be recast in a neoclassical model
with subjective time. Whether this is leads to parsimonious, predictive models, or experiments on these
effects can be designed that give results inconsistent with any intertemporal utility model, remains an open
question.




                                                      28
    VII.2. The Sociality of Choice. Man is a social animal, identified with family and kin, and with clubs,
troupes, tribes, ethnicities, and nationalities. This has several consequences for economic choice behavior.
First, individuals may look to their social networks for information. Second, they may look to social
networks for approval, and use accountability to limit choice. Third, they may out of pure self-interest
engage in mutually beneficial reciprocity, simple when the acts are synchronous, involving more complex
elements of reputation and trust when they are not. Pursuing comparative advantage, with division of
labor and trade, is a form of reciprocity. Fourth, they may engage in genetic altruism, making choices that
are in the interest of their progeny rather than themselves as individuals. Fifth, they may exhibit altruistic
behavior that does not obviously serve their personal or genetic self-interest, such as incurring costs to
sanction greedy behavior. There is a large literature in economics about the sociality of consumption, from
Dusenberry on relative consumption and the sensitivity of savings behavior to relative income within a
society and relative insensitivity to its absolute level of income, to conspicuous consumption, fads, and
bandwagon effects. However, while sociality has been recognized as important, the mechanisms of its
operation have been obscure, and it has not led to a simple formalization comparable to that for
conventional demand theory; these questions are explored further in McFadden (2010).


    VII.2.1. One major way sociality may work is simply through transmission of information, learning by
imitation rather than learning by doing. People constantly make interpersonal comparisons, judging the
desirability of options from the apparent satisfaction and advice of others. While personal experience is
the proximate determinant of the utility of familiar objects, and may be extrapolated to similar objects, our
primary sources of information on new objects come from others, through observation, advice, and
association. McFadden & Train (1996) show that in innovation games with uncertain payoffs, it may pay
to wait, and learn by observing rather than learn by doing. Manski (1991) has explored the possibility that
individuals faced with dynamic stochastic decision problems that pose immense computational challenges
may simply look to others to infer valuation functions to be used to judge the future payoff of current acts,
or to infer satisfactory policies. An objection to such copycat behavior is that it fails to take account of the
individual’s idiosyncratic tastes, and correcting this quickly gets the individual back into the computational
difficulties that imitation was intended to circumvent. But if tastes as well as perceptions are modified
socially, the relevance and value of the lessons from others increases.


    VII.2.2. Economic demographer Hans Peter Kohler (2001) has investigated the effect of
word-of-mouth communication from friends on choice of contraceptive. He studies Korean peasant
women, who have access to relatively little public information on efficacy, costs, and side effects of new
                                                      29
contraceptives. Choices within villages show little diversity, but there is substantial, persistent diversity
across villages. This pattern not explained by income, education, or price differences.
    Word of mouth communication from friends was found to be the important explanation of most
women's choices. Lack of inter-village mobility explained multiple equilibria, with persistent inter-village
differences. Thus, some apparent taste heterogeneity is due to the boundedly rational practice of imitation
in balkanized social networks. The moral is that any complete measurement system for consumer
behavior must account for social network effects. Suggestions for measurement are that stated perceptions
and preferences should be conditioned on the behavior of members in an individual's social network, and
the distribution of consumption in social equilibrium should be modeled as the (often non-unique) solution
to a game in which choices of peers matter.


    VII.2.3. In addition to providing information, social networks may discipline the behavior of members
through consensus on social norms, accountability for choices, and sanctions for behavior that violates
norms. The individual gains from affiliation with such networks if imitation and conformity save energy,
if the “expectation that one will be called upon to justify one’s beliefs, feelings, or actions, to others”
improves decision-making, and if approval is itself a source of pleasure. We engage in a great deal of
automatic or intuitive thinking, or one might say semi-conscious or background thinking, in daily decisions.
For example, an experienced driver does not go through a conscious process of deciding to change lanes.
Automatic thinking saves energy, and time. The classical idea of herd mentality is that social animals find
it easier and more comfortable to adhere to a group, accept group roles, and mimic group behavior than to
act independently. Accountability reinforces herd mentality in fixed groups, and promotes safety in
numbers. Individual membership may be voluntary, as in the peloton of tightly packed riders in a bicycle
race, with riders tightly clustered and constrained in order to save energy in preparation for "breakaways".
The lack of well-defined measures for social norms and accountability are a significant barrier to modeling
their influence on utility and on social equilibria, but clearly natural or laboratory experiments in which the
social environment of market behavior is manipulated can be used to test for the effect of social pressures in
various contexts.


    VII.2.4. Reciprocity is a simple form of social interaction, present in economic trade and explained by
self-interest. Reciprocity is simple to establish when it is synchronous, as in bilateral barter. However,
asynchronous reciprocity requires reputation and trust. In the words of Kenneth Arrow, "Trust is an
element in every commercial transaction".


                                                      30
    Norms for fair practice, and sanctions for bad behavior, may evolve in social networks to facilitate
asynchronous reciprocity, and individuals may by habit or internalization conform to these norms even in
novel situations where the normal cycle of approval and reputation is suspended. Consider the single-shot
ultimatum game with anonymous players: Player 1 proposes a division of a prize of 100 units. If Player 2
accepts, the players get the proposed shares; otherwise, they get nothing. It is rational for Player 2 to
accept any positive amount, and thus rational for Player 1 to offer the minimum positive amount. However,
if the probability of acceptance a(s) by player 2 is less than one when the share s offered by player 1 is low,
then player 1's optimal strategy is to maximize a(s)⋅(1-s). Students in a cross-section of developed
countries play similarly, but not rationally. Offers are usually 42 to 50 percent of the prize, and offers less
than 20 percent are rejected about half the time. These results are consistent with behavioral rationality for
the first player if for example a(s) = min(1,2.5⋅min(s,0.2)+6⋅max(s-0.2,0)). Whether stated beliefs of
Player 1 regarding acceptance by Player 2 would be consistent with this a(s), or another function that
rationalizes Player 1 behavior, is an open question.
    VI.2.5. Isolated cultures offer natural experiments for testing the impact of social norms on trust and
reciprocity. Sam Bowles and a team of experimental economists and ethnographers have conducted
anonymous ultimatum game experiments in 15 isolated societies; see Henrich et al (2004), Bowles and
Gintis (2011). Four of these are the Lamalera, a cooperative whale-hunting culture in Indonesia; the Ache,
seasonal foraging bands in Paraguay that have some exposure to markets; the Hadza, hunter-gatherer bands
in Tanzania; and the Machiguenga, horticultural family groups in Peru. The research finds strong cultural
differences, shown in Table 3, with large mean offers among the Lamalera, who have ritualized rules for
cooperation and sharing, and low mean offers among the Machiguenga, who have little experience in
interaction outside the family. Within a culture, lower offers generate more rejections, but willingness to
incur the cost of rejecting an offer differs substantially across cultures. The research concludes that
violation of the selfishness axiom is common across cultures, but with differences that are a product of the
social and economic lives of the subjects. The more integrated and market-oriented the contacts between
individuals, influenced by the technologies available for subsistence, the stronger a norm for "fair play",
and the more willing respondents to punish selfish behavior at a cost to themselves.
    VII.2.6. Genetic Altruism is the phenomenon of self-sacrifice for the good of your family or kinship
group. Genetic altruism appears to explain cooperation in most species, and appears to have a convincing
evolutionary basis. William Hamilton (1964), an icon of sociobiology, wrote


      "The force of evolution favors “selfish” genes, those that promote their own reproduction. Individuals do not
      consistently do things for the good of their group, their family, or even themselves. They consistently do
      things for the good of their genes."
                                                       31
Matt Ridley (1996), in an entertaining account of the evolution of sociality, wrote “None of your ancestors
died celibate.”
    The principles of selection and genetic altruism infuse classical economics. However, despite their
recognized importance, particularly in economic models of the family and of intergenerational transfers,
they were not systematically studied as determinants of economic behavior; see Becker (1976), Koszegi
(2004). The operation of genetic selection in promoting a disposition toward altruism could be very
indirect. Thus, the acquisition of language, the exploitation of comparative advantage, the formation of
successful defenses against marauders and disease, and a disposition to "fair play" that reduces
interpersonal conflict, may all arise from the selective advantage to group traits that promote sociality.
Then altruistic behavior, including gifts to unrelated individuals with no possibility of personal gain, might
be explainable as an indirect consequence of genetic self-interest. If so, the center of the original
utilitiarian concept of relentless pursuit of pleasure could still hold, with group selection leading to the real,
selfish pleasure we get from altruism.
    Paul Samuelson (1994) demonstrated that group selection works if the advantages of altruism are
sufficient to offset a Gresham's law of individual selection, in which altruistic traits are driven out by
antagonistic selfish traits. However, experimental studies of altruistic punishment collected and carefully
interpreted by Ernst Fehr and colleagues (2002, 2005) suggest that evolutionary pressure for group
selection is not consistent enough, and the costs of altruistic punishment in large groups are too high, to
explain the pervasive and distinguishing level of altruism in large human groups. His conclusion is that
human altruism is a mystery that selfish genes and selection cannot fully explain, something about our
wiring that may not fit the notion of utility calibrated to experience pleasure from genetic survival. What is
important for a discussion of the measurement of well-being is to understand that whatever its roots, our
perceptions of the well-being of others do affect our own behavior and well-being, in ways that may be
explained in part by genetic altruism and group selection even if other causes are buried deeper in the
human makeup; see Zamagni (1995).


    VII.3. Sensation and Neuroeconomics.             Brain science offers a new frontier for consumer
measurements, through identification of reward structures and neurotransmitters in the brain, and study of
the impact of choice problems on the brain in the presence of experimental treatments.                      Brain
measurements include maps of energy consumption (fMRI and PET tomography), electrochemistry
(probes, peptides, and radionucleides), and physical intervention (gene manipulation, structural
manipulation in animals, and natural experiments in brain-damaged humans). In tandem with behavior
                                                          32
intervention (manipulation of the choice environment, measurement of response), brain measurements
provide information on the cognitive processing structure, perceptions, and sensations associated with
choice. They fall considerably short of Edgeworth's wistful call for a hedinometer to measure pleasure,
but they provide some functionality and insight into the sensations that economists call utility.
    The early biologists observed that as the human embryo developed, it seemed to go through stages of
evolution, from a simple one-celled creature to its complex final form. That view was superficial, but it
does seem to be the case that human physiology, and in particular, the structure of the brain, is consistent
with a layering of added functionality over a simpler and more primitive core. The aspects of brain
function that we identify with being human – language, the cognitive processes of deduction and induction,
the ability to empathize and interact with others, are primarily sited in frontal lobe of the cerebrum, the outer
layer of the brain whose relative size and complexity in humans differentiate us from most other species.
The more basic limbic system, buried at the base of the cerebrum, is heavily involved in emotion and the
reward pathways that are associated with sensations of pain and pleasure. This system includes the
amygdala, sometimes termed the "switchboard of the brain", which is particularly rich in reward pathways
and is active in animal behavior at a visceral level: approach and avoidance, foraging, territory, and
reproduction.
    The brain is a potent chemical factory, producing peptides that act as neurotransmitters and
neuromodulators that bind to receptors on neurons and act to either excite or inhibit neuron firing. A few
examples of natural peptides and related molecules are Dopamine, a pleasure/reward transmitter and pain
supresser; Epinephrine, a stress or threat transmitter; Bradykinin, a pain transmitter; and Oxytocin, a
regulator of approach-avoidance behavior, promoting "tend and befriend" rather than "fight or flight".
Oxytocin is sometimes called the "trust" or "love" hormone because it plays a primary role in sexual and
maternal bonding.
    Most people think of economic activity as quite cerebral, learned through lengthy education and shaped
by culture. If the brain is the hardware, then the utilitarian calculus might be pictured as software, an
operating system that is stored and run at various, possibly relocatable hardware sites, and modified by
experience and selection. In this view, monitoring the brain can tell you something about the burden the
software places on the hardware, but relatively little about what the software is doing. However, the
picture that is now emerging is that economic behavior, like the brain itself, has layers, and high-level
cognitive activities may appropriate primitive reward pathways to control behavior.                 Working a
spreadsheet to balance a retirement portfolio is indeed a high-level, learned skill. However, economic
trading also seems to involve relatively primitive circuits in the limbic system. An evolutionary tale,
adapted from Ridley (1996) and Barrett and Fiddick (1999) suggests why this may be so.
                                                       33
    A few million years ago, the great apes had established family structures that were successful in the
essentials, obtaining food, protecting themselves from predators, and reproducing. In common with other
animals, they evolved a sense of personal space sufficient to provide some defense against attack, and a
system of trust that allowed them to get close to family members. These spatial, interactive activities had a
physiological basis – neuromodulators and reward pathways in the brain that facilitated these interactions.
Some of these apes discovered that through division of labor, specialization, and trade, they could be more
successful in surviving and reproducing. But trade, particularly outside the family, was iffy business. To
get close enough to a stranger to trade flints for hides, one had to risk being attacked. The apes who were
able to form bonds of trust over larger social groups than the family were the most successful at this. These
interactions were facilitated by adapting the brain’s visceral reward pathways that already functioned in
family units. In addition, these apes developed analytic and communication skills, such as language and
empathetic attribution of sentiment, that allowed them to operate in larger social and economic groups.
These were cerebral activities, and evolution selected the apes with more cerebral capacity.
    Among these apes were our ancestors. They gave us large brains, with the capacity to explore the
corners of our universe, and to engage in sophisticated economic activities. They also gave us an
emotional reward system that processes economic actions in much the same way that it processes personal
interactions: when to trust, when to form personal or professional bonds. Therefore, you should not be
surprised to learn that brain hardware, the limbic system and its reward pathways, are associated with
economic decisions in a substantial and relatively direct way.        In particular, the ventral tegmental
dopamine reward pathway in the amygdala qualifies as the brain's primary center for recording pleasure,
and appears to be active when we are involved in matters of threat, trust, sex, and economic trade.
    Much of the information on the neurological foundations of economic behavior comes from measuring
brain activity through levels of cellular energy consumption, using imaging techniques such as functional
MRI and PET scans.        Used in combination with experimental treatments with electrical probes,
neurotransmitters, and neuromodulators, and experimental presentation of economic decision-making tasks
in games or markets, one has a powerful tool for detecting the links between choice and sensations of
pleasure or pain. Brain-damaged humans and animals allow imaging under conditions under which some
brain pathways are blocked.        However, the linkages from physiological sensation to conscious
interpretation and reasoning may be complex, and physiology may give an incomplete picture, just as
computer hardware monitoring gives an incomplete picture of what software is doing. Nevertheless, it
should be clear than any ability to measure directly in the brain the impact of economic choice tasks on
reward pathways is potentially an immensely powerful tool for linking economic activities and consumer


                                                     34
well-being. I will outline a scattering of results from human and animal studies that provide an intriguing
picture of how sensation is directly influenced by economic tasks.


    VII.3.1.    How do organisms process sensations of pleasure and pain? The answer goes directly to
the question of whether there is a single, absolute physiological scale of well-being, and whether the
organism consciously or unconsciously acts out of self-interest to maximize this quantity; see Berridge
(2003), Bhatt and Camerer (2005). Bozarth (1994), Camerer (2005), Damasio (2005).                First, both
behavioral observation and brain studies indicate that organisms seem to be on a hedonic treadmill, quickly
habituating to homeostasis, and experiencing pleasure from gains and pain from losses relative to the
reference point that homeostasis defines; see Sanfey et al (2003).   People quickly grow to accept the city
in which they are located, their job, their mate, and their health status. They may recognize and complain
about unfavorable absolute states, but their levels of satisfaction by various measures are not nearly as
differentiated as they would have to be if their sensation of well-being was experienced on an absolute
scale. For example, Inglehart (2004) plots country means of self-rated happiness against income. There
are obviously major measurement issues associated with such a study, beginning with the difficulty of
rendering comparable semanic scales in different languages, but the study's conclusion that money does not
buy proportionate happiness is consistent with both the hedonic treadmill and with the proposition that
effects other than market goods enter utility.
    Second, the picture that emerges from brain studies is that the ventral tegmental dopamine pathways in
the limbic/amygdala region play a central role in experiencing pleasure, and also mitigate, with a lag, the
sensation of pain; see Becerra et al (1999), McCabe et al (2001), McClure et al (2004), Rustichini et al
(2003), Dichhaut et al (2005), Camerer (2005), Glimcher et al (2005, 2009).      Adaptation to homeostasis
and differentiation between the pleasure and pain circuits coincide with the powerful endowment and loss
aversion effects, and sensitivity to framing and context, found in behavioral studies, and suggest that these
phenomena are tied fundamentally to brain structure. This is good news and bad news for utilitarians: the
limbic system reward pathways seem to correspond to a utility pump, but specialized brain circuitry
processes experience in ways that are not necessarily consistent with relentless maximization of hedonic
experience.


    VII.3.2.   Ivan Diamond, a neurologist at the University of California, San Francisco who studied
ethanol addiction, found that this and other substance addictions worked primarily by stimulating ventral
tegmental dopamine pathways, although addiction once established has other physiological effects; see
Diamond and Gordon (1997), Appel et al (2004). His laboratory engineered neuromodulators that block
                                                     35
the D2 dopamine receptors in this reward pathway; these may lead to effective therapies for ethanol
addiction. I cite this work because it shows, indirectly, the close relationship between these reward
pathways and economic behavior: Diamond and his colleagues operated an experimental bar in which the
spending rate was observed for alcoholics treated with various blockers; this rate was a very good predictor
for the efficacy of the blocker.


    VII.3.3. David Laibson and colleagues (McClure et al, 2004) have investigated the processing of
intertemporal choices. They find that choices involving delayed gratification are primarily processed in
the frontal system, and those involving immediate gratification are primarily processed in the limbic
system. Thus, eating a candy bar now activates the limbic pleasure center of the brain, deciding to delay
gratification requires thought. Unless these systems work together in harmony, time-inconsistent behavior
results.


    VII.3.4. One of the interesting bits of contemporary biology has been the establishment for a variety of
species of simple direct links from particular genes to the production of and receptors for specific
neurotransmitters, and from this to specific social behavior. Specific genes control the production and
efficacy of the peptide oxytocin in the brain, and this in turn appears to control sexual attraction and
behavior in everything from fruit flies to voles to humans. One may ask why these biological findings
have any relevance to our discipline. The answer is that sexual reproduction requires close interaction
between organisms, and to achieve such interaction requires a suspension of distrust. The oxytocin
peptide appears to have the genetic role of promoting trust and bonding between the sexes. This is relevant
to economics because trade, and more generally interactions in economic games, also involve elements of
trust; see Kosfeld et al (2005), Eisenberger and Lieberman (2004). Thus, in its fundamentals, the
primitives of economic behavior and sexual behavior may be the same neurotransmitters and reward
pathways in the brain – shopping and sex share the same Dopamine reward pathways.
    In a study that strikes at the heart of consumer sovereignty, Ernst Fehr and associates (2005) administer
oxytocin or a placebo to subjects, and then ask them to play the trust game. In this game, an investor is
given 100 MU, and has the option of placing Y MU with an anonymous trustee, who then receives triple
this amount, and then chooses to send Z MU back to the investor. The trustee's game is a dictator game in
which norms of fairness and reputation matter, but the rational response in a single-shot anonymous game is
to return nothing. By backward induction, the investor should send nothing. In fact, both the investment
and the return are usually positive, with the level of investment higher in subjects who are administered the
"trust" peptide oxytocin. However, oxytocin has no effect on play of the dictator sub-game, where trust
                                                     36
does not matter. The conclusion is that economic perceptions and decisions are sensitive to brain
chemistry, and susceptible to chemical manipulation.




VIII. The Future
    What are the challenges and measurement opportunities in the future of research on consumers'
economic behavior and well-being? Even from a neoclassical perspective, the role of experience and
memory on perceptions and preferences, non-linear budget sets, household production, and hedonics
complicate the identification of utility and well-being, but also offer new measurement opportunities,
through the added information contained in choice in nonlinear budget sets, and through natural and
designed experiments that alter household production possibilities. New results challenge the standard
assumption of maximization of individualistic utility, indicating that social networks as information
sources, reciprocity, and altruism enter human behavior and cannot be ignored.               There are new
opportunities to study the sociality of choice through experiments that manipulate the information provided
through social networks, the effect of approval, and, through comparative study of isolated societies, the
role of cultural and social norms. Finally, the striking ties between brain physiology and behavior in
economic decisions, and new methods for measuring and manipulating brain activity, offer the possibility
of powerful experiments in which economic, social, and physiological treatments are employed to identify
and isolate the causal foundations of economic choice behavior. In particular, the "warm glow" attached to
bonding and trust in family and social groups seems to be tied to reward pathways in the limbic system that
we experience as pleasure. It may be this chemistry that has worked with selection to promote social
cognition and empathy in humans, giving them the mental capacity to function as social animals in large
groups, to organize complex and productive economic systems, and to internalize cultural norms for
reciprocity, trust, fairness, and altruism.
    The challenge facing economic consumer theory is to utilize the disparate measurements and
experimental methods that have become available to synthesize a new behavioral science of pleasure that
retains the quantitative, predictive features of neoclassical theory in the economic settings where it works
well, and extends these features into areas of individual sensation of well-being and choice in the context of
social network information and approval, so that the theory can better predict the impact of novel economic
policies on consumer well-being.


                                                     37
38
References

Afriat, S.N. (1967) “The construction of utility functions from expenditure data,” International Economic Review, 8,
    67-77.
Anderson, Simon; A. de Palma; J. Thisse (1992) Discrete choice theory of product differentiation, Cambridge: MIT
    Press.
Antonelli, G. (1886) "Sulla teoria matematica della economia politica," Nella tipografia del Folchetto, Pisa.
Appel, W., M. McBride, M Diana, I Diamond, A Bonci, (2004) “Ethanol Effects on Dopaminergic "Reward"
    Neurons in the Ventral Tegmental Area and the Mesolimbic” Alcoholism: Clinical & Experimental Research,
    2004
Arrow, Kenneth, H. Chenery, B. Minhas, R. Solow (1961) “Capital-Labor Substitution and Economic Efficiency,”
    Review of Economics and Statistics, 43, 225-250.
Arrow, Kenneth (1971) "Exposition of the Theory of Choice Under Uncertainty," Essays on the Theory of
    Rosk-Bearing, New York: Macmillan, Chap. 2.
Attanasio, O.; N. Pavoni (2011) “Risk Sharing in Private Information Models with Asset Accumulation: Explaining
    the Excess Smoothness of Consumption,” Econometrica, 79, 1027-1068.
Auspitz, Rudolph and R. Lieben (1889) Untersuchungen uber die Theorie des Prices, Leipzig: Verlag von Duncker
    & Humblot.
Barrett, Clark, L. Fiddick (1999) “Evolution and Risky Decisions,” Trends in Cognitive Science, 4, 251-252.
Becerra, Limo, Hans C. Breiter, Milan Stojanovic, Scott Fishman, Annabel Edwards, Alison R. Comite,, R. Gilberto
    Gonzalez,, David Borsook (1999) “Human brain activation under controlled thermal stimulation and habituation
    to noxious heat: An fMRI study,” Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 41, 1044 - 1057
Becker, Gary (1976) “Altruism, Egoism, and Genetic Fitness: Economics and Sociobiology,” Journal of Economic
    Literature, 14, 817-826.
Bentham, Jeremy (1789) An introduction to the principles of morals and legislation, reprintd by Oxford: The
    Clarendon press, 1876.
Berridge, Kent (2003) “Pleasures of the Brain,” Brain and Cognition, 52, 105-128.
Berry, Steve; J. Levinsohn; A. Pakes (1995) "Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium," Econometrica. 63, 841-90.
Berry, Steve; J. Levinsohn; A. Pakes (2004) "Differentiated Products Demand Systems from a Combination of Micro
    and Macro Data: The New Car Market," Journal of Political Economy. 112, 68-105.
Berry, Steve; O. Linton; A. Pakes (2004) "Limit Theorems for Estimating the Parameters of Differentiated Product
    Demand Systems," Review of Economic Studies. 71, 613-54.
Bhatt, Meghana, Camerer, Colin F., (2005) "Self-referential Thinking and Equilibrium as States of Mind in Games:
    fMRI Evidence" . Games and Economic Behavior, 52, 424-459.
Blackorby, Charles; E. Diewert (1979) "Expenditure Functions, Local Duality, and Second Order Approximations,"
    Econometrica, 47, 579-601.
Block, H., J. Marschak (1960) "Random Orderings and Stochastic Theories of Response," in I. Olkin (ed)
    Contributions to Probability and Statistics, Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Blundell, Richard; J. Powell (2004) "Endogeneity in Semiparametric Binary Response Models," Review of Economic
    Studies, 71, 655-79.
Blundell, Richard; Browning, Martin; Crawford, Ian (2008) “Best Nonparametric Bounds on Demand Responses,”
     Econometrica 76. 6: 1227-1262.
Blundell, R; Browning, M; Cherchye, L J H; Crawford, I; Rock, B de; Vermeulen, F M P (2012) “Sharp for SARP:
     Nonparametric Bounds on the Behavioural and Welfare Effects of Price Changes,” Tilburg University, Center
     for Economic Research.
Bowles, Sam and H. Gintis (2011) A Cooperative Species: Human Reciprocity and Its Evolution, Princeton
     University Press: Princeton.
Bozarth, Michael (1994) “Pleasure Systems in the Brain,” in D.M. Warburton (ed.), Pleasure: The politics and the
    reality, Wiley.
Bridges, D. (1988) "The Euclidean Distance Construction of Order Homeomorphism," Mathematical Social Sciences,
    15, 179-188.
Browning, Martin (1991) "A Simple Nonadditive Preference Structure for Models of Household Behavior over
    Time," The Journal of Political Economy, 99, 607-637.
Campbell, J.; A. Deaton (1989) “”Why is Consumption So Smooth?” The Review of Economic Studies, 56, 357-74.
                                                        39
Camerer, Colin, R. Thaler (1995) “Anomalies: Ultimatums, Dictators, and Manners,” Journal of Economic
    Perspectives, 9, 209-219.
Camerer, Colin (1999) “Behavioral Economics: Reunifying Psychology and Economics,” PNAS, 96, 10575-77.
Camerer, Colin (2005) “Strategizing in the Brain,” Science, 300.
Carson, Richard, N. Flores, N. Meade (2001) “Contingent Valuation: Controversies and Evidence,”, Environmental
    and Resource Economics, 19, 173-210.
Chipman, John; J. Moore (1980) "Compensating Variation, Consumer's Surplus, and Welfare," American Economic
    Review. 70: 933-49
Chipman, John; J. Moore (1990) "Acceptable Indicators of Welfare Change, Consumer's Surplus Analysis, and the
    Gorman Polar Form," in D. McFadden, M. Richter (eds) Preferences, uncertainty, and optimality: Essays in
    honor of Leonid Hurwicz. Boulder and Oxford: Westview Press; 68-120
Christensen, Laurits; D. Jorgenson,; L. Lau (1975) "Transcendental Logarithmic Utility Functions," American
    Economic Review. 65: 367-83
Conniffe, Denis (2007) “A Note on Generating Globally Regular Indirect Utility Functions,” B.E. Journal of
    Theoretical Economics, 7.1, 1-11.
Court, Andrew (1939) "Hedonic Price Indexes with Automobile Examples," in General Motors Corp. The Dynamics
    of Automobile Demand, New York: General Motors Corp., pp. 99-117.
Dagsvik, J.; S. Strom, Z. Zia (2005) "Utility of Income as a Random Function: Behavioral Characterization and
    Empirical Evidence," Statistics Norway, Working Paper.
Damasio, Antonio (2005) “Brain Trust,” Nature, 435.
Deaton, Angus; J. Muellbauer (1980a) "An Almost Ideal Demand System," American-Economic-Review. 70, 312-26
Deaton, Angus, John Muellbauer (1980b) Economics and Consumer Behavior, Cambridge Univ. Press.
Debreu, Gerard (1959) Theory of Value, New Haven : Yale University Press.
Debreu, Gerard (1974) “Excess Demand Functions,” Journal of Mathematical Economics, 1, 15-24.
Debreu, Gerard (1986) "Topological Methods in Cardinal Utility Theory," Mathematical economics: Twenty papers
    of Gerard Debreu, Econometric Society Monograph. Cambridge; New York and Melbourne: Cambridge
    University Press,
Diamond, Ivan, A. Gordon (1997) “Cellular and molecular neuroscience of alcoholism,” Physiological Review, 77.
Diamond, P.; Hausman, J. {1994) "Contingent Valuation: Is Some Number Better than No Number?" Journal of
    Economic Perspectives; 8, 45-64.
Dickhaut, John, K. McKabe, J. Nagode, A. Rustichini, K. Smith, J. Pardo (2005) “The Impact of Certainty Context on
    the Process of Choice,” University of Minnesota working paper.
Diewert, Erwin (1971) "An Application of the Shephard Duality Theorem, a Generalized Leontief Production
    Function," Journal of Political Economy, 79, 481-507.
Diewert, Irwin (1974) “Applications of duality theory,” in M. Intriligator and D. Kendrick (eds) Frontiers of
          Quantitative Economics, II, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 106-71.
Diewert, Irwin (1982) “Duality approaches to microeconomic theory,” in K.J. Arrow and M.D. Intriligator (eds)
          Handbook of Mathematical Economics, II, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 535-99
Domemcich, Thomas, D. McFadden (1975) Urban Travel Demand: A Behavioral Analysis, North Holland:
    Amsterdam.
Dubin, Jeffrey,, D. McFadden (1984) "An Econometric Analysis of Residential Electric Appliance Holdings and
    Consumption," Econometrica, 52, 345-62
Dupuit, Jules (1844) "On the Measurement of the Utility of Public Works", Annales des ponts et chaussées. (English
    translation, International Economic Review, 1952).
Edgeworth, Francis Y. (1881) Mathematical Psychics; an essay on the application of mathematics to the moral
    sciences,, London, C. K. Paul & co.
Edgeworth, Francis Y. (1894) “Distance in Time as an Element of Value,” Palgrave’s Dictionary of Political
    Economy. Republished in P. Newman, F. Y. Edgeworth's Mathematical Psychics and Further papers on
    Political Economy, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003.
Eisenberger, Naomi, M. Lieberman (2004) “Why rejection hurts: a common neural alarm system for physical and
    social pain,” Trends in Cognitive Science, 8, 294-300.
Ekeland, Ivar (2010) “Existence, Uniqueness, and Efficiency of Equilibrium in Hedonic Markets with
    Multidimensional Types,” Economic Theory, 42, 275-315.
Fisher, Irving (1892) Mathematical Investigations in the Theory of Value and Prices, Yale.
                                                       40
Fisher, Irving (1908) "Are Savings Income?" American Economic Association Quarterly, 3rd Series, 9, 21-47.
Fisher, Irving (1918) "Is 'utility' the Most Suitable Form for the Concept it is Used to Denote?" American Economic
     Review, 8, 335-337.
Fisher, Irving (1927) "A Statistical Method for Measuring Marginal Utility and Testing for the Justice of a Progressive
     Income Tax," in J. Hollander (ed) Economic Essays in Honor of John Bates Clark, New York Macmillan.
Fisher, Irving (1930) The theory of interest as determined by impatience to spend income and opportunity to invest it,
     New York, The Macmillan Company.
Fehr, Ernst, S. Gachter (2002) “Altruistic Punishment in Humans,” Nature 415, 137-140.
Fehr, Ernst, U. Fischbacher (2002) “Why Social Preferences Matter – The Impact of Non-selfish Motives on
     Competition, Cooperation, and Incentives,” The Economic Journal, 112, 1-33.
Fehr, Ernst, U. Fischbacher, M. Kosfeld (2005) “Neuroeconomic Foundations of Trust and Social Preferences,”
     American Economic Review, 95, 346-351.
Fenchel, W. (1953) Convex Cones, Sets, and Functions: Lecture Notes, Princeton University mimeograph.
Fosgerau, Mogens, D. McFadden (2012) “A theory of the perturbed consumer with general budgets,” working paper.
Frey, Bruno and A. Stutzer (2002a) “The Economics of Happiness,” World Economics, 1-17.
Frey, Bruno and A. Stutzer (2002b) Happiness and Economics, Princeton University Press.
Frisch, Ragnar (1926) "Sur un Probleme of Economie Pure," Norsk Matematisk Forenings SSkrifter, 16, 1-40;
     Translation in J. Chipman, L. Hurwicz, M. Richter, and H. Sonnenschein (eds) Preferences, Utility, and Demand,
     New York: Harcourt.
Frisch, Ragnar (1932) New Methods of Measuring Marginal Utility, Tubingen, Mohr.
Fuss, Mel, D. McFadden (1978) Production Economics: A Dual Approach to Theory and Applications, North
     Holland: Amsterdam.
Gilovich, Thomas, D. Griffin, D. Kahneman (2002) Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment,
     Cambridge.
Glimcher, Paul, M. Dorris, H. Bayer (2005) “Physiological utility theory and the neuroeconomics of choice,” Games
     and Economic Behavior, 52, 213-256.
Glimcher, Paul, E. Fehr, C. Camerer, R. Poldrack, eds. (2009) Neuroeconomics: Decision Making and the Brain,
     Academic Press: New York.
Georgescu-Roegen, Nicholas. 1936. “The Pure Theory of Consumer’s Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 50.4: 545-93.
Gorman, W. (1953) “Community Preference Fields,” Econometrica, 21, 63-80.
Gorman, W. (1961) “On a Class of Preference Fields,” Metroeconomica, 13, 53-56.
Gossen, Hermann (1854) Die Entwicktlung, English translation: The Laws of Human Relations, Cambridge: MIT
     Press, 1983.
Green, Paul, D. Carroll, P. Greem, S. Goldberg (1981) “A general approach to product design optimization via
     conjoint analysis,” Journal of Marketing, 45, 17-37.
Green, Paul ,A. Krieger, Y. Wind (2001) “Thirty Years of Conjoint Analysis: Reflections and Prospects,” Interfaces
     31, S56-S73.
Green, Donald, K. Jacowitz,, D. Kahneman, D. McFadden (1998) "Referendum Contingent Valuation, Anchoring,
     and Willingness to Pay for Public Goods," Resource and Energy Economics, 20, 85- 116.
Griliches, Zvi., I. Adelman (1961) “On an Index of Quality Change,” Journal of the American Statistical Association,
     56, 535-548.
Hall, R. E. (1978), “Stochastic Implications of the Permanent Income Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence," Journal of
          Political Economy, 96: 971-987.
Hamilton, William (1964). "The genetical evolution of social behaviour". Journal of Theoretical Biology 7: 1–52.
Hammond, Peter (1994) "Money Metric Measures of Individual and Social Welfare Allowing for Environmental
     Externalities," in W. Eichhorn (ed) Models and Measurement of Welfare and Inequality, Springer-Verlag,
     694-724.
Hastie, Reid, R. Dawes (2001) Rational Choice in an Uncertain World, Sage.
Hausman, Jerry (1985) "The Econometrics of Nonlinear Budget Sets," Econometrica, 53, 1255-82
Heckman James J, Rosa Matzkin and Lars Nesheim (2010), “Nonparametric Identification and estimation of
     nonadditive hedonic models,” Econometrica, 78, 1569-91.
Henrich, Joseph, R. Boyd, S. Bowles, C. Camerer, E. Fehr, H. Gintis (2004) Foundations of Human Sociality, Oxford
     University Press.
Hicks, John (1939) Value and Capital, Oxford, Clarendon press.
                                                           41
Horowitz, Joel; N. Savin (2001) “Binary Response Models: Logits, Probits and Semiparametrics,”Journal of
     Economic Perspectives. 15, 43-56
Horowitz, Joel (1992) “A Smoothed Maximum Score Estimator for the Binary Response Model,” Econometrica, 60,
     505-31
Hotelling, Harold (1935) “Demand Functions with Limited Budgets,” Econometrica, 3, 66-78.
Houthakker, Hendrik (1950) "Revealed Preference and the Utility Function," Economica, 17, 159-174.
Huang, Ju Chin; D. Nychka (2000) “A Nonparametric Multiple Choice Method within the Random Utility
     Framework,” Journal of Econometrics. 97, 207-25
Huber, Joel, J. Lynch, K. Corfman, J. Feldman, M. Holbrook, D. Lehman, B. Munier, D. Schkade, I. Simonson (1997)
     “Thinking about values in prospect and retrospect: maximizing experienced utility,” Marketing Letters, 8,
     323-334.
Hurwicz, Leonid, H. Uzawa (1971) "On the Integrability of Demand Functions," in J. Chipman, L. Hurwicz, M.
     Richter, and H. Sonnenschein (eds) Preferences, Utility, and Demand, New York: Harcourt, 114-148.
Ichimura, Hidehiko; L. F. Lee (1991) “Semiparametric Least Squares Estimation of Multiple Index Models: Single
     Equation Estimation,” in W. Barnett, J. Powell,, G. Tauchen, (eds). Nonparametric and semiparametric methods
     in econometrics and statistics: Proceedings of the Fifth International Symposium in Economic Theory and
     Econometrics. Cambridge; Cambridge University Press; 3-49
Ichimura, Hidehiko; T. S. Thompson (1998) “Maximum Likelihood Estimation of a Binary Choice Model with
     Random Coefficients of Unknown Distribution,” Journal of Econometrics. 86: 269-95.
Inglehart, Ronald (2004) European and World Value Surveys Integrated Data File, 1999-2002, Ann Arbor: Institute
     for Social Research, University of Michigan.
Jevons, William (1871) Theory of Political Economy, reprinted by London, Macmillan, 1931.
Johansson-Stenman, H. Svedsater (2003) “Self-Image and Choice Experiments: Hypothetical and Actual Willingness
     to Pay,” working paper, Goteborg University.
Johnson, Richard (1974) “Trade-off analysis of consumer values,” Journal of Marketing Research, 11, 121-127.
Jorgenson, Dale; L. Lau,; T. Stoker (1980) "Welfare Comparison under Exact Aggregation," American Economic
     Review, 70: 268-72
Jorgenson, Dale; L. Lau; T. Stoker (1997) "The Transcendental Logarithmic Model of Aggregate Consumer
     Behavior," in D. Jorgenson (ed) Welfare. 1. Aggregate consumer behavior. Cambridge and London: MIT Press;
     203-356. Previously published: 1982.
Kahneman, D.; Knetsch, J.; Thaler, R. (1990) "Experimental Tests of the Endowment Effect and the Coase
     Theorem," Journal of Political Economy 98, 1325-1348.
Kahneman, D.; Knetsch, J.; Thaler, R. (1991) "The Endowment Effect, Loss aversion, and Status Quo bias," Journal
     of Economic Perspectives 5, 193-206.
Kahneman, Daniel, P. Wakker, R. Sarin (1997) “Back to Bentham? Explorations of Experienced Utility,” The
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 375-405.
Kahneman, Daniel, E. Diener, N. Schwartz (1999) Well-Being: The Foundations of Hedonic Psychology, Sage.
Katzner, Donald (1970) Static Demand Theory, New York: Macmillan.
King, Gary, C. Murray, J. Salomon, A. Tandon (2004) “Enhancing the Validity and Cross-Cultural Comparability of
     Measurement in Survey Research,” American Political Science Review, 98, 191-207.
Knetsch, Jack (1989) “The Endowment Effect and Evidence of Nonreversible Indifference Curves,” American
     Economic Review, 79, 1277-1284.
Kohler, Hans-Peter (2001) Fertility and Social Interactions, Oxford University Press.
Kosfield, Michael, M. Heinrichs, Paul Zak, U. Fischbacher, E. Fehr (2005) “Oxytocin increases trust in humans,”
     Nature, 435.
Koszegi, Botond (2004) “Ego Utility, Overconfidence, and Task Choice,” Journal of the European Economics
     Association, 4, 673-707.
Lancaster, Kevin (1966) “A New Approach to Consumer Theory,” Journal of Political Economy, 132-157.
Langer, Thomas, M. Weber (2001) “Prospect Theory, Mental Accounting, and Differences in Aggregated and
     Segregated Evaluation of Lottery Portfolios,” Management Science 47, 716-733.
Lewbel, Arthur (1992) "Aggregation with Log-Linear Models," Review of Economic Studies, 59: 635-42.
List, John (2004) "Neoclassical Theory versus Prospect Theory: Evidence from the Marketplace," Econometrica, 72,
     615-25


                                                       42
Lowenstein, George (1996) “Out of Control: Visceral Influences on Behavior,” Organizational Behavior and Human
    Decision Processes, 65, 272-292.
Lowenstein, George, D. Read, R. Baumeister (2003) Time and Decision: Economic and Psychological Perspectives
    on Intertemporal Choice, Sage.
Lucas, Robert (1975) "An Equilibrium Model of the Business Cycle," The Journal of Political Economy. 83,
    1113-1144.
Luce, Duncan, John Tukey (1964) “Simultaneous conjoint measurement: A new type of fundamental measurement,”
    Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1, 1-27.
Luce, R., P. Supes (1965) "Preference, Utility, and Subjective Probability," in R. Luce, R. Bosh, and F. Galanter (eds)
    Handbook of Mathematical Psychology, 3, New York: Wiley.
Malinvaud, E. (1953) "Capital Accumulation and Efficient Allocation of Resources," Econometrica, 21, 233-268.
Manski, Charles (1991) “Nonparametric estimation of expectations in the analysis of discrete choice under
    uncertainty,” in W. Barnett, J. Powell, and G. Tauchen (eds) Nonparametric Methods in Econometrics and
    Statistics, Cambridge University Press, 259-275.
Manski, Charles (1993) “Dynamic Choice in Social Settings: Learnings from the Experiences of Others,” Journal of
    Econometrics. 58: 121-36.
Manski, Charles (2004) “Measuring Expectations,” Econometrica, 72, 1329-1376.
Marschak, J. (1960) "Binary Choice Constraints on Random Utility Indicators," in K. Arrow (ed) Stanford Symposium
    on Mathematical Methods in the Social Sciences, Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Marshall, Alfred (1895) Principles of economics, London ; New York : Macmillan.
Mas-Colell, Andreu; M. Whinston, and J. Green (1995) Microeconomic Theory, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mas-Colell, Andreu (1996) “A model of equilibrium with differentiated commodities,” in G. Debreu (ed) General
    Equilibrium Theory, 2, Elgar: Cheltenham, 462-494.
Matzkin, Rosa (1992) “Nonparametric and Distribution-Free Estimation of the Binary Threshold Crossing and the
    Binary Choice Models,” Econometrica, 60, 239-70
Matzkin, Rosa (1993) “Nonparametric Identification and Estimation of Polychotomous Choice Models,” Journal of
    Econometrics, 58, 137-68.
Matzkin, Rosa (2005) “Identification of consumers’ preferences when their choices are unobservable,” Economic
    Theory, 26, 423-444.
Matzkin, Rosa (2008) “Identification in Nonarametric Simultaneous Equations Models,” Econometrica, 76, 945-978.
Matzkin, Rosa (2012) “Identification in Nonparametric Limited Dependent Variable Models with Simultaneity and
    Unobserved Heterogeneity,” Journal of Econometrics, 166, 106-115.
Matzkin, Rosa and D. McFadden (2011) “Trembling Payoff Market Games,” working paper.
McCabe, Kevin, Daniel Houser, Lee Ryan, Vernon Smith, and Theodore Trouard (2001) "A functional imaging study
    of cooperation in two-person reciprocal exchange," PNAS, 98, 11832-5.
McClure, S. M., D. Laibson, G. Lowenstein, J. Cohen (2004) “Separate neural systems value immediate and delayed
    monetary rewards,” Science, 306.
McFadden, Daniel (1966) “Cost, Revenue, and Profit Functions,” Univ. of California lecture notes.
McFadden, Daniel (1974a) “Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior,” in P. Zarembka (ed)
    Frontiers of Econometrics, Academic Press: New York, 105-142.
McFadden, Daniel (1974b) “The Measurement of Urban Travel Demand,” Journal of Public Economics, 3, 303-328.
McFadden, Daniel (1974c) "On Some Facets of Betting," in M.S. Balch, D. McFadden, and S.Y. Wu (eds.), Essays on
    Economic Behavior under Uncertainty, North-Holland: Amsterdam, 126-137.
McFadden, Daniel, R. Mantel, A. Mas-Colell, and M.K. Richter (1974) “A Characterization of Community Excess
    Demand Functions," Journal of Economic Theory, 9, 361-374.
McFadden, Daniel (1986) “The Choice Theory Approach to Market Research,” Marketing Science, 275-297.
McFadden, Daniel (1990) "Stochastic Rationality and Revealed Stochastic Preference," with M.K. Richter, in J.
    Chipman, D. McFadden, and M.K. Richter (eds.), Preferences, Uncertainty, and Optimality: Essays in Honor of
    Leo Hurwicz, Westview Press: Boulder, CO, 161-186.
McFadden, Daniel (1994) "Contingent valuation and social choice," American Journal of Agricultural Economics 76,
    689-708.
McFadden, Daniel, K. Train (1996) "Consumers' Evaluation of New Products: Learning from Self and Others,"
    Journal of Political Economy, 104, 683-703.
McFadden, Daniel (1999a) "Rationality for Economists?" Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 19, 73-105.
                                                          43
McFadden, Daniel (1999b) "Computing Willingness-to-Pay in Random Utility Models," in J. Moore, R. Riezman, and
    J. Melvin (eds.), Trade, Theory, and Econometrics: Essays in Honour of John S. Chipman, Routledge: London.
McFadden, Daniel, K. Train (2000) "Mixed MNL Models for Discrete Response," Journal of Applied Econometrics,
    15, 447-470.
McFadden, Daniel (2005) “Revealed Stochastic Preference: A Synthesis,” Economic Theory, 26, 245-264.
McFadden, D. (2006) “Free Markets and Fetered Consumers,” American Economic Review, 96, 5-29.
McFaden, Daniel (2008) “Environmental Valuation of Environmental Projects,” Univ. of California working paper.
McFadden, Daniel (2010) “Sociality, Rationality, and the Ecology of Choice,” in Stephane Hess and Andrew Daly
    (eds) Choice Modelling: The State-of-the-Art and the State-of-Practice, Emerald: Bingley.
McFadden, Daniel (2012) “Economic Juries and Public Project Provision,” Journal of Econometrics, 166, 116-126.
McKenzie, Lionel (1957) "Demand Theory Without a Utility Index," The Review of Economic Studies, 24, 185-189 .
Mellers, Barbara (2000) “Choice and the Relative Pleasure of Consequences,” Psychological Bulletin, 126, 910-974.
Morikawa, Takashi; M. Ben-Akiva; D. McFadden (2002) "Discrete Choice Models Incorporating Revealed
    Preferences and Psychometric Data," in P. Franses and A. Montgomery (eds) Econometric models in marketing.
    Amsterdam; London and New York: Elsevier Science,; 29-55
Moscati, Ivan (2007) “Early Experiments in Consumer Demand Theory: 1930-1970,” History of Political Economy,
    39, 359-401.
Muth, John (1992) "Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price Movements," in K. Hoover, ed. The new classical
    macroeconomics. Vol. 1. Elgar, 3-23. Previously published: 1961.
Muth, John (1994) "Optimal Properties of Exponentially Weighted Forecasts," in A. Harvey, ed. Time series. Vol. 1..
    Elgar. 121-28. Previously published: 1960.
Muth, Richard (1998) "Household Production and Consumer Demand Functions," in K. Lancaster,-ed. Consumer
    theory. Elgar, 302-11. Previously published: 1966.
Myagkov, Mikhail; C. Plott (1997)" Exchange Economies and Loss Exposure: Experiments Exploring Prospect
    Theory and Competitive Equilibria in Market Environments," American Economic Review. 87, 801-28
Newman, Peter (2003) F.Y. Edgeworth: Mathematical Psychics and further papers on political economy, Oxford.
Ohta, Makoto (1971) Hedonic price index for boiler and turbo-generator: a cost function approach. Ph.D. Thesis,
    University of California, Berkeley.
Ohta, Makoto, Z. Griliches (1986) “Automobile Prices and Quality: Did Gasoline Pric Increases Change Consumer
    Tastes in the U.S.?” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 4, 187-198.
Okubo, Masakatsu (2008) "Intertemporal Substitution and Nonhomothetic Preferences," Economic Letters, 98, 41-47.
Pagan, Adrian; A. Ullah (1999): Nonparametric econometrics, Cambridge; Cambridge University Press.
Pareto, Vilfredo (1906) Manual of Political Economy, English Translation, Augustus M. Kelley, NY, 1971.
Peleg, B. (1970) “Utility functions for partially ordered topological spaces,” Econometrica, 38, 93-96.
Pollack, Robert (1970) "Habit Formation and Dynamic Demand Function," Econometrica, 41, 867-887.
Rabin, Matthew (1998) “Psychology and Economics,” Journal of Economic Literature, 36, 11-46.
Rader, Trout (1973) “Nice demand functions,” Econometrica, 41, 913-935.
Redelmeier, Donald, D. Kahneman (1996) “Patent’s memories of painful medical treatments: real-time and
    retrospective evaluations of two minimally invasive procedures,” Pain, 66, 3-8.
Richter, Marcel K. (1966) “Revealed Preference Theory,” Econometrica, 34, 635-645.
Rosen, Sherwin (1974) "Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in Perfect Competition,"
    Journal of Political Economy, 82, 34-55.
Rustichini, A., J. Dickhaut, P. Ghirardato, K. Smith, J. Pardo (2003) “A Brain Imaging Study of the Choice Process,”
    working paper, University of Minnesota.
Ridley, Matt (1996) The Origins of Virtue, Penguin.
Rosen, Sherwin (1974) "Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in Pure Competition," Journal
    of Political Economy, 82, 34-55.
Rossi, Peter (1979). Vignette analysis: Uncovering the normative structure of complex judgements. In R. K. Merton &
    J. S. Coleman & P. H. Rossi (Eds.), Qualitative and quantitative social research: Papers in honor of Paul
    Lazarsfeld (pp. 175-188). New York: Macmillan.
Roy, Rene (1942) Elements d'econometrie. Presses universitaires de France, 1970.
Sanfey, Alan G., James K. Rilling, Jessica A. Aronson, Leigh E. Nystrom, Jonathan D. Cohen, (2003) The Neural
    Basis of Economic Decision-Making in the Ultimatum Game,” Science, 300, 1755-1758 .
Samuelson, Paul (1947) Foundations of economic analysis, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1983.
                                                        44
Samuelson, Paul (1948) “Consumption theory in terms of revealed preference,” Economica, 15, 243-253.
Samuelson, Paul (1950) “The problem of integrability in utility theory,” Economica, 17, 355-385.
Samuelson, Paul (1993) “Altruism as a problem involving group versus individual selection in economics and
    biology,” American Economic Review, 83, 143-148.
Savage, L. J. (1954) The Foundations of Statistics, New York, Wiley.
Shephard, Ron (1953) Cost and production functions. Princeton, Princeton University Press,
Signorini, D., M. Jones (2004) “Kernel Estimators for Univariate Binary Regression,” Journal of the American
    Statistical Association; 99,: 119-26
Slutsky, Eugen (1915) "Sulla teoria del bilancio del consummatore", Giornale degli Economisti. English translation,
    "On the Theory of the Budget of the Consumer," in G. Stigler and K. Boulding, eds, Readings in Price Theory,
    Homewood: Irving.
Smith, Adam (1753) The Theory of Moral Sentiments, Oxford University Press, 1984.
Smith, Adam (1776) An inquiry into the nature and causes of the wealth of nations. London, W. Strahan and T. Cadell.
Stone, Richard (1954) “Linear Expenditure Systems and Demand Analysis,” Economic Journal, 64, 511-527.
Sundaresan, Suresh (1989) "Intertemporally Dependent Preferences and the Volatility of Consumption and Wealth,"
    Review of Financial Studies, 2, 75-89.
Taussig, F/ (1912) Principles of Economics, New York: Macmillan.
Taylor, Lester (2005) “Estimation of Theoretically Plausible Demand Functions from U. S. Consumer Expenditure
    Survey Data,” working paper, University of Arizona.
Thurstone, L.L. (1931) “The indifference function,” Journal of Social Psychology, 2, 139-167.
Toubia, Olivier, D. Simester, J. Hauser, E. Dahan (2003) “Fast Polyhedral Adaptive Conjoint Estimation,” Marketing
    Science, 22, 273-303.
Train, Kenneth, C. Winston (207) “Vehicle Choice Behavior and the Declining Market Share of U.S. Automakers,”
    International Economic Review, 48, 1469-1498.
Urban, Glen. L., John. R. Hauser, and John. H. Roberts (1990), "Prelaunch Forecasting of New Automobiles: Models
    and Implementation," Management Science, Vol. 36, No. 4, (April), 401-421.
Urban, Glen L., John R. Hauser, William J. Qualls, Bruce D. Weinberg, Jonathan D. Bohlmann and Roberta A. Chicos
    (1997), "Validation and Lessons from the Field: Applications of Information Acceleration," Journal of Marketing
    Research, 34, 1, (February), 143-153.
Uzawa, Hirofumi (1971) "Preference and Rational Choice in the Theory of Consumption," in J. Chipman, L. Hurwicz,
    M. Richter, and H. Sonnenschein (eds) Preferences, Utility, and Demand, New York: Harcourt, 7-28.
Van Praag, Bernard, A. Kapteyn (1994) “How Sensible is the Leyden Individual Welfare Function of Income? A
    Reply ” International Economic Review, 38, 1817-1825.
Varey, Carol, & D. Kahneman (1992). “Experiences extended across time: Evaluation of moments and episodes,”
         Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 5, 169-186.
Varian, Hal (1982) "The Nonparametric Approach to Demand Analysis," Econometrica, 50: 945-73.
Varian, Hal (1992) Microeconomic Analysis, New York: Norton.
Varian, Hal (2006) Revealed Preference. New York: Oxford University Press.
Von Neumann, John; O. Morgenstern (1953) Theory of games and economic behavior, Princeton, Princeton
    University Press
Wallis W. Allen, and Milton Friedman (1942) “The Empirical Derivation of Indifference Functions,” in O. Lange and others (eds)
         Studies in Mathematical Economics and Econometrics, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 175-89.
Willig, Robert (1976) "Consumer's Surplus without Apology," American-Economic-Review. 66: 589-97.
Yatchew, Adonis (1998) "Nonparametric Regression Techniques in Economics," Journal of Economic Literature, 36,
    669-721.
Yatchew, Adonis (2003) Semiparametric regression for the applied econometrician, Cambridge, UK ; New York :
    Cambridge University Press.
Yoon, Kiho (2001) “The Modified Vickery Double Auction,” Journal of Economic Theory, 101, 572-584.
Zamagni, Stefano (1995) The Economics of Altruism, Elgar.




                                                             45
                The New Science of Pleasure – Figures and Tables



              Figure 1. Dupuit’s Inverse Problem


Bridge Toll




                        Demand = Marginal Utility




      Area = Utility
      Difference




                                                      Trips




                                      45
                   Figure 2. The Extended Neoclassical Model



Experience                           Information


                                                          Statistical Information
 Memory                        Perceptions/Beliefs        Processing (rational
                                                          expectations)



             Budget Constraint
             (linear or nonlinear)                   Process                Choice


             Household Production                    Utility maximization
                                                     (static or dynamic)


                       Preferences


                      Memory-dependent
                      utility of outcomes




                                            46
                             Figure 3. The Behavioral Choice Model



        Experience                           Information


                                                                       Stated Perceptions
            Memory                     Perceptions/Beliefs




                     Budget Constraint
                     (linear or nonlinear)                   Process               Choice
  Affect
(emotion)
                     Household Production



                               Preferences
                                                              Stated Preferences
                              Memory-dependent
  Motivation                  utility of outcomes




                                                    47
                                           Figure 4. Bids in the Pencil Experiment

                           150
                           140        Bid Price of Buyers
                           130
                           120
                           110                                          Asking Price of Sellers
                           100
Price of Pencils (cents)




                            90
                            80
                            70
                            60
                            50
                            40
                            30
                            20
                            10
                             0
                                 0   10    20    30     40       50    60    70    80     90      100


                                                             Pencils




                                                                48
                           Table 1. Price and Total Expenditure Elasticities

            Almost Ideal Demand System, 1995 CES‐ACCRA Surveys, from Lester Taylor (2005)

                 food       shelter      utilities         trans    health      misc        total exp

 food           ‐0.2981     0.6644       0.0599           ‐0.0013   0.1400     ‐0.5044       0.4469

shelter         ‐0.1105     ‐0.8285      0.1909           0.1902    0.2782     ‐0.5777       0.8876

utilities       ‐0.1071     0.1638       ‐0.7222          0.0523    ‐0.0669    0.1783        0.4612

 trans          ‐0.6134     ‐0.2520      ‐0.2471          ‐1.3739   ‐0.7627    1.5824        1.7250

health          ‐0.7813     0.0023       0.4260           ‐0.0129   ‐0.9375    0.8318        0.6338

 misc           0.4395      ‐0.2179      ‐0.2267          ‐0.0154   0.0470     ‐1.1448       1.2150




                                                     49
                                  Table 2. COGNITIVE ANOMALIES

        EFFECT                                             DESCRIPTION

COMPREHENSION
Completion/Substitution   Missing or ambiguous parts of question are reconstructed
Disjunction               Failure to reason through or accept the logical consequences of choices
Engagement/Awareness      Limited attention to and engagement in the cognitive task
Format/Mode               Availability influenced by format, visual or auditory presentation
Construal                 Question interpreted as one the subject is able (or prefers) to answer
Translation               Question terminology translated into subject’s personal vocabulary

RETRIEVAL OF FACTUAL AND AFFECTIVE MEMORY
Affective attenuation     Affective memories are recalled with diminished intensity
Availability              Memory reconstruction is tilted toward the most available and salient
                          information
Primacy/Recency           Initial and recent experiences are the most available
Reconstructed Memory      Imperfect memories rebuilt using contemporary cues and context, historical
                          exemplars, commonly employed search criteria
Selective Memory          Coincidences are more available than non‐coincidences
Telescoping/Temporal      Compression and attenuation of history, inconsistent time discounting

JUDGMENT AND THE FORMATION OF PERCEPTIONS AND BELIEFS
Anchoring                 Judgments are influenced by quantitative cues contained in the decision task
Context/Framing           History and framing of the decision task influence perception and motivation
Endowment                 No action is the “safe” choice. “The devil you know is better than the devil
                          you don’t”
Extension                 Representative rates are more available than integrated experience
Prominence/Order          The format or order of decision tasks influences the weight given to different
                          aspects
Prospect                  Inconsistent probability calculus, asymmetry in gains and losses
Regression                Attribution of causal structure to fluctuations; failure to anticipate regression
                          to mean
Representativeness        Frequency neglect in exemplars

TASK DEFINITION, AND THE DECISION AND REPORTING PROCESSES
Awareness                Recognition of choices, subjective definition of choice set
Construal/Constructive Cognitive task misconstrued, preferences constructed endogenously
Prevarication/Projection Misrepresentation for real or perceived strategic advantage or to project
                         self‐image
Suspicion/Superstition   Subjects mistrust offers and question motives of others in unfamiliar
                         situations, avoid choices that “tempt fate”
Rule‐Driven              Choice guided by principles, analogies, and exemplars rather than utilitarian
                         calculus; rules induce pro forma, focal responses




                                                   50
                        Table 3. ULTIMATUM GAME OUTCOMES

                        Society                  Mean Offer   Rejection Rate

Lamalera (communal hunting village)                 57%            NC

Ache (seasonal foraging band)                       48%           0.0%

Hazda (foraging band)                               40%           19.2%

Machiguenga (subsistence farming families)          26%           4.8%




                                        51
