                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         EXPLAINING AFRICA'S (DIS)ADVANTAGE

                                           Ann E. Harrison
                                           Justin Yifu Lin
                                            L. Colin Xu

                                        Working Paper 18683
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18683


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2013




This paper previously circulated as "Africa's (Dis)advantage: the Curse of Party Monopoly." We are
grateful for very useful comments, discussions, help, and criticism from Yaw Ansu, Jing Cai, Hinh
Dinh, Weili Ding, Luosha Du, Li Gan, Philip Keefer, Steve Lehrer, Dimitris Mavridis, Howard Pack,
Vincent Palmade and Jean-Philippe Platteau. Three referees’ and Magaret McMillan’s constructive
comments have significantly improved the quality of this paper. Helen Yang offered superb research
assistance. This study has been financed by the Japanese PHRD TF096317, the Dutch BNPP TF 097170,
along with the Africa Region of the World Bank. The views expressed here are the authors’ own and
do not reflect those of the World Bank, its executive directors, its member countries, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Ann E. Harrison, Justin Yifu Lin, and L. Colin Xu. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Explaining Africa's (Dis)advantage
Ann E. Harrison, Justin Yifu Lin, and L. Colin Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 18683
January 2013, February 2013
JEL No. O14,O4,O43

                                           ABSTRACT

Africa’s economic performance has been widely viewed with pessimism. In this paper, we use firm-level
data for around 80 countries to examine formal firm performance. Without controls, manufacturing
African firms perform significantly worse than firms in other regions. They have lower productivity
levels and growth rates, export less, and have lower investment rates. Once we control for geography,
political competition and the business environment, formal African firms lead in productivity levels
and growth. Africa’s conditional advantage is higher in low-tech than in high-tech manufacturing,
and exists in manufacturing but not in services. The key factors explaining Africa’s disadvantage at
the firm level are lack of infrastructure, access to finance, and political competition.


Ann E. Harrison                                   L. Colin Xu
The Wharton School                                MC 3-420, World Bank
University of Pennsylvania                        1818 H Street, N.W.
2016 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall                 Washington, DC 20433
3620 Locust Walk                                  lxu1@worldbank.org
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6370
and NBER
annh@wharton.upenn.edu

Justin Yifu Lin
Peking University
China Center for Economic Research
justinlin@ccer.pku.edu.cn
I.       Introduction

         In the 1960s, Africa’s economic growth was similar to South Asia (Collier and Gunning

1999a). However, between 1970 and 2000, the average GDP per capita growth rate was only 0.5

percent per annum, and sub-Saharan Africa is now the poorest continent.2 In the decade before

the recent financial crisis, however, the continent experienced a resurgence in growth. Growth in

GDP for the continent averaged 5.9 percent annually (World Economic Forum 2009). Is this

trend sustainable? How can Africa keep growing? What are the key policies that facilitate

Africa’s economic performance?

         This paper sheds light on these questions using micro data. We use recent surveys of the

World Bank’s Enterprise Survey for more than 80 countries. We combine these surveys with

other cross-country datasets on politics, macro policies, geography and the business environment,

to study the determinants of performance of formal manufacturing firms. Our goal is to explore

the key factors behind Africa’s disadvantage, if any, relative to other regions.3 We focus in

particular on African firm performance relative to firms in countries from other continents with

GDP per capita below 3000 U.S. dollars. We look at a comprehensive set of firm performance

outcomes, including static efficiency, dynamic efficiency, export shares, and investment rates.

         Our paper adds to the literature explaining Africa’s economic performance (see Collier

and Gunning 1999a, 1999b; Bigsten and Soderbom 2006). There are many previous studies

examining one aspect of firm performance (such as investment rates, sales growth, exports, or

productivity), often using one or several African countries’ firm-level data. However, there is no


2
  The numbers are based on World Development Indicators of the World Bank.
3
  In the rest of this paper, we use SSA and Africa interchangeably. Africa does not include the North Africa region
in this paper. It is important to keep in mind that all firms in the World Bank Enterprise Survey that we use consist
of formal firms. In a few African countries, informal firms were also surveyed, but the number of countries is too
small to merit a full scale cross-country firm-level study.

                                                                                                                        2
study, as far as we know, that examines all these key determinants of African development at the

firm level, with both large African and non-African firm samples. We aim to be comprehensive

in including potential explanatory variables: firm characteristics, geography, infrastructure,

access to finance, political and institutional factors, and (other) aspects of the business

environment (including labor flexibility, corruption, international competition, domestic

competition, and crime). 4 In light of the limited financial and administrative capacity of

reformers and policy makers—capacity that is especially constrained in Africa—it is important

to identify the key constraints to growth (Hausman et al. 2005).

           Our broad focus on firm performance thus differentiates our paper from the existing

studies of African firms, which tend to focus on a single outcome at a time and miss important

aspects of how African firms behave and perform. Without controls, we find that formal African

manufacturing firms have significant disadvantages across all performance measures, including

productivity, labor productivity growth, sales growth, investment rates and export intensity. Yet

if we control for infrastructure, access to finance, the political and business environment, African

firms lead in productivity levels and growth rates. We interpret the positive premium for African

firms, after controlling for the political and business environment, as suggesting that there is no

inherent African disadvantage. Taken at face value, if one could adjust observable policy or

environmental factors, African firms possess an intrinsic advantage. For export intensity and

investment rates, the Africa dummy is insignificant. Whatever makes African firms lag behind

can thus be explained by observable differences in a few key elements of the environment.

           We then break down the differences between African and other manufacturing firms to

identify which factors explain constraints on performance. Infrastructure and access to finance


4
    See Xu 2011 for a survey of this growing literature.

                                                                                                  3
prove to be of paramount importance in explaining Africa’s disadvantage relative to similar

income countries. Party monopoly also plays an important role.        The longer a single political

party remains in power, the lower are firm productivity and sales growth rates. In contrast, many

elements thought to be important for explaining African performance are found to matter less:

geography, crime, domestic and international competition do not matter as much.

       This paper also adds to the literature on the effects of the (broadly-defined) business

environment. We obtain several novel findings. First, modern telecommunications development

is of critical importance. Second, even relative to formal finance, trade credit plays an especially

important role in developing countries. Third, political monopoly is negatively associated with

productivity growth rates and firm expansion.            Finally, different policies have distinct

implications for structural change. Telecom development, for instance, is structure-neutral: it

helps manufacturing and services about equally and facilitates both low- and high-tech

manufacturing. In contrast, development of banking helps services more than manufacturing,

and corruptions hurts services more than manufacturing. Some tariff protection helps high tech

manufacturing but not low-tech manufacturing.        Party monopoly hurts manufacturing much

more than services.

       In each of the survey countries of the World Bank Enterprise Survey (WBES) included in

this paper, firms of all sizes and ownership are covered for both manufacturing and services.

The survey questions are broad, including detailed quantitative measures which allow us to infer

firm performance such as labor productivity levels and growth rates, TFP, sales growth,

investment rates and export intensity.     Moreover, the survey asks detailed questions, both

subjective and objective, on the political, institutional, and business environment that a firm

faces, such as infrastructure issues, regulatory burdens, corruption, crime, and access to finance.


                                                                                                  4
To produce comprehensive measures of the business environment, we supplement the WBES

data with cross-country data on the political and business environment: telecommunications,

infrastructure quality, the incidence of domestic conflicts, and political competition.

           We address the potential endogeneity of the business environment in several ways.5 First,

we mainly rely on objective measures of the business environment. Subjective answers may be

based on firms’ performance directly, and may be determined by country-specific factors such as

exposure to the media and development history. Second, we do not directly use firms’ answers

on the business environment. Instead, we rely on city-industry-size averages of firm answers to

gauge the local business environment. This local measure is less subject to the reverse causality

issue associated with firm-level answers, and may provide a better proxy for the actual business

environment. Finally, to check for possible omitted variables, we control for additional local and

country-level determinants of firm outcomes, and show that our key results remain robust.

However, with observational data, it remains true that endogeneity issues—especially in the

context of a horse race between various alternative explanations—can never be ignored. This is

especially true when many conventional instruments proposed for a particular variable (such as

institutions) are often correlated with other channels in the residual of the performance equation

(Bazzi and Clemens 2010; Morck and Yeung 2011). We thus resort to as many robustness

checks as possible, and offer a coherent story to tie various findings together (Rosenbaum 2010).

We offer a menu of facts and explanations, and we invite readers to offer alternative explanations

for what we find here.




5
    See also Dollar et al. 2006, Aterido et al. forthcoming; Xu 2011

                                                                                                  5
II.      Data and Measurement

         The main data sources for this paper are the World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys (WBES) in

around 80 countries. The WBES data are collected by the World Bank to benchmark the

investment climate in developing countries across the world and to understand the determinants

of firm performance and behavior. In each country the survey was based on the universe of

eligible firms obtained from the country’s statistical office with stratified random sampling with

replacement, and the result is a representative sample of the non-agricultural private economy in

the country.6 Stratification was based on three criteria: the sector of activity, firm size, and

geographic location.7

         For each country in the sample, we use the most recent survey available. Consequently,

this paper focuses on explaining cross-country differences in firm performance, but by

controlling for industry effects we will focus on differences within specific industries. With our

primary focus on the manufacturing sector, we will mainly use the manufacturing sample of

around 12000 firms. The number of countries in sub-Saharan Africa is 32 (see the Appendix for

the list of the SSA countries).8 Typically the stratified sampling yields 100 to 1000 firms per

country.

         The WBES includes questions on various aspects of the business environment, including

infrastructure, regulation burdens, corruption, and access to finance. The availability of these

indicators about the business environment allows us to simultaneously control for various aspects

of the business environment. The survey has both objective and subjective measures of the

6
  Thus wholly state-owned firms are not in the sample.
7
  See Ayyagari, Demirguc-Kunt, and Maksimovic (2011) for more detailed description of the WBES.
8
  In the data set, Ghana is included but we exclude it because we suspect the quality of the data is too poor—for
instance, its labor productivity is almost always 400 log points higher. We note that the data period for Ghana, 2007,
was around the period that Ghana experienced currency rebasing. We thank Margaret McMillan for pointing this
out.

                                                                                                                   6
business environment. In general we rely on objective measures to avoid endogeneity of firm

responses. We avoid using the so-called subjective measures, which record a firm’s perceived

obstacles to doing business. Only for questions related to crime do we use the subjective

measures due to its importance in less developed countries and the lack of alternative data

sources.

         For indicators of the business environment from WBES, we do not directly use individual

answers because we believe they are endogenous. We thus use the local average of the business

environment as a proxy for the local business environment (Dollar et al. 2005; Hallward-

Dreimeier et al. 2006; Aterido et al. forthcoming; Xu 2011). In particular, we opt to rely on a

city-industry-size cell as the basic unit for measuring the local business environment.                            In

computing the mean for a firm, the observation for the firm itself is excluded to avoid

endogeneity. The business environment has been shown to differ vastly across regions (Almeida

and Carneiro 2009; Hallward-Driemeier and Pritchett 2010; Xu 2011) so we allow for a city-

specific dimension.        The literature also suggests that firms of various sizes face different

business environments. In particular, small firms are particularly vulnerable to expropriation

(Beck et al. 2005; Cull and Xu 2005), so we allow the business environment to differ by size. To

implement the empirical strategy, we define a firm to be small (large) if the firm has fewer (more)

number of employees than the median-sized firm of the city-industry cell.9

         We also rely on cross-country data to capture important elements of the business and

political environment that the Enterprise Surveys do not measure, including elements such as

geography, infrastructure, the political and institutional environment, and macroeconomic

policies. Aiming to be comprehensive, we combine measures of the business environment from

9
 When the city-industry-size cell has fewer than 5 observations, we replace the cell mean with the city-industry
mean as a proxy of the local business environment.

                                                                                                                   7
WBES with other measures of the political, institutional and business environment at the country

level. We describe below how we measure our key variables.

         Infrastructure. Two related measures capture the extent of modern communication

infrastructure: telephone density (from WDI indicators), and the local (i.e., city-industry-size)

share of firms using websites for their businesses (based on WBES). Since telephone density

and local web intensity are closely correlated, and they both measure the use of modern

telecommunication, we rely on factor analysis to obtain their principal factor, and call it

Telecom.10

         Geography has been suggested as an important reason for Africa’s lack of development

(Collier and Gunning 1999; Sachs and Warner 1997). In particular, Africa has more landlocked

countries, which heightens the need for coordination with neighboring countries. Given the

significantly higher trade costs associated with borders, being landlocked necessarily impedes

international trade.       Another somewhat subtle aspect of geography for Africa is its small

population in general. The low fertility of land and other aspects of geography imply that

African countries tend to have sparsely populated land. To capture the geographic elements

above, we thus rely on (1) a dummy variable for whether a country is landlocked and (2)

domestic market size, as proxied by country population. We also explore in robustness tests the

importance of natural resource endowments, such as the share of land in tropical areas.

         Political and institutional factors.                This category includes three political and

institutional factors that might influence firm performance. The first is ethnic fractionalization, a

key feature that affects many formal and informal institutions in Africa (Easterly and Levine

10
  One omission in our measure of infrastructure is the lack of road network data. While the WDI has data on paved
roads, the data are very unreliable. For instance, India is said to have longer road network than China, a possibility
that is instantly dismissed for anyone who has travelled to both countries. The WDI road data simply do not capture
the quality of roads well. In contrast, the measures we adopt here make more sense in our judgment.

                                                                                                                     8
1997). Ethnic fractionalization has been suggested as an important explanation for poor African

performance (see Collier and Gunning (1999) and Easterly and Levine (1997)).

         The second component is basic property rights protection. Cross-country evidence

suggests that countries with worse property rights have lower aggregate investments, worse

access to finance, and slower economic growth (North 1990; Knack and Keefer 1995; Acemoglu,

Johnson and Robinson 2001). Acemoglu and Johnson (2005) find evidence that property rights

institutions (i.e., those related to government expropriation) tend to be more important than

contracting institutions (e.g., those safeguarding private transactions). Some new firm-level

evidence also points to the importance of property rights (Johnson, McMillan and Woodruff

2002; Cull and Xu 2005) and the adverse effects of corruption. Potential mechanisms for the

property rights effects include better external finance (Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic 1998),

better asset allocation (Claessens and Laeven 2003), and a higher share of large formal firms

(Demirguc-Kunt et al. 2006). To capture the protection of property rights, we rely on political

competition, in particular, the number of years that the ruling party has been in power from the

Data of Political Institutions (DPI, based on Beck et al. 2001 and Keefer 2007). Our reasoning is

that the longer a ruling party has been in power, the more absolute power the ruling party has,

and the higher the risk of unconstrained government expropriation. 11                           There are clearly

alternative explanation for this party monopoly variable. For instance, a ruling party with


11
  This intuition seems to capture the reality of most developing countries well. However, some argue that several
East-Asian countries also have low political competition as measured by this variable but seem to have performed
well in the past several decades. Gehlbach and Keefer (2010a, 2010b) suggests that this may be due to much better
ruling party institutionalization in East Asian countries relative to other countries. Institutionalized ruling parties
facilitate development in autocratic countries for two main reasons. First, they tend to have broad party bases so that
the party represents broad rather than narrow constituent interest. Second, there are institutionalized rules about
removing incompetent or shirking party-leading rulers. Thus the party can credibly commit to remove bad leaders,
and leaders as a result work hard and perform well. As Acemoglu and Johnson (2012) argue, an effective state
machinery, that is, a bureaucracy that is effective and competent and has centralized power to tax and implement
infrastructure investment, can bring about growth by itself, and the question is whether such growth are sustainable
due to the lack of incentives for innovations.

                                                                                                                     9
monopoly power may behave like “stationary bandits” in contrast to “roving bandits”, and

therefore internalize the benefits of providing a good business environment and property rights

protection so that the party has a sustained economic payoff over the long run (Olsen 2000).

This stationary bandit interpretation of party monopoly thus implies a positive effect on

economic performance rather than the negative effect predicted by the expropriation-risk

interpretation.     We shall thus allow the empirical results to distinguish between these two

opposite interpretations.

         In later sensitivity checks, we also include alternative measures of protection of property

rights, including voice and accountability, executive competition, and government size. While

the first two measures are clearly related to the protection of property rights of citizens from

government expropriation, the size of government captures the de facto power of government,

and could be viewed as de facto protection of property rights.12

         The third component of political and institutional factors is whether a country

experienced any armed domestic conflicts in the previous ten years. This variable is related to the

political structure of a country (Acemoglu and Robinson 2012). In countries with no strong

centralized power, armed conflicts may develop as challengers attempt to grab power from

incumbents by violence. To capture basic domestic safety, we use a dummy variable on whether

domestic armed conflicts occurred in the past 10 years, based on Gleditsch et al. (2002) and

updates of UCDP/PRIO (2010).

         Business environment. The first element of business environment that we measure is

the extent of corruption. We use the WBES measure of corruption which is the local average of


12
  There are alternative interpretations for government size, but here we just mean to use it as a sensitivity check, and
the key conclusions do not hinge on our classification.

                                                                                                                     10
bribes to the government normalized by firm sales. This is directly comparable across countries,

and avoids some of the flaws of subjective perceptions of corruption. Previous research has

shown that firms in developing countries (such as Uganda and China) are hurt more by

corruption than by taxation (Fisman and Svensson 2007; Cai, Fang and Xu 2011). Since we

have very few measures of crime across countries, we use one subjective measure from the

dataset: firms were asked the extent to which they view crime as an obstacle to their expansion.

We thus construct a variable called Obstacle_crime, which is the local share of firms that view

crime as a moderate or major constraint.13

         The second element of the business environment that we measure is labor market

flexibility. Some recent studies suggest that stringent labor regulations can have serious adverse

effects (Xu 2011). For instance, cumbersome labor regulations are associated with smaller firm

size, more informality and higher unemployment in India and Brazil (Amin 2009a, Almeida and

Carneiro 2009; Li, Mengistae and Xu 2011). Minimum wages in Indonesia were found to have

large negative effects on employment (Harrison and Scorse 2010). Labor market flexibility is

proxied by an index of the difficulty of firing workers at the county level (Firing Difficulty

hereafter) (Botero et al. 2004).         Firing Difficulty is an index measuring the cost of firing 20

percent of a standardized firm’s workers (10% are fired for redundancy and 10% without cause).

The cost of firing a worker is calculated as the sum of severance pay and any mandatory

penalties established by law or mandatory collective agreements for a worker with three years of

tenure with the firm.

         The third element of the business environment captures product market competition.

Given the multifaceted nature of product market competition, we employ several measures to

13
  The data set also has the share of sales lost due to theft and vandalism during transportation. For manageability
of table length, we do not include this variable in our list of explanatory variables.

                                                                                                                  11
capture this. The first is the country-industry-year import tariff, a high level of which means

lower international competition for domestic producers. Related, a larger presence of foreign

firms also represents stronger competition (see Aitken and Harrison 1999). Foreign firms in

developing countries tend to be more productive, as shown later in this paper. The third measure

captures domestic country-industry level competition (“Competition_ind”), as measured by (1 –

markupCI). MarkupCI is the country-industry average of firm-level markup (i.e., (value added –

labor costs)/sales). A higher value of Competition_ind implies more competition (Aghion et al.

2005).     Fourth, in sensitivity checks, we also include a subjective measure of informal

competition as well as the effect of entry barriers, proxied by the minimum capital required (%

of income per capita) for starting a business (from Doing Business data set). A higher ratio

implies higher entry barriers and less competition.

         Access to finance. There is a large literature on the linkages between access to finance

and economic development (see Levine 1997). While most of this literature focuses on access to

formal finance such as bank loans and overdraft facilities, there is a growing literature that

examines the impact of access to informal finance (Cull and Xu 2005). Following this literature,

we include access to both formal and informal finance, and investigate whether they have

different effects on firm performance. Access to formal finance is measured as the city-industry-

size share of firms with access to overdraft facilities, as in Dollar et al. (2005). Access to

informal finance is measured as the city-industry-size share of firms that grant trade credit (to

other firms).14




14
  We have also tried using the local share of firms receiving trade credit. These two variables are, not surprisingly,
very closely correlated. This fact, coupled with the fact that the latter measure has significantly fewer observations,
leads us to use the former trade credit measure in our empirical analysis.

                                                                                                                     12
III.    How does Africa stack up against other countries?

        To examine African manufacturing performance, we include both static and dynamic

measures of performance.             We compare both total factor productivity (TFP) and labor

productivity (in logs). Labor productivity is measured as sales (in constant 2005 U.S. dollars)

divided by the number of employees. TFP is derived from estimating an industry-specific

production function and measured as the residual from such a production function.15

        To see Africa’s dynamic momentum, we also examine African firms’ labor productivity

growth, sales growth and investment rates. TFP levels (measured across countries) may not fully

capture differences in productive efficiency since they may be affected by differences in

markups and prices (Foster et al. 2008). The advantage of using growth in labor productivity is

that we can filter out the component of markup ratios and price differentials if they are relatively

stable over a short time period. Moreover, growth in labor productivity perhaps better captures

the gains from improvements in efficiency over time, including those originating from

technological and organizational efficiency, and increasing competition.16

        For both labor productivity and sales growth, we use growth during a three-year period

since we only have data going back for three years at the firm level. Following Davis and

Haltiwanger (1995), we compute sales growth rates as (sales this year – sales three years


15
   We later also allow for industry-income-level-specific technology, proceeding as follows. We classify all
countries into 4 categories of income levels based on the quartiles of GDP per capita. We allow for income-
category-industry specific coefficients for capital and labor for the value added production function. We also
include income-category-industry dummies to capture common income-category-industry productivity.
      Capital is measured as replacement value of capital stock. This is the only feasible measure of capital we can
obtain from the data. It is perhaps useful to point out that our TFP measure is likely less reliable than the other
performance measures. To measure capital reliably in any country is a daunting task, and to measure it consistently
and reliably in 89 countries with differences in accounting systems and survey implementation is even more
challenging. The questionnaire designs tend to be the same across countries, but there are minor differences across
countries and regions.
16
   While an even better measure would be the growth rate of TFP, the data set only asks sales and employment in the
survey year and three years earlier, so that multiple observations of TFP cannot be computed.

                                                                                                                 13
ago)/average; labor productivity growth is constructed similarly. To measure the exposure of

African firms to global markets, we also compare firm-level export intensity, defined as the share

of exports in total sales.

           Since our primary focus is to shed light on what determines the performance of non-rich

African countries, we exclude from our SSA sample the richest four countries: South Africa,

Botswana, Mauritius and Namibia, which have GDP per capita higher than 3000 US dollars (in

2005 value). The countries in our new African sample consist of all SSA sample countries that

have GDP per capita lower than 3000 U.S. dollars (in 2005 value) at the time of each country’s

survey.17 However, later in the paper we also report the results when including the four richest

African countries.

           Evaluating African economic performance necessarily entails comparing Africa with

other countries. We thus construct two comparison groups for Africa. The first, the average

comparison group, consists of countries in non-SSA countries with per capita GDP lower than

3000 U.S. dollars (in 2005 value). The second, the better comparison group, consists of the top

half countries of the average comparison group in terms of performance. We measure country

performance in the following way. We first standardize each of the six performance measures so

that each now has a mean of zero and a standard deviation of 1. We then add up the six

standardized measures to form an aggregate performance measure. Countries whose mean

aggregate performance ranks in the top half of the average comparison group are defined to be

members of the better comparison group.




17
     As mentioned in an earlier footnote, we also exclude Ghana.

                                                                                               14
Mean Differences across African and non-African firms

       African manufacturing firms are 4 to 5 years younger than the two comparison groups

(see Table 2). They have slightly lower state ownership but significantly higher foreign

ownership, by 6 (4) percentage points relative to the average (better) comparison group. They

show higher ownership concentration, with the largest owner claiming 82 percent of firm

ownership, higher than the average (better) comparison group by 8 (11) percentage points.

African manufacturing firms are much smaller, with the log number of employees lower than the

average (better) comparison groups by 72 (104) log points.

       Geography in Africa is characterized by a higher tendency to be landlocked and a smaller

domestic market. Africa is slightly more likely to be landlocked than the average comparison

group (but this difference is statistically insignificant), but significantly more likely to be

landlocked than the better comparison group (28 versus 8 percent). African countries also have

smaller populations, with the population of the average country lower by 67 (146) log points than

those in the average (better) comparison group. Furthermore, African countries (excluding the

top four richest countries) still have much lower average GDP per capita at $497, about 1000

dollars lower than both comparison groups.

       Africa displays stronger political monopoly—the logarithm of the number of years that

the ruling party in an African country has been in power is greater by 51 (25) log points than the

average (better) comparison group. In addition, African firms have to confront violence and

crime to a greater extent. In terms of the incidence of major or minor domestic conflicts in the

previous 10 years, Africa has a higher tendency than the average comparison group (56 versus 41

percent).   Surprisingly, the better-performing group actually has a similar past history of

domestic conflicts. Relatedly, Africa exhibits the highest level of ethnic diversity. The ethnic

                                                                                               15
fractionalization (or diversity) in Africa, at 0.72, is much higher than the average (better)

comparison group by 0.32 (0.37).

         Infrastructure in Africa is significantly worse, an outcome expected in light of its low

income level. The telecom index is much lower in Africa than the two comparison groups. The

overall business environment clearly is worse in Africa than both comparison groups. To begin

with, African firms have to pay higher bribes to get things done.18 African firms’ average share

of bribes to the government as a share of sales at 2.9 percent, is significantly higher than the

average comparison group by 1.4 percentage points, and higher than the better comparison group

by 1.8 percentage points. The subjective perception of crime as a moderate or severe obstacle is

higher for Africa. Africa also exhibits lower labor flexibility, with higher firing costs. African

firms also face less competition, both domestically and internationally. The average industry-

level tariff rate in Africa, for instance, is about 50% higher than both comparison groups. The

country-industry level index of competition is also significantly lower in Africa than in both

comparison groups.

         African firms also have worse access to finance, both formal and informal. The local

average share of firms with overdraft facilities is 23 percent, 22 (13) percentage points lower

than the average (better) comparison group.19 Equally important, African firms also have less

access to trade credit: the local share of firms granting trade credit is 27 percent, which is 27




18
   This is very similar to the fact that firms in the poorer regions in China tend to spend more on entertainment costs
(for government officials) in China (Cai et al. 2011).
19
   Note that the better comparison group actually has lower access to formal finance than the average comparison
group, suggesting that access to formal finance is perhaps not crucial for firm performance for countries at low
income levels.

                                                                                                                     16
percentage points lower than the average comparison group, and 30 percentage points lower than

the better comparison group.20

        To summarize, African firms face a more daunting business environment in almost all

respects. They operate in poorer, smaller economies that are more likely to be landlocked and

they have inherited a history of armed conflict. Infrastructure is much poorer, access to both

trade credit and other forms of credit is lower, and regulatory barriers in the form of labor market

regulations and other types of regulations are higher. Political monopoly is more significant,

tariffs are higher, and the payment of bribes is also higher. Only the firm characteristics in our

sample play a positive role, as the African firms in the sample are on average younger, and more

likely to have foreign equity participation.




Differences in (unconditional) firm performance

        In this section, we report our comparison of the unconditional means for different

measures of firm performance, including labor productivity, total factor productivity (TFP), sales

growth, exports and investment. Later in the paper, we will report the “conditional” performance

for African firms, after controlling for observable characteristics of the environment. Given the

much more difficult environment faced by African firms as described above, we would expect

poorer performance on the part of African firms in the unconditional means.

        For the average comparison group, Africa manufacturing firms have significantly worse

outcomes for five out of our six performance measures. Log labor productivity in Africa is

lower by 48 log points (statistically significant). Labor productivity growth is lower by 8.6

20
   Note the rank order of trade credit prevalence corresponds to the order of firm performance, which suggests that
trade credit may play an important role in explaining regional economic performance, a conjecture confirmed later.

                                                                                                                  17
percentage points, and TFP is lower by 33 log points. Sales growth is similar. Export share is

lower by 8.8 percentage points (statistically significant), with African firms exporting at only

half the level of exports for the average comparison group. Qualitatively consistent with a

number of previous studies (Bisten et al. 1999, Gimah-Brempong and Traynor 1999, Devarajan

et al. 1999),21 investment intensity in Africa is lower by 3.6 percentage points (14 versus 17.6

percent).

        The difference with the better comparison group is more pronounced.                            The labor

productivity lag is at 77 log points, and the TFP lag is 53 log points. While the sales growth

difference remains insignificant, the labor productivity growth lag is 9.9 percentage points. The

export share is significantly lower by 13.3 percentage points, and the investment rate is

significantly lower by 9.3 percentage points. To summarize, relative to similar-income countries

and the better comparison group, growth and productivity levels of formal manufacturing firms

in African countries are across the board significantly behind (except in sales growth), and

African firms exhibit much lower export capacity and investment levels.

Determinants of firm performance (conditional differences)

        We now investigate how the business environment affects firm performance, and explore

how African firms compare when we control for the external environment. The empirical

specification is as follows:




                                                                                                                (1)



21
   There is inconclusive evidence about whether investment in Africa is efficient. Devarajan et al. (1999) argue for
inefficiency based largely on cross-country data, while Gunning and Mengistae (2001) argue for efficiency based on
firm-level African data.

                                                                                                                 18
where Y is the firm performance indicator, and i, c, and j represent firm, country, and local

levels. Y could be log labor productivity (or TFP), the labor productivity growth rate, the rate of

sales growth, export intensity, or the investment rate.22 Firm is a set of basic firm-level controls

including firm age, state and foreign ownership, and the ownership share of the largest owner.

For the sales (labor productivity) growth rate equation we control for initial sales (labor

productivity) three years ago to allow for regression toward the mean. Geography includes log

country population and a dummy equal to one for landlocked countries. Infrastructure includes

the telecom index (measured at the local, that is, the city-industry-size, level).                        PoliInst

represents the category of political and institutional factors, and includes log party years, any

conflict in the past ten years, and ethnic fractionalization.                   BusiEnvi indicates business

environment consisting of firm-level foreign ownership, average country-industry foreign

ownership, firing difficulty, the local average bribe, country-industry tariff levels, country-

industry competition index, and the average perceived level of crime at the local level. Finance

includes the local share of firms having access to an overdraft facility, and the local average for

access to trade credit. We also include industry dummies, so that comparisons are between firms

within the same sectors across countries. The error term captures unobserved variables and

measurement errors.23 Since the error terms within a country may be correlated due to omitted

common factors or shocks, and many of our explanatory variables are aggregate variables, we

22
   Log labor productivity is trimmed of tail one percent to avoid the outlier issue. Results are similar without
trimming.
23
   Since we have many control variables, and the coverage of both the Enterprise Survey and cross-country sources
differ for some countries, dropping the observations with any variable missing would result in the loss of the
majority of the sample, and render our empirical exercises mush less representative. For variables with significant
number of missing observations, we thus resort to imputation, using the predicted value based on the following basic
controls: the country-level urbanization level, the regional dummies (Africa, East Asia and Pacific, East Europe and
Central Asia, South Asia, Middle East and North Africa), the manufacturing dummy, and firm size dummies (10-20,
20-60, and 60+ employees). Why do we use the manufacturing dummy in imputation when our analysis largely
focuses on the manufacturing subsample? While we largely use the manufacturing subsample for most of analysis,
we do use the service subsample in some sensitivity checks.


                                                                                                                 19
cluster the standard errors of each equation at the country level (Moulton 1990). We also report

White standard errors to allow for heteroskedasticity.

         The base results from equation (1) are reported in Table 4. Once we control for firm

characteristics and the business environment, the coefficient on the Africa dummy is positive and

large for TFP (38 log points), labor productivity (76 log points), labor productivity growth (12

percentage points), and sales growth (12 percentage points). Thus conditional on our key

variables, Africa does not lag behind in productivity and growth—in fact it is ahead of other

regions. Taken at face value, if one could adjust the daunting list of geography, infrastructure,

political, economic and institutional factors to the levels elsewhere, Africa possesses an inherent

advantage.24 For export intensity and investment rates, the Africa dummy switches from negative

and significant to merely insignificant. Whatever makes African firms lag behind can thus be

fully explained by our control variables.

         Firm characteristics matter a great deal in explaining firm performance. First, younger

firms tend to have lower labor productivity but not TFP. The positive correlation between age

and labor productivity is consistent with the conjecture that entrants learn in the initial years

(SleuWaegen and Goedhuys 2002). Younger firms also have lower labor productivity growth

rates but higher investment rates. Second, and maybe surprisingly, state ownership is positively

and significantly associated with labor productivity, labor productivity growth, sales growth, and

export share in value added. This is surprising in light of the large literature that suggests that

private ownership is superior in delivering firm performance (see Megginson and Netter (2001)

for a summary). But other evidence suggests that state owned enterprises could outperform


24
  In this paper we do not have a measure of the extent of clustering. Previous literature suggests that clustering may
be important for explaining firm performance (see Long and Zhang 2011).


                                                                                                                   20
private enterprises when there is sufficient competition (Bartel and Harrison (2005)) or no strong

monitoring mechanism associated with dispersed private ownership (Xu, Zhu and Lin 2005).25

Also, state ownership is not significantly associated with higher TFP, which could indicate that

labor productivity levels and growth rates are associated with higher capital investments on the

part of the state. Finally, a large ownership share of the largest owner is negatively related to

labor productivity, labor productivity growth, sales growth, and export share.

         Geography and Infrastructure. Both measures of geography are mostly uncorrelated with

firm growth or productivity levels. A larger country (in terms of population) is associated with

lower export intensity, consistent with the interpretation that large domestic markets as captured

by population size typically have smaller export shares.

         The telecom index, our proxy of infrastructure, is positively and significantly associated

with all measures of productivity, labor productivity and sales growth, and export intensity.

Modern telecom infrastructure thus emerges as an important force behind enabling better firm

performance, both in level and in growth.26

         Political and institutional factors. The number of years that the ruling party has been in

power is negatively associated with TFP and labor productivity levels, but is statistically

insignificant. In contrast, this proxy for party monopoly is significantly correlated with labor

productivity and sales growth rates. The findings here are the opposite of the “stationary bandits”


25
   Alternatively, the positive state effects could reflect selection bias—the state keeps the best assets for themselves,
or such firms maintain more monopoly power in the market.
26
   One may wonder whether the results of telecom are due to the high correlation between telecom development and
GDP per capita. Indeed, their correlation is high at 0.81. To assuage this concern, we control for income per capita
in a sensitivity check (not reported). Our key results remain intact. Conditional African advantages become even
larger: for TFP, 0.50; log labor productivity, 0.89; sales growth, 0.13; labor productivity growth, 0.14. The
magnitudes of telecom are slightly smaller in most cases but remain highly significant: for TFP, 0.30 (vs. 0.48 in
base specification); log labor productivity, 0.59 (vs. 0.78), sales growth, 0.10 (vs. 0.12); labor productivity growth,
0.11 (vs. 0.13); export share, 0.06 (vs. 0.03); investment rate, 0.07 (and significant at 1 percent level vs. 0.01 and
insignificant). Note that the telecom effects on export and investment become even more pronounced.

                                                                                                                      21
hypothesis which suggests that a long time horizon for rulers leads to better economic outcomes.

Similarly, countries that experienced domestic conflicts in the previous ten years tend to have

lower productivity and both growth rates, but the effects are statistically insignificant.

       Ethnic fractionalization has been suggested to have important adverse effects on macro

outcomes (Easterly and Levine 1997; Collier and Gunning 1999a).                However, our micro

evidence does not bear this out. Indeed, ethnic fractionalization is robustly and positively

correlated with labor productivity levels and growth. We cannot, of course, rule out the

possibility that ethnic fractionalization has adverse effects through its indirect effects on other

variables such as party monopoly, and that ethnic fractionalization adversely affect macro

outcomes through the non-firm channels such as the provision of public goods.

       Business environment. The local share of bribe payments in sales is negatively related to

sales growth. This result is consistent with other studies in developing countries. The effect of

crime, largely negative for most outcomes, is negative and significant only for export share. One

of the key components of managerial discretion, firing costs, is associated with higher TFP and

labor productivity, which likely reflects the fact that managers hire fewer workers and substitute

them with capital when firing costs are higher. Firing costs are also associated with lower sales

growth, which may reflect firms’ lower willingness to expand when it is difficult to reduce the

number of workers if necessary.

       Foreign ownership has positive and significant effects on all outcomes except for the

investment rate. This can reflect a number of mechanisms such as better access to finance and/or

technological and managerial know-how. Foreign presence in an industry, as proxied by the

share of foreign ownership within a country-industry cell, reduces investment rates (significantly)

and labor productivity (insignificantly). This may reflect the market stealing effects of foreign

                                                                                                22
entry (Aitken and Harrison 1999). We do, however, find positive spillover effects of foreign

ownership on export shares, which is also consistent with Aitken, Hanson, and Harrison (1997).

Foreign presence in an industry is, therefore, positively associated with boosting export

orientation, perhaps reflecting information sharing on export destinations and products. Finally,

our measure of domestic competition is significantly and positively associated with investment,

but negatively and significantly associated with productivity levels and growth. The negative

correlation with productivity level could simply reflect the fact that our productivity measure

contains price effects (Foster et al. 2008). The negative correlation of productivity growth and

competition could reflect the well-known Schumpeterian conjecture that a firm needs some

monopoly rents for innovation and therefore productivity growth.

        Financial access. Access to bank finance (i.e., overdraft facilities) is positively correlated

with TFP and labor productivity, yet it is also negatively correlated with export intensity. The

positive correlation of formal finance and productivity is consistent with the macro finance-

growth literature (Levine 1997). The negative correlation with export intensity, somewhat

puzzling, suggests that formal financing may encourage firms to focus more on the domestic

market.27 Interestingly, the prevalence of trade credit has a stronger positive correlation with

labor productivity, labor productivity growth, sales growth, and export intensity. Thus, informal

finance may have played a stronger role in facilitating local development in developing countries

than formal finance.

Alternative TFP Measure




27
  One possibility is that with better access to formal finance, domestic firms can develop with less financial
constraints, which then imply a less pull for foreign-owned firms who have comparative advantage in exporting.

                                                                                                                 23
           As discussed earlier, our TFP measure is derived from estimating an industry-specific

production function and measured as the residual from such a production function. 28

Alternatively, we could allow for technology heterogeneity in a number of different ways. In

one sensitivity check, we classify countries into four income groups based on the income level,

and we allow for income-level-industry-specific technology (i.e., factor shares).29 We obtain TFP

as the residual in such a production function.

           The results exploring this alternative specification for TFP are reported in Table 5. The

conditional advantage for Africa remains similar in magnitude (0.41 vs. 0.38), but becomes

statistically insignificant. Most of the point estimates are robust to this alternative specification,

but statistical significance increases in some cases and declines in others. Most of the results

focusing on the importance of firm age, foreign ownership, and domestic competition remain

intact.     The effect of party monopoly remains negative but becomes significant, while the

importance of bribes switches from negative to positive. The results thus seem to be sensitive to

the choice of TFP estimators. This is not surprising since in the more nuanced income-level-

industry-specific technology estimator, our estimates focus on within-income-group variations.

Nevertheless, the key message that Africa’s disadvantage disappears when we control for

infrastructure, access to credit, and the business environment remains intact.

Do the large Africa premiums reflect multicollinearity?

           The large and positive conditional African premiums for TFP, labor productivity, labor

productivity growth, and sales growth may surprise many. Does the positive and significant

coefficient for the Africa dummy merely reflect the close correlation of this dummy variable

with some of the aggregate (national or local) variables? Alternatively, could the positive Africa
28
     In this paper, we only consider the Cobb-Douglas production function.
29
     And industry-income-level-specific intercept.

                                                                                                   24
premium merely reflect the fact that some variables are endogenous and their inclusion in the

regressions bias the estimates of the Africa dummy? One solution is to leave out potential

endogenous variables one at a time, and see if our estimate of the Africa effect is robust to these

omissions. In Table 6, we run a series of regressions for each of the dependent variable, dropping

one aggregate variable at a time, and ascertain that the Africa dummy always retains the same

sign, and remains largely significant and with similar magnitudes in the TFP, labor productivity,

labor productivity growth, and sales growth equations.

Omitted variable bias

         As with any study using cross-sectional data, a legitimate concern is that the effects of

our business environment variables may merely reflect those of omitted variables. To consider

this possibility, we examine the robustness of our key results when we include more controls. In

particular, we add more controls for openness, political and institutional factors, the business

environment, and natural resource endowments. First, we capture openness with a measure of

imports and export as a share of GDP. Sachs and Warner (1997) find cross-country evidence that

Africa’s disadvantage can be partly explained by the lack of openness.

         Second, we add more political and institutional factors, including voice and

accountability from ICRG, executive competition from DPI, and government size to capture the

de facto power of the government.30 We control for government size because we are concerned

that the strong negative effects associated with political monopoly may merely capture the

association of political monopoly with (the omitted) government macro policies. Since the




30
   Moreover, we have also tried adding inflation rate or a dummy variable of high inflation rate to proxy for macro
risks, and have not found it matter.

                                                                                                                  25
negative effect of political monopoly may reflect other omitted governance variables, we also

further control for “voice and accountability” and executive competition.

           Third, some argue that Africa is particularly affected by a “natural resource curse”. Some

economists have argued that SSA countries are more likely to be located in tropical areas, which

have poorer quality of soil and a worse disease environment and are therefore bad for

development (Sachs and Warner 1997). Other economists have argued that countries with a

heavy reliance on natural resource exports tend to have worse economic performance due to a

number of reasons such as the lack of diversification. To capture the natural resource curse, we

include three measures: the share of land area in the tropics, the ratio of petroleum exports to

GDP (lagged by one year), and the ratio of raw material exports to GDP, lagged by one year. 31

           Fourth, since the business environment is a large category that covers many aspects, we

try to control for further subjective measures, including the local share of firms viewing the

following as moderate or severe constraints: electricity, transport, informal competition, tax rate,

land access, financial access, and labor regulation. Since entry barriers are particularly important

(Klapper, Laeven and Rajan 2006), we also control for an objective measure of entry barrier,

namely, the logarithm of minimum capital to start a business (from Doing Business).

           Overall, our results are generally robust (see Table 7). Africa’s advantage in TFP and

labor productivity remain, with small changes in magnitude. However, the African conditional

disadvantage in export intensity becomes more pronounced, at 5 percent and significant. The

positive effects of telecom and the negative effects of bribes become significant for investment

rates. The negative effect of firing difficulty on productivity growth also becomes significant.

The negative effects of political monopoly on productivity and sales growth rates remain

31
     The first measure is from http://www.cid.ha, while the latter two are both from WDI of the World Bank.

                                                                                                              26
qualitatively similar but less significant, not surprising since we are controlling for many

aggregate governance variables closely correlated with party monopoly.

         The entry-barrier measure, the minimum capital to start a business, has a negative

association with TFP, labor productivity and its growth rate, but a positive association with

export intensity, perhaps because such entry barriers tend to foster large firms that have higher

export capacity.32 We do not find that the two proxies of natural resources matter in a robust

way. Openness to trade is significantly associated with higher TFP and higher labor productivity,

but tariffs have an insignificant impact.

Adding four rich African countries

         So far our “Africa” consists of SSA countries excluding the four richest sub-Saharan

countries (i.e., South Africa, Namibia, Mauritius, and Botswana), all of which have GDP per

capita exceeding 3000 U.S. dollars (in 2005 value). Some may want to know how all of SSA is

doing. To shed light on this, in this section we define Africa to include the four rich SSA

countries. The results suggest that the conditional advantages of African firms drop significantly

but do not disappear. The coefficient on the Africa dummy remains positive for all outcomes but

remains significant at the 1 percent level only for labor productivity growth.                    The coefficients

for the other variables are very similar, and some results become stronger—the negative effects

of party monopoly on productivity are now significant, for instance. 33 Thus adding the four rich

countries in fact reduces Africa’s conditional advantage. Thus conditional advantages for Africa

are stronger for the relatively poorer African countries.



32
   Most of the locally-perceived constraint variables are not statistically significant, and often they are the wrong
sign (results not reported in the table to save space). This is consistent with the perception that objective measures
tend to out-perform subjective measures of the business environment (Dethier et al. 2008).
33
   The results are available upon request.

                                                                                                                   27
IV.    Further Considerations

       In this section, we provide further sensitivity checks, and then investigate how the effects

of the business environment differ in several key dimensions. We want to understand whether

African firms have a distinct conditional performance advantage depending on their industries

and technologies.

Manufacturing versus services

       So far we have focused on how African manufacturing firms fare relative to those in

other regions. However, do the results differ if we look at services? Different sectors may rely

to a greater degree on the political and business environment. Since WBES has no good capital

data for services, we cannot estimate TFP for services. We thus focus on comparing the other

five measures. The results, in Table 8, indicate significant sector-level differences, and suggest

that most of the business environment variables have stronger effects in manufacturing than in

services.

       Perhaps the most interesting finding is that the conditional Africa advantage is large in

manufacturing but non-existent in services. Similarly, party monopoly significantly reduces

growth in manufacturing but not in services. Since in developing countries manufacturing tends

to out-perform services in productivity (McMillan and Rodrik 2011), one possible implication is

that party monopoly might shift a country’s sector structure to less productive sectors, and lower

a country’s overall allocation efficiency.    Interestingly, foreign ownership has no positive

spillovers on exports in services but has significant spillovers in manufacturing. The strong

positive effects of ethnic fractionalization in manufacturing is much more muted in services.




                                                                                                28
           In contrast, bribes seem to have more adverse effects for services, as seen in the negative

and significant coefficients for labor productivity level and growth. In addition, sales growth

rates of service firms are more affected by the availability of formal finance than manufacturing

firms.

Low-tech and high-tech manufacturing

           Does the conditional African advantage differ by the level of sophistication of particular

manufacturing industries? This question is interesting since countries at different stages of

development often display distinct areas of comparative advantage (Lin 2009, 2010; and Lin and

Monga 2010), and industries with varying level of technological sophistication and specific

investments may need different supporting institutions and business environments (Lin 2010).

           Since our sample African countries are largely located at the less sophisticated end of the

technology spectrum, Africa’s comparative advantage likely is in low-tech rather than high-tech

manufacturing. We classify the manufacturing sectors as low-tech manufacturing if enterprises

are in food and beverages, leather, wood processing and wood products, simple metal products,

textiles, or garments. We classify as high-tech manufacturing firms in metal and machinery,

electronics, chemical and pharmaceutical products, non-metal and plastic, automobile and

parts.34

           Table 9 shows that the conditional Africa advantage is indeed higher in low-tech

manufacturing.          For labor productivity the Africa advantage is 88 log points for low-tech

manufacturing, but 72 for high-tech manufacturing. The conditional Africa advantages for labor

productivity growth and for sales growth are larger and significant only for low-tech



34
     The data set has “other manufacturing”, which is not classified as either since we don’t know its nature.

                                                                                                                 29
manufacturing, at around 15 percentage points in both cases.         Interestingly, the conditional

Africa advantage in investment is higher for high-tech industries.

       The dependence on modern infrastructure is strong for both types of industries. While

party monopoly has adverse effects on productivity levels and growth for both low- and high-

tech industries, corruption is associated with a more adverse effect on high-tech than on low-tech

manufacturing. Similarly, crime has much more severe negative effects on high-tech than on

low-tech manufacturing.

       Firing costs are associated with more adverse effects for high-tech than for low-tech

manufacturing industries as well. Finally, tariff promotion is only associated with positive

effects in high tech industries—suggesting that trade incentives only work in promoting new, not

existing areas of comparative advantage.          The importance of different industrial policy

instruments for encouraging sectors with a “latent” comparative advantage is reviewed in

Harrison and Rodriguez-Clare (2010).

Selection bias associated with the size of the informal sector

       So far we have found a large and positive conditional Africa premium in productivity,

productivity growth and sales growth. A concern is that the Africa premiums merely reflect

selection bias. In particular, only formal firms are present in our data. Since it is possible that

African countries have a relatively higher share of informal firms, and more able firms tend to

self-select into the formal sector, then the African premiums may reflect a smaller group of high-

ability firms self-selecting into the formal sector.

       This is a valid concern. Shneider et al. (2010) offer estimates of the relative size of the

informal sector in the whole economy for around 160 countries, and is the best data on informal


                                                                                                30
sector available.35 By this informality index (which captures the share of the informal sector in

the whole economy), Africa does have a relatively high level of informality. Africa’s average of

42.3 percent (ranging from 30.3 to 56.4 percent) is slightly above the average of 41.6 for the

similar-income group (ranging from 15.1 to 66.1%), and the average of 37.3% for the non-Africa

group (ranging from 15.1 to 66.1%). To make sure that the non-African sample has a similar

level of informality, we now retain the African sample and the non-African sample with the

informality index overlapping with the African informality range, that is, from 30.3% to 56.4%.

The results are reported in Table 10.

         The conditional TFP advantage, which was statistically significant with a coefficient of

0.38, now has a coefficient that is roughly 1/2 smaller, and is no longer significant. However,

selection bias apparently cannot explain the overall pattern of conditional African premiums in

other outcomes: the labor productivity premium increases from 0.76 to 0.83; the labor

productivity growth premium from 12 to 19 percentage points, and the sales growth premium

from 12 to 25 percentage points, all statistically significant.

         There are several other notable findings. First, the negative effects of party monopoly are

slightly stronger in countries with higher informality. Second, telecom has even more

pronounced effects in high-informality countries. Third, access to finance, both formal and

informal, is less closely correlated with firm performance. This is not surprising since the

external finance needs for small and informal firms tend to be weaker due to less capacity and

desire to expand.




35
  Ayyagari et al. (2011) similarly relies on this informality index to address concern about selectivity based on
informality.

                                                                                                                    31
       The overall patterns in Table 10 suggest that some forces of selection could explain a

small part of the conditional African premiums, but that the selection story is far from the whole

story. The conditional African premiums in labor productivity, its growth, and sales growth

remain intact and significant. High-informality countries also limit the influence of finance, but

amplify the influence of party monopoly and telecom.




V.     Explaining Africa’s Disadvantage

       We now examine why Africa falls behind the better comparison group—by reporting

100*        (XAfrica – Xbetter)/Δy, the percentage of outcome differences attributable to the

independent variables X. Here y is the outcome variable, and “better” stands for the better

comparison group.         refers to the coefficient for a generic variable X. The coefficients are

drawn from our baseline specification in Table 4. XAfrica and Xbetter refer to the mean for Africa

and for the better comparison group, and Δy refers to the outcome difference between Africa and

the better comparison group. For simplicity, we only report the statistically significant and

quantitatively important effects (i.e., accounting for more than 4% of the outcome difference in

absolute value), and we only report those variables that are of policy concern. The results are in

Table 12.

       The key factors explaining Africa’s disadvantage are infrastructure, access to finance,

and party monopoly. Telecom, our proxy for infrastructure, is consistently the number one

factor in explaining the African disadvantage: accounting for 114% of the 66 log points

disadvantage in TFP, 142% of the 85 log points disadvantage in labor productivity, 172% of the

12 percentage point disadvantage in labor productivity growth, 535% of the 3.4 percentage point



                                                                                               32
disadvantage in sales growth rate, and 40% of the 13.5 percentage point disadvantage in export

share.36

         Finance, and mainly informal finance, is consistently the number two factor in explaining

the African disadvantage—11% of the TFP disadvantage, half of the labor productivity

disadvantage, 59% of labor productivity growth disadvantage, all of the sales growth

disadvantage, and a quarter of the export share disadvantage.

         Party monopoly proves to be quantitatively important as well, accounting for about half

of the labor productivity growth disadvantage, and about 130% of the sales growth disadvantage.

Thus party monopoly proves to be a key deterrent of firm growth and productivity improvement.

         Two components of the business environment, corruption and firing difficulty, are

important in accounting for sales growth, accounting for about 80% of the sales growth

disadvantage. But they do not affect other key performance measures. So their importance pales

in comparison with the tripod of infrastructure, finance and party monopoly.

         There are also several factors that contribute significantly to reduce Africa’s disadvantage.

The foremost of them is ethnic fractionalization, which would contribute to African advantage in

TFP of 20%, in labor productivity of 37%, and in labor productivity growth of 59 percent.

Another key African advantage is lead in foreign ownership, which contributes to a 7%

advantage in labor productivity growth, a 22% advantage in sales growth, and a 14% advantage

in export share.




36
  It is perhaps useful to point out here that the importance of telecom does not reflect its high correlation with GDP
per capita, as pointed out earlier.

                                                                                                                    33
VI.    Conclusions

       In this paper we use a comprehensive cross-country firm-level data to understand how

formal African firms stack up against those in other regions. We also explore whether Africa’s

political and business environment can explain its performance shortfalls (if any), and what the

key factors are for explaining Africa’s performance. We begin by comparing the unconditional

means of various performance measures. We find that formal African manufacturing firms show

significant disadvantages in all measures of firm performance. In the unconditional means,

African firms exhibit lower total factor productivity (TFP) levels, lower labor productivity levels

and growth rates, lower sales growth, and lower investment rates and export orientation.

       Once we control for key differences in firm characteristics, geography, infrastructure,

political and institutional factors, business environment, and access to finance, Africa

manufacturing firms actually exhibit a conditional advantage in productivity levels and growth,

as well as sales growth. This conditional advantage remains reasonably intact across a variety of

robustness checks and additional specifications. Most importantly, the negative and significant

coefficient on the Africa dummy becomes either positive or insignificant when controlling for

observable factors in the environment faced by these firms.       The implication is that African

entrepreneurs are not inherently disadvantaged. In light of the highly challenging environment,

they actually perform better than those in other regions of the world at similar income levels.

       The conditional advantage for African firms is higher in low-tech than in high-tech

manufacturing, and in manufacturing than in services. The key factors in explaining Africa’s

disadvantage in firm performance relative to better-performing similar income countries are

infrastructure, lack of access to finance and political monopoly. The impacts of telecom and

finance, especially informal finance, are felt across the board. In contract, the damages of party


                                                                                                  34
monopoly are mostly revealed in dynamic performance measures such as productivity growth.

Some elements of business environment, mainly labor regulation and corruption, also have

effects. Some other elements often viewed as important in the literature, in contrast, do not

matter much: geography proves to be unimportant, as are crime, tariffs, and domestic conflict.

Not surprisingly, higher foreign participation has helped Africa consistently. We also obtain

some findings that suggest that different policies have distinct implications for structural change.

Telecom development, for instance, helps manufacturing and services about equally, and helps

low- and high-tech manufacturing about equally, and is therefore sector-neutral. In contrast,

development of banking helps services more than manufacturing, and corruption hurts services

more than manufacturing. Some tariff protection helps high tech manufacturing but not low-tech

manufacturing.      Party monopoly hurts manufacturing much more than services.               Since

manufacturing as a sector has relatively high productivity growth in developing countries

(McMillan and Rodrik 2011), party monopoly may hurt development by lowering manufacturing

productivity levels and growth.

       The findings in this paper have direct policy implications. The first implication is

somewhat optimistic for Africa.      The results indicate that conditional on the political and

business environment, African firms actually have advantages in their productivity levels,

productivity growth rates, and sales growth rates—at least no disadvantage relative to other

countries with similar GDP per capita. So there is no inherent Africa “curse” that hinders its

development; only a need for action to address the poor political and business environment. This

is consistent with Africa’s growth record before the 1970s and the growth record in the past

decade.




                                                                                                 35
       Second, our results show that the key factors that affect African manufacturing firms are

infrastructure, access to finance, and party competition. What is especially important in terms of

improving financing is to facilitate inter-firm trust and contracting so that trade credit is easily

extended. Since these key variables are mostly related to the functions of the state, reforms to

the state are likely to have the largest effects in improving African competitiveness.

       This research suggests that there are several ways for African firms to shift gears and

move towards a positive reinforcing cycle of development. Given the paramount importance of

infrastructure, how to develop Africa’s infrastructure remains a key policy challenge. To

increase access to finance and especially trade finance, complementary institutions such as

contract enforcement mechanisms for trade credit disputes could be considered. Given the key

importance of reducing party monopoly for our results, political competition and accountability

would be the critical factor for inducing better firm performance. Finally, foreign ownership has

yielded positive benefits across the board. This suggests that additional foreign entry would

improve competitiveness and promote development.




                                                                                                 36
                                        References
Acemouglu, Daron, and Simon Johnson. 2005. "Unbundling Institutions." Journal of Political
     Economy 113(5), 949–95.
Acemouglu, Daron, and Simon Johnson. 2012. Why Nations Fail: Origins of Power, Poverty
     and Prosperity, Crown Publishers (Random House),
Acemouglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson. 2001. "The Colonial Origins of
        Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation.” American Economic Review
        91, 1369–401.
Aghion, P., N. Bloom, R. Blundell, R Griffith, P. Howitt. 2005. “Competition and Innovation:
        An Inverted-U Relationship.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 701-728.
Almeida, Rita. 2005. "Enforcement of Regulation, Informal Labor and Firm Performance." IZA
        (Institute for the study of labor) Discussion Paper 1759.
Almeida, Rita, and Pedro Carneiro. 2009. “Enforcement of Labor Regulation and Firm Size.”
        Journal of Comparative Economics 37, 28–46.
Amin, Muhammad. 2009a. “Labor Regulation and Employment in India’s Retail Stores.”
        Journal of Comparative Economics 37, 47–61.
———. 2009b. “Are Labor Regulations Driving Computer Usage in India’s Retail Stores?”
        Economics Letter 102, 45–8.
Arvis, Jean-Francois, Monica Alina Mustra, Lauri Ojala, Ben Shepherd, and Daniel Saslavsky.
        2010. Connecting to Compete 2010: The Logistics Performance Index and Its
        Indicators. World Bank.
Aitken, Brian, and Ann E. Harrison. 1999. “Do Domestic Firms Benefit from Direct Foreign
        Investment? Evidence from Venezuela.” American Economic Review 89, 605-618.
Aterido, Reyes and Hallward-Dreimeier, Mary. 2010. “The Impact of the Investment Climate
        on Employment Growth” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 5218.
Aterido, R. Hallward-Driemeier, M., and Pages, C. Forthcoming. “Big Constraints to Small
        Firms’ Growth.” Economic Development and Cultural Change.
Ayyagari, Meghana, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, Vojislav Maksimovic. 2011. “Small vs. Young Firms
        across the World: Contribution to Employment, Job Creation, and Growth.” Policy
        Research Working Paper 5631, World Bank.
Bazzi, Samuel, and Michael Clemens (2010). “Blunt Instruments: A Cautionary Note on
        Establishing the Causes of Economic Growth.” Center for Global Development, Working
        Paper 171.
Beck, Thorsten, George Clarke, Alberto Groff, Philip Keefer and Patrick Walsh. 2001. “New
        Tools and New Tests in Comparative Political Economy: the Database of Political
        Institutions”. World Bank Economic Review 15 (September): 165-176.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Vojislav Maksimovic. 2005. "Financial and Legal
        Constraints to Growth: Does Firm Size Matter?" Journal of Finance LX, 137–77.
Blanke, Jennifer, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. 2009. “Examining Africa’s Competitiveness.” In
        The Africa Competitiveness Report 2009, World Economic Forum.


                                                                                          37
Bigsten, A.,Collier, P., Dercon, S., Fafchamps, M., Gauthier, B., Gunning, J.W., Oduro, A.,
        Oostendorp, R., Pattillo, C., S–derbom, M., Teal, F., and Zeufa. A, 2003. "Risk Sharing
        in Labor Markets," World Bank Economic Review, Oxford University Press 17(3), 349-
        366.
Bigsten, A., P. Collier, S. Dercon, M. Fafchamps, B.Gauthier, J.W. Gunning, J. Habarurema, A.
        Isaksson, A. Oduro, R. Oostendorp, C. Pattillo, M. Söderbom, F.Teal, A. Zeufack .1999.
        “Exports of African Manufactures: Macro Policy and Firm Behaviour”. Journal of
        International Trade and Development, 8, 1, 53-71.
Bigsten, A., Collier, P., Dercon, S., Fafchamps, M., Gauthier, B., Gunning, J.W., Oduro, A.,
        Oostendorp, R.,Pattillo, C., Soderbom, M., Teal, F., Zeufack, A., 2004. Do African
        manufacturing firms learn from exporting. Journal of Development Studies 40 (3),
        115– 141.
Bigsten, Arne, and Mans Soderbom. 2006. “What Have We Learned from a Decade of
        Manufacturing Enterprise Surveys in Africa?” World Bank Research Observer 21, 241–
        65.
Botero, Juan, Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei
        Shleifer. 2004. "The Regulation of Labor." Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(4),
        1339-1382.
Cai, Hongbin, Hanming Fang, and Lixin Colin Xu. 2011. “Eat, Drink, Firms, Government: An
        Investigation of Corruption from Entertainment and Travel Costs of Chinese Firms.”
        Journal of Law and Economics, 54, 55-78.
Claessens, Stijn, and Luc Laeven. 2003. "Financial Development, Property Rights and
        Growth." Journal of Finance 58(6), 2401–36.
Collier, Paul, and Jan Willem Gunning. 1999a. “Why Has Africa Grown Slowly?” Journal of
        Economic Perspectives 12(3): 3-22.
_____. 1999b. “Explaining African Economic Performance” Journal of Economic Literature
        37: 64-111
Cull, Robert, and Lixin Colin Xu. 2005. “Institutions, Ownership, and Finance: The
        Determinants of Investment among Chinese Firms.” Journal of Financial Economics
        77, 117–46.
Davis, Steven and Haltiwanger, John. 1995. "Employer Size and The Wage Structure in U.S.
        Manufacturing," NBER Working Papers 5393.
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, and Vojislav Maksimovic. 1998. "Law, Finance, and Firm Growth."
        Journal of Finance 53, 2107–37.
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, Inessa Love, and Vojislav Maksimovic. 2006. “Business Environment
        and the Incorporation Decision.” Journal of Banking and Finance 30, 2967–93.
Dethier, Jean-Jacques, Maximilian Hirn, and Stephane Straub. 2011. “Explaining Enterprise
        Performance in Developing Countries with Business Climate Survey Data.” World
        Bank Research Observer ????.
Devarajan, Shantayanan, William R. Easterly, and Howard Pack. 2001. “Is Investment in
        Africa       Too Low or Too High?” Journal of African Economies 10: 81–108.



                                                                                             38
Dinh, Hinh, Mavridis, Dimitris and Nguyen, Hoa B. “The Binding Constriant on Firm’s
         Growth in Developing Countries”. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 5485.
Djankov, Simeon. 2009. “The Regulation of Entry: A Survey.” World Bank Research Observer
         24, 183–203.
Dollar, David, Mary Hallward-Driemeier, Taye Mengistae. 2005. “Investment Climate and
         Firm Performance in Developing Economies.” Economic Development and Cultural
         Change 54(1), 1-31.
———. 2006. “Investment Climate and International Integration.” World Development 34(9),
         1498–516.
Easterly, William, Ross Levine. 1997. “Africa's Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic Divisions.
         “Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(4), 1203-50.
Fafchamps, Marcel. 2000. “Ethnicity and Credit in African Manufacutring.” Journal of
         Development Economics 61, 205-35.
Foster, Lucia; Haltiwanger, John; Syverson, Chad. 2008, “reallocation, firm turnover, and
         efficiency: selection on productivity or profitability.” American Economic Review 98
         (1), 394-425.
Gauthier, Bernard, and Mark Gersovitz. 1997. “Revenue Erosion through Evasion and
         Exemptions in Cameroon, 1993.” Journal of Public Economics 64: 407–24.
Gehlbach, Scott, Philip Keefer. 2010. “Private Investment and the Institutionalization of
         Collective Action in Autocracies: Ruling Parties and Legislatures.” Mimeo, World
         Bank.
-------------------------------------. 2010. “Investment without Democracy: Ruling Parties
         Institutionalization and Credible Commitment in Autocracies.” Mimeo, World Bank.
Gleditsch, Nils Petter, Peter Wallensteen, Mikael Eriksson, Margareta Sollenberg & Håvard
         Strand (2002). Armed Conflict 1946–2001: A New Dataset. Journal of Peace Research
         39(5): 615–637.
Greene, William. 1997. Econometric Aanlysis. The third edition. New Jersey: Prentice-Hall Inc.
Griliches, Z., and J. Hausman. 1986. “Errors in Variables in Panel Data Find More Like This.”
         Journal of Econometrics 31, 93–118.
Gunning, J.Willem and Mengistae, Taye. 2001. “Determinants of African manufacturing
         Investment: the Microeconomic Evidence.” Journal of African Economies 10 (supp. 2),
         48–80.
Gyimah-Brempong, Kwabena, and Thomas L. Traynor, 1999. “Political Instability, Investment,
         and Economic Growth in Sub-Saharan Africa,” Journal of African Economies 8(1) ,
         52-86.
Hallward-Driemeier, Mary, Scott Wallsten, Lixin Colin Xu. 2006. "The Investment Climate
         and the Firm: Firm-Level Evidence from China" Economics of Transition, 13(1), 1-24.
Hallward-Driemeier, Mary, Gita Khun-Jush, and Lant Pritchett. 2010. “Deals versus Rules:
         Uncertainty in Policy Implication in Africa.” NBER (National Bureau of Economic
         Research) Working Paper 16001.



                                                                                            39
Hallward-Driemeier, Mary, and Lant Pritchett. 2010. “How Business is Done and the `Doing
         Business’ Indicators: The Investment Climate when Firms have Climate Control”.
         Mimeo, World Bank and Harvard Kennedy School of Government.
Harrison, Ann and Jason Scorse. 2010. “Multinationals and Anti-Sweatshop Activism.”
         American Economic Review 100(1), 247–73.
Harrison, Ann, and Andres Rodriguez-Clare. 2010. “Trade, Foreign Investment, and Industrial
         Policy for Developing Countries,” in Handbook of Development Economics, Volume 5,
         edited by Dani Rodrik and Mark Rosenzweig, North Holland, 2010, pp. 4039-4214.
Hausman, R., Dani Rodrik, and Andres Velasco. 2005. “Growth Diagnostics.” In J. Stiglitz and
         N. Serra, eds., The Washington Consensus Reconsidered: Towards a New Global
         Governance. New York: Oxford University Press.
Iarossi, Giuseppe. 2009. “Benchmarking Africa’s Costs and Competitiveness.” In The Africa
         Competitiveness Report 2009, World Economic Forum.
Johnson, Simon, John McMillan, and Christopher Woodruff. 2002. “Property Rights and
         Finance.” American Economic Review 92(5), 1335–56.
Keefer, Philip. 2007. DPI2006. Database of Political Institutions: Changes and Variable
         Definitions. Development Research Group, World Bank.
-----------. 2010. “Do Ethnic Parties Represent Ethnic Interests? Ethnic Fractionalization,
         Clientelism and Collective Action in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Working paper, World Bank.
Klapper, Leora, Luc Laeven, and Raghuram Rajan. 2006. “Entry regulation as a barrier to
         entrepreneurship.” Journal of Financial Economics 82, 591-629.
Knack, Stephen and Keefer, Philip.1995. "Institutions and Economic Performance: Cross-
         Country Tests        Using Alternative Institutional Measures" Economics and Politics
         7(3):207-27
Kremer, Michael, 1993. "The O-Ring Theory of Economic Development," The Quarterly
         Journal of Economics 108(3), 551-75.
La Porta, Rafael, and Andrei Shleifer. 2008. “The Unofficial Economy and Economic
         Development.” Working paper, Harvard University.
Lederman, Daniel, Taye Mengistae, Lixin Colin Xu. 2013. “Microeconomic Consequences and
         Macroeconomic Causes of Foreign Direct Investment in Southern African Economies,”
         Applied Economics 45(25), 3637-3649.
Levine, Ross. 1997. “Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda.”
         Journal of Economic Literature.
Leuven, E., and B. Sianesi. 2003. "PSMATCH2: Stata module to perform full Mahalanobis
         and propensity score matching, common support graphing, and covariate imbalance
         testing". http://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s432001.html. Version 1.2.3.
Li, Wei, Taye Mengistae, Lixin Colin Xu. 2011. “Diagnosing Development Bottlenecks: China
         and India.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 73(6), 722-752.
Li, Wei, Lixin Colin Xu 2004. “The Impact of Privatization and Competition in the
         Telecommunications Sector around the World?” Journal of Law and Economics XLVII ,
         395-430.


                                                                                           40
Lin, Justin Yifu. 2009. Economic Development and Transition: Thought, Strategy, and
        Viability. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Lin, Justin Yifu, “New Structural Economics: A Framework for Rethinking Development,”
        World Bank Research Observer, no. 2, Vol. 26 (September 2011), pp. 193-221.
Lin, Justin Yifu and Celestin Monga, “Growth Identification and Facilitation: the Role of State in
        the Process of Dynamic Growth”, Development Policy Review, Vol. 29, No. 3 (May
        2011), pp. 264-290.
Long, Cheryl X., Xiaobo Zhang. 2011. “Cluster-Based Industrialization in China: Financing
        and Performance.” Journal of International Economics 84(1), 112-123.
Maddison, A.. 2001. The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective, Paris, OECD.
McMillan, J., Woodruff, C., 2002. The central role of entrepreneurs in transitional economies.
      Journal of Economic Perspectives 16(3), 153-170.
McMillan, Margaret, and Dani Rodrik. 2011. “Globalization, Structural Change, and
      Productivity Growth.” Working Paper, Harvard University.
Megginson, W., and Netter, JR. 2001. “From State to Market: A Survey of Empirical Studies
      on Privatization.” Journal of Economic Literature 39, 321-389.
Mengistae, Taye and Catherine Pattillo. 2004. “Export Orientation and Productivity in
        Subsaharan Africa.” IMF Staff Papers 51, 327-353.
Morck, Randall, Bernard Yeung. 2011. “Economics, History, and Causation,” Business History
        Review 85(1), 39-63.
Moulton, Brent. 1990. “An Illustration of a Pitfall in Estimating the Effects of Aggregate
        Variables on Micro Units.” Review of Economics and Statistics 72, 334-38.
North, Douglass C. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance.
        Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Olson, Mancur. 2000. Power and Prosperity: Outgrowing Communist and Capitalist
        Dictatorships. Basic Books.
Palmade, Vincent. 2005. “Industry level analysis : the way to identify the binding constraints to
        economic growth.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, 3551.
Petrin, Amil, and Jagadeesh Sivadasan. 2006. "Job Security Does Affect Economic Efficiency:
        Theory, A New Statistic, and Evidence from Chile," processed, University of Minnesota.
Platteau, Jean-Philippe, 2009. "Institutional obstacles to African Economic Development: State,
        Ethnicity, and Custom", Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 71(3), 669-89.
Reader, John. 1999. Africa: A Biography of the Continent. New York: Vintage Books.
Rosenbaum, Paul R. 2010. Observational Studies. New York: Springer.

Sachs, Jeffrey D., Andrew M. Warner. 1997. “Sources of Slow Growth in African Economies.”
       Journal of African Economies 6(3), 335-76.
Sachs, Jeffrey D., Andrew M. Warner. 2001. “The Curse of Natural Resources.” European
       Economic Review 45(4), 827-838.


                                                                                                 41
Schiantarelli, Fabio. 2010. “Product Market Regulation and Macroeconomic Performance.” In
        Loayza and Serve eds., Business Regulation and Economic Performance, Washington
        D.C.: The World Bank.
Schneider, F., A. Buehn, and C. E. Montenegro. 2010. “Shadow Economies all over the World:
        New Estmates for 162 countries from 1999 to 2007.” Policy Research Working Paper
        Series 5356, the World Bank.
Sleuwaegen, Leo., and Goedhuys, Micheline. 2002. “Growth of Firms in Developing Countries,
        Evidence from Côte d’Ivoire.” Journal of Development Economics 68 (1): 117–35.
Stern, Nicholas. 2002. A Strategy for Development. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Tybout, James. 2000. “Manufacturing Firms in Developing Countries: How Well Do They Do
       and Why,” Journal of Economic Literature 38(1), 11-44.
UCDP/PRIO. 2010. “UCDP/PRIO Armed Conflict Dataset Codebook.” www.prio.no/cscw.
Van Biesebroeck, Johannes.2005. Exporting raises productivity in sub-Saharan African
       manufacturing firms, Journal of International Economics 67(2), 373-391.
World Bank. 2005. A Better Investment Climate for Everyone. World Development Report,
       World Bank.
------ The World Bank Enterprise Survey Database. www.enterprisesurvey.org. Washington,
       D.C. United States.
------ Doing Business. www.doingbusiness.org.
World Economic Forum. 2009. The Africa Competitive Report 2009. Washington D.C.: World
       Bank.
Xu, Lixin Colin. 2011. "The Effects of Business Environments on Development: A Survey of
       New Firm-Level Evidence,” World Bank Research Observer, 26, 310-340.
Xu, Lixin Colin, Tian Zhu, and Yi-Min Lin. 2005. “Politician Control, Agency Problems, and
       Ownership Reform: Evidence from China” Economics of Transition 13, 1-24.




                                                                                       42
                                         Table 1. Definition of variables
Variable                   Definitions
TFP                        Total factor productivity.
ln(LP)                     Log(sales per worker). From the Enterprise Survey of the World Bank.
LP growth                  (Three-year) labor productivity growth rate at the firm level, computed as (labor productivity this
                           year – labor productivity three years ago)/average. All monetary values are in this paper is in
                           constant U.S. dollars in 2005.
Sales Growth               (Three-year) sales growth rate at the firm level, computed as (sales this year – sales three years ago)/
                           average.
Export share               Export value over sales.
Inv/VA                     The value of investment over total value added for a firm. Investment is the sum of new purchases in
                           equipment and land. Trimed of tail one percent.
lnL                        The logarithm of the number of employees.
Firm age                   Firm age.
Foreign                    The share of foreign ownership.
Ind avg Foreign            Country-industry (employment-weighted) average of foreign ownership.
Ownership largest          The ownership share of the largest owner of the firm.
GDP per capita             GDP per capita in constant U.S. dollars. From WDI.
Ln(population)             Log of the population of the country. From WDI.
Trade                      The ratio of the sum of the values of imports and exports over GDP. From WDI.
govConsumption/GDP         The ratio of total government consumption over GDP. From WDI.
Landlock                   The dummy variable indicating that a country is landlocked.
Share of land in tropics   The share of land areas in Koeppen-Geiger tropics, from http://www.cid.ha.
Voice and                  The index of voice and accountability, measuring perceptions of the extent to which a country's
accountability             citizens are able to participate in selecting their government, as well as freedom of expression,
                           freedom of association, and a free media. From ICRG.
Ln(partyYears)             Logarithm of the number of years that the ruling party has been in power, from DPI (Beck et al.
                           2001; Keefer 2007).
Any Conflict               The dummy variable of any domestic armed conflicts in the previous 10 years, from Gleditsch et al.
                           (2002) and UCDP/PRIO (2010).
EthnicFrac                 Ethnic fractionalization, a larger value implies more ethnic diversity, from WDI.
Firing difficulty          An index measuring the cost of firing 20 percent of the firm’s workers (10% are fired for redundancy
                           and 10% without cause). The cost of firing a worker is calculated as the sum of the notice period,
                           severance pay, and any mandatory penalties established by law or mandatory collective agreements
                           for a worker with three years of tenure with the firm. Based on Doing Business (Botero et al. 2004).
Executive competition      An index measuring the competition for the executive branch of the government, from DPI (Beck et
                           al. 2001; Keefer 2007).
Min capital to start       A proxy for entry barriers, the minimum capital required (% of income per capita) for starting a
business                   business, from Doing Business of World Bank.
Telecom                    The principal factor for two telecom-related variables: (i) log of the number of mainline phones per
                           10000 inhabitants in a country (from WDI); (ii) the city-industry-size share of firms using website for
                           business (from the Enterprise Survey). Size is defined as large and small based on whether the firm
                           is above or below the median of the cell. When the cell size falls below 5 firms, we use the city-
                           industry mean instead. All proxies for business environment based on firm answers are dealt with in
                           the same way as here.




                                                                                                                           43
                             Table 1. Definition of variables (Cont’d)
Variable                     Definitions
Bribe                        The city-industry-size average of the share of bribes to government divided by sales.
Bank                         The city-industry-size share of firms having access to overdraft facility, as a proxy of
                             access to formal finance.
Trade Credit                 The city-industry-size average of the share of output sold in the form of supplier credit, as a
                             proxy for local access to informal finance.
Competition_ind              The Lerner index of competition, constructed as (1 – markupCI), and markupCI is the
                             country-industry average of firm-level markup. Firm-level markup is computed as (value
                             added – labor costs)/sales. A larger value implies greater competition.
Tariff                       Country-industry-year level of import tariffs.
Obstacle_crime               The city-industry-size share of firms that view crime as a moderate or severe constraint.
Obstacle_InformalCompete     The city-industry-size share of firms viewing “practices of competitors in the informal
                             sector” as a serious obstacle.
Obstacle_landAccess          The city-industry-size share of local firms that view access to land as a moderate or severe
                             constraint.
Obstacle_electricity         The city-industry-size share of firms that view electricity access as a moderate or severe
                             constraint.
Obstacle_transport           The city-industry-size share of firms that view transport as a moderate or severe constraint.
Obstacle_tax                 The city-industry-size share of firms that view tax burdens as a moderate or severe
                             constraint.
Obstacle_finance             The city-industry-size share of firms that view finance access and costs as a moderate or
                             severe constraint.
Obstacle_laborRegulation     The city-industry-size share of firms that view labor regulation as a moderate or severe
                             constraint.
Petroleum export/GDPt-1      The ratio of petroleum exports to GDP, lagged by one year, from WDI.
Raw material export/GDPt-1   The ratio of raw material exports to GDP, lagged by one year, from WDI.




                                                                                                                        44
                 Table 2. Differences between Africa and the Two Comparison Groups


Variable                                                                         T-test for median difference
                                                      Africa       Africa – the average comparison          Africa – the better
                                                                                            group           comparison group
Performance measures
  TFP                                                  -0.585                        -0.329** (0.043)           -0.525*** (0.052)
  ln(LP)                                                8.792                      -0.483*** (0.030)            -0.769*** (0.035)
  LP growth                                            -0.115                      -0.086*** (0.015)            -0.099*** (0.017)
  Sales Growth                                          0.066                          -0.009 (0.015)              -0.010 (0.017)
  Export Share                                          0.073                      -0.088*** (0.006)            -0.133*** (0.007)
  Investment/Value-added                                0.140                      -0.036*** (0.009)            -0.093*** (0.011)
Firm characteristics
  lnL                                                   2.937                      -0.720*** (0.026)            -1.043*** (0.030)
  Firm age                                            12.667                       -5.344*** (0.313)            -3.795*** (0.348)
  State ownership                                       0.007                      -0.004*** (0.001)            -0.007*** (0.002)
  Ownership largest                                     0.820                       0.080*** (0.006)             0.112*** (0.007)
Basic country characteristics and geography
  GDP per capita                                     497.408                   -1051.850*** (14.546)     -1047.308*** (15.626)
  Ln(pop)                                             16.067                       -0.669*** (0.025)            -1.461*** (0.026)
  Landlock                                              0.278                       0.034** (0.009）              0.197*** (0.008)
Infrastructure
  Telecom                                              -1.278                      -1.333*** (0.011)            -1.563*** (0.012)
Political and institutional factors
  Ln(partyYears)                                        2.571                       0.507*** (0.024)             0.252*** (0.026)
  Any Conflict                                          0.561                       0.152*** (0.009)                0.013 (0.011)
  EthnicFrac                                            0.715                       0.315*** (0.004)             0.373*** (0.004)
Business environment
  Foreign                                               0.163                       0.064*** (0.006)             0.044*** (0.007)
  Bribe                                                 0.029                      0.014*** (0.0006)            0.018*** (0.0005)
  Obstacle_crime                                        0.397                       0.091*** (0.004)             0.093*** (0.005)
  FireCosts                                             0.389                       0.082*** (0.004)             0.016*** (0.004)
  Competition_ind                                       0.588                      -0.028*** (0.003)            -0.034*** (0.003)
  Tariff                                                0.144                       0.052*** (0.002)             0.051*** (0.002)
Finance
  Bank                                                  0.232                      -0.222*** (0.005)            -0.129*** (0.005)
  Trade credit                                          0.270                      -0.270*** (0.004)            -0.299*** (0.005)
Notes: One-sided test.   The asterisks *, ** and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels.




                                                                                                                              45
Table 3. Industry distribution for Africa, the Average Comparison Group, and the Better Comparison Group

                                     Poor Africa
                                                           Average Comparison          Better Comparison
                                (without the four rich
                                                                 Group                       Group
                                      countries)
Textiles                                0.020                     0.066                      0.050
Garments                                0.120                     0.164                      0.174
Metal & Machinery                       0.065                     0.105                      0.170
Electronics                             0.007                     0.027                      0.045
Chemical, pharmaceutical                0.040                     0.104                      0.086
Wood and furniture                      0.021                     0.023                      0.023
Non-metal and plastic                   0.041                     0.103                      0.132
Automobiles and parts                   0.000                     0.002                      0.003
Other manufacturing                     0.451                     0.174                      0.111
Notes: Manufacturing sample only.




                                                                                                           46
                                                               Table 4. Explaining Firm Performance, OLS results
                                                  TFP          Ln(Labor Productivity)      Labor Productivity           Sales Growth              Export Share             Investment/VA
                                                                                                Growth
                                         coef           se        coef          se          coef          se          coef          se          coef          se          coef             se
Poor Africa                           0.377**       0.189      0.762***     0.279        0.122*       0.066        0.121*       0.069        -0.019       0.039        0.015        0.040
Firm characteristics
 Ln(firm age)                         -0.059***     0.023      0.119***     0.023        0.044***     0.009        -0.019       0.012        0.001        0.004        -0.025***    0.005
 State Ownership                      0.548         0.349      0.706***     0.199        0.241**      0.094        0.296***     0.096        0.174***     0.054        0.139        0.085
 Ownership largest                    -0.019        0.087      -0.279**     0.126        -0.088***    0.032        -0.123***    0.030        -0.047**     0.018        0.001        0.014
 Ln(labor productivity 3 years ago)                                                      -0.191***    0.020
 Ln(sales 3 years ago)                                                                                             -0.093***    0.007
Geography
 Ln(population)                       0.073         0.094      0.152        0.137        0.020        0.031        0.013        0.027        -0.031***    0.007        -0.001       0.009
 Landlock                             -0.145        0.197      0.071        0.271        -0.041       0.073        -0.061       0.077        -0.014       0.016        0.039**      0.019
Infrastructure
 Telecom                              0.485***      0.086      0.777***     0.105        0.131***     0.039        0.117***     0.041        0.034**      0.016        0.013        0.018
Political and institutional factors
 Ln(party years)                      -0.148        0.094      -0.154       0.138        -0.090**     0.039        -0.074*      0.042        -0.005       0.011        0.002        0.012
 Any conflict in past 10 years        -0.130        0.159      -0.311       0.257        -0.089       0.066        -0.050       0.070        0.032        0.021        -0.031       0.023
 Ethnic fractionalization             0.350*        0.204      0.838***     0.301        0.189**      0.085        0.155        0.103        -0.047       0.039        -0.041       0.041
Business environment
 Foreign                              0.336***      0.082      0.719***     0.074        0.184***     0.027        0.173***     0.030        0.204***     0.030        -0.004       0.010
 Bribe                                -1.796        1.481      -1.445       1.879        -0.759       0.607        -1.233**     0.624        -0.117       0.266        -0.091       0.305
 Obstacle_crime                       0.231         0.265      -0.011       0.478        -0.112       0.094        -0.093       0.088        -0.101***    0.036        -0.063       0.048
 Firing difficulty                    0.814***      0.277      0.877**      0.389        -0.093       0.096        -0.269***    0.103        -0.014       0.035        -0.005       0.042
 Competition_ind                      -2.431***     0.371      -0.876**     0.354        -0.255***    0.090        -0.106       0.090        0.036        0.044        0.159***     0.055
 Tariff                               0.336         0.415      0.314        0.584        0.192        0.175        0.308        0.192        0.133        0.168        0.028        0.112
 Country-industry Average of
                                      -0.013        0.241      -0.524       0.363        -0.009       0.081        0.088        0.082        0.185***     0.042        -0.094***    0.035
 foreign
Finance
 Bank                                 0.557***      0.173      0.587***     0.218        0.110        0.070        0.083        0.084        -0.072**     0.032        -0.032       0.044
 Trade credit                         0.158         0.261      0.898**      0.390        0.260***     0.094        0.188*       0.102        0.163***     0.039        0.076        0.048
N observations                        9,770                    12,764                    10,482                    10,729                    13,818                    10,002
R square adjusted                     0.127                    0.338                     0.243                     0.135                     0.162                     0.024
Notes: *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels. White standard errors, clustered at the country level. Coefficients for industry dummies not
reported.

                                                                                                                                                                                                47
                      Table 5: Sensitivity checks with respect to Total Factor Productivity (TFP) measure

                                                                  Industry technology
                                                                                                        Income-category-ind tech
                                                           (Basic Specification from Table 4)
                                                            Coefficient        Standard Error       Coefficient       Standard Error
Poor Africa                                              0.377**             0.189              0.405                0.266
Firm Characteristics
   Ln(firm age)                                          -0.059***           0.023              -0.046               0.029
  State ownership                                        0.548               0.349              0.854*               0.442
  Ownership largest                                      -0.019              0.087              -0.097               0.093
Geography
  Ln(population)                                         0.073               0.094              0.137                0.116
  Landlock                                               -0.145              0.197              0.161                0.273
Infrastructure
  Telecom                                                0.485***            0.086              0.131                0.111
Political and institutional factors
  Ln(party years)                                        -0.148              0.094              -0.277*              0.144
  Any conflicts in 10 years                              -0.130              0.159              -0.426*              0.249
  Ethnic fractionalization                               0.350*              0.204              -0.015               0.361
Business environment
  Bribe                                                  -1.796              1.481              4.913***             1.758
  Obstacle_crime                                         0.231               0.265              -0.280               0.392
  Firing difficulty                                      0.814***            0.277              0.498                0.475
  Comeptition_ind                                        -2.431***           0.371               -2.301***           0.613
  Tariff                                                 0.336               0.415              0.745                0.547
  Foreign                                                0.336***            0.082              0.431***             0.095
  Country-industry avg of foreign                        -0.013              0.241              0.093                0.386
finance
  Bank                                                   0.557***            0.173              0.256                0.298
  Trade credit                                           0.158               0.261              0.040                0.437


N                                                        9,770                                  9,770
R-Square Adjusted                                        0.127                                  0.054
Notes: *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels. White standard errors, clustered at the
country level. Coefficients for industry dummies not reported.


                                                                                                                                       48
                          Table 6. The coefficient for Africa When Dropping One Explanatory Variable at a Time
                                                                                      Labor
                                                              Ln(labor                                        Sales                 Export              Investment/
                                         TFP                                       productivity
                                                            productivity)                                    Growth                 Share               Value added
                                                                                      growth
Base (no dropping)               0.377**     0.189      0.762***    0.279       0.122*    0.066        0.121*     0.069       -0.019     0.039       0.015      0.040
When dropping:
Ln(firm age)                     0.376*      0.192      0.733***    0.276       0.114*     0.065       0.119*     0.068       -0.017     0.039       0.022      0.040
State                            0.374**     0.190      0.760***    0.279       0.121*     0.066       0.120*     0.069       -0.018     0.039       0.015      0.040
Ln(population)                   0.317*      0.167      0.648***    0.237       0.107      0.067       0.111      0.071       0.002      0.038       0.013      0.041
Ln(party years)                  0.241       0.155      0.622***    0.211       0.040      0.064       0.054      0.076       -0.023     0.036       0.017      0.036
Any conflicts in 10 years        0.336**     0.170      0.667***    0.251       0.096      0.068       0.107      0.071       -0.008     0.040       0.007      0.040
Ethnic fractionalization         0.457**     0.206      0.959***    0.318       0.167**    0.072       0.158**    0.073       -0.030     0.037       0.006      0.038
telecom                          0.178       0.205      0.429       0.307       0.064      0.065       0.071      0.064       -0.033     0.036       0.010      0.037
Foreign                          0.402**     0.193      0.807***    0.286       0.130*     0.067       0.126*     0.069       -0.005     0.039       0.015      0.040
Country-ind avg of foreign       0.376**     0.183      0.735***    0.273       0.122*     0.065       0.126*     0.070       -0.009     0.040       0.011      0.040
Firing difficulties              0.296       0.204      0.680**     0.278       0.129**    0.065       0.146**    0.072       -0.016     0.041       0.017      0.041
Bribe                            0.362*      0.191      0.754***    0.284       0.117*     0.067       0.112      0.070       -0.019     0.039       0.015      0.040
Crime                            0.336*      0.198      0.762***    0.288       0.132*     0.069       0.129*     0.069       -0.007     0.043       0.020      0.042
Bank                             0.389**     0.196      0.756***    0.277       0.125*     0.066       0.124*     0.069       -0.018     0.040       0.015      0.040
Trade credit                     0.364**     0.178      0.690***    0.267       0.100      0.065       0.105      0.071       -0.032     0.040       0.010      0.041


Notes: Each row reports the coefficient or standard error of the (poor) Africa dummy for all the outcome equations. For the “base” row, no variables are dropped. For
row “x”, only “x” is dropped from the list of explanatory variables. *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels. White standard
errors are clustered at the country level.




                                                                                                                                                                        49
                                                                Table 7: Sensitivity checks with Additional Controls
                                                          TFP              Ln(labor prod.)         Labor Productivity              Sales Growth                Export Share       Investment/Value Added
                                                                                                        Growth
 Poor Africa                                   0.301*       0.174    0.716***       0.215       0.146**      0.069         0.110          0.070        -0.050*        0.030       -0.035        0.029
 Geography: ln(population)                     0.164***     0.050    0.202**        0.086       0.016        0.019         -0.012         0.020        -0.030***      0.008       -0.008        0.009
              landlock                         -0.327**     0.155    -0.219         0.172       -0.135**     0.054         -0.152**       0.075        0.005          0.019       0.033         0.021
 Infrastructure: Telecom                       0.188**      0.090    0.522***       0.145       0.112**      0.048         0.117**        0.046        0.044**        0.017       0.035*        0.018
 Poli. and inst.:   ln(party years)            -0.103       0.072    -0.137         0.103       -0.063**     0.027         -0.046         0.029        -0.002         0.009       0.003         0.009
              Any conflicts in 10 years        0.118        0.113    0.019          0.177       -0.002       0.045         -0.003         0.055        0.001          0.020       -0.065***     0.022
              Ethnic fractionalization         0.158        0.209    0.743**        0.340       0.248**      0.108         0.234*         0.127        0.007          0.026       0.058         0.038
 Business environment: Bribe                   -0.517       1.308    0.391          1.548       -0.370       0.360         -0.998*        0.516        -0.308         0.192       -0.537**      0.230
              Obstacle_crime                   -0.489***    0.184    -0.709***      0.267       -0.264***    0.063         -0.168**       0.071        -0.091***      0.032       -0.048        0.037
              Firing difficulty                0.004        0.230    0.056          0.288       -0.179**     0.091         -0.285**       0.116        0.012          0.040       0.030         0.040
              Competition_Ind                  -2.635***    0.368    -1.115***      0.237       -0.368***    0.076         -0.169**       0.082        0.109***       0.039       0.179***      0.046
              Tariff                           0.575*       0.333    0.317          0.360       0.129        0.162         0.218          0.168        0.057          0.138       -0.098        0.079
              Foreign                          0.395***     0.076    0.715***       0.072       0.194***     0.028         0.182***       0.030        0.214***       0.031       -0.008        0.010
              Country-ind avg foreign          0.132        0.194    -0.480**       0.245       -0.026       0.065         0.078          0.066        0.196***       0.040       -0.065        0.041
 Finance:    Bank                              0.453***     0.158    0.323          0.270       0.049        0.079         0.007          0.081        -0.067***      0.024       -0.052        0.037
              Trade credit                     0.088        0.180    0.733***       0.216       0.152**      0.067         0.110          0.068        0.178***       0.043       0.103**       0.041
 Openness: Trade                               0.006***     0.002    0.006**        0.003       0.001        0.001         -0.001         0.001        -0.000         0.000       -0.000        0.000
 More poli./inst.: voice & accountability      0.455***     0.123    0.487***       0.160       0.139***     0.052         0.020          0.059        -0.092***      0.019       -0.089***     0.022
              Executive competition            -0.041       0.057    -0.116*        0.064       -0.044       0.027         -0.028         0.033        0.014*         0.007       -0.007        0.010
              Government size                  0.036***     0.009    0.040***       0.015       0.006*       0.003         0.002          0.004        -0.002         0.002       -0.002        0.002
 Natural resource: petro. exp/GDP lagged       2.063        1.336    2.290          1.888       1.180*       0.614         0.834          0.685        -0.358*        0.202       -0.447        0.384
              Raw material exp/GDP lagged      -1.604**     0.674    -1.357         1.031       -0.024       0.440         -0.153         0.533        -0.139         0.091       0.262         0.226
              Share of land in tropics         -0.322*      0.185    -0.382         0.309       -0.009       0.070         -0.038         0.062        0.010          0.018       0.015         0.020
 More business environment:
              Ln(min capital to start busi.)   -0.048*      0.029    -0.105**       0.043       -0.019*      0.010         -0.008         0.011        0.014***       0.004       0.003         0.004
 More subjective bus env controls              yes                   yes                        yes                        yes                         yes                        yes
 Firm controls, industry dummies               yes                   yes                        yes                        yes                         yes                        yes
 N                                             8,700                 11,236                     9,325                      9,545                       12,165                     8,828
 R-Square Adjusted                             0.163                 0.411                      0.246                      0.132                       0.182                      0.043
Notes: *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels. Intercept not reported. White standard errors are clustered at the country level. For all equations
we also control for all firm characteristics, and subjective indicators of the business environment (including average local obstacle scores in electricity, transportation, informal competition,
tax rate, land administration, financial access, and labor regulation) . For simplicity, we do not report them here.



                                                                                                                                                                                              50
                                                                                Table 8. Services only
                                              Ln(labor               Labor productivity               Sales                      Export                   Investment/
                                            productivity)                Growth                      Growth                      Share                    Value added
Poor Africa                             0.219      0.209           0.019      0.063            0.042      0.063           -0.003     0.011           -0.010      0.017
Firm characteristics
    Ln(firm age)                        0.098***      0.027        0.032**       0.014         -0.020       0.015         0.008***     0.002         -0.018***     0.006
    State                               -0.165        0.182        0.172         0.112         0.231**      0.108         0.030        0.025         0.058         0.088
    Ownership largest                   -0.054        0.115        0.023         0.035         -0.006       0.035         -0.003       0.007         -0.001        0.018
    Ln(sales 3 years ago)                                                                      -0.104***    0.008
    Ln(LP 3 years ago)                                             -0.192***     0.013
Geography
    Ln(population)                      0.048         0.075        0.005         0.018         0.004        0.017         -0.010***    0.003         -0.000        0.005
    Landlock                            0.178         0.203        0.028         0.055         -0.016       0.056         -0.013*      0.007         0.028**       0.014
Infrastructure
    Telecom                             0.683***      0.122        0.154***      0.037         0.119***     0.038         0.008        0.006         -0.032***     0.012
Political and institutional factors
    Ln(party years)                     -0.054        0.100        -0.035        0.030         -0.017       0.032         -0.002       0.004         -0.007        0.007
    Any conflict in past 10 years       -0.121        0.176        -0.026        0.046         0.011        0.050         0.010        0.009         -0.015        0.013
    Ethnic fractionalization            0.508*        0.261        0.035         0.078         0.048        0.078         0.019        0.014         -0.053*       0.030
Business environment
    Bribe                               -3.794*       1.936        -1.961***     0.670         -2.029***    0.743         0.142        0.130         -0.245        0.188
    Obstacle_crime                      0.065         0.312        0.024         0.070         -0.037       0.065         -0.006       0.016         -0.024        0.025
    Firing difficulty                   0.818**       0.393        0.106         0.113         -0.065       0.108         -0.003       0.016         -0.003        0.028
    Competition_ind                     -0.254        0.407        0.048         0.120         0.142        0.111         0.023        0.017         0.093         0.060
    Tariff                              0.742         1.704        0.226         0.546         -0.654       0.618         0.022        0.116         -0.662*       0.400
    Foreign                             0.725***      0.087        0.171***      0.029         0.183***     0.031         0.057***     0.011         0.013         0.013
    Country-industry avg of foreign     0.000         0.328        -0.025        0.087         0.070        0.090         -0.000       0.019         0.029         0.031
Finance
    Bank                                0.661***      0.228        0.167**       0.076         0.228***     0.082         0.004        0.020         0.002         0.029
    Trade credit                        0.969***      0.347        0.193**       0.097         0.105        0.104         0.072***     0.024         -0.002        0.035
N                                       8,930                      7,177                       7,352                      9,901                      6,004
R-Square Adjusted                         0.293                      0.220                     0.120                        0.043                      0.021
Notes: *, **, and ***: statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels. White standard errors are clustered at the country level. Industry dummies also controlled for.




                                                                                                                                                                                     51
                                              Table 9: Determinants of Firm Performance by Industry Sophistication
                                                 Low-Tech Manufacturing                                                           High Ttech Manufacturing
                          TFP         Ln(LP)         LP gr.       Sale gr.     Exp. Sh.      Inv/VA         TFP         Ln(LP)        LP gr.       Sale gr.     Exp. Sh.          Inv/VA
Poor Africa            0.211         0.879***      0.141*        0.150*       -0.071        0.005        0.465         0.719**      0.062         0.059        0.053         0.099**

                       (0.207)       (0.277)       (0.072)       (0.083)      (0.049)       (0.049)      (0.310)       (0.363)      (0.086)       (0.075)      (0.047)       (0.049)

Geography
Ln(population)         0.074         0.159         0.010         -0.005       -0.036***     -0.002       0.207*        0.272**      0.031         0.021        -0.024***     0.006

                       (0.087)       (0.145)       (0.032)       (0.027)      (0.009)       (0.011)      (0.125)       (0.137)      (0.030)       (0.024)      (0.009)       (0.009)

Landlock               -0.412**      -0.091        -0.071        -0.058       0.006         0.080***     0.144         0.290        -0.069        -0.131       0.006         0.022

                       (0.200)       (0.280)       (0.074)       (0.076)      (0.023)       (0.025)      (0.267)       (0.276)      (0.075)       (0.085)      (0.023)       (0.026)

Infrastructure
Telecom                0.343***      0.757***      0.165***      0.146***     0.022         0.022        0.368**       0.701***     0.124**       0.142***     0.057***      0.027

                       (0.099)       (0.136)       (0.044)       (0.041)      (0.029)       (0.028)      (0.149)       (0.157)      (0.053)       (0.054)      (0.021)       (0.018)

Poli & inst.
Ln(party years)        -0.144*       -0.243*       -0.085**      -0.060       0.012         0.007        -0.335**      -0.172       -0.074*       -0.049       -0.011        0.013

                       (0.084)       (0.146)       (0.039)       (0.040)      (0.015)       (0.015)      (0.137)       (0.122)      (0.040)       (0.044)      (0.013)       (0.015)

Any conflicts in 10    -0.092        -0.331        -0.055        0.010        0.049*        -0.023       -0.351        -0.378       -0.037        -0.009       0.025         -0.031

    yrs                (0.145)       (0.271)       (0.064)       (0.065)      (0.027)       (0.025)      (0.228)       (0.241)      (0.058)       (0.064)      (0.028)       (0.027)

Ethnic frac.           0.366         0.680*        0.257**       0.203*       0.003         0.009        -0.403        0.615**      0.178**       0.266**      -0.101**      -0.120**

                       (0.224)       (0.347)       (0.105)       (0.115)      (0.060)       (0.047)      (0.346)       (0.304)      (0.086)       (0.111)      (0.042)       (0.051)

Business environ.
Bribe                  -1.613        0.767         0.345         -0.821       -0.638        -0.780**     -2.200        -2.818*      -1.463**      -1.465       0.236         0.072

                       (2.235)       (2.738)       (0.923)       (0.938)      (0.443)       (0.374)      (2.173)       (1.697)      (0.744)       (0.893)      (0.395)       (0.311)

Obstacle_crime         0.303         0.002         -0.054        0.025        -0.134**      -0.035       0.130         -0.179       -0.277***     -0.311***    -0.052        -0.133***

                       (0.241)       (0.509)       (0.096)       (0.091)      (0.054)       (0.066)      (0.399)       (0.341)      (0.097)       (0.093)      (0.039)       (0.051)

Firing difficulty      0.622**       0.833**       -0.054        -0.246**     -0.004        0.016        0.713**       0.239        -0.269**      -0.364***     -0.003       -0.005

                       (0.300)       (0.392)       (0.104)       (0.110)      (0.050)       (0.058)      (0.353)       (0.365)      (0.106)       (0.120)      (0.023)       (0.037)

Competition_ind        -2.415***     -0.807        -0.441***     -0.263       0.078         -0.032       -2.299***     -1.026       -0.397**      -0.204       0.084         0.179**

                       (0.548)       (0.652)       (0.144)       (0.187)      (0.119)       (0.194)      (0.566)       (0.641)      (0.184)       (0.188)      (0.073)       (0.081)

Tariff                 -0.209        0.380         0.206         0.296        0.046         0.119        3.046**       1.321        1.300***      1.476***     -0.255        0.372

                       (0.449)       (0.665)       (0.193)       (0.219)      (0.146)       (0.108)      (1.438)       (1.320)      (0.320)       (0.389)      (0.263)       (0.259)

Foreign                0.247**       0.632***      0.193***      0.223***     0.235***      0.003        0.419***      0.649***     0.136***      0.141***     0.224***      0.011

                       (0.104)       (0.096)       (0.037)       (0.038)      (0.034)       (0.018)      (0.145)       (0.105)      (0.048)       (0.054)      (0.051)       (0.020)

Country-ind avg of     -0.046        -0.683*       -0.013        0.076        0.317***      -0.031       -0.266        -0.621*      -0.013        0.068        0.069         -0.197***

    foreign            (0.320)       (0.382)       (0.100)       (0.102)      (0.075)       (0.063)      (0.363)       (0.366)      (0.091)       (0.093)      (0.049)       (0.051)

Finance
Bank                   0.348*        0.519**       0.082         0.022        -0.037        -0.031       0.765**       0.398        0.116         0.117        -0.069        -0.008

                       (0.184)       (0.248)       (0.079)       (0.085)      (0.037)       (0.052)      (0.309)       (0.275)      (0.104)       (0.113)      (0.049)       (0.043)

Trade credit           0.175         0.593         0.192*        0.232**      0.204***      0.076        0.579**       1.433***     0.181**       -0.007       0.155**       0.082

                       (0.302)       (0.460)       (0.108)       (0.108)      (0.070)       (0.069)      (0.279)       (0.344)      (0.078)       (0.103)      (0.070)       (0.053)

Firm controls          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes

N                      4,872         5,950         4,860         4,964        6,489         4,596        2,855         3,621        3,047         3,136        3,944         2,739
r2_a                   0.097         0.294         0.235         0.126        0.180         0.019        0.158         0.324        0.238         0.146        0.183         0.064
Note. *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels. Intercept not reported. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. Industry
dummies also controlled for.

                                                                                                                                                                                    52
                               Table 10. Using the sample with the same informality index as Africa

                                                        pooled                                                      similar informal index


                        tfp        lnLPs     LPgrow          saleG     exportSh   inv_VA        tfp       lnLPs     LPgrow       saleG       exportSh   inv_VA

Poor Africa          0.377**      0.762***   0.122*        0.121*      -0.019     0.015      0.180       0.830**    0.193**    0.247***      0.011      0.047

                     (0.189)      (0.279)    (0.066)       (0.069)     (0.039)    (0.040)    (0.248)     (0.345)    (0.092)    (0.092)       (0.043)    (0.038)

Infrastructure
 Telecom             0.485***     0.777***   0.131***      0.117***    0.034**    0.013      0.555***    0.842***   0.162***   0.155***      0.047***   0.043**

                     (0.086)      (0.105)    (0.039)       (0.041)     (0.016)    (0.018)    (0.087)     (0.122)    (0.043)    (0.045)       (0.016)    (0.018)

Poli/inst. factors
 Ln(party years)     -0.148       -0.154     -0.090**      -0.074*     -0.005     0.002      -0.105      -0.288     -0.110**   -0.106*       -0.006     -0.016

                     (0.094)      (0.138)    (0.039)       (0.042)     (0.011)    (0.012)    (0.139)     (0.202)    (0.053)    (0.054)       (0.012)    (0.010)

 Ethnic frac.        0.350*       0.838***   0.189**       0.155       -0.047     -0.041     0.734*      1.205**    0.174      0.049         -0.016     0.057

                     (0.204)      (0.301)    (0.085)       (0.103)     (0.039)    (0.041)    (0.421)     (0.580)    (0.140)    (0.146)       (0.052)    (0.047)

Busi. Environ.
Bribe                -1.796       -1.445     -0.759        -1.233**    -0.117     -0.091     -1.884      -1.531     -0.730     -0.876        -0.026     -0.266

                     (1.481)      (1.879)    (0.607)       (0.624)     (0.266)    (0.305)    (1.525)     (1.900)    (0.665)    (0.721)       (0.219)    (0.286)

 Firing diff.        0.814***     0.877**    -0.093        -0.269***   -0.014     -0.005     0.902**     1.082*     -0.189     -0.427***     -0.019     0.039

                     (0.277)      (0.389)    (0.096)       (0.103)     (0.035)    (0.042)    (0.455)     (0.594)    (0.154)    (0.153)       (0.033)    (0.030)

                     -2.431***    -0.876**   -0.255***     -0.106      0.036      0.159***   -2.481***   -0.921**   -0.165     -0.028        0.035      0.117**
Competition_ind
                     (0.371)      (0.354)    (0.090)       (0.090)     (0.044)    (0.055)    (0.468)     (0.369)    (0.114)    (0.128)       (0.038)    (0.056)

 Foreign             0.336***     0.719***   0.184***      0.173***    0.204***   -0.004     0.421***    0.765***   0.215***   0.209***      0.203***   -0.024**

                     (0.082)      (0.074)    (0.027)       (0.030)     (0.030)    (0.010)    (0.104)     (0.104)    (0.033)    (0.035)       (0.042)    (0.011)

Finance
 Bank                0.557***     0.587***   0.110         0.083       -0.072**   -0.032     0.265       0.431      0.137      0.196**       -0.031     -0.004

                     (0.173)      (0.218)    (0.070)       (0.084)     (0.032)    (0.044)    (0.232)     (0.300)    (0.085)    (0.095)       (0.030)    (0.042)

 Trade credit        0.158        0.898**    0.260***      0.188*      0.163***   0.076      0.062       0.876*     0.271**    0.158         0.140***   0.032

                     (0.261)      (0.390)    (0.094)       (0.102)     (0.039)    (0.048)    (0.340)     (0.512)    (0.112)    (0.114)       (0.037)    (0.047)
Firm and other
                     Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
controls
others controls      Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes

N                    9,770        12,764     10,482        10,729      13,818     10,002     5,784       7,846      6,390      6,552         8,584      5,854

r2_a                 0.127        0.338      0.243         0.135       0.162      0.024      0.135       0.367      0.258      0.158         0.201      0.025



Notes: *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels. Intercept not reported. White standard errors are
clustered at the country level. Only countries within the same range of informality index as Africa are included in the regressions. Industry
dummies also controlled for. Omitted firm controls include those for ln(firm age), state ownership, ownership largest, and lagged levels for the
growth equations. Other controls include: ln(population), landlock, any conflicts in 10 years, obstacle_crime, tariff, country-industry average of
foreign. The coefficients for omitted other controls tend to have similar results with or without restricting the sample.




                                                                                                                                                           53
                 Table 11. Accounting for performance differences between the Poor African countries
                               and the top half performers of the similar-income sample

                                                                                                                                    Investment /
                                     TFP                  Ln Labor          Labor            Sales Growth      Export Growth        Value Added
                                                          Productivity      Productivity
                                                                            Growth




Difference between Africa
   and the top half
   performers of the similar-        -0.662               -0.855            -0.119           -0.034            -0.135               -0.096
   income sample


Infrastructure                       114.4%               141.9%            171.5%           535.2%            39.8%
  Telecom                            114.4                141.9             171.5            535.2             39.8
Finance                              10.9%                50.5%             59.2%            116.0%            26.2
  Bank                               10.9                 8.9                                                  -6.9
  Trade credit                                            41.6              59.2             116.0             33.1
Political and inst. factors
                                     -19.7%               -36.6%            -12.8%           134.3%
Of which:
  Ln(party years)                                                           46.2             134.3
  Any conflicts in 10 years
  Ethnic Fractionalization           -19.7                -36.6             -59.0
Geography
                                                                                                               -33.0%               -8.0%
Of which
  Ln(population)                                                                                               -33.0
  Landlock dummy                                                                                                                    -8.0
Business environment
                                     -12.4%                                 -2.6%            55.2%             -6.9%                10.8%
Of which:
  foreign                                                                   -6.7             -22.2             -6.6
  Country-ind average of
   foreign                                                                                                     -7.3                 5.2
  Firing difficulty                                                                          12.9
  Bribe                                                                                      64.5
  Tariff
  Competition_Ind                    -12.4                                  -7.2                                                    5.6
  Obstacle_crime                                                                                               7.0
Note. We do not report the effects for some variables (e.g., industry dummies, Africa, and firm characteristics). When a cell is empty, it means
that the coefficient is statistically insignificant from zero or the magnitude is too small (less than 4 percent).

   The number of the first row is the absolute difference between the Africa sample (excluding the four richest countries) and the better
comparison group sample. The rest of the numbers represent the percentage of contribution that a specific variable or category contributes in
explaining the African disadvantage.

                                                                                                                                                54
                            Appendix. The list of countries for each sample
                    (The numbers in the table are GDP per capita in 2005 U.S. dollars)

                                                        Africa
Angola2006                      767.4   Guinea2006                      141.6   Niger2009                        170.5
Benin2009                       353.8   GuineaBissau2006                396.5   Rwanda2006                       250.2
Burundi2006                     109.2   Ivory Coast2009                 530.1   Senegal2007                      522.3
Cameroon2009                    692.0   Lesotho2009                     501.5   Sierra Leone2009                 254.1
CapeVerde2009                  1553.8   Liberia2009                     144.4   Swaziland2006                   1463.2
Chad2009                        285.2   Madagascar2009                  260.2   Tanzania2006                     316.3
Congo2009                      1156.4   Malawi2009                      148.4   Togo2009                         248.5
DRC2006                          85.8   Mauritania2006                  429.5   Uganda                           283.1
Eritrea2009                     151.0   Mozambique2007                  307.8
Gambia2006                      332.7   Namibia2006                    2460.2

                        The average comparison group (i.e., with GDP per capita < 3000 USD)
Albania2007                   1541.0 Georgia2008                      1079.9 Romania2009                        2595.5
Armenia2009                   1425.2 Guatemala2006                    1749.2 Russia2009                         2866.3
Azerbaijan2009                1945.6 Honduras2006                     1244.9 Samoa2009                          1800.0
Belarus2008                   2067.6 Kazakhstan2009                   2332.2 Tajikistan2008                      217.2
Bolivia2006                   1039.3 Kyrgyz Rep.2009                   352.1 Timor Leste2009                     299.7
Bosnia and                    2041.4 LaoPDR2009                        450.0 Tonga2009                          1659.7
Herzegovina200
Bulgaria2009                   2412.6   Mongolia2009                    683.1   Ukraine2008                     1037.3
Colombia2006                   2955.2   Nepal2009                       245.1   Vanuatu2009                     1288.0
Ecuador2006                    1515.7   Nicaragua2006                   818.4   Vietnam2009                      617.1
ElSalvador2006                 2359.4   Paraguay2006                   1346.5   Yemen2010                        561.3
Fiji2009                       2190.4   Peru2006                       2228.3   Uzbekistan2008                   725.4
Fyr Macedonia2009              2075.8   Philippines2009                1201.7

         The better comparison group (i.e., with GDP per capita < 3000 USD, and top half in firm performance)
Albania2007                   1541.0 Georgia2008                        1079.9 Tajikistan2008                    217.2
Armenia2009                   1425.2 Peru2006                           2228.3 Ukraine2008                      1037.3
Bosnia & Herz.200             2041.4 Philippines2009                    1201.7 Vietnam2009                       617.1
Bulgaria2009                  2412.6 Romania2009                        2595.5
Fyr Macedonia2009             2075.8 Russia2009                         2866.3

Note. The “Africa” in the table excludes South Africa, Botswana, Mauritius, and Namibia. We also excludes Ghana
due to potential data errors (with extremely high labor productivity, due perhaps to wrong uses of currency units
during a currency rebasing period).




                                                                                                                         55
