                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                EXPECTATIONS OF RETURNS AND EXPECTED RETURNS

                                          Robin Greenwood
                                           Andrei Shleifer

                                        Working Paper 18686
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18686


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2013




We thank Yueran Ma for outstanding research assistance and Josh Coval, Jared Dourdeville, Sam
Hanson, Owen Lamont, Stefan Nagel, Joshua Schwartzstein, Adi Sunderam, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen,
Jessica Wachter, Fan Zhang and seminar participants at UC Berkeley and the NBER for helpful suggestions.
We are grateful to the Survey Research Center at the University of Michigan for providing access
to their data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Robin Greenwood and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Expectations of Returns and Expected Returns
Robin Greenwood and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 18686
January 2013
JEL No. G02,G12,G14

                                                ABSTRACT

We analyze time-series of investor expectations of future stock market returns from six data sources
between 1963 and 2011. The six measures of expectations are highly positively correlated with each
other, as well as with past stock returns and with the level of the stock market. However, investor expectations
are strongly negatively correlated with model-based expected returns. We reconcile the evidence by
calibrating a simple behavioral model, in which fundamental traders require a premium to accommodate
expectations shocks from extrapolative traders, but markets are not efficient.


Robin Greenwood
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 267
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
rgreenwood@hbs.edu

Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center M-9
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu
Introduction
       Over the last 20 years, increasing amounts of data on investor expectations of stock market

returns have become available. We analyze these expectations obtained from six data sources: the

Gallup investor survey, the Graham-Harvey Chief Financial Officer surveys, the American Association

of Individual Investors survey, the Investor Intelligence survey of investment newsletters, Robert

Shiller’s investor survey, and the Survey Research Center at the University of Michigan. We also

compare these investor expectations of returns with what financial economists call “expected returns”

(hereafter ER) computed from aggregate data on dividends, consumption, and market valuations. The

measures of ER we examine include the dividend price ratio, but also variables proposed by Campbell

and Cochrane (1999) and Lettau and Ludvigson (2001). These ER measures seek to capture fluctuations

in investors’ required returns over time.

       We begin with three findings about the expectations of returns. First, the six measures of

expectations of stock market returns are highly positively correlated with each other. Second, these

measures of investor expectations tend to be extrapolative: they are positively correlated with past stock

market returns, as well as with the level of the stock market (i.e., they are positively correlated with the

price-dividend ratio). Third, these measures of expectations are also highly correlated with investor

inflows into mutual funds. Together, these results suggest that survey measures of investor expectations

are not meaningless noise, but rather reflections of widely shared beliefs about future market returns,

which tend to be extrapolative in nature.

       We next compare these measures of investor expectations to four standard measures of ER. Two

findings stand out. First, although results differ across variables, generally speaking ER and

expectations of returns are negatively correlated with each other. When investors say that they expect

stock market returns to be high, model-based expected returns are low. In rational expectations models,

expectations of stock market returns and model-based measures of ER should be perfectly positively

                                                      2
correlated. We can reject this hypothesis with considerable confidence. This evidence is inconsistent

with the view that expectations of stock market returns reflect the beliefs or requirements of a

representative investor in a rational expectations model.

         Second, both expectations of returns and ER predict future stock market returns, but with

opposite signs. When ER is high, market returns are on average high; when expectations of returns are

high, market returns are on average low.

         Reconciling all the evidence poses a significant challenge. One possibility, pursued by all the

authors constructing measures of ER, is that investors hold rational expectations and ER measure true

but not directly observed expectations of market returns. But this possibility seems broadly inconsistent

with the facts that the directly observed expectations of market returns 1) are highly correlated across

data sources, 2) have a clear extrapolative structure, and 3) are negatively correlated with available

measures of ER. The expectations of investors captured by the surveys are not at all the expectations

obtained indirectly from rational expectations models.

         A second possibility is that when investors say “high,” they mean “low.” For example, perhaps

when investors report high expectations of market returns, they mean high expected growth of

fundamentals, in which case their true expectations of market returns are low. This conjecture seems

inconsistent with the obvious fact that respondents in the surveys we cover are active investors, and even

CFOs, and they are asked directly about their expectations of stock market returns, not changes in

fundamentals. The conjecture is also inconsistent with the high correlation between investors’ reported

expectations and their actual behavior, as measured by the flows that retail investors direct into mutual

funds.

         The third possibility is that survey measures of expectations of returns capture actual

expectations of a broad segment of investors, and that these investors extrapolate returns and act on their



                                                      3
beliefs, as in models of Cutler, Poterba, and Summers (1990) and DeLong et al. (1990b). But in this

case, what do the standard empirical measures of ER reflect, if not these investors’ expectations of

market returns?

       To pursue this question, we perform a simple exercise. We construct a behavioral model that is a

special case of Cutler, Poterba, and Summers (1990), in which a subgroup of investors hold

extrapolative expectations, and another subgroup are fundamentalists whose demand is inversely related

to market valuations. Fundamentalists can be interpreted as rational investors with limited risk bearing

capacity, although a full dynamic model with extrapolative expectations and rational investors has not

been worked out. In this model, aggregate risk is constant, but the amount of risk that must be held by

the fundamentalists varies over time. This is because the fundamentalists must accommodate the time-

varying demand of the extrapolative traders.

       The CPS model has a very simple structure, which makes it easy to solve and calibrate. We

calibrate the model using our findings on actual expectations of extrapolative investors. Our main

question is whether, in such a model, the standard measures of ER have forecasting power for market

returns? Using simulated data, the answer is a clear yes. This suggests that the forecasting powers of

ER need not from changes in required risk premia in a representative agent model. A high dividend price

ratio may predict high future stock market returns not because investors in aggregate have become more

risk averse, but because a subset of investors in the market demand a premium for absorbing stock sold

by positive feedback traders who believe future market returns will be low.

       There is a small but vibrant literature using data on actual expectations to test economic

hypotheses. Some of the earlier work focused on exchange rates, and found an extrapolative component

in expectations data (Dominguez 1986, Frankel and Froot 1987). Robert Shiller and his coauthors have

used expectations data to analyze bubbles in markets ranging from Japanese stocks (Shiller, Kon-Ya,



                                                    4
and Tsutsui 1996) to American housing (Case, Shiller, and Thompson 2012). For equities, the papers

closer to our work are Amronin and Sharpe (2008) and Bacchetta, Mertens, and Wincoop (2009), who

find, as we also document below, that return expectations and expectational errors are related to

dividend yields. Finally, several papers present evidence that investors’ personal experiences influence

their expectations, e.g., Vissing-Jorgensen (2004), Malmendier and Nagel (2011), and Nagel (2012).

Our contribution to the literature is to put several data sources together, to present data on the structure

of investor expectations about stock market returns in a systematic way, and to compare these data to

expected returns constructed by financial economists.

         The next section describes our data. Section 3 presents the basic statistical description of the

data on expectations of returns. Section 4 compares investors’ expectations of returns with the standard

ER measures. Section 5 describes a simple behavioral model and performs a calibration exercise, which

allows some tentative conclusions on how the various pieces of evidence can be reconciled.



2. Measuring Investor Expectations

         We collect survey results from six major sources: the Gallup investor survey, Graham and

Harvey’s surveys of CFOs, the American Association of Individual Investors survey, Investor

Intelligence’s summary of professional investors’ beliefs, Shiller’s survey on individual investors, and

the University of Michigan survey of US consumers. Below we describe each of the series individually.

An online appendix lists the individual time-series and sources, except Investor Intelligence for which

we purchased a license.



Gallup




                                                      5
           The Gallup survey, conducted between 1996 and 2012, asks individual investors about their

experiences in the economy and in the stock market, as well as their beliefs about the economy and the

stock market over the next 12 months. Participants change from survey to survey. In the early sample

years, the survey was run monthly with samples exceeding 700 respondents, but there are some gaps in

later years, the largest being November 2009 through February 2011 when the survey was discontinued

before being restarted in March 2011. The individual respondent data, also studied in Vissing-Jorgensen

(2004) is available between 1996 and 2007. We use Gallup to construct our benchmark source of

expectations, because of Gallup’s large sample size and consistent methodology.

           Ideally, each monthly instance of the survey would have asked participants to specify the

percentage return they expect to earn in the stock market. Instead, the survey asked participants whether

they were “very optimistic,” “optimistic,” “neutral,” “pessimistic,” or “very pessimistic” about stock

returns over the next year. Gallup sent us the percentage of participants in each group, which is

available beginning in October 1996. In addition, more precise quantitative estimates of survey

participants’ beliefs are available between September 1998 and May 2003. During this time,

participants were asked to give an estimate of the percentage return they expect on the market over the

next 12 months. For an even shorter time period between 1998 and 2000, participants were also asked

to indicate “the minimum acceptable rate of return” on their portfolio over the next twelve months.1 The

former can be used as a proxy for expectations, while the latter can be used as a measure of required

returns, albeit for a short sample period.

           Panel A of Figure 1 shows the Gallup investor expectations series. The solid line denotes our

measure of expectations:

           Gallup  % Bullish  % Bearish,                                                         (1)


1
    We constructed this variable ourselves using the mean of participant-level survey responses.

                                                                6
the percentage of investors who are “very optimistic” or “optimistic” about the future performance of

the stock market, minus the percentage of investors who are “pessimistic” or “very pessimistic”. The

dashed line between 1996 and 2003 shows the average expectation of return on the stock market. These

two series are 84% correlated in levels and 65% correlated in one-month changes, indicating that the

qualitative measure of investor beliefs about market returns is capturing the same variation as the

quantitative measure.

       For additional comparison, the short dashed line between 1998 and 2000 shows investors

reported “minimum acceptable returns” which closely track the two other series during the short window

of overlap. On average, minimum acceptable returns are 1.74 percentage points lower than actual

expectations of returns. The 87% correlation between minimum acceptable returns and expectations of

returns suggests that investors actually understand the questions, but also see expected returns and

minimum required returns as driven by similar factors.

       One can use the strong correlation between the time-series to rescale Gallup from Eq. (1) to

estimate a corresponding percentage expectation of return. If we project Gallup on the percentage

expected return, the fitted return values suggest that expectations of one-year returns vary between a low

of 3.9% (February 2009) and a high of 14.27% (January 2000). An equal share of investors reporting

being “bullish” and “bearish” (i.e., Gallup=0) corresponds to an expectation of 8.5%, close to the

average one-year return of 8.1% on the CRSP value-weighted stock market during the 1997-2011.



Graham and Harvey

       Since 1998, John Graham and Campbell Harvey have been surveying chief financial officers

(CFOs) of major U.S. corporations. The survey solicits CFO views regarding the US economy and the

performance of their firms, as well as their expectations of returns on the U.S. stock market over the



                                                    7
next twelve months.2 Expectations of the stock market are available beginning in October 2000. The

survey contains answers from more than 200 respondents each quarter. Graham and Harvey publish

summary statistics for each question on each survey.

        We obtain average expected returns from these surveys from John Graham’s website, and plot

the resulting time-series in Figure 2, alongside the Gallup series. As can be seen, CFO expectations are

highly correlated with expectations reported in the Gallup survey, with a correlation coefficient of 0.77.

Especially for CFOs, it is unreasonable to argue that they do not know what the market return is.



American Association of Individual Investors

        The American Association of Individual Investors Investor Sentiment Survey measures the

percentage of individual investors who are bullish, neutral, or bearish on the stock market for the next

six months. The survey is administered weekly to members of the American Association of Individual

Investors. We construct a time-series of investor expectations by subtracting the percentage of “bearish”

investors from the percentage of “bullish” investors between 1987 when the survey first started and

December 2011. Because most of our other data are available monthly, we work with monthly averages

of this data. As shown in Panel A of Figure 3, the American Association expectations are strongly

positively correlated with the Gallup time-series.



Investors’ Intelligence Newsletter Expectations

        Since 1963, “Investors Intelligence,” has been summarizing the outlook of over 120 independent

financial market newsletters. Their survey was conducted monthly for 1963, then bi-weekly through




2
 In addition to asking CFOs for their “best guess” of the performance of the stock market, Graham and Harvey also ask for
90% confidence intervals. See Ben-David, Graham, and Harvey (2012) for further discussion.

                                                           8
June 1969 when it was shifted to weekly, which it remained through 2011. Data from this survey has

been previously studied by Clarke and Statman (1998).

         The editors of the survey classify each newsletter as having “bullish,” “bearish” or “neutral”

forecasts of returns on the stock market over the near term. Since newsletters disappear and new ones

are started, the editors of the survey watch the national business press looking for references to new

letters, but wait a few months after introduction before including any new source. Only four editors

have been involved in classifying newsletters since inception of the survey in 1963, ensuring consistent

treatment over time.3

         In line with our methodology for the Gallup and American Association series, we summarize

their measure as the difference between the percentage of newsletters that are “bullish” and the

percentage that are “bearish.” We obtain the time-series of their expectations measure, which we plot

alongside the Gallup series in Panel B of Figure 3. For months in which the survey was conducted

multiple times, we use the average.

         The Investors’ Intelligence series exhibits more short-term volatility than our other measures of

investor expectations. Nevertheless, the correlation with the other series is high: 60% with Gallup, 55%

with American Association, and 64% with CFO expectations.



Shiller’s Survey

         Started by Robert Shiller in the 1980s, the Investor Behavior Project at Yale University releases

surveys of individual investor confidence in the stock market. We use the one-year individual

confidence index, measured as the percentage of individual investors who expect the market to rise over



3
 There are relatively few studies analyzing the structure of newsletter expectations or their performance in forecasting the
equity premium. For one prominent example, see Graham and Harvey (1996) who analyze the newsletters covered by the
Hulbert Financial Digest.

                                                               9
the following year.4 Data are available only sporadically between 1999 and July 2001. After that, the

surveys are conducted monthly. As can be seen in Figure 3, Shiller is 39% correlated with the Gallup

survey.



Michigan Survey

           Survey Research Center at the University of Michigan has been surveying US consumers since

1946 about their experiences and beliefs regarding the economy and their consumption habits. For 22 of

the surveys, occurring between November 2000 and October 2005, respondents were asked about their

beliefs about expected returns on the broader stock market. For a subset of these surveys, respondents

are asked about 12-month returns, but for all 22 they are asked about their beliefs regarding annualized

expected returns over the next two to three years. Respondents are occasionally polled more than once,

but never more than two times. Because time series on individuals consist of at most two data points, we

restrict our attention to the survey averages. Amronin and Sharpe (2008) also rely on the Michigan data

in their study of household expectations.

           The Survey Research Center provided us the raw survey data from these surveys and we

compute average expected returns for each survey date. As can be seen in Figure 3, Michigan

expectations are 61% correlated with expectations from the Gallup survey. Due to the limited number of

time-series observations (there are only 22 data points), however, we interpret results using this series

with more caution.



Rescaling Investor Expectations




4
    See http://icf.som.yale.edu/stock-market-confidence-indices-explanation and Shiller (2000).

                                                               10
        To keep things simple, for most of our statistical tests we use the unadjusted raw time series of

investor expectations described above. However, but for the Graham-Harvey and Michigan surveys, the

expectations are all in different units, making direct comparisons between them difficult, as well making

it difficult to assert the economic significance of their predictive power for stock returns. For this reason,

we create rescaled versions of each expectations measure, which we denote by an asterisk (e.g.,

Gallup*). We do this by projecting the Gallup % stock return expectation (available between 1999 and

2003) onto each series.5 We then use the fitted regression coefficients to rescale each series. This has the

effect of simply multiplying by a constant and adding a (different) constant.

        Panel B of Table 1 summarizes the rescaled series. Note that GrahamHarvey and Michigan do

not change at all because they are already in units of annual percent. Panel B shows that the average

expected return, now including all series, ranges from 6.0 percent per annum (Graham-Harvey) to 10.6%

per annum (Shiller). In comparing surveys, we must bear in mind that all of the series cover different

time periods. The standard deviation of expected stock returns is similar across all measures, ranging

from 1.3 percent (American Association) to 2.3 percent (Gallup).



Critiques of Survey Data

        Two common criticisms of survey data on expected returns are that (1) they are noisy and thus

meaningless, and (2) people do not mean what they say, or relatedly, that survey responses are strongly

dependent on framing and language. With regard to the first point, we have noted that although there is

some noise in the individual surveys, responses of return expectations tend to be highly correlated with

each other.



5
  We have also experimented with projecting the Graham-Harvey expectations series onto each series. This relies on slightly
fewer data points and produces expectations of returns that are slightly higher. Similarly, we could rescale using the
Michigan data.

                                                            11
       The second point is that financial economists are generally skeptical about survey data. Lamont

(2003) submits, for example, that “survey data about expectations and beliefs is the weakest form data,

just one rung up in the quality ladder above anecdotes.” Cochrane (2011) maintains that “survey reports

of people’s expectations are certainly unsettling. However, surveys are sensitive to language and

interpretation.”

       A simple consistency check for survey expectations data is to ask whether investors behave in a

manner that is consistent with what they report in the surveys. This can be done by examining mutual

fund flows. We obtain a measure of investor inflows into equity-oriented mutual funds from Investment

Company Institute. We scale the net dollar inflows in each month by the aggregate capitalization of the

US stock market. Although flows do not directly measure expectations, Figure 4 shows that they are

strongly positively correlated with investor expectations. In addition, consistent with prior evidence,

aggregate flows are strongly influenced by past returns (not tabulated, see Sirri and Tufano 1998 and

Frazzini and Lamont 2008, Lamont 2012). The evidence thus suggests that investors act in line with

their reported expectations – when they report high expected market returns, they also tend to be

purchasing equity mutual funds.

       We also consider the objection that investors are confused by the questions. One possibility is

that investors believe they are answering questions about current or future fundamentals rather than the

performance of the stock market. Suppose, following Cochrane (2011), that investors report not their

true beliefs, but instead their “risk neutral” equivalents, whereby they report their expectations of future

discounted cash flows. Adopting this logic, when investors say “high cash flow” they mean “low

required returns”. But the survey questions we analyze here explicitly ask about future stock market

returns. Gallup, for example, asks survey participants about their beliefs on the “performance” of the

stock market over the next 12 months; the Michigan survey asks “what is the average annual percentage



                                                    12
rate of return that you would expect to earn over the next 2 to 3 years?”; CFOs in the Graham-Harvey

survey are asked “during the next year, I expect the S&P 500 return will be...” If investors were

answering these questions using risk neutral equivalents, it would mean that they would simply report

the risk-free rate. In light of these observations, it is more plausible to conclude that investors understand

the questions, and to take their answers at face value.



Correlation between different measures of investor expectations

       In Table 2, we show partial correlations between the different measures of investor expectations.

The table summarizes the visual impressions from Figures 1, 2 and 3. The average correlation is 43%

and the maximum correlation is 77% (between Gallup and Graham-Harvey). All correlations are

positive, but for the correlation between Michigan and Graham Harvey (the correlation is zero) and

between Michigan and Shiller (the correlation is significantly negative). The high degree of correlation

between the time series is impressive given the variety of different investors being surveyed for their

expectations – from individuals to chief financial officers to professional investors.

       At the bottom row of the table, we show the correlations between investor expectations and

flows. Again, the correlation is positive and statistically significant in nearly every case. The only

exception is the Michigan survey, which is strongly positively correlated with Gallup and American

Association, but uncorrelated or negatively correlated with the other surveys. For this survey, we should

bear in mind, however, the limited number of observations (N=22).



3. Determinants of Investor Expectations

       Our next task is to describe the time series structure of investor expectations. In this, we are

guided by past research. Several empirical studies in finance have emphasized the role of extrapolative



                                                     13
expectations in explaining behavior of security prices (e.g., Barsky and DeLong 1993, Cutler, Poterba,

and Summers 1991, Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny 1994). Theoretical papers in behavioral finance

also often recognize the role of extrapolation (Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny 1998, Campbell and Kyle

1993, Cutler, Poterba, and Summers 1990b, DeLong et al. 1990b, Fuster, Laibson, and Mendel 2010).

Prior work on direct measures of expectations, and of trading behavior guided by expectations, also

points to the importance of extrapolation (Frankel and Froot 1987, 1988, Hurd et al. 2009, Shiller 2000,

Case et al. 2012, Yagan 2012). These earlier studies guide our empirical analysis.

         We start in Figure 5 by plotting the Gallup measure of investor expectations against past 12-

month returns on the US stock market. There appears to be a high positive correlation between investor

expectations and past returns.

         Table 3 presents results for the corresponding time-series specifications

         Expt  a  bRt  k  cPt  dZ t  ut ,                                                             (2)

where R denotes the past k-period cumulative raw return on the stock market, P denotes the price level

(either log price of the S&P 500 or the log price-dividend ratio) and Z denotes other variables. In the

table, we show specifications in which R denotes the past 12-month return, but the results that follow are

not sensitive to changing the horizon between 3- and 24-months. In other words, the findings obtain as

long as we focus on recent returns.6

         In time-series regressions of this sort, both the left- and right-hand side variables are persistent,

leading to positive autocorrelation of the error term ut.7 The standard correction is to report t-statistics

based on Newey and West (1987), allowing for a sufficient number of lags. In our case, this is

somewhat complicated by the sporadic sampling of some of the time-series. For example, the Graham-
6
  Results vary somewhat across the different expectations measures. The evidence suggests that measures of investor
expectations based on individuals are slightly more sensitive to recent past returns (3-months as opposed to, say, the past 24-
months) than the measures based on CFOs and professional investors.
7
  Another concern is that in columns (1)-(6) of the table, the log price level is not stationary; for this reason we show
regressions also using the dividend-price ratio.

                                                              14
Harvey survey measures are released quarterly, while the Gallup data have short episodes of missing

data. We follow Datta and Du (2012), who suggest a simple modification of the Newey and West

procedure in which the researcher treats the data as if it is equally spaced.

       Although the results differ across measures, Table 3 shows that investor expectations are well

explained by two variables. First, when recent past returns are high, investors expect higher returns

going forward. Second, even after controlling for recent returns, investor expectations of future returns

are positively correlated with the level of prices. These results appear irrespective of how investor

expectations are measured. Across the columns of Panel A of Table 3, the average R-squared is 0.40.

       Because the survey expectations measures all have different units, the regression coefficients

must be rescaled in order to compare them across different survey types. Consider the first regression in

column (1): the coefficient on lagged returns is 33.71 while the coefficient on the price level is 16.88.

An increase in the price level over the past year of 20 percent (roughly one standard deviation of annual

returns over the period on which the regression is based) increases the Gallup measure of expectations

by 20.5 units. Rescaling this to a percentage return, this is approximately 2.10 percentage points, which

is approximately one standard deviation. More broadly, across all specifications, the coefficients on

lagged price level tend to be lower, but the same order of magnitude, than the coefficients on the 12-

month past return. Because the price level, in log terms, is essentially just the sum of all past returns,

this simply says that more recent returns exert a stronger influence on investor expectations.

       In addition to past returns and price levels, we experiment with several proxies for fundamentals,

including past and current changes in log dividends, past and current changes in log earnings, as well as

measures of macroeconomic conditions such as current and lagged GDP growth, industrial production,

and the unemployment rate. In further untabulated tests we have also attempted to use measures of log

consumption and consumption growth because these are suggested by academic research as being



                                                     15
related to ER. None of these variables, it turns out, have much explanatory power for investor

expectations. While these variables sometimes have statistically significant univariate correlations with

investor expectations, they are nearly always eliminated when we control for returns and the price level.

In Panel B we show representative results, in which we include 12-month earnings growth, the

unemployment rate, and the risk-free interest rate. Only in the case of earnings growth do any of these

variables consistently play any role in explaining investor expectations. When we include the price level

and the past stock market return, these variables again become insignificant.

       These results are broadly consistent with a great deal of evidence that has accumulated in finance

over the last 25 years. A substantial share of investors, including individuals, CFOs, and professional

investors hold extrapolative expectations. When stock prices are high, and when they have been rising,

investors are optimistic about future market returns. These results decisively reject the view that survey

measures of investor expectations are meaningless noise: this is both because of the high correlations of

expectations across data sources and because of the highly predictable structure of expectations. In the

remainder of the paper, we compare our measures of expectations with measures of ER derived from

consumption-based models, and seek to provide a consistent account of the evidence.



4. How Expectations of Returns and ER predict future returns

       Ever since Robert Shiller’s (1981) path-breaking work on excess volatility of stock prices under

the assumption of constant expected returns, financial economists have sought to reconcile stock market

volatility with efficient markets theory. The leading approach has been to construct theoretical models

in which required returns are variable in a way that explains the volatility of market prices, and to

evaluate empirical measures of ER suggested by these models. We study three measures of expected




                                                     16
returns suggested by this research: the dividend price ratio, surplus consumption from Campbell and

Cochrane (1999), and the consumption wealth ratio from Lettau and Ludvigson (2001).8,9

        The starting point of this research is the behavior of the log price dividend ratio. As first pointed

out by Campbell and Shiller (1988), Cochrane (1992), and Campbell and Ammer (1993), and recently

summarized by Cochrane (2011), most of the variation in price dividend ratios describes variation in

expected future returns rather than future dividend growth. In other words, in the decomposition of the

log dividend price ratio dp,

                                  k                            k               
         var( dpt )  cov  dpt ,   j 1rt  j   cov  dpt ,   j 1d t  j    k cov(dpt , dpt  k )   (3)
                                 j 1                         j 1             

all of the variation in dividend-price ratios is explained by the first term. This is because, as shown by

Cochrane (2008), the dividend-price ratio does not forecast changes in future dividend growth Δd.

Campbell and Shiller (1989) show that there is little evidence that changes in the dividend-price ratio

forecast changes in observable risk. Equation (3) is essentially an accounting identity from the viewpoint

of the econometrician. In a representative agent rational expectations models, however, time-series

variation in expected returns in (3) must be the same as time-series variation in expectations of returns.

        To explain variation in the expected returns implied by changes in the dividend price ratio,

researchers have put forth rational expectations models in which investors’ required market returns

fluctuate enough to match the data. These models come in three broad flavors: habit formation models in

the spirit of Campbell and Cochrane (1999) that focus on the variation in investor risk aversion; long-run

risk models in the spirit of Bansal and Yaron (2004) in which investors’ perception of the quantity of

8
  We have also studied, but do not report here, a measure of ER derived from the Bansal and Yaron (2004) long-run risks
model. Dana Kiku kindly provided us with a measure of expected returns from Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2011). Time-series
variation in their measure is closely related to the dividend yield (and thus negatively correlated with most measures of
survey expectations), and so we do not lose much by focusing on the dividend yield instead. We exclude this material from
the paper because, although we obtain similar results as for the dividend price ratio, the data are only available annually.
9
 Also related, but not studied here, are models of time-varying rare disasters. See Barro (2006), Berkman, Jacobsen and Lee
(2010) and Wachter (2012).

                                                                  17
long-run risk drives variation in discount rates, and so-called rare disaster models that capture time-

varying estimates of disaster probability (Barro (2006), Berkman, Jacobsen and Lee (2010) and

Wachter (2012)). Taking the dividend-price ratio as a proxy for ER, these models are often calibrated so

as to match the time-series variation in this ratio.

       We pay particular attention to the Campbell and Cochrane habit formation model, in part

because of its prominence in the literature, and in part because this model suggests an empirically

implementable proxy for ER. In Campbell and Cochrane, investor utility is defined relative to “habit”,

which is essentially a moving average of past consumption. When past consumption has been high, risk

aversion falls and prices are high. As shown in Cochrane (2011), the surplus consumption ratio,

computed using aggregate data on nondurable consumption, closely matches time-series variation in the

price dividend ratio in recent decades.

       We also study the consumption wealth ratio of Lettau and Ludvigson (2001). This variable is

best understood as reflecting consumption behavior under the permanent income hypothesis, with time-

series variation in required returns (where this variation comes perhaps from habit formation models or

elsewhere). If prices are high because required returns are low (rather than dividend growth being high),

then consumption will rise only modestly under the permanent income hypothesis, and the consumption-

wealth ratio must be low. In an endowment economy the role of consumption is analogous to that of

dividends. According to Lettau and Ludvigson, “when the consumption aggregate wealth ratio is high,

agents must be expecting either high returns on the market portfolio in the future or low consumption

growth rates. Thus, consumption may be thought as the dividend paid from aggregate wealth.” Lettau

and Ludvigson do not take a position on what drives the underlying variation in expected returns, only




                                                       18
that whatever is the driver, consumers understand the variation and adjust their consumption

accordingly.10

           Panel C of Table 1 summarizes the ER measures. We compute the log dividend yield based on

CRSP value-weighted returns. Surplus consumption is computed following Campbell and Cochrane

(1999) and using code provided on John Cochrane’s website. We obtain cay from Martin Lettau’s

website.



Correlations between expectations of returns and ER

           If expectations of returns are measured without noise, then models of ER predict a perfect

positive correlation between investor expectations and ER. If expectations and ER are measured in the

same units, the regression coefficient in a regression of expectations on ER should be exactly one.11

           Table 4 shows the pairwise correlation between each measure of expectations of returns and ER.

The various survey measures of expectations are available for different periods of time and at different

frequencies, so the number of observations used to estimate each correlation varies.

            The time-series correlation between Gallup expectations and Log(D/P) is -0.33 (p-value = 0.00).

As suggested by the regressions in Table 2, Gallup expectations are even more strongly negatively

correlated with 12-month changes in Log(D/P) (not tabulated)—the correlation is -0.57, reflecting the

role of recent returns in shaping expectations.

           The second set of rows in Table 4 shows that expectations are even more strongly negatively

correlated with minus the surplus consumption ratio (-0.48 correlation with Gallup and -0.53 with

Graham-Harvey) The correlations between expectations of returns and the consumption wealth ratio,

10
     Other authors have questioned whether this assumption is reasonable. See for example Brennan and Xia (2002).
11
  If ER and expectations are in the same units then a regression of Expectationst = a + bERt + ut should yield coefficients a=0,
b=1, and an R-squared of one. We do not test this hypothesis here directly, because neither expectations nor ER are directly
in units of expected one-year stock returns.

                                                              19
cay, are more mixed, as can be seen in the bottom line of the table. Gallup, Graham-Harvey, and

Michigan expectations are uncorrelated with cay; Shiller expectations are positively correlated with cay;

while American Institute, and Investors’ Intelligence are negatively correlated with cay. Keep in mind

that the null hypothesis is that expectations are perfectly positively correlated with ER.12 In addition, it

turns out that the level of expectations is strongly negatively correlated with 12-month changes in cay.

        The evidence in this subsection raises a significant puzzle. We have argued in earlier sections –

based on the consistency of survey expectations across surveys, their alignment with mutual fund flows,

and their extrapolative structure – that survey measures of expectations in fact reflect the true beliefs of

many investors about future returns. And theory suggests that survey expectations should be strongly

positively correlated with ER. To the extent that either expectations or true ER are measured with noise,

the correlation is biased towards zero. But we have now shown that these measures of expectations are if

anything negatively correlated with measures of ER used by financial economists. If surveys indeed

measure expectations of broad classes of investors, then what is measured by these computations of

expected returns, which after all are indirect?



Forecasting regressions

        A critical property of ER measures is that they actually forecast future returns, even if they lack

explanatory power at short horizons.13 In this subsection, we examine the relationship between

expectations of returns, ER, and realized stock returns.

        Table 5 shows the results of time-series regressions of the form:


12
  Although there is not much correlation if both cay and expectations are measured in levels, the correlation is strongly
negative when we examine the correlation between expectations and 12-month changes in cay (not tabulated).
13
  See Ferson, Sarkissian and Simin (2003); Stambaugh (2000); Welch and Goyal (2008); Campbell and Yogo (2006);
Campbell and Thompson (2008) and Lewellen and Shanken (2002) for a discussion of the time-series properties and
performance of stock market return predictors.

                                                           20
         Rtx k  a  bX t  ut  k                                                                          (4)

where Rx denotes the k-month excess return, i.e., cumulative return on the CRSP value weighted stock

market net of the k-period compounded risk free rate, and X is a predictor variable.14 We study the

forecasting power for 12- and 36-month forward excess returns. t-statistics for k-period return

regressions are based on Newey and West (1984), using 1.5k lags.

         We begin with the null hypothesis: If reported expectations measure true expected returns and

are measured in the same units as ER, then expectations should forecast future returns with a coefficient

of one. That is, if Xt = Et[Rt+k] then under a rational expectations null hypothesis, the coefficient a in

equation (4) is 0 and b=1. Moreover, expectations should subsume all information in statistical

predictors of future stock market returns. This means that no additional forecasting variables should

exhibit any additional power for forecasting returns.

         To interpret the regression coefficients, we use the rescaled versions of expectations that are in

the same units as stock returns. Since all rescaling is linear, this has no impact on the t-statistics or R-

squared in any of the regressions, but does allow us to test whether b=1 in equation (4).

         Panel A shows that Gallup survey return expectations negatively forecast future stock returns.

The coefficient on survey expectations is -1.99. This is in contrast to the dividend yield (column (7)) and

other measures of ER, which are positively related to subsequent returns over the sample period.

         In all of the univariate specifications, the explanatory power is weak, with R-squareds ranging

from 0.02 (column (3)) to 0.34 (column (6)). Although the t-statistics appear to be low, we are interested

in the null hypothesis that the coefficient on expectations of returns is equal to one. We can reject this

null with confidence for each of the six measures of expectations. In the case of Gallup, for example, we


14
   Technically, we think of the surveys as asking investors about expected nominal stock returns, although perhaps
“optimistic” can be interpreted as optimistic relative to the risk-free return. We have repeated the return tests using a risk-
free rate control with virtually identical results (not tabulated)

                                                              21
can reject the null with a p-value of 0.04. In the case of Graham-Harvey, the p-value is 0.00. The results

of these hypothesis tests are shown for all six measures of expectations at the bottom of Panel A.

         Columns (9)-(14) show that the forecasting power of survey expectations is partly, but not fully,

accounted for by its correlation with the dividend yield, although the magnitude varies depending on

which measure of expectations we use. That is, when prices are high, both ER and realized future returns

are low, but expectations are high. This result also obtains if we proxy for the price level using the log of

the inflation adjusted S&P 500 index (not tabulated).

         Panel B shows that the forecasting results, which are quite weak at a 12-month horizon, tend to

strengthen when we study 36-month returns. Note that here we exclude the Michigan data, because of

insufficient observations to correctly compute standard errors.15

         The results of this subsection in some ways deepen the puzzle identified earlier. On the one

hand, measures of ER positively forecast realized returns, consistent with rational expectations models

with changing required returns. On the other hand, survey measures of expectations negatively forecast

realized returns, consistent with behavioral models in which investors extrapolate and are most

optimistic at the top, when future returns are actually low. The evidence on the extrapolative structure

of expectations is supportive of this interpretation as well. But this leaves us with the question: if

measures of ER do not actually capture expectations of returns, then how can they forecast realized

returns? We suggest a possible answer in the next section.



5. A Calibration Exercise

         We are unable to reconcile our evidence with conventional representative agent asset pricing

models in which investors’ time-varying discount rate drives variation in stock prices. Equilibrium logic

15
  The OLS coefficients are strongly negative (the coefficient on Michigan is -0.12 with an OLS t-statistic of -4.16 and R-
squared of 0.46.) but not reported in the table. There are insufficient observations to compute Newey-West standard errors in
the same manner as for the other regressions in Panel B.

                                                             22
suggests that for investor expectations to negatively forecast future stock returns, there must be multiple

classes of investors.

        We start by specifying a simple model in which one group of investors behaves in a way that

parallels the structure of expectations we observe in the data. In such a model, we can also compute

some proxies for ER that previous research has identified. We can then ask under what circumstances

the model can explain the available evidence, including 1) the negative correlation between model ER

and expectations of returns, 2) the positive forecasting power of constructed ER for realized returns, and

3) the negative forecasting power of investor expectations for realized returns.

        To construct the model, we follow (actually simplify) Cutler, Poterba, and Summers (1990b) and

consider a market with two types of traders. The first type, introduced by DeLong et al. (1990b), is

positive feedback traders whose beliefs and trading are shaped by prices and past returns. The second

type is fundamental traders who accommodate the feedback traders’ demand by buying stocks when

prices are high relative to fundamentals, and selling stocks when prices are low relative to fundamentals.

These fundamental traders can perhaps be rational accommodators, who are willing to buy stocks when

extrapolators sell them, but have a limited risk bearing capacity and thus require a return premium

(DeLong et al 1990a).16 The aggregate quantity of risk held by all investors in the model is constant, but

the fundamental traders hold a time-varying amount of risk because of their accommodation of

extrapolative trader demand (although their risk tolerance does not need to change over time as in many

representative agent models). The model has the advantage of being perhaps the simplest behavioral

model; and one constructed before most rational accounts of time varying expected returns had been

articulated.



16
  Interpreting the fundamental traders as “reduced form rational” is not entirely straightforward. In some behavioral models
such as DeLong et al (1990b), the fundamental traders can jump on the bandwagon and destabilize prices. In the model here,
however, they always exert a stabilizing influence on prices.

                                                            23
Setup and Discussion

        There is a single risky asset in net supply of q. The asset has a terminal value f but does not pay

interim dividends. Every period t, news about the fundamentals is revealed according to the random

walk:

        ft  ft 1  zt .
                                                                                              (5)

In (5), zt is i.i.d with variance σ2. Demand of the fundamental traders sft is given by

        s f ,t   ( pt  1 ft   2 ft 1 ),                                                (6)

where p denotes the log price, ft the log fundamental perceived at time t, and β < 0. The magnitude of β

fixes the weight (or relative wealth) of fundamental traders in the economy. Fundamental traders buy

when prices are low relative to fundamental value, and sell when prices are high. For simplicity, we fix

α1+ α2 =1, meaning that their demand is proportional to the price-to-fundamental ratio, with

fundamentals being observed with a lag. Allowing non-zero α2 has the effect of making fundamental

traders bet slowly against mispricing, and thus introduces persistence in the price to fundamental ratio,

consistent with the data in which price-dividend ratios are highly persistent. When returns are normally

distributed, equation (6) is close to the demand curve that would obtain for a perfectly rational constant

absolute risk aversion investor.

        Demand of the positive feedback traders spt is directly motivated by our data. In Section 3 and

Table 3, we showed that expectations were positively related to both past returns and the current price

level. We thus specify

        s p ,t   pt   ( pt  pt 1 ),                                                    (7)

where γ and δ are both positive. In describing positive feedback trader demand, we have also

experimented with different specifications in which the γ applies to p-f instead of p directly. For γ=0, the

demand of the positive feedback traders depends only on past returns, as in the original CPS model. It is

                                                     24
also possible to add further lags of returns to equation (7), but this complicates the algebra without

changing the central intuitions.

        To solve the model, we impose market clearing:

         pt   ( pt  pt 1 )   ( pt   1 ft   2 ft 1 )  q                                          (8)

From expression (8), we can write prices as a function of past prices and fundamentals:

                         1
        pt                    pt 1   ( ft 1  (1  2 ) zt ) ,                                     (9)
                      

where θ is the constant q/(β + γ + δ). If |                   |       1, the fundamental traders have sufficient risk-

bearing capacity to counter the potentially unstable beliefs of the positive feedback traders.

        Rearranging terms in the above, we can write down the price to fundamental ratio as a function

of past prices and fundamentals:

                                                  
        pt  ft            pt 1          ft 1  2        z .
                                             t                                                (10)

Equations (9) and (10) show how prices and price-fundamental ratios respond to fundamental news zt. If

we assume α2β + γ + δ > 0 and β + γ + δ < 0 then pt – ft increases with zt. To see this, consider what

                                                                                                    (1   2 )
happens following a positive shock zt. The equilibrium price pt has to change by                                z for the
                                                                                                       t

                         (1  2 )
market to clear, and                is greater than 1 as long as γ + δ are neither too small (absolute value of β
                           

+ γ + δ smaller than α1β) nor too large (β + γ + δ < 0). Intuitively, a good fundamental shock increases

fundamental traders’ demand and therefore the price, which in turn leads to an increase in the feedback

traders’ demand. However, since the asset is in fixed net supply, it is impossible for both types of

traders’ demand to increase in the same direction. If β + γ + δ > 0, then positive feedback traders are

more sensitive to price changes than fundamental traders. In this case, the equilibrium price must end

                                                                      25
up lower so that feedback traders’ demand eventually decreases. On the other hand, if β + γ + δ < 0,

then fundamental traders’ demand is more sensitive to price. In this case, the equilibrium price must end

up higher so that fundamental traders’ demand decreases. If γ + δ is too small, or feedback traders are

not very sensitive to price changes, then the price response to the fundamental shock will also be small.

       To work out how the demand of positive feedback traders responds to news about fundamentals,

we write their demand sp,t as a function of zt and past values of prices and fundamentals:

        s p ,t  (   ) pt   pt 1
                               (   )          (1   2 )(   )                       (11)
                        pt 1             ft 1                       zt  (   ) .
                                                

When β + γ + δ < 0, positive feedback trader’s demand rises with fundamental shock. This follows from

our earlier intuition that the equilibrium price pt rises following a positive shock to fundamentals.

       Finally, we can use the model to understand the relationship between fundamental news, the

price-to-fundamental ratio pt – ft, and future returns pt+1 – pt. Returns are given by

                           1
        pt  pt 1                 ( pt 1  pt 2 )   (1 zt   2 zt 1 ).             (12)
                         

Consider the path of prices following a shock zt. Using (9) and (12), future returns pt+1 – pt respond to zt

according to

        d ( pt 1  pt )                      (1   2 ) 
                                        2                 .                                (13)
              dzt                             

For β + γ + δ < 0, the first term is positive. The entire expression is then negative when α2 is small or δ

is large (for α2 (β + γ) + δ > 0). Intuitively, if the fundamental traders are responsive enough to price

changes, they eventually push price back to near-fundamental levels, leading to mean reversion.



Calibration



                                                                    26
       To get a sense of how the model specified above might allow us to reconcile the negative

correlation between ER and expectations of returns, we consider a simple exercise in which we simulate

returns using functional forms of feedback trader expectations based on our data. We interpret the

fundamental ft as being analogous to a dividend on the stock market, in which case pt – ft is the log price-

dividend ratio.

       We first specify demand of the positive feedback traders. Following the coefficients in the first

column of Table 3, we write

        s p,t  0.17 pt  0.34( pt  pt 1 ).                                                       (14)

Here the absolute scale of the coefficients is arbitrary (we can simply double the number of positive

feedback traders or cut them in half), but we use Table 3 to pin down the relative magnitudes of the δ

and γ coefficients.

       For the fundamental traders’ demand, as an example we choose the coefficients in Cutler,

Poterba and Summers, i.e.,

        s f ,t  1( pt  0.75 ft  0.25 ft 1 ).                                                   (15)

Fundamental traders bet on the fundamental, but observe it with a slight lag. Note that we have chosen

β = -1, which means that the fundamental traders have the same weight in the model as the positive

feedback traders.

       We simulate 5000 paths of 100 years of stock market returns. In each simulation, we throw out

the first 50 years of simulated returns, and study the relationship between prices, dividend yields, the

current fundamental ft, and future stock market returns for the last 50 years of the sample. The idea is to

get as close as possible to our empirical specification in Table 5, where we have a maximum of 50-years

of expectations data and returns.

       For each simulation, we run regressions of the form


                                                    27
         pt  k  pt  a  bX t  ut  k .                                                                          (16)

where the left-hand side is the log return, and X denotes a predictor variable drawn from our data. For

each simulation, we store the coefficient estimate b and the R-squared from this regression, which we

summarize in Table 6. As predictors, we use f-p (analogous to the dividend-price ratio), innovations in

the fundamental z, the fundamental f, and the difference between the fundamental and its moving

average (analogous to a “surplus fundamental”). The idea is to approximate the predictors that have been

emphasized in the predictability literature. Some caution is warranted in interpreting these predictors,

however, since we have not worked out a full model with consumption.17 Notwithstanding, it is

straightforward to see that, if dividends are correlated with aggregate consumption, then changes in

consumption or dividends can be related to future returns.

        Table 6 shows that we can match many of the facts developed so far. Specifically, in this model,

expectations of one group of traders are extrapolative. These expectations are negatively correlated with

measured ER and negatively forecast future returns, while measured ER (f-p in our simulated

regressions) positively forecasts future returns. Critically, this is so even though measured ER has

nothing to do with changes in risk aversion as contemplated by rational expectations models.

        The evidence thus raises a possibility that might account for all the evidence, namely that

financial markets are governed by a behavioral model including positive feedback traders exhibiting

extrapolative expectations, as well as accommodating fundamentalists. In such a model, ER accurately

reflects the fundamental traders’ required returns, but equilibrium prices are far from rational.



Who is on the Other Side?


17
  This is especially true for the “surplus fundamental”, in which we are trying to approximate surplus consumption. Our
model does not involve consumption; notwithstanding, it is straightforward to see that if dividends are correlated with
aggregate consumption, then changes in consumption or dividends can be related to future returns. The results in Table 6
suggest this approach could be fruitful.

                                                             28
       While the surveys document the ubiquity of extrapolative investors, in equilibrium these

investors’ demands must be accommodated, thereby raising the question of who is on the other side.

Who are the fundamentalists? While a full investigation of this question is constrained by data on stock

market positions, previous research in corporate finance that suggests firms play an important role in

accommodating shifts in investor demand. Baker and Wurgler (2000) suggest that firms issue equity

when overall market prices are high, and Frazzini and Lamont (2008) suggest that firms may issue stock

in response to retail mutual fund flows. And, it is well known that firms tend to issue equity following

periods when the market has performed well (Shultz 2002; Baker and Xuan 2009).

       Figure 6 plots the Gallup series alongside the number of IPOs in that month, obtained from Jeff

Wurgler’s website. There is a strong positive correlation (ρ=0.60) between the two time series,

consistent with the idea that equity issuance plays a significant accommodative role. That is, the

fundamentalists in the CPS model, in part, are firms. Table 7 shows the corresponding specifications for

the full set of survey, where we regress the number of IPOs in month t on survey expectations in the

same month. For all but one of the surveys (Shiller), the correlation is positive, and for all but two the

correlation is strongly statistically significant. In the last column of the table, we further show the strong

positive correlation between mutual fund inflows and the number of IPOs. This evidence is tentative, but

it points strongly in the direction of a behavioral model in which firms are among the rational investors

accommodating swings in demand by extrapolative traders.



6. Conclusions
       Much of modern asset pricing seeks to explain changes in stock market valuations using theories

of investors’ time-varying required returns. Although researchers have achieved considerable progress in

developing proxies for ER, an important but often overlooked test of these theories is whether investors’

expectations line up with these proxies. In this paper, we show that they do not.

                                                      29
       At a minimum, our evidence rules out rational expectations models in which changes in market

valuations are driven by the required returns of a representative investor. Although prices may behave in

a way that is observationally equivalent to such models, survey expectations are inconsistent with the

standard model’s predictions. We suggest a simple behavioral alternative, in which variation in market

prices is driven by changes in demand by extrapolative investors captured in expectations data, and

accommodated by fundamental, and possibly rational investors. Future models of stock market

fluctuations should embrace the large fraction of investors whose expectations are extrapolative.




                                                   30
                                            References
Amronin, Gene and Steven A. Sharpe, 2008, “Expectation of Risk and Return Among Household
      Investors: Are their Sharpe Ratios Countercyclical?” Finance and Economics Discussion Series
      Working Paper, 2008-17, Federal Reserve Board, Washington DC.
Bacchetta, Philippe, Elmar Mertens, and Eric van Wincoop, 2009, “Predictability in Financial Markets:
      What Do Survey Expectations Tell Us?” Journal of International Money and Finance, 406-426.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2000, “The Equity Share in New Issues and Aggregate Stock
       Returns” Journal of Finance 55, 2219–57.
Baker, Malcolm, and Yuhai Xuan, 2009, “Under New Management: Equity Issuance and the Attribution
       of Past Returns,” Working paper.
Bansal, Ravi, Dana Kiku and Amir Yaron, 2012, “An Empirical Evaluation of the Long-Run Risks
       Model for Asset Prices,” Critical Finance Review 1 (1): 183-221.
Bansal, Ravi and Amir Yaron, 2004, “Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset Pricing
       Puzzles,” Journal of Finance 59 (4): 1481-1509.
Ben-David, Itzhak, John R. Graham and Campbell R. Harvey, 2010. “Managerial Miscalibration,”
      NBER Working Papers 16215.
Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny, 1998, “A Model of Investor Sentiment,” Journal
       of Financial Economics 49 (3): 307-343.
Barro, Robert J., 2006, “Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century,” The Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 823-866.
Barsky, Robert B. and J. Bradford DeLong, 1993, “Why Does the Stock Market Fluctuate?” Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 108, 291-311.
Berkman, Henk, Ben Jacobsen, and John Lee, 2010, “Time-varying Rare Disaster Risk and Stock
      Returns,” forthcoming, Journal of Financial Economics.
Brennan, Michael J. and Yihong Xia, 2005, “Tay’s as Good as Cay,” Finance Research Letters 2, 1-14.
Campbell, John Y & Ammer, John, 1993. “What Moves the Stock and Bond Markets? A Variance
     Decomposition for Long-Term Asset Returns,” Journal of Finance 48, 3-37.
Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane, 1999, “By force of habit: A consumption-based explanation
     of aggregate stock market behavior”, Journal of Political Economy 107, 205–251.
Campbell, John Y. and Albert S. Kyle, 1993, “Smart Money, Noise Trading and Stock Price
     Behaviour,” Review of Economic Studies 60 (1): 1-34.
Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, 1988a, “The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of Future
     Dividends and Discount Factors,” Review of Financial Studies 1, 195-228.



                                                 31
Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, 1988b, “Stock Prices, Earnings, and Expected Dividends,”
     Journal of Finance 43 (3): 661-676.
Campbell, John Y., and Samuel B. Thompson, 2008. “Predicting Excess Stock Returns Out of Sample:
     Can Anything Beat the Historical Average?,” Review of Financial Studies 21, 1509-1531.
Campbell, John Y. & Yogo, Motohiro, 2006. “Efficient tests of stock return predictability,” Journal of
     Financial Economics 81, 27-60.
Case, Karl E., Robert J. Shiller, and Anne Thompson, 2012, “What Have They Been Thinking? Home
       Buyer Behavior in Hot and Cold Markets.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Cecchetti, Stephen G., Pok-sang Lam and Nelson C. Mark, 2000, “Asset Pricing With Distorted Beliefs:
      Are Equity Returns Too Good To Be True?” American Economic Review 90 (4): 787-805.
Clarke, Roger G., and Meir Statman, 1998, “Bullish or Bearish,” Financial Analysts Journal 54, 63-72.
Cochrane, John H., 1992, “Explaining the Variance of Price-Dividend Ratios,” Review of Financial
      Studies 5, 243-80.
Cochrane, John H., 2008, “The Dog that Did Not Bark: A Defense of Return Predictability,” Review of
      Financial Studies 21, 1533-1575.
Cochrane, John H., 2011, “Presidential Address: Discount Rates,” Journal of Finance 66 (4): 1047-
      1108.
Cutler, David M., James M. Poterba, and Lawrence H. Summers, 1991, “Speculative Dynamics,”
       Review of Economic Studies 58 (3): 529-546.
Cutler, David M., James M. Poterba, and Lawrence H. Summers, 1990, “Speculative Dynamics and the
        Role of Feedback Traders,” American Economic Review 80 (2): 63-68.
Datta, Deepa Dhume and Wenxin Du, 2012, Nonparametric HAC Estimation for Time Series Data with
       Missing Observations, Working paper.
DeLong, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert J. Waldmann, 1990a, “Noise
     Trader Risk in Financial Markets,” Journal of Political Economy 98, 703-738.
DeLong, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert J. Waldmann, 1990b,
     “Positive Feedback Investment Strategies and Destabilizing Rational Speculation,” Journal of
     Finance 45 (2): 379-395.
Dominguez, Kathryn M., 1986, Are Foreign Exchange Forecasts Rational?: New Evidence from Survey
     Data, Economics Letters 21, 277-281.
Dominitz, Jeff, and Charles F. Manski, 2010, “Measuring and Interpreting Expectations of Equity
      Returns,” Journal of Applied Econometrics 26, 352-370.
Ferson, Wayne E., Sergei Sarkissian and Timothy T. Simin, 2003. “Spurious Regressions in Financial
       Economics?,” Journal of Finance 58, 1393-1414.


                                                  32
Frankel, Jeffrey A. and Kenneth A. Froot, “Explaining the Demand for Dollars: International Rates of
       Return, and the Expectations of Chartists and Fundamentalists,” in Macroeconomics,
       Agriculture, and the Exchange Rate, eds. Robert G. Chambers and Philip L. Paarlberg, Boulder,
       CO: Westview Press (1988).
Frankel, Jeffrey A. and Kenneth A. Froot., 1986. “Explaining the Demand for Dollars: International
       Rates of Return and the Expectations of Chartists and Fundamentalists,” Economics Working
       Papers 8603, University of California at Berkeley.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. and Kenneth A. Froot, 1987, “Using Survey Data to Test Standard Propositions
       Regarding Exchange Rate Expectations,” American Economic Review 77 (1): 133-153.
Fisher, Kenneth L., and Meir Statman, 2002, “Blowing Bubbles,” Journal of Psychology and Financial
        Markets, 3, 53-65.
Frazzini, Andrea, and Owen Lamont, 2008, “Dumb Money: Mutual Fund Flows and Cross-Section of
       Stock Returns,” Journal of Financial Economics 88, 299-322.
Froot, Kenneth A., 1989, “New Hope for the Expectations Hypothesis of the Term Structure of Interest
       Rates,” Journal of Finance 44 (2): 283-305.
Fuster, Andreas, David Laibson and Brock Mendel, 2010, “Natural Expectations and Macroeconomic
        Fluctuations,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 24 (4): 67-84.
Graham, John R. and Campbell R. Harvey, 1996, “Market timing ability and volatility implied in
      investment newsletters’ asset allocation recommendations,” Journal of Financial Economics 42,
      397–421.
Greenwood, Robin and Samuel G. Hanson, 2012, “Issuer Quality and Corporate Bond Returns,”
      Working paper.
Hirshleifer, David, 2001, “Investor Psychology and Asset Pricing,” Journal of Finance 56 (4): 1533-
       1597.
Hurd, Michael, Maarten van Rooij and Joachim Winter, 2009, “Stock Market Expectations of Dutch
      Households,” De Nederlandsche Bank Working Paper No. 228.
Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer and Robert W Vishny, 1994, “Contrarian Investment, Extrapolation,
      and Risk," Journal of Finance 49, 1541-78.
Lamont, Owen, 2003, Discussion of “Perspectives on Behavioral Finance: Does Irrationality Disappear
      with Wealth? Evidence from Expectations and Actions” by Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, NBER
      Macroeconomics Annual 2003, edited by Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoff.
Lamont, Owen, 2012, “Risk on, Risk off: Return-chasing Flows and Stock/bond Dynamics,” Working
      paper.

Lettau, Martin and Sydney C. Ludvigson, 2005, “Expected Returns and Expected Dividend Growth,”
        Journal of Financial Economics 76 (3): 583-626.

                                                33
Lettau, Martin and Sydney Ludvigson, 2001, “Consumption, Aggregate Wealth, and Expected Stock
       Returns,” Journal of Finance 56 (3): 815-849.
Lewellen, Jonathan, and Jay Shanken, 2010. “A skeptical appraisal of asset pricing tests," Journal of
       Financial Economics 96 175-194.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Stefan Nagel, 2011, “Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic Experiences
     Affect Risk-Taking?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126, 373-416.
Nagel, Stefan, 2012, “Macroeconomic Experiences and Expectations: A Perspective on the Great
       Recession,” Working paper.
Newey, W. K., and K. D. West, 1987 “A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite Heteroskedasticity and
      Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,” Econometrica, 55(3), 703–708.
Shiller, Robert, 1981, Do stock prices move too much to be justified by subsequent changes in
        dividends? American Economic Review 71, 421–436.
Shiller, Robert J., 2000, “Measuring Bubble Expectations and Investor Confidence,” Journal of
        Psychology and Financial Markets 1 (1): 49-60.
Shiller, Robert J., Kon-ya Fumiko, and Yoshiro Tsutsui, 1996, “Investor Behavior in the October 1987
        Stock Market Crash: The Case of Japan,” The Journal of Japanese and International Economics.
Robert J. Shiller, Irrational Exuberance, Princeton University Press, Princeton NJ, 2000.
Schultz, Paul, 2002, “Pseudo Market Timing,” Journal of Finance.
Sirri, Erik R., and Peter Tufano, 1998, “Costly Search and Mutual Fund Flows,” Journal of Finance 53,
        1589-1622.
Stambaugh, Robert F., 1999, Predictive regressions, Journal of Financial Economics 54, 375-421.

Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, 2004, “Perspectives on Behavioral Finance: Does ‘Irrationality’ Disappear
       with Wealth? Evidence from Expectations and Actions,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual,
       Volume 18, eds. Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoff, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press (2004).
Wachter, Jessica, 2012, “Can Time-varying Risk of Rare Disasters Explain Aggregate Stock Market
      Volatility?” forthcoming Journal of Finance.
Welch, Ivo, and Amit Goyal, 2008, “A Comprehensive Look at The Empirical Performance of Equity
      Premium Prediction”, Review of Financial Studies 21, 1455-1508.
Yagan, Danny, 2012, “Why Do Individual Investors Chase Stock Market Returns? Evidence of Belief in
       Long-Run Market Momentum,” Working Paper.




                                                   34
                 Appendix: Measures of Investor Expecatations and Mutual Fund Flows



Survey Name                     Periodicity                     Detail

Gallup:                         Monthly, with gaps              We use three series. The longest-running series asks
October 1996-December 2011                                      investors whether they are “very pessimistic”
                                                                “pessimistic” “neutral” “optimistic” or “very
                                                                optimistic” about the market, we measure. This series
                                                                is almost complete with reporting every month, with a
                                                                notable gap between November 2009 and February
                                                                2011. A shorter series (September 1998-April 2003)
                                                                asks for a percentage expected return over the next
                                                                twelve months. A shorter series still (September 1998-
                                                                March 2000) asks for the “minimum acceptable
                                                                return” over the next 12 months.
Graham-Harvey:                  Quarterly                       Sample is Chief Financial Officers of large U.S.
October 2000-December 2011                                      Corporations. (http://www.cfosurvey.org/)

American Association of         Weekly; we use a monthly-       Surveyed investors claim to be “bullish,” “neutral” or
Individual Investors:           sampled series                  “bearish.” We measure investor expectations as
July 1987-December 2011                                         “bullish” minus “bearish”
                                                                (http://www.aaii.com/sentimentsurvey/sent_results)
Investor Intelligence:          Weekly, we use a monthly-       Investment newsletters are classified as being
January 1963-December 2011      sampled series                  “bullish,” “neutral” or “bearish.” We measure investor
                                                                expectations as “bullish” minus “bearish”
                                                                (http://www.investorsintelligence.com/x/default.html)
Shiller Individual Investors:   Every 6-months before July      Sample is drawn from list of wealthy investors.
April 1999-December 2011        2001, after that monthly        (http://icf.som.yale.edu/stock-market-confidence-
                                                                indices-united-states-one-year-index-data)
University of Michigan Survey   Sporadic, 22 surveys in total   We use the mean response to the question “Now,
Research Center                                                 thinking about a broadly diversified set of investments
September 2000-October 2005                                     in U.S. stocks and stock mutual funds, what is the
                                                                average annual percentage rate of return that you
                                                                would expect it to earn over the next 2 to 3 years?”
Mutual Fund Flows:              Monthly                         From Investment Company Institute. We scale dollar
January 1984-December 2011                                      flows into equity mutual funds by the size of the US
                                                                equity market from CRSP.
                                                                (http://www.ici.org/info/flows_data_2012.xls)




                                                          35
                                                                                                                                                        Figure 1
                                                                                                                                                    The Gallup Survey


The main Gallup series is computed as the fraction of investors who are bullish (optimistic or very optimistic) minus the
fraction of investors who are bearish. The figure also shows a short time-series when investors reported their “minimum
acceptable return” and a slightly longer time-series of their percentage “expected returns.” The latter two series are marked
on the right axis.

                        80                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             18

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Gallup Main Series =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  % Optimistic - % Pessimistic                                                         16
                        60

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14

                        40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Expected or Required Returns (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12
  Bullish-Bearish (%)




                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       8
                         0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       6
                        -20
                                                                    "Minimum                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4
                                                                    Acceptable                                               % Expected Returns
                                                                    Return"
                        -40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2


                        -60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                              Dec-95


                                                Dec-96


                                                                  Dec-97


                                                                                    Dec-98


                                                                                                      Dec-99


                                                                                                                        Dec-00


                                                                                                                                          Dec-01


                                                                                                                                                            Dec-02


                                                                                                                                                                              Dec-03


                                                                                                                                                                                                Dec-04


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Dec-05


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Dec-06


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Dec-07


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Dec-08


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Dec-09


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Dec-10


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Dec-11
                                       Jun-96


                                                         Jun-97


                                                                           Jun-98


                                                                                             Jun-99


                                                                                                               Jun-00


                                                                                                                                 Jun-01


                                                                                                                                                   Jun-02


                                                                                                                                                                     Jun-03


                                                                                                                                                                                       Jun-04


                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jun-05


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jun-06


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun-07


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jun-08


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jun-09


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jun-10


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jun-11


                                                           Gallup Main Series = Bullish-Bearish (Left axis)                                                                                       "Minimum Acceptable Return" (Right axis)
                                                           "Expected Return" (Right axis)




                                                                                                                                                                              36
                                                                    Figure 2
                                        Comparing the Gallup Survey with Graham-Harvey CFO expectations

The main Gallup series, marked with a solid line (left axis), is computed as the fraction of investors who are bullish
(optimistic or very optimistic) minus the fraction of investors who are bearish. The dashed line denotes forecasts of nominal
returns made by CFOs in John Graham and Campbell Harvey’s quarterly surveys (right axis).

                                  80                                                                       10

                                                                                                           9
                                  60
                                                                                                           8




                                                                                                                Graham-Harvey CFOs % Expected Return
                                  40                                                                       7
   Gallup % Bullish - % Bearish




                                                                                                           6
                                  20

                                                                                                           5

                                   0
                                                                                                           4


                                  -20                                                                      3

                                                                                                           2
                                  -40
                                                                                                           1

                                  -60                                                                      0



                                            Gallup Survey Expectations        Graham-Harvey Survey




                                                                         37
                                                 Figure 3
 Comparing the Gallup Survey with American Association, Investor Intelligence, Shiller, and the Michigan Surveys

In each panel, the solid line shows the Gallup survey (left axis) and the dashed line shows the other survey.

Panel A. Gallup and American Association

                                  80                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Americaqn Association Bullish -
   Gallup % Bullish - % Bearish




                                  60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 40
                                  40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Bearish
                                  20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -20
                                  -20

                                  -40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -40

                                  -60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -60
                                        Jan-87
                                        Jan-88
                                        Jan-89
                                        Jan-90
                                        Jan-91
                                        Jan-92
                                        Jan-93
                                        Jan-94
                                        Jan-95
                                        Jan-96
                                        Jan-97
                                        Jan-98
                                        Jan-99
                                        Jan-00
                                        Jan-01
                                        Jan-02
                                        Jan-03
                                        Jan-04
                                        Jan-05
                                        Jan-06
                                        Jan-07
                                        Jan-08
                                        Jan-09
                                        Jan-10
                                        Jan-11
                                                                                        Gallup Survey Expectations                                                                      American Association


Panel B. Gallup and Investor Intelligence

                                  80                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Investor Itntelligence Bullish -Bearish
   Gallup % Bullish - % Bearish




                                  60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      60

                                  40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      40

                                  20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20

                                   0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0

                                  -20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -20

                                  -40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -40

                                  -60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -60
                                        Jan-63
                                                 Jan-65
                                                          Jan-67
                                                                   Jan-69
                                                                            Jan-71
                                                                                     Jan-73
                                                                                              Jan-75
                                                                                                       Jan-77
                                                                                                                Jan-79
                                                                                                                         Jan-81
                                                                                                                                  Jan-83
                                                                                                                                           Jan-85
                                                                                                                                                    Jan-87
                                                                                                                                                             Jan-89
                                                                                                                                                                      Jan-91
                                                                                                                                                                               Jan-93
                                                                                                                                                                                        Jan-95
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jan-97
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jan-99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jan-01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jan-03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jan-05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Jan-07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jan-09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jan-11




                                                                                          Gallup Survey Expectations                                                                     Investor Intelligence




                                                                                                                                                               38
                                                                       Figure 3 [Continued]
                                   Comparing the Gallup Survey with American Association, Investor Intelligence, and the Shiller Survey



Panel C. Gallup and Shiller

                                  80                                                                                         100
                                                                                                                             95
   Gallup % Bullish - % Bearish




                                  60
                                                                                                                             90
                                  40                                                                                         85




                                                                                                                                    Shiller Survey
                                  20                                                                                         80
                                                                                                                             75
                                   0                                                                                         70
                                  -20                                                                                        65
                                                                                                                             60
                                  -40
                                                                                                                             55
                                  -60                                                                                        50
                                    Jan-96    Jan-98     Jan-00      Jan-02     Jan-04     Jan-06   Jan-08     Jan-10

                                                                  Gallup Survey Expectations         Shiller


Panel D. Gallup and Michigan

                                  80
                                                                                                                              14




                                                                                                                                   Michigan (% Expected Return)
   Gallup % Bullish - % Bearish




                                  60

                                  40                                                                                          12

                                  20                                                                                          10
                                   0
                                                                                                                              8
                                  -20
                                                                                                                              6
                                  -40

                                  -60                                                                            4
                                    Sep-00 Mar-01 Sep-01 Mar-02 Sep-02 Mar-03 Sep-03 Mar-04 Sep-04 Mar-05 Sep-05

                                                              Gallup Survey Expectations            Michigan




                                                                                      39
                                                                       Figure 4
                                            Comparing the Gallup Survey with Flows into Equity Mutual Funds

The solid denotes the percentage of investors who are bullish in the Gallup survey (left axis). The dashed line (right axis) is
flows into mutual funds as a percentage of equity market capitalization, as reported by the Investment Company Institute.

                                      80                                                                       1.00%

                                                                                                               0.80%
                                      60
                                                                                                               0.60%

                                      40                                                                       0.40%
       Gallup % Bullish - % Bearish




                                                                                                                        Flows into Equity Market
                                                                                                               0.20%
                                      20

                                                                                                               0.00%

                                       0
                                                                                                               -0.20%


                                      -20                                                                      -0.40%

                                                                                                               -0.60%
                                      -40
                                                                                                               -0.80%

                                      -60                                                                      -1.00%



                                                  Gallup Survey Expectations         Flows into Stock Market




                                                                           40
                                                                                    Figure 5
                                                     The Role of Past Stock Market Returns in Explaining Survey Expectations

The dashed line denotes the 12-month rolling nominal return on the CRSP VW stock index. The solid line marked with
circles denotes expectations from the Gallup survey (% optimistic - %pessimistic).


                                       80                                                                                          80%
   Gallup % Optimistic-% Pessimistic




                                       60                                                                                          60%




                                                                                                                                          Past Stock return
                                       40                                                                                          40%
                                       20                                                                                          20%

                                       0                                                                                           0%
                                -20                                                                                                -20%

                                -40                                                                                                -40%
                                -60                                                                                                -60%
                                            Jan-96


                                                      Jan-98


                                                                 Jan-00


                                                                            Jan-02


                                                                                       Jan-04


                                                                                                  Jan-06


                                                                                                               Jan-08


                                                                                                                        Jan-10
                                                         Lagged 12-month Returns                           Gallup Survey Expectations




                                                                                       41
                                                       Figure 6
                                          Survey Expectations and IPO Activity

Gallup Survey Expectations and IPO activity. (ρ=0.60)


                                  100                                                             100
   Gallup % Bullish - % Bearish




                                                                                                  90
                                   80
                                                                                                  80
                                   60




                                                                                                        Numbero f IPOs
                                                                                                  70
                                   40                                                             60
                                                                                                  50
                                   20                                                             40
                                    0                                                             30
                                                                                                  20
                                  -20
                                                                                                  10
                                  -40                                                             0



                                        Gallup Survey Expectations               Number of IPOs




                                                          42
                                                                           Table 1
                                                                       Summary Statistics
Mean, median, standard deviation, extreme values, and the monthly autocorrelations. Gallup, American Association, and Investor Intelligence are all index values
based on whether polled survey respondents claim to be optimistic or pessimistic. Graham-Harvey and Michigan are measures of the percentage expected return, and
Shiller measures the fraction of surveyed investors who report positive expected returns. For GrahamHarvey, the autocorrelation is quarterly. Panel A shows
measures of investor expectations. Panel B rescales the qualitative measures of investor expectations so that they can be interpreted as a percentage nominal stock
return. Panel C summarizes other variables, including percentage flows into equity mutual funds, the log of the inflation adjusted S&P 500 index value, past nominal
stock returns, the log dividend-price ratio, Lettau and Ludvigson’s (2001) consumption-wealth ratio, surplus consumption according to Campbell and Cochrane,
future 12- and 36-month excess log stock returns, aggregate stock market earnings growth, the unemployment rate, and the number of IPOs.
  Variable                                        Date Range               N        Mean        Median               SD          Min           Max              ρ
  Panel A: Raw Measures of Investor Expectations (%)
  Gallup: Main Series                             1996-2011              135         48.50        50.00            11.10        20.00         68.00          0.66
       % Expected Return                          1998-2003               51         10.63        10.21             2.47         6.52         15.56          0.86
       % Min Acceptable Return                    1998-2000               14         11.52        11.32             1.02        10.33         14.57          0.14
  Graham-Harvey                                   2000-2011               42          5.95          5.98            1.62         2.18          9.21          0.49
  American Association                            1987-2011              294          8.54          9.25           15.67       -41.00         50.47          0.63
  Investor Intelligence                           1963-2011              588         12.63        14.55            19.89       -49.20         66.64          0.80
  Shiller                                         1996-2011              132         82.03        82.17             6.42        66.99         95.62          0.87
  Michigan                                        2000-2005               22          9.34          8.83            1.37         7.58         12.51          0.53
  Panel B: Rescaled Measures of Investor Expectations Used in Return Forecasting Regressions (% annual)
  Gallup*                                         1996-2011              135        10.49         10.73            2.27          3.94        14.27           0.66
  Graham-Harvey*                                  2000-2011               42          5.95         5.98            1.62          2.18         9.21           0.49
  American Association*                           1987-2011              294        10.23         10.29            1.28          6.19        13.66           0.63
  Investor Intelligence*                          1963-2011              588        10.18         10.38            2.09          3.68        15.85           0.80
  Shiller*                                        1996-2011              132        10.56         10.52            1.94          6.46        15.11           0.87
  Michigan*                                       1996-2011               22          9.35         8.83            1.37          7.58        12.51           0.53
  Panel C: Other Variables
  Flows into Equity Funds                         1984-2011              336          0.19          0.19            0.28         -0.90         1.00          0.66
  Log(SP500)                                      1963-2011              588          6.55          6.46            0.54          5.57         7.60          0.99
  Rt-12                                           1963-2011              588          0.11          0.13            0.17         -0.42         0.61          0.92
  Log(D/P)                                        1963-2011              588         -3.60         -3.52            0.41         -4.59        -2.86          0.98
  cay                                             1963-2011              588          0.00          0.00            0.02         -0.04         0.04          0.97
  Surplus Consumption                             1963-2011              588          0.15          0.17            0.06         -0.09         0.23          0.97
  rxt+12                                          1963-2010              576          0.06          0.08            0.17         -0.47         0.53          0.92
  rxt+36                                          1963-2008              552          0.18          0.15            0.34         -0.51         1.19          0.96
  Earnings Growth (%)                             1963-2008              612          0.02          0.05            0.38         -2.17         2.17          0.98
  Unemployment (%)                                1963-2008              624          6.04          5.70            1.61          3.40        10.80          0.99
  NIPOs                                           1960-2011              612         26.25            19              23             0         122           0.86

                                                                                43
                                                         Table 2
                             Correlations between Different Measures of Investor Expectations

The table shows partial correlation coefficients, i.e., it uses the full sample of overlapping data for each series.

                                                    Graham-       American             Investor
                                      Gallup                                                            Shiller         Michigan
                                                     Harvey      Association       Intelligence
                                    (N=135)                                                           (N=132)            (N=22)
                                                     (N=42)        (N=294)            (N=588)

    Graham-Harvey                  0.77
                                  [0.000]
    American Association           0.64              0.56
                                  [0.000]          [0.000]
    Investor Intelligence          0.60             0.64            0.55
                                  [0.000]          [0.000]         [0.000]
    Shiller                        0.39              0.66            0.51             0.43
                                  [0.000]          [0.000]         [0.000]          [0.000]
    Michigan                        0.61            -0.12            0.60             0.19           -0.55
                                  [0.003]          [0.922]         [0.003]          [0.395]         [0.020]
    Fund Flow                       0.69             0.71            0.42             0.20            0.51              0.40
                                  [0.000]          [0.000]         [0.000]          [0.002]         [0.001]            [0.068]




                                                                44
                                                                            Table 3
                                                              Determinants of Investor Expectations

Time series regressions of survey expectations of stock market returns for the next year on past stock market returns returns R, the price level P (either log price
of S&P500 or log price-dividend ratio), and measures of fundamental growth:
                                                                Expt  a  bRt  k  cPt  dZ t  ut ,
Newey-West t-statistics with 12-monthly lags are shown in brackets. GH refers to Graham-Harvey, AA to American Association, and II to Investor Intelligence.
In Panel A, the regressions include only past returns and the price level; in Panel B, measures of fundamentals (earnings growth, unemployment, and the risk-free
rate) are included.


Panel A: Past Returns and Price Levels

                 (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)         (9)         (10)        (11)        (12)
                Gallup        GH           AA            II        Shiller     Michigan      Gallup        GH          AA           II        Shiller    Michigan

Rt-12            33.71       1.882        31.49        50.21        -1.878       2.114       41.84        3.354       36.17       53.45        3.368        6.868
                [5.790]     [1.377]      [4.522]      [6.463]      [-0.205]     [2.070]     [11.72]      [2.460]     [5.839]     [7.031]      [0.691]      [5.050]
Log(SP500)       16.88       4.140        11.32        8.607         9.168       6.370
                [3.170]     [2.200]      [2.748]      [2.868]       [1.062]     [4.205]
Log(P/D)                                                                                     12.99        3.404      15.72        11.46        17.80       5.389
                                                                                            [3.446]      [3.264]    [4.234]      [3.131]      [4.808]     [6.359]
Constant        -109.7       -25.92       -105.3      -99.63        17.94       -39.02       -49.38       -11.33     -92.63       -88.11       6.525       -20.40
               [-3.267]     [-2.065]     [-3.646]    [-4.822]      [0.307]     [-3.477]     [-2.952]     [-2.188]   [-5.100]     [-5.293]     [0.368]     [-4.257]

N                 135         42           294         588           132          22          135          42          294         588          132         22
R2               0.616       0.285        0.218       0.242         0.044        0.735       0.632        0.348       0.259       0.243        0.317       0.827




                                                                                 45
Panel B: Including Controls for Fundamentals and the Risk-free Rate

                    (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)             (6)       (7)        (8)        (9)        (10)       (11)        (12)
                   Gallup        GH           AA            II        Shiller        Michigan   Gallup      GH         AA          II       Shiller    Michigan

Rt-12                                                                                             54.95     7.337       39.25     57.87      3.117       3.772
                                                                                                [8.761]    [8.084]    [4.906]    [8.038]    [0.504]     [5.135]
Log(P/D)                                                                                          17.70     4.360       10.80     6.627       16.77      3.978
                                                                                                [3.298]    [3.599]    [2.006]    [1.406]    [3.128]     [7.222]
Earnings Gr.        9.615       0.272         5.331        2.336       0.753           2.998     -7.572     -1.215     -1.632     -6.444     -0.626      1.580
                   [2.572]     [1.154]      [2.124]      [0.404]      [0.833]         [4.260]   [-1.966]   [-5.603]   [-0.720]   [-1.882]   [-0.578]    [5.068]
Unemployment        0.367       -0.410       -3.654        1.827       -3.341          0.267     -1.353    -0.0481     -1.816     1.785      -2.367      -0.180
                   [0.202]     [-2.390]     [-3.146]     [1.610]      [-5.118]        [0.634]   [-0.765]   [-0.307]   [-1.367]   [1.850]    [-3.595]   [-0.670]
Risk-free Rate      190.4       -8.287       -145.7       -200.7       -246.4          82.68     -103.4     -8.103     -116.7     -186.3     -272.4       21.48
                   [1.517]     [-0.486]     [-1.521]     [-3.115]     [-2.774]        [3.854]   [-1.374]   [-0.687]   [-1.111]   [-2.887]   [-3.833]    [1.404]
Constant            -149.1       17.01        181.5        213.0        355.1          -77.22     30.62     -10.72      55.23      110.0      304.5      -32.51
                   [-1.090]    [0.932]      [1.724]      [3.175]      [3.765]        [-3.193]   [0.352]    [-0.957]   [0.434]    [1.337]    [4.169]    [-2.110]

N                   135          42           294          588         132             22        135        42         294        588        132         22
R2                 0.333        0.190        0.119        0.103       0.370           0.803     0.667      0.509      0.271      0.321      0.521       0.929




                                                                                46
                                                     Table 4
                      Relationship between model expected returns and survey expected returns

The table shows pairwise correlation beteween measures of investor expectations and measures of expected returns. P-values
and the number of observations are shown directly below each estimate. We use only data where both measures are reported
and do not interpolate missing values. AA = American Association and II=Investor Intelligence.

                                        Graham-
                        Gallup           Harvey                 AA                 II           Shiller        Michigan

 Log(D/P)                -0.328           -0.443            -0.305            -0.193            -0.554            -0.567
 [p-val]                [0.000]          [0.003]           [0.000]           [0.000]           [0.000]           [0.000]
 N                          135               42               294               588               132                22

 -Surplus C             -0.481            -0.529            -0.283            -0.054            -0.670            -0.736
 [p-val]                [0.000]          [0.000]           [0.000]           [0.191]           [0.000]           [0.000]
 N                          135               42               294               588               132                22

 cay                      0.025            0.139            -0.016            -0.185             0.366            -0.003
 [p-val]                [0.776]          [0.380]           [0.788]           [0.000]           [0.000]           [0.988]
 N                          135               42               294               588               132                22




                                                           47
                                                                               Table 5
                                                                     Forecasting Future Returns
We estimate time-series regressions of the form:
                                                                        Rtx k  a  bX t  ut  k
where Rx denotes the k-month excess return on the stock market and X is a predictor variable. The independent variables include measures of expectations and
measures of expected returns, including cay, the log dividend price ratio, and surplus consumption. Investor expectations variables are starred to indicate that we
use the rescaled versions so that they can be interpreted in units of nominal stock returns. Panel A shows results for 12-month returns; Panel B shows 36-month
returns. Newey-West-based t-statistics are in brackets. Note that Michigan is excluded from Panel B due to insufficient observations to compute the standard
errors. In columns (1)-(6) of Panel A, for each measure of survey expectations we show the p-value on the test that b=1.

Panel A. Forecasting 12-month returns
 Gallup*                      -1.99                                                                                      -0.61
                           [-1.371]                                                                                     [0.433]
 Graham-Harvey*                       -0.021                                                                                       0.003
                                      [0.684]                                                                                     [0.111]
 American Association*                          -1.654                                                                                      -0.341
                                                [0.888]                                                                                     [0.185]
 Investor Intelligence*                                   -1.542                                                                                      -1.321
                                                          [2.326]                                                                                     [1.993]
 Shiller*                                                           -0.625                                                                                        -4.13
                                                                    [0.231]                                                                                     [1.676]
 Michigan*                                                                     -0.081                                                                                      -0.024
                                                                              [-3.964]                                                                                    [-1.350]
 Log(D/P)                                                                                  0.074                         0.399     0.390     0.151     0.059     0.600      0.625
                                                                                          [1.475]                       [4.414] [4.272] [1.932] [1.137] [4.395] [4.739]
 -Surplus Consumption                                                                                0.891
                                                                                                    [3.988]
 cay                                                                                                           3.235
                                                                                                              [3.153]
 Constant                    0.235     0.144       0.24    0.214     0.099      0.695      0.327     0.188     0.057     1.747     1.576     0.692     0.403     2.898      2.871
                            [1.460] [0.683] [1.219] [2.897] [0.371]            [2.845 [1.842] [5.644] [3.101] [5.021] [6.065] [2.529] [2.172] [3.917] [5.791]
 [p-val, b=1]               [0.040] [0.000] [0.154] [0.000] [0.550] [0.000]
 N                             131        38       282       576       120         22        612       612       610       131        38       282       576       120         22
 R2                          0.057     0.031     0.015     0.036     0.004      0.342      0.031     0.111     0.111     0.299     0.207     0.104     0.056     0.298      0.696
                                                                                     48
                                                                      Table 5 [Continued]

                                                               Forecasting Future Returns


Panel B. Forecasting 36-month returns

 Gallup*                       -6.185                                                                            -5.483
                              [3.509]                                                                           [2.591]
 Graham-Harvey                           -0.010                                                                             0.000
                                        [0.303]                                                                           [0.004]
 American Association*                             -3.329                                                                             1.321
                                                  [0.838]                                                                           [0.382]
 Investor Intelligence*                                      -5.173                                                                            -4.631
                                                            [3.126]                                                                           [2.656]
 Shiller*                                                               -3.679                                                                           -4.521
                                                                       [1.249]                                                                          [1.732]
 Log(D/P)                                                                          0.194                           0.49     0.183     0.525     0.145     0.247
                                                                                 [1.612]                        [1.268]   [0.855]   [2.285]   [1.132]   [0.861]
 Surp                                                                                         2.959
                                                                                            [3.737]
 cay                                                                                                   12.537
                                                                                                      [4.998]
 Constant                       0.668     0.084     0.576     0.703      0.423     0.882      0.634     0.166     2.649     0.773     2.141     1.167     1.526
                              [3.362]   [0.429]   [1.553]   [3.571]    [1.282]   [2.127]    [4.428]   [3.871]   [1.623]   [0.888]   [2.782]   [2.634]   [1.191]
 N                                121        30       258       552         96       588        588       586       121        30       258       552        96
 R2                             0.158     0.004     0.012     0.105       0.06     0.056      0.232     0.406     0.252      0.02      0.23     0.136     0.079




                                                                              49
                                                                            Table 6
                                                     Forecasting Stock Market Returns Using Simulated Data

We simulate stock prices when the demands of fundamental and positive feedback traders are given by:
                                                    s f ,t  pt  0.75 f t  0.25 f t 1 , and s p , t  0.17 pt  0.34( pt  pt 1 ).
The table shows time-series regressions of the form:
                                                                       Rt  k  p t  k  p t  a  bX t  u t  k ,
estimated on the simulated data. The fundamental f is a random walk with mean zero and standard deviation of one. We run the simulation for 100 data points
and keep only the last 50. p-value corresponds to the fraction of samples for which the estimated coefficient is greater than zero (or less than zero in the case of
the average coefficient value being negative).

Dep Var:                    X=f-p                                       X=z                                             X=f                                    X=f-mav(f,10)
Horizon:            Rt+1        Rt+2         Rt+3            Rt+1           Rt+2             Rt+3             Rt+1          Rt+2             Rt+3       Rt+1          Rt+2         Rt+3

b-mean            1.040        0.761       0.913         -0.560          -0.525          -0.690           -1.366         -0.985            -1.147     -6.484        -5.435       -6.945
[t-mean]        [5.580]      [4.105]     [4.601]       [-1.829]        [-2.011]        [-2.439]         [-5.681]       [-4.056]          [-4.353]   [-1.877]      [-1.766]     [-2.065]
[p-val]         [0.000]      [0.000]     [0.000]        [0.000]         [0.016]         [0.014]          [0.000]        [0.000]          [0.000]    [0.002]        [0.038]     [0.044]
      2
Avg R             0.385       0.260        0.303          0.073           0.087           0.122             0.395         0.255            0.281      0.077         0.074        0.099




                                                                                           50
                                                   Table 7
                                Equity Issuance and Stock Market Expectations

We estimate time-series regressions of the form:
                                             NIPOt  a  bX t  ut ,
where NIPO denotes the number of IPOs in month t and X alternately denotes survey expectations of future returns
(Gallup, Graham-Harvey, American Association, Investor Intelligence, Shiller, or Michigan) or monthly flows into
equity-oriented mutual funds. Newey-West-based t-statistics, based on 12 months of lags, are in brackets.

 Gallup                           0.514
                                [4.360]
 Graham-Harvey                                 1.689
                                             [1.847]
 American Association                                      0.34
                                                        [2.161]
 Investor Intelligence                                                0.064
                                                                    [0.559]
 Shiller                                                                        -0.386
                                                                               [0.722]
 Michigan                                                                                    3.682
                                                                                           [8.229]
 Flows                                                                                                4,342.51
                                                                                                       [8.989]
 Constant                          8.88        3.021     23.984      25.355    45.254      -24.608      22.132
                                [4.196]      [0.530]    [6.693]     [7.802]    [0.990]      [4.885]    [7.157]

 N                                  131          38           282        576       120          22         324
 R2                               0.362       0.099         0.062      0.003     0.037       0.424       0.260




                                                       51
