                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           ARE IMMIGRANTS THE BEST AND BRIGHTEST U.S. ENGINEERS?

                                            Jennifer Hunt

                                        Working Paper 18696
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18696


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2013




I thank Rachel Friedberg, Norman Matloff and participants in the NBER High-Skill Immigration Conference
for comments on an earlier version, and Francesco Fasani, Ethan Lewis and Joan Llull for helpful
discussions. No external funding was used to write the paper, though the NBER provided an honorarium
for its presentation, and I have no conflict of interest to report. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Jennifer Hunt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Are Immigrants the Best and Brightest U.S. Engineers?
Jennifer Hunt
NBER Working Paper No. 18696
January 2013
JEL No. J61

                                            ABSTRACT

Using the American Community Surveys of 2009 and 2010, I examine the wages of immigrants compared
to natives among engineering workers. Among workers in engineering occupations, immigrants are
the best and brightest thanks to their high education level, enjoying a wage distribution shifted to the
right of the native distribution. Among workers with an engineering degree, however, immigrants
underperform natives, despite somewhat higher education. The gap is particularly large in the lower
tail, where immigrants work in occupations not commensurate with their education. In the upper tail,
immigrants fail to be promoted out of technical occupations to management, handicapped by imperfect
English and their underrepresentation among older age groups. In both samples, immigrants from the
highest income countries are the best and brightest workers.


Jennifer Hunt
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248
and NBER
jennifer.hunt@rutgers.edu
       The United States has established certain visas for the express purpose of permitting
entry for highly productive workers. These include temporary work visas, such as the H–
1B specialty occupation visas and the L–1 intra-company transferee visas for managers
and specialty workers, and certain classes of employment-based green cards (conferring
permanent residence). It is therefore natural to ask whether with these or other visas, the
United States is succeeding in its objective of attracting the best and brightest workers.
Some commentators are convinced immigrants are highly productive, and also increase
productivity growth and native productivity through their innovation, skills complemen-
tary to those of natives, and positive spillovers on co–workers. These commentators call
for increased numbers of visas targetting skilled workers.1 Other commentators contest
the claim that the United States admits the best and brightest immigrants, and call for
major reforms to skilled immigration visas.2
       In this paper, I assess the labor market performance of immigrant engineers in the
United States, using the 2009 and 2010 American Community Surveys (ACS). I also in-
vestigate reasons for performance differences between immigrants and natives, including
the role of English proficiency. English proficiency is rarely mentioned in the academic
and public debates over immigration of scientists and engineers; the implicit assumption
is that highly educated immigrants have sufficiently good English for the technical oc-
cupations in which they are heavily represented. I focus on engineers because of their
critical role in technological innovation: Hunt et al. (forthcoming) show that the fields of
study associated with most patenting are electrical engineering, physical science, chemical
engineering and mechanical/industrial engineering. Engineers’ shared human capital also
makes them a naturally coherent group to evaluate for evidence that immigrants are the
best and brightest among them. I choose the ACS because the data are recent, the sample
is large enough to allow a focus on engineers, and the variables include the field of study
   1
     Brookings–Duke Immigration Policy Roundtable (2009), Bush et al. (2009), Kirkegaard (2007), Pa-
pademetriou and Yale–Loehr (1996), The Partnership for a New American Economy and the Partnership
for New York City (2012).
   2
     Hira (2007), Matloff (2002–3, 2008), Miano (2007). They also believe that the purportedly skilled
immigrants undercut native wages, reduce native wages and facilitate off–shoring of American jobs.



                                                  1
of any bachelor’s degree and self–reported English proficiency. My study complements
a companion piece on computer workers (Hunt 2012), and the study of Hunt (2011),
which examines various performance measures for immigrant college graduates using the
2003 National Survey of College Graduates (NSCG), a dataset which contains visa and
patenting information but no English information.
   I show that whether immigrants appear to be the best and brightest depends upon
whether the sample of engineers is defined based on occupation or education. Among
those working in engineering occupations, immigrants are the best and brightest thanks
to their higher education, earning 9.6% more per hour than natives on average, 6.5%
more at the 95th percentile compared to the native 95th percentile, and 11 log points
more at the 10th percentile. However, among holders of engineering bachelor’s degrees,
immigrants perform less well than natives despite an education advantage, earning 9.2%
less on average, 15.5 log points less at the 95th percentile, and a huge 27 log points less
at the 10th percentile. I do identify unambiguously best and brightest groups: thanks to
their good English and favorable unobservable characteristics, immigrants from primarily
anglophone developed countries and from western Europe far outearn natives throughout
the distribution in the degree sample as they do in the occupation sample.
   There are several reasons for immigrants’ worse performance in the degree sample than
in the occupation sample. First, the immigrant education advantage is lower than in the
occupation sample, as the degree sample excludes the less–educated natives forming the
lower tail of the occupation sample. Though immigrants’ higher education boosts mean
immigrant earnings relative to native earnings, education plays no role in explaining
immigrant–native wage differences in the tails of the degree sample. Second, the degree
sample includes a disproportionately immigrant lower tail of workers in occupations not
commensurate with their education. Supplemental analysis of the 2003 NSCG suggests
that this tail should not be wholly attributed to families arriving based on ties to relatives
already in the United States. Such immigrants are likely to have been admitted on a green
card, and when immigrants who arrived on green cards are dropped from the NSCG
sample of engineering degree holders, the immigrant 10th percentile wage rises relative to

                                              2
the native 10th percentile, but stays below it (the same is true of the mean and the 95th
percentile). Third, immigrants’ underrepresentation in the oldest age groups (in both
samples) contributes to their poor performance in the upper tail in the degree sample,
unlike in the occupation sample, reflecting a higher return to age (experience) in the
degree sample. Assuming immigrants’ relative youth is due to low immigration in earlier
decades, this implies more immigrants will move to the top of the wage distribution with
time.
   Fourth, the return to English proficiency, or possibly to unobserved ability correlated
with English proficiency, is much higher in the degree sample than in the occupation
sample, particularly in the tails. This is in part because analysis of the degree sample
captures that component of the return to English which permits promotion out of technical
occupations into more language–intensive occupations such as management. The high
return to English in the upper tail thus constitutes a barrier for top immigrants, despite
their relatively good English. The return to English is equally high in the lower tail,
though operating principally through higher pay within occupation, and is compounded
by the poor English of the lowest–paid immigrants.
   These same four factors explain the contrast between engineering degree holders and
computer degree holders, among whom Hunt (2012) shows immigrants hold a wage ad-
vantage. In the computer degree sample, immigrants’ education advantage is larger; there
is a much smaller lower tail of immigrants working in occupations not commensurate with
their degree, possibly due to greater international portability of computer skills; the re-
turn to age (experience) is lower; and the return to English is modest, with promotion to
management less of a factor in success.
   The contrast between the two engineering samples highlights that a visa policy focused
on admitting immigrants who would be the best and brightest in technical occupations
would admit immigrants lacking the skills (whether English or related unobserved ability)
that would allow them to rise to the top later in their career. Supplementary analysis of
the 2003 NSCG data shows top–paid engineers and engineers in management positions are
the most prolific patentees, results which reinforce the desirability of admitting immigrants

                                             3
who will sooner or later work in highly–paid management positions. The current U.S. visa
system may promote just such a focus on technical occupations, however. The delays of
up to a year in obtaining an H–1B visa (if the cap is filled immediately), the legal expense
of preparing an application dossier for the first and second preference employment–based
green cards, and the wait times of longer than a year for third preference employment–
based green cards may effectively preclude the use of immigrants for top jobs which must
often be filled at short notice and cannot be performed even temporarily by others at the
firm. At the same time, employers will not screen applicants for technical positions for
management potential, since they cannot be promoted to management while on an H–1B
visa, and may leave the firm once promotion is possible.
   Assuming English proficiency does not proxy entirely for unobserved ability, the En-
glish proficiency results imply that immigrants are likely to be closer substitutes for natives
in their engineering occupation than for natives with their engineering education (Lewis
forthcoming). This implies any negative impact immigrants might have on the wages of
natives in engineering occupations is likely to be larger than the effect on natives with an
engineering degree. Natives may also attenuate any negative effect on wages in engineer-
ing occupations by moving into more language–intensive jobs, as suggested by Peri and
Sparber (2011) for a more general sample of skilled workers. The discussion of the impact
of skilled immigrants is usually at the level of the occupation rather than the worker,
however, despite the fact that welfare concerns relate to people rather than jobs.
   The evidence of this paper adds pieces to the puzzle of the contribution of skilled
immigrants partially assembled by several earlier papers with an emphasis on innovation.
Hunt and Gauthier–Loiselle (2010) find that increases in college–educated immigrants
translate into increased patenting per capita in the United States; Kerr and Lincoln
(2010) find increased H–1B visa caps also increase patenting per capita. Hunt (2011)
shows that college–educated immigrants outperform college–educated natives in wages,
patenting and publishing. Immigrants who originally arrived on student or temporary
work visas (including H–1Bs and L–1s), in particular, are indeed the best and brightest.
It is significant that she finds immigrants’ concentration in science and engineering fields

                                              4
of study explains most of their patenting advantage, while field of study combines with
immigrants’ higher level of education to explain the publishing and wage advantages. The
evidence of this paper indicates immigrants would contribute more to the U.S. economy if
they were not merely heavily concentrated in engineering, where they patent at the same
high rate as natives, but also rose higher in the non–technical engineering hierarchy.
        The results of my paper paint a more positive picture of immigrant wages than certain
papers using administrative data on H–1B applicants or holders. The disadvantages of
focusing on holders of a particular visa type are that there is no natural native comparison
group and that immigrants’ performance is not assessed over their whole stay in the United
States. The Lofstrom and Hayes (2011) native comparison group is more than nine years
older than the immigrant sample and has commensurately higher wages. Adjusted for
age, immigrants earn 12–34% more, while a smaller wage advantage persists after controls
for education, occupation and industry. Miano (2005) finds that (young) immigrants have
low wages compared to natives (of all ages) in the same detailed computer occupation
and state.3


1         Theoretical considerations
If the international pool of applicants from which universities, firms and hospitals choose
students, workers and interns is larger than the American pool, and particularly if the
foreign applicants are positively self-selected in terms of education, initiative and ambition,
immigrants may outperform natives. However, because migrants tend to move when
young, applicants from abroad are unlikely to be more experienced than applicants from
within the United States, which means they are unlikely to outperform natives (of all
ages) immediately upon arrival.
        In order for immigrants to outperform natives of the same age, the positive selection
effect must be large enough to offset obstacles immigrants in general tend to face on
    3
     Using a possibly unrepresentative web–based sample of readers of a business technology magazine,
Mithas and Lucas (2010) find that immigrants earn considerably more than natives among information
technology professionals, both unconditionally and conditional on covariates.


                                                 5
arriving in a new country. Prior to and upon arrival, immigrants are unfamiliar with
local workplace conventions and institutions, may not have professional networks helpful
for job search, have not had a chance to job shop to find their best match with a U.S.
employer, and often do not have a perfect command of English. With time, much of
this can be remedied, and immigrants’ wages would be expected to converge from below
towards those of natives. A vast empirical literature confirms this pattern for immigrants
generally (Duleep 2013). At the same time, immigrants who arrive as youths would be
expected to resemble natives much more closely than immigrants arriving at older ages,
as they learn English more easily, obtain U.S. education, and enter and learn about the
U.S. labor market at the same age as natives. This too has much empirical support.4
      Many immigrants who do not arrive as youths never fully catch up with natives of
their age. Skills honed on jobs abroad may not be portable to the United States: the
empirical literature confirms that there is no return at all to experience gained abroad.5
The quality of education in many foreign countries is lower than in the United States and
would command a lower return: the empirical literature confirms this.6 Discrimination
could also hinder immigrant success: immigrants could encounter discrimination based on
their status as immigrants, or, for many, based on their race or religion. Oreopoulos (2011)
demonstrates this for skilled immigrants to Canada. Furthermore, not all immigrants who
arrive as adults have the language aptitude to bring their English reading and writing to
the native level, while others calculate that the financial or opportunity cost of doing so is
not worthwhile. Immigrants who arrive as adults can rarely rid themselves of their foreign
accent, which in many cases impedes their ability to communicate at work. Lewis (2011)
finds that for workers in general, English skills play a key role in rendering immigrants
and natives imperfect substitutes, and the implication of this is that any negative wage
impact of immigrants is smaller than it would otherwise be.
      These various factors that have been studied for immigrants generally are likely to
  4
      Bleakley and Chin (2004), Friedberg (1992), Schaafsma and Sweetman (2001).
  5
      Akee and Yuksel (2008), Aydemir and Skuterud (2005).
  6
      Akee and Yuksel (2008), Chiswick and Miller (2008).




                                                 6
apply also to science and engineering workers, though possibly to a lesser extent. Educated
immigrants may arrive with better English skills than immigrants generally, and technical
skills are particularly likely to transcend languages and borders, which is presumably why
many immigrants are in these fields. Hunt (2011) finds that for skilled workers generally,
a highest degree obtained in the United States commands a 19% wage premium, but finds
no such premium for the probability of patenting or publishing. This suggests that while
technical skills may be portable across countries, other skills may be less portable, posing
a barrier to advancement beyond technical occupations. This raises the possibility that
the firms that hire young immigrants choose those who will be most productive in the
short run, without considering the potential for longer term productivity if the immigrant
stays in the United States, since by then the immigrant is likely to be at another firm.
    The possibility that immigrants may be willing to or forced to work for less than
natives because they have fewer outside options is particularly salient for H–1B holders.
For these workers, changing employer is administratively complex and may endanger a
pending application for a green card. For some workers, in administrative limbo between
the expiry of their H–1B visa (after a maximum of six years) and the granting of their
green card, changing employer is impossible. Like the discrimination theory, this raises
the possibility that immigrants are being paid less than their marginal product, which
would call into question the equivalence of wage and productivity. I nevertheless use wage
and productivity interchangeably in the paper, while bearing in mind the possibility of a
small discrepancy between the two.


2     Data
I use the IPUMS micro–data for the American Community Surveys of 2009 and 2010
(Ruggles et al. 2010). I use these particular years because beginning in 2009, respondents
with a bachelor’s degree are asked in which field it was obtained. I include respondents
aged 18–64 employed full year (there were few part–year workers, and many of them had
implausible wages), dropping those currently enrolled or self–employed (worker class 13


                                             7
or 14). I define immigrants as though those born abroad, except those born in U.S. terri-
tories and born abroad as U.S. citizens. I construct two samples: workers in engineering
occupations (excluding drafters and technicians) and workers with engineering bachelor’s
degrees (including architecture and computer engineering, but excluding technology).
    The ACS asks whether each person in the household speaks a language other than
English at home. If the answer is yes, the survey asks whether that person speaks English
very well, well, not well, or not at all. Very few people in my samples report speaking
English not well or not at all, so I collapse the bottom three categories into the category
of speaking English less well.
    I do not use the NSCG 2003 as my primary data, because they are somewhat outdated
and do not contain information on English proficiency. However, they do contain infor-
mation on patenting (unlike the new wave of the NSCG, about to be released) and entry
visa, so I provide some information from them. All respondents who have ever worked are
asked a series of questions concerning the five–year window since October 1998, includ-
ing how many U.S. patents they had been granted and how many granted patents had
resulted in commercialized products or processes or had been licensed. My NSCG sample
contains respondents 64 or younger (the youngest respondent is 23, but few are younger
than 26), and exclude the enrolled and the self–employed. The Data Appendix provides
some additional details on the sample and variable construction.


3     Method
I first present detailed descriptive statistics, which both indicate the degree of wage success
enjoyed by immigrants relative to natives, and give indications of what may lie behind
differences in immigrant and natives wages. I then proceed to regression analysis to
quantify the factors determining the differences. I run either least squares or quantile log
wage regressions, weighted with sample weights:

            log wit = α + β1 IitF + β2 IitC + β3 IitT + γEit + δAit + φXit + νt + it ,    (1)



                                                8
where wi represents the hourly wage of worker i, I k are dummies for the foreign–born,
E represents dummies for self–reported English ability, A represents dummies for age,
and X represents other worker and job characteristics. I T indicates a worker born in a
U.S. territory, I C indicates a worker born abroad as a U.S. citizen, and I F indicates the
other foreign–born workers, the main group of interest, whom I refer to as immigrants.
The coefficient of interest is therefore β1 . I gradually increase the number of covariates
to ascertain which are most influential for the immigrant–native wage gap β1 .
    The age dummies are included to control for potential experience, but I do not attempt
to distinguish between foreign and U.S. experience. The low return to foreign experience
is therefore likely to be reflected in a lower β1 than would otherwise obtain. The Xs
include dummies for educational degrees: if immigrant education is of lower quality than
U.S. education, or if a given degree corresponds to fewer years of education, β1 will also
be biased down.
    I also estimate an extended specification where I interact the English dummies E with
a linear term in age, to test the hypothesis that the return to English changes over the
career. The return to English could increase if excellent English is required for promotion
to non–technical occupations. When including these interactions, I also control for age
at arrival (equivalently in a single cross–section, for years in the United States), since
English proficiency could be proxying for assmilation along other dimensions.


4     Descriptive statistics
In this section, I begin by using the NSCG data to show the relation between patenting
and wages for immigrants and natives, before examining immigrant and native wages and
other characteristics in the ACS samples.


4.1    Patents and wages in the NSCG sample

The 2003 NSCG data indicate that immigrants with an engineering degree were granted
an average of 0.21 patents in the previous five years, similar to the value of 0.19 for their

                                             9
native counterparts, and compared with 0.04 for all college–educated natives. Figure 1
shows that patenting and wages are strongly positively correlated. Patents per capita
rise with the (pooled) wage decile for both immigrant and native holders of engineering
degrees, and jump in the top decile: native earners in the top 10% of all earners were
granted 0.5 patents per capita in the five previous years, while immigrants in the top 10%
of all earners were granted 0.75 patents per capita in the five previous years. These results
indicate that identifying top earners is closely related to identifying top innovators.


4.2      Wages in the ACS sample

I next turn to the analysis of immigrants and natives in the two ACS samples. The
samples overlap less than might be expected. Only 34% of holders of bachelor’s degrees
in engineering work in engineering occupations, while 64% of workers in engineering oc-
cupations hold bachelor’s degrees in engineering. The number of workers in engineering
occupations is about half the number of holders of engineering bachelor’s degrees.
      Immigrants’ large share of both samples is shown in the odd columns of Table 1’s
top panel: 19% of workers in engineering occupations (column 1) and 31% of workers
with engineering degrees (column 3). Workers born in U.S. territories form 0.4% of each
sample, while U.S. citizens born abroad represent 1.1% of each sample. The even columns
show the average hourly wage of each group. Immigrants earn 10.3% more per hour than
natives in the sample of engineering occupations (column 2), but earn only 93% of native
wages in the sample of holders of engineering bachelor’s degrees (column 4). The relatively
lower earnings of the immigrant engineering degree holders contrasts with Hunt (2011)’s
results for all immigrants with a college degree and with Hunt (2012)’s results for computer
degree holders.7
      Figure 2 plots wages against age for each of the samples. Graph A, for natives, shows
that at early ages, average wages are similar in the two samples, but the bachelor’s degree
holders gradually pull ahead. The picture for immigrants is quite different in graph B,
  7
     The contrast with Hunt (2011) is not due to the data, however; in the NSCG 2003, immigrants also
earn less than natives among engineering degree holders.


                                                 10
where there is little difference in the profiles of the two samples.
   In Figure 3, I further investigate the relative wages of immigrants and natives, by
considering the entire distributions of log wages. For engineering occupations, in graph A,
the immigrant distribution is more equal and shifted to the right compared to the native
distribution. Graph B indicates that immigrants earn less than natives in the degree
sample because immigrants are overrepresented in the bottom 10%, and underrepresented
between the 10th percentile and the median. The upper halves of the immigrant and
native distributions are similar.
   It is useful to replot these distributions in graphs C and D, so as to allow degree
and occupation samples to be compared on the same graph. The native degree–holder
distribution is shifted rightwards compared to the occupation distribution (graph C). For
immigrants, by contrast, the share of degree holders with low wages is much higher than
the share in the occupation sample (graph D). The right tail is slightly thicker for the
degree sample.
   The middle panel of Table 1 breaks down immigrants into countries or regions of origin.
Column 3 show that Indians are the largest group among degree holders, representing 8.3%
of the sample. No individual origin country has as large a share of the occupation sample,
as indicated in column 1, though Asians together represent 11.3% (compared to 17.7%
of the degree sample). I distinguish finely among developed countries for the purposes of
identifying top earners and of grouping primarily anglophone countries, though I have left
Japan with other Asian countries. The primarily anglophone countries (dominated by the
United Kingdom and Canada; also including Ireland, Australia and New Zealand) and the
western European countries outearn natives in both samples (by 17-24%), as do Indians
to a lesser degree. Chinese also perform well, while immigrants from the non–Canadian
Americas (including the Carribbean) have the lowest earnings, the only group to earn less
than natives in the occupation sample.
   The bottom panel of Table 1 indicates that while one quarter of immigrants in the
occupation sample arrived age 17 or younger (column 1), the share is only 17% for the
degree sample (column 2). For the occupation sample, young arrival is associated with a

                                             11
wage disadvantage (column 2), while the opposite is true for the degree sample (column 4).


4.3    Education

I turn next to tabulating the educational attainment of engineers in the two samples.
Table 2 shows that among workers in engineering occupations, immigrants are more ed-
ucated than natives, with a much larger share holding more than a bachelor’s degree:
39% of immigrants hold a master’s degree (column 2), compared to 20% for natives (col-
umn 1), and fully 11.6% hold a doctoral degree, compared to 1.7% for natives. The share
of workers with less than a bachelor’s degree is 21.5% for natives compared to only 7.4%
for immigrants. Considering the three education categories containing most of the immi-
grants, immigrants earn more (columns 3 and 4) than natives in the lowest (bachelor’s
degree) and less in the higher ones (master’s, doctoral).
   The education distribution for holders of engineering bachelor’s degrees is shown in
Table 3. Immigrants are again more educated than natives, with only 49.6% holding
a bachelor’s degree only (column 1), compared to 65.7% for natives (column 2), but
the education gap is less than in the occupation sample. Furthermore, immigrants earn
less than natives at every education level. For natives, unlike for immigrants, there
is a large increase in average education in moving from the occupation to the degree
sample, explaining why the native wage–earnings profile is steeper for the degree sample
in Figure 2.
   Immigrants’ relative earnings may not only be affected by the level of education,
but also the field of study of the bachelor’s degree. Table 4 shows among those in the
occupation sample who hold a bachelor’s degree (a subset), more immigrants than natives
have the most highly–paid computer, science or mathematical backgrounds. I also analyze
the detailed fields of study of workers in the bachelor’s degree sample. I confine the detail
to Appendix Table 1, as the immigrant–native differences are not striking: immigrants
are somewhat overrepresented in electrical engineering, a field of study associated with
above average pay.



                                             12
4.4      Occupations and English proficiency

In order to describe immigrants–native contrasts more richly, I turn to a comparison of
the occupations in which they work. There are no striking immigrant–native differences in
occupation in the occupation sample, though immigrants are somewhat overrepresented
in electrical engineering, an occupation that pays above the average (Appendix Table 2).
However, there are considerable differences in the education–based sample, tabulated in
Table 5. The highest–paying large occupation is management, associated with a wage
of about $54 per hour for both natives and immigrants (columns 3 and 4), suggesting
that to a certain degree success in engineering consists in being promoted out of narrow
engineering occupations. Only 24% of immigrants work in management, compared to
29% of natives (columns 1 and 2), which is one source of the native wage disadvantage
among engineering degree holders. Another is also apparent in the table: while the share
of immigrants and natives working in “other” occupations is not so different at 20.5%
and 18.1% respectively, the immigrant average wage in this category, at only $28.3, is
far below the native average of $39.5. These immigrant occupations represent the thick
lower tail seen in the wage distribution of Figure 3. The largest occupation contrast is
in the share of engineering degree holders who work in computing occupations: 22% of
immigrants compared to only 8% of natives (columns 1 and 2).
      While it may appear surprising to lament a lack of immigrants in management if
innovation is an important concern, managers in fact obtain many patents. Columns 5
and 6, based on the NSCG data, show that immigrant managers with engineering degrees
average 0.52 patents granted over the previous five years, compared to 0.35 for their
counterparts working as engineers, and that for natives, the average number of patents
is similar for managers and engineers (0.23–0.24). While some of managers’ patents may
have been awarded before they were promoted to management, the statistics coupled with
anecdotal evidence suggest that management is complementary to the innovative process.8
      As Figure 1 showed that the top 10% of (pooled) engineering degree earners are par-
  8
      Management is defined more narrowly in the NSCG than in the ACS.



                                               13
ticularly prolific patentees, I tabulate separately the occupations of the top 10% of immi-
grants and natives with engineering degrees in Table 6, columns 1 and 2. The top 10% of
immigrants earn $100 per hour, less than the top 10% of natives at $109 per hour (not
tabulated). The share of managers is much higher than for the full sample, and only
slightly lower for immigrants (51%) than natives (53%). The share working as engineers
is only a small minority of 18% for both groups. The differences between immigrants
and natives lie in the much higher share of immigrants working in computer occupations
(13%, compared to 5% for natives), the lower share of immigrants working as lawyers and
physicians (only 1.8%, compared to 6.4% of natives), and the lower share of immigrants
working in “other” occupations.
   Given the thick lower tail of immigrants with engineering degrees observed in Figure 3,
it is also informative to examine the occupations of the bottom 10% of immigrant and
native workers with engineering degrees, which I do in columns 3 and 4 of Table 6. Fully
69% of such immigrants and 43% of such natives work in “other” occupations (columns 1
and 2), which Table 5 showed are the lowest paid occupations other than education.
Workers in the bottom tail of natives, especially immigrants, are working in occupations
not commensurate with their education. It is also possible that field of study contains
some measurement error.
   The NSCG can help us understand on which visas the top and bottom of the immi-
grants in the bachelor’s degree sample first entered the United States. Though the 2003
information is somewhat dated (in recent years, more entries have been on temporary
visas than in the past), the comparison of top and bottom earners could still be informa-
tive. The first row of Table 7 shows that the bottom 10% of earners are almost twice as
likely as the top 10% to be admitted on a green card (i.e. with permanent residence), and
are hence much more likely to have been admitted on the basis of family ties. Conversely,
the bottom 10% are half as likely to be admitted on temporary work visas (typically H–1B
or L–1 visas for skilled workers) or on student visas. An immigrant who arrived as the
child of the holder of a temporary work or student visa would hold a dependent’s visa.
It is useful to note, however, that in the NSCG immigrants still earn less than natives at

                                            14
the 10th and 95th percentiles as well as the mean if immigrants who originally entered on
green cards are dropped.
   One aspect of assimilation to the United States is English proficiency, which I tabulate
for immigrants in the two samples in Table 8 panel A (a small share of natives reports
speaking a language other than English at home, but I do not tabulate this). 20% of
immigrants in engineering occupations report speaking English only at home (column 1),
while the majority, 62%, report speaking English very well. The shares are similar for
the degree sample in column 2. There is a large wage return to English proficiency, or
possibly to the unobserved ability or social and cultural skills with which it is correlated,
for the degree sample (column 4), but almost none for the occupation sample (column 2).
There is an enormous penalty for an engineering degree holder who speaks English less
well (column 4): his or her immigrant counterpart who speaks English very well earns
38% more. In panels B and C, I tabulate English proficiency for the top and bottom 10%
of immigrant earners, respectively. As would be expected, speakers of English only are
overrepresented among the top 10% and underrepresented among the bottom 10%, and
particularly so in the degree sample. The English of the bottom 10% of the engineering
sample is particularly poor, with fully 49% speaking English less well. The table is
consistent with an important role for English skills in immigrant success in the engineering
degree sample, though also with other interpretations that will be considered below.
   As would be expected, English proficiency varies greatly by origin region, though in
the interest of conciseness I do not tabulate these figures. For the engineering degree sam-
ple, where English appears to matter more, Chinese and eastern European immigrants
have the worst English (with 35% and 42% respectively reporting speaking English less
well, and less than 10% speaking only English at home), closely followed by immigrants
from the non–Canadian Americas (with 33% speaking English less well, and 14% speak-
ing English only). While only 8% of Indians speak English only, 83% speak English very
well, leaving them a share speaking English less well (10%) similar to that of western
European immigrants (9%), and significantly surpassed only by immigrants from primar-
ily anglophone countries (0.5%). 27% of western European immigrants report speaking

                                             15
English only.9 Appendix Table 3 contains the means of most of the covariates used in the
regression analysis which have not already been tabulated.


5         Results
In this section, I use regressions analysis to pursue the roles of education, age and English
in the immigrant–native wage differences.


5.1        Immigrant–native wage differences

In Table 9, I present the coefficient on the immigrant dummy from log wage regressions
for the occupation sample (panel A) and the degree sample (panel B). In the first column,
whose only covariates are the foreign–born dummies and a year dummy, immigrants earn
a large 9.6 % more in engineering occupations, and a large 9.2% less among holders of
engineering degrees.10 The addition of education controls in column 2 explains all of the
immigrant advantage in the occupation sample, and worsens the immigrant disadvantage
in the engineering degree sample by about 50%, to a very large 13.9%. Next (column 3),
I control for the detailed field of study of bachelor’s degree (in the occupation sample,
interacted with the dummy for having a bachelor’s degree). This reduces the immigrant
wage by two log points compared to natives in the occupation sample, making it statisti-
cally significantly lower than the native wage, but has a smaller effect in the engineering
sample (where the possible fields are more circumscribed). In columns 4 and 5, I control
for age and gender, which has only small effects on the immigrants coefficients.
        In column 6, I control for English proficiency. As expected from the descriptive tables,
the controls have a large effect in the degree sample (panel B). If all immigrants with an
engineering degree had the proficiency of English–only speakers (the omitted category),
they would have conditional wages very close to those of natives natives (1.9% lower),
    9
      There could be differences across country in how confident respondents are in a given quality of
English.
  10
     The immigrant–native wage gaps differ from those in Table 1 due to the difference between the mean
of log wages and the log of mean wages.



                                                  16
rather than 13% lower. In the occupation sample (panel A), the English controls have
only a small effect, raising the immigrant coefficient by three log points. I investigate in
later tables to what degree the English controls reflect language facility versus assimilation
along other dimensions. The similarity of the conditional wages in this specification
suggests that any unobservable advantages immigrants have relative to natives, due to
positive selection into migration or the engineering field, or due to the visa selection
process, are offset by assimilation difficulties or discrimination.
       In the following two columns, I control for the detailed occupation (column 7), and
for firm type and industry (column 8), which does not change the immigrant coefficients
greatly.11 Characteristics of the job, especially the occupation, may be considered out-
comes in their own right, related to the wage gap, rather than explanatory factors for the
wage gap. In the final column, 9, I control for state dummies, which probably capture
a mix of nominal price differences and genuine productivity differences. The controls re-
duce immigrant wages relative to natives’ by about two log points, leaving both samples’
immigrant wages statistically significantly lower than natives (by 2–3%).
       Table 9 is informative about the average performance of immigrants and natives, but
is not informative about top performers, who are most likely to influence U.S. growth
through innovation. I therefore repeat some of the Table 9 specifications using quantile
regression at the 95th percentile: choosing such a high percentile leads to large standard
errors, but guarantees that the part of the wage distribution being examined is where
Figure 1 indicated that much patenting occurs. The first column of Table 10 panels A
and B indicates that conditional on only a year dummy and the other foreign born dum-
mies, the 95th percentile immigrant earns more than his or her native counterpart in the
occupation sample (by 6.5%, panel A), but considerably less in the degree sample (15.5
log points, panel B). Immigrants could therefore be characterized as being some of the
the best and brightest workers in the occupation sample.
       Column 2 shows that for the occupation sample (panel A), immigrants’ higher edu-
  11
     In the occupation sample, occupation dummies are for the 3–digit (sub–) occupations. In the
education sample, I control for 3–digit engineering occupations, and 2–digit other occupations.



                                              17
cation and more remunerative fields of study explain why the 95th percentile immigrant
earns more than the 95th percentile native, just as at the mean, leaving immigrants and
natives very similar conditional on education. These controls have only a small effect on
the immigrant disadvantage in the degree sample (panel B), however.
   Column 3 shows that for the degree sample (panel B), 70% of the remaining immigrant
wage disadvantage is explained by age, despite the unimportance of this variable in the
mean regressions. Although immigrants’ average age is only slightly below that of natives
(see Appendix Table 3), the distribution is rather different: immigrants are very overrep-
resented among engineering degree holders in their 30s, and underrpresented at older and
very young ages. The lack of older immigrants, due either to the low immigration in the
1970s and earlier, or to selective return migration, means immigrants tend not to reach
the top of the wage distribution. The role of age in the occupation sample is qualitatively
similar, but small (panel A): the unreported age dummies show the return is lower than
in the degree sample. The gender control in column 4 has little effect on the immigration
coefficient in either sample.
   Column 5 shows that in the degree sample (panel B), English plays almost as large a
role as age in explaining the immigrant–native wage gap. The 95th percentile immigrant
in this sample would earn (a statistically insignificant) 3% more than the native at the 95th
percentile if all immigrants spoke English only, instead of suffering the 4% disadvantage
conditional on education, age and gender only. For the occupation sample, on the other
hand, the English controls raise immigrant relative wages by a more modest 2.5 log points.
The effect of English in both samples is similar to the effect in the mean regressions.
Controls for occupation reduce the immigrant coefficients slightly (column 6). I do not
add further controls due to the difficulty of reaching convergence with large numbers of
covariates.
   It is important not only to examine the upper tail and potential stars, but also to
understand the reason for the underperformance of immigrants in the thick lower tail of
the degree sample. Consequently, in panels C and D of Table 10, I present the results of



                                             18
quantile regressions at the 10th percentile.12 For the occupation sample, panel C shows
that the immigrant advantage of 11 log points is more than explained by level and type
of education (compare columns 1 and 2), and immigrants would have lower wages if they
had the native age distribution (compare columns 2 and 3). English proficiency controls
raise the immigrant relative wage by eight log points (compare columns 4 and 5), much
more than at the mean. The immigrant coefficient is close to zero in this specification,
and is not much changed by the occupation controls (column 6).
       The results for the degree sample (panel D) are rather different. Controls for level
and type of education in column 2 make little difference to the enormous 27 log point
disadvantage of immigrants, while age has only half the effect it did in the occupation
sample (column 3), though a larger effect than at the mean. Conditional on education,
age and gender, immigrants still have a 30 log point wage disadvantage (column 4).
The English controls in column 5 explain two thirds of this disadvantage, reducing it to
ten percent. Column 6 shows that two thirds of the remaining gap is accounted for by
differences in occupations. Lack of English proficiency therefore plays a large role in the
thickness of the lower tail of the distribution of wages for immigrants with engineering
degrees, as well as in the underperformance of the 95th percentile immigrants.


5.2       Returns to English proficiency

In this section, I examine the coefficients on the English dummies directly, test whether
they are robust to immigrant origin, distinguish between English proficiency and assimila-
tion along other dimensions, and check how much of the return to English works through
entering specific occupations. I also check whether the return changes with age.
       I present the English proficiency coefficients for the two samples in Table 11 panels
A and B, beginning with those from the specifications of Table 9 column 6 (controls for
education, age and gender, as well as English). The omitted dummy is for speaking only
  12
     I do not look at the 5th percentile, which would provide symmetry with the analysis of the 95th
percentile, because the 10th percentile is low enough to investigate the underperformance of immigrants
with an engineering degree, while yielding lower standard errors than analysis at the 5th percentile.



                                                  19
English at home. For the occupation sample (panel A), the penalty for speaking English
well is only 2.7%, while the penalty for speaking English less well is larger at 9.7%.
The corresponding penalties are much larger for the degree sample in panel B: 4.8% for
speaking English very well, and an enormous 40 log points for speaking English less well.
In column 2, I replace the control for immigrant with the seven region of origin controls
shown in Table 1. These controls slightly reduce the penalties for speaking something
other than English at home.
   Because English proficiency increases with time in the United States, and because
immigrants who arrive young have better English skills and are more assimilated to the
United States at a given number of years in the United States, English proficiency could
be proxying in part for assimilation along dimensions other than English. I test this
by controlling for age at arrival (indistinguishable from years in the United States in a
single cross–section) and its square in column 3, which reduces the English penalties. The
penalty for speaking English very well is small in both samples with these controls (-0.3%
and -1.6% for occupation and degree samples respectively), and the penalty for speaking
English less well is modest in the occupation sample (-4.5%). The penalty for speaking
English less well remains very large for the degree sample, however, at 25 log points. The
English coefficients still need not capture English per se, but could also capture factors
correlated with linguistic ability and English knowledge, which might include general
ability and cultural knowledge acquired from English language study that goes beyond
the average of the origin region.
   In column 4, I test how much of the effect of English proficiency operates through
access to higher–paying occupations, rather than higher wages within occupations. For
the occupation sample, with its limited set of occupations, the answer is none (panel A).
For the degree sample (panel B), occupation controls account for approximately half of
the effect of English. I have experimented with adding groups of related occupations
separately, rather than all occupations, but no single group accounts for a large part
of the reduction in the return to English. Column 5, for example, shows that adding a
dummy for being in a management occupation does little to change the English coefficients

                                           20
compared to column 3.
   I investigate the return to English further for the degree sample, where it is larger,
presenting the 95th and 10th percentile results in panels C and D respectively. In panel C,
the specification of column 1, with education, age and gender as additional controls, shows
a penalty of 5.4% for speaking English well, similar to the effect at the mean, and a very
large penalty of 30 log points for speaking English less well that is nevertheless smaller
than the penalty at the mean. As at the mean, controlling for country or region of
origin reduces the coefficients slightly (column 2), which given the larger standard errors
at the 95th percentile renders the coefficient on speaking English very well statistically
insignificant despite a point estimate of -4.1%. In column 3, I control for age at arrival and
its square, but this scarcely changes the English dummies. In this preferred specification,
the return to English is greater than in the mean regressions. Column 4 shows that
that two thirds or more of the return to English operates through access to higher–
paying occupations, leaving within–occupation penalties of only 1.3% and 10 log points
for speaking English very well and less well respectively. The final column, 5, shows that
most of the effect of the occupation dummies on the English coefficients can be captured
with a single dummy for being in a management occupation: the unreported return to
being in a management occupation is 45 log points, compared to only 16 log points at the
mean, so at the 95th percentile even a small immigrant–native difference in the share in
management can have a large wage consequence.
   At the 10th percentile (panel D), the penalty for very good English, conditional on
education, field, age and gender, is 6.9% (column 1), larger than at the mean or 95th per-
centile, though not statistically significantly so, while the penalty for less good English is
statistically significantly larger than at the mean or 95th percentile, at 57 log points. The
controls for immigrant origin reduce the latter penalty considerably to 43 log points (col-
umn 2), while increasing the penalty for speaking English very well (though statistically
insignificantly). The penalites are reduced by the addition of age at arrival in column 3,
leaving the penalty for speaking English very well at 4.4%, and for speaking English less
well at 31 log points, penalties similar to those of the 95th percentile regressions. The

                                             21
addition of the occupation dummies in column 4 shows that most of the return to En-
glish comes from increased earnings within occupation, rather than access to better–paid
occupations.
   In summary, Table 11 shows that for the degree sample at the mean and the 10th
percentile, but not the 95th percentile, some of what was attributed to English in Tables 9
and 10 in fact reflected other factors, particularly assimilation. Nevertheless, the return
to English remains higher in the degree sample than the occupation sample even once
these other factors are taken into consideration. The higher return to English at the
tails than the mean in the degree sample (Table 11 column 3) seems consistent with a
genuine role for English, rather than with its proxying entirely for unobserved ability,
since low returns in technical occupations in the middle of the distribution and a high
return to English in language–intensive occupations in the upper tails had been expected,
while the return to ability seems likely to vary monotonically along the distribution. The
qualitative results of Tables 9 and 10, that English has the largest effect on the degree
sample immigrant–native wage gap in the lower tail (where English proficiency is poor and
the return to English high), followed by the upper tail (where English proficiency is good
but the return to English high) and the mean (where English proficiency is intermediate
and the return to English low), remain.
   I probe the effect of English further by investigating whether the return increases
with age, as would be expected if access to management occupations in later career is an
important channel for the effect of English. Appendix Table 4 shows that there is no such
increase in the mean regressions, but confirms the increase in the return with age in the
95th percentile regressions, and further shows that the increase operates largely through
access to management occupations.


5.3    Distinctions by region of origin

I next investigate how immigrant performance varies according to country or region of
origin. In Tables 12 and 13, I repeat the regressions of Table 9, replacing the immigrant



                                            22
dummy with six dummies for immigrants from different regions.
   For engineering occupations (Table 12), all immigrant groups except those from the
non–Canadian Americas earn more than natives (column 1). A comparison of columns
1 and 2 shows that superior education explains 22 log points of Chinese immigrants’
large 18 log point advantage, and 18 log points of Indian immigrants’ 13 log point advan-
tage, leaving both groups at a statistically significant conditional disadvantage of 4–5%
compared to natives. All immigrants groups look worse conditional on education than
unconditionally, and only immigrants from primarily anglophone countries earn statisti-
cally significantly more (12.4 log points) than natives conditional on education (though
the point estimate for western Europeans is 4.8%). Controls for age (column 3) have
a large effect on the Indian coefficient; Indians’ youth explains their underperformance
conditional on education.
   All origin groups except primarily anglophone countries would gain considerably if all
members spoke English only (compare columns 4 and 5). Nevertheless, in the specifica-
tion with English controls, only immigrants from primarily Anglophone countries have a
statistically significant wage advantage, though only immigrants from the non–Canadian
Americas, eastern Europeans and the “other” immigrants have a statistically significant
wage disadvantage. Controlling for all remaining covariates in column 6 leaves the coeffi-
cients similar.
   In Table 13, I present the results for the degree sample, where immigrants from India,
primarily anglophone countries and western Europe have a wage advantage (column 1).
The effect of controlling for education in column 2 is small for many immigrant groups,
but very large for Chinese (13 log points), who unconditionally earn the same as natives.
Conditional on education and field of study, immigrants from primarily anglophone coun-
tries still enjoy an 18 log point wage advantage, immigrants from western Europe enjoy a
6% wage advantage, while all other groups earn the same (Indians) or considerably less
than natives. Age controls (column 3) again have the largest effect on the young Indians.
All origin groups except primarily anglophone countries would gain considerably if all
members spoke English only (compare columns 4 and 5). The largest benefits would be

                                           23
for those noted above as having the worst English: Chinese, other Asians, non–Canadian
Americans and eastern Europeans, who would all gain 11–15 log points. The addition of
the remaining covariates in column 6 reduces the conditional immigrant–native gaps.
       In order to identify the best and brightest, it is again helpful to use quantile regres-
sion at the 95th percentile. Because the effect of covariates is broadly similar to their
effect at the mean, I report only the unconditional (except for the year and other foreign
born dummies) immigrant–native wage gaps between the 95th percentiles, in Table 14
columns 1 and 2. The table shows that workers from primarily anglophone countries and
western Europe clearly include stars in both samples, with wage advantages ranging from
17.6 log points to 41.5 log points. For the engineering degree sample, workers from all
other countries or regions strikingly fail to provide top earners, with wage disadvantages
ranging from 16.9 to 35.2 log points.13
       It is also useful to identify the origin regions of the immigrants in the lower tail,
particularly for the underperforming lower tail of the degree sample, and I present the
corresponding results at the 10th percentile in Table 14 columns 3 and 4. In the occupation
sample (column 3), only immigrants from the non–Canadian Americas earn statistically
significantly less than natives, while most other groups earn statistically significantly more.
For the degree sample in column 4, the results are more varied. Two immigrant groups’
10th percentile worker earns statistically significantly more the native 10th percentile
worker: Indians and immigrants from primarily anglophone countries, both with a 15.7
log point advantage. Chinese and western Europeans earn the same as natives, while
remaining groups have large disadvantages, the largest being for immigrants from the
non–Canadian Americas (72 log points).
  13
     I have not gone through origin countries one by one to identify those whose immigrants are partic-
ularly high performing. For example, I leave Japanese immigrants, likely to be high performers, in the
residual Asian group.




                                                  24
6    Conclusions
In this paper, I have shown that immigrants are the best and brightest in engineering oc-
cupations, thanks to their high education, but not among holders of engineering degrees,
despite the excellent performance of immigrants from the highest income countries. How-
ever, the nature of survey data is such that the performance of true stars, such as founders
of major companies, cannot be evaluated, and indeed, I exclude the self–employed from
my analysis. I have uncovered an important role for English proficiency, or, equivalently
for policy, for correlated unobserved ability, in being promoted out of technical occu-
pations to the top ranks. This implies that the current visa system targetting skilled
workers may need revision. Assuming English proficiency is not proxying entirely for un-
observed ability, the return to English suggests that immigrants and natives are imperfect
substitutes among engineering degree holders, and that natives might be able to atten-
uate any negative wage effects from immigration by moving to more language–intensive
occupations.




                                            25
Data Appendix
American Community Survey
I compute hourly wages by dividing weekly wages by usual weekly hours multiplied by
52. I leave the topcoded annual earnings as coded by the Census Bureau: the top 0.5%
of earners are assigned the average earnings of the top 0.5%. Given the short time period
involved, and the absence of information on the month of the survey, I use nominal wages
(though I include a year dummy in regressions). I drop observations with wages above
$750 per hour if usual weekly hours are less than or equal to 15, or with wages below $5
per hour.
    I drop observations with imputed values of variables I use in the analysis. Some
detailed occupational categories became more detailed in 2010, and I collapse them to
correspond as closely as possible to the 2009 classification. Details of the occupations and
degrees are given below in the descriptive statistics.

National Survey of College Graduates 2003
The survey is a stratified random sample of respondents to the 2000 census long form
who reported having a bachelor’s degree or higher, and the data may be downloaded at
sestat.nsf.gov/datadownload/.
    I compute hourly wages by dividing the annual salary by the number of weeks it was
based on and by the usual weekly hours on this job. I drop observations with missing
or zero wage values and observations with hourly wage values below $5.15, the federal
minimum wage in 2003. I also drop observations with a high hourly wage for respondents
who looked likely to have confused annual weeks and months, or weekly and daily hours
(the heaping patterns suggest such confusion exists): I drop observations with hourly
wages of more than $100 if weekly hours are nine or less or annual weeks are twelve or
less.




                                            26
References
Akee, Randall and Mutlu Yuksel. 2008. “A Note on Measures of Human Capital for
  Immigrants: Examining the American Community Survey and New Immigrant Survey”.
  IZA Discussion Paper 3897.

Aydemir, Abdurrahman B. and Mikal Skuterud. 2005. “Explaining the Deteriorating
 Entry Earnings of Canada’s Immigrant Cohorts: 1966–2000”. Canadian Journal of
 Economics, 38 (2) pp. 641–671.

Bleakley, Hoyt and Aimee Chin. 2004. “Language skills and earnings: Evidence from
  childhood immigrants”. Review of Economics and Statistics, 86 pp. 481–96.

Brookings–Duke Immigration Policy Roundtable. 2009. “Breaking the Immi-
  gration Stalemate:    From Deep Disagreements to Constructive Proposals”.
  www.brookings.edu//̃media/research/files/reports/2009/10/06%20immigration%20
  roundtable/1006 immigration roundtable, accessed 5 September 2012.

Bush, Jeb, Thomas F. McLarty III and Edward Alden. 2009. “U.S. Immigration Policy”.
  Council on Foreign Relations Independent Task Force Report No. 63.

Chiswick, Barry R. and Paul W. Miller. 2008. “Why is the payoff to schooling smaller for
 immigrants?” Labour Economics, 15 (6) pp. 1317–1340

Duleep, Harriet. 2013. “The Adjustment of Immigrants in the Labor Market”. In Barry
 R. Chiswick and Paul Miller eds. Handbook of International Migration, Elsevier.

Dustmann, Christian and Arthur van Soest. 2002. “Language and the Earnings of Immi-
 grants”. Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 55 (3) pp. 473–492.

Friedberg, Rachel M. 1992. “The Labor Market Assimilation of Immigrants in the United
  States: the Role of Age at Arrival”. Brown University working paper.

Hira, Ron. 2007. “Outsourcing America’s technology and knowledge jobs: High–skill guest
  worker visas are currently hurting rather than helping keep jobs at home”. Briefing
  Paper no. 187, Economic Policy Institute, Washington, D.C.

Hunt, Jennifer. 2012. “Are Immigrants the Best and Brightest U.S. Computer and Engi-
 neering Workers?”. Rutgers University working paper.

Hunt, Jennifer. 2011. “Innovation and Entrepreneurship: Distinctions by Entry Visa”.
 Journal of Labor Economics, 29 (3) pp. 417–457.

Hunt, Jennifer, Jean-Philippe Garant, Hannah Herman and David J. Munroe.
 2013. “Why Are Women Underrepresented Amongst Patentees?” Research Policy,
 dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2012.11.004



                                          27
Hunt, Jennifer and Marjolaine Gauthier–Loiselle. 2010. “How Much Does Immigration
 Boost Innovation?” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2 pp. 31–56.

Kerr, William R and William F. Lincoln. 2010. “The supply side of innovation: H–1B
  visa reforms and U.S. ethnic invention”. Journal of Labor Economics, 28:473–508.

Kirkegaard, Jacob Funk. 2007. “The accelerating decline in America’s high-skilled work-
  force: Implications for immigration policy”. Policy Analyses in International Economics
  no. 84, Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C.

Lewis, Ethan G. Forthcoming. “Immigrant–Native Substitutability: The Role of Lan-
  guage Ability”. In David Card and Stephen Raphael, eds. Immigration, Poverty, and
  Socioeconomic Inequality.

Lofstrom, Magnus and Joseph Hayes. 2011. “H-1Bs: How Do They Stack Up to U.S. Born
  Workers?”. IZA Discussion Paper 6259, December.

Matloff, Norman. 2002–2003. “On the need for the reform of the H–1B non–immigrant
 work visa in computer–related occupations”. University of Michigan Journal of Law
 Reform, pp. 815–914.

Matloff, Norman. 2008. “H–1Bs: Still not the best and the brightest”. Center for Immi-
 gration Studies Backgrounder.

Miano, John. 2007. “Low salaries for low skills: Wages and skill levels for H–1B computer
 workers”. Center for Immigration Studies Backgrounder.

Miano, John. 2005. “The Bottom of the Pay Scale: Wages for H-1B Computer Program-
 mers”. Center for Immigration Studies Backgrounder.

Mithas, Sunil and Henry C. Lucas. 2010. “Does high-skill immigration make everyone
 better off? United States visa policies and compensation of information technology
 professionals”. Management Science, 56 pp. 745–765.

Oreopoulos, Philip. 2011. ”Why Do Skilled Immigrants Struggle in the Labor Market?
  A Field Experiment with Thirteen Thousand Resumes”. American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy, 3 pp. 148–171.

Papademetriou, Demetrios G. and Stephen Yale–Loehr. 1996. Balancing Interests: Re-
  thinking U.S. Selection of Skilled Immigrants. Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Endowment
  for International Peace, International Migration Program.

Peri, Giovanni and Chad Sparber. 2011. “Highly-Educated Immigrants and Native Occu-
  pational Choice”. Industrial Relations, 50 (3) pp. 385–411.

Ruggles, Steven, J. Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B.
 Schroeder, and Matthew Sobek. 2010. “Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version
 5.0 [Machine-readable database]”. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.

                                           28
Schaafsma, Joseph and Arthur Sweetman. 2001. “Immigrant earnings: age at immigration
  matters”. Canadian Journal of Economics, 34 (4) pp. 1066–1099.

The Partnership for a New American Economy and the Partnership for New York
 City. 2012. “Not Coming to America: Why the U.S. is Falling Behind in the Global
 Race for Talent”. www.renewoureconomy.org/sites/all/themes/pnae/not-coming-to-
 america.pdf, accessed 18 September 2012.




                                        29
                           Figure 1: Patenting by wage decile; holders of engineering bachelor’s degrees



           1       Natives
                Immigrants
           2       Natives
                Immigrants
           3       Natives
                Immigrants
           4       Natives
                Immigrants
           5       Natives
                Immigrants




30
           6       Natives
                Immigrants
           7       Natives
                Immigrants
           8       Natives
                Immigrants
           9       Natives
                Immigrants
         10        Natives
                Immigrants

                               0        .1         .2        .3      .4      .5             .6         .7       .8
                                                              Patents per person

     Source: National Survey of College Graduates 2003.
     Note: The sample contains workers aged 64 or under, who are not self employed, and hold an engineering bachelor’s degree.
     Deciles are based on hourly wages of pooled immigrants and natives. Calculations are weighted with survey weights.
                                          Figure 2: Age–earnings profiles for engineers


                                A. Natives                                         B. Immigrants




             60
                                                                    60




             50
                                                                    50




             40
                                                                    40




31
           30
                                                                  30




         Wage ($)
                                                                Wage ($)




             20
                                                                    20




             10
                                                                    10




                                             Degrees                                              Degrees
                                             Occupations                                          Occupations




             0
                                                                    0




                    20     30       40       50        60                  20     30      40      50      60
                                   Age                                                    Age


     Source: American Community Survey 2009, 2010.
     Note: Hourly wages. The sample contains non-enrolled workers ages 18-64, employed full year but not self-employed, who
     are working in an engineering occupation or hold an engineering bachelor’s degree. Data are for 2009 and 2010, and are
     weighted with survey weights. Age is measured in years and a moving average with one lag and one lead is applied to
     smooth the series.
                                   Figure 3: Log wage distributions for immigrants and natives

                        A. Engineering occupations                                  B. Engineering degrees




         1.5
                                                                      1.5
                                                     Natives                                                  Natives
                                                     Immigrants                                               Immigrants




         1
                                                                      1




         .5
                                                                      .5




         0
                                                                      0
                 2       3        4        5         6            7         2       3       4       5         6            7
                                                                                           Log wage




32
                       C. Native engineering workers                            D. Immigrant engineering workers




         1.5
                                                                      1.5
                                                  Degrees                                                    Degrees
                                                  Occupations                                                Occupations




         1
                                                                      1




         .5
                                                                      .5




         0
                                                                      0




                 2       3        4       5          6            7         2       3       4       5         6            7
                                 Log wage                                                  Log wage


     Source: American Community Survey 2009, 2010.
     Note: Hourly wage kernel density estimates using an Epanechnikov kernel and a bandwidth of 0.05, weighted with survey
     weights. The dotted vertical lines indicate the 10th, 50th and 90th percentiles of the wage distribution for the combined
     immigrant and native sample.
           Table 1: Wages and shares of immigrants among engineering workers

                                            Occupations            Bachelor’s degrees
                                     Share (%)     Wage ($)     Share (%)     Wage ($)
                                         (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)
Natives                                 79.2         37.8          67.1         44.9
Immigrants                              19.4         41.7          31.4         41.9
U.S. citizens born abroad                1.1         41.6           1.1         45.4
Born in U.S. territories                 0.4         33.1           0.4         39.2
All                                    100.0         38.6         100.0         43.9
Observations                                  25,295                    47,011
Immigrants from
 India                                   3.5          42.6          8.3         45.4
 China                                   2.2          44.2          2.5         43.0
 Other East, Southeast, South Asia       5.6          41.7          6.9         40.8
 Americas except Canada                  2.6          37.1          4.8         33.2
 UK, Ireland, Canada, Antipodes          1.3          45.5          1.7         55.7
 Western Europe                          1.0          44.1          1.5         54.0
 Eastern Europe                          1.3          38.9          2.5         34.7
 Other                                   2.0          41.3          3.3         40.1
 All immigrants                         19.4          41.7         31.4         41.9
Immigrants arrived at age
    17 or younger                       24.8          39.5         16.8          43.3
    18 or older                         75.2          42.4         83.2          41.6
    All                                100.0         100.0        100.0         100.0

Note: Computed using survey weights. The sample contains non-enrolled workers ages 18-
64, employed full year but not self-employed, who are working in an engineering occupation
(columns 1 and 2) or hold an engineering bachelor’s degree (columns 3 and 4). Data are for
2009 and 2010. China does not include Hong Kong; Europe is defined as west of the Urals;
Eastern Europe is defined as European former Communist countries. The Antipodes
include Australia and New Zealand.
            Table 2: Education and wages of workers in engineering occupations

                                               Share (%)                Wage ($)
                                         Natives Immigrants       Natives Immigrants

                                            (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)
GED or no high school diploma               0.5         0.0         25.6         21.1
High school diploma or <1 year college      5.9         1.3         28.4         37.5
More than 1 year college, no diploma        6.3         2.5         32.0         33.6
Associate’s degree                          8.8         3.6         30.8         33.1
Bachelor’s degree                          55.6        40.3         37.8         38.4
Master’s degree                            20.2        38.7         44.1         43.5
Professional degree                         1.0         1.8         43.4         45.3
Doctoral degree                             1.7        11.6         54.5         51.1
All                                       100.0        100.0        37.8         41.7
Observations                              20,316       4640        20,316        4640

Note: Computed using survey weights. The sample contains non-enrolled workers ages 18-
64, employed full year but not self-employed, who are working in an engineering occupation.
Data are for 2009 and 2010. American citizens born abroad and workers born in U.S.
territories are not included.
       Table 3: Education and wages of workers with engineering bachelor’s degrees

                                  Share (%)                          Wage ($)
                        Natives          Immigrants        Natives          Immigrants
                           (1)                 (2)           (3)                (4)
Bachelor’s degree         65.7                49.6          41.1               35.7
Master’s degree           28.7                38.4          50.5               47.2
Professional degree        2.5                 2.3          64.2               45.3
Doctoral degree            3.1                 9.7          56.9               51.1
All                      100.0               100.0          44.9               41.9
Observations            33,322              13,991         33,322             13,991

Note: Computed using survey weights. The sample contains non-enrolled workers ages 18-
64, employed full year but not self-employed, who hold an engineering bachelor’s degree.
Data are for 2009 and 2010. American citizens born abroad and workers born in U.S.
territories are not included.
      Table 4: Field of study of bachelor’s degree workers in engineering occupations

                                      Share (%)                        Wage ($)
                               Natives       Immigrants        Natives      Immigrants
                                 (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)
Computer-related                 2.6             4.9            42.4            47.2
Engineering, architecture       77.6            84.1            40.6            42.4
Science and mathematics          7.1             6.7            42.5            44.9
Technology                       3.9             1.9            34.0            34.6
Business                         4.3             1.8            35.7            34.0
None of the above                6.9             2.4            34.4            36.4
All                            >100.0          >100.0           39.9            42.3
Observations                   15,987           4318           15,987           4318

Note: Computed using survey weights. The sample contains non-enrolled workers ages 18-
64, employed full year but not self-employed, who are working in an engineering occupation
and hold an engineering bachelor’s degree. Data are for 2009 and 2010. American citizens
born abroad and workers born in U.S. territories are not included. Most technology
bachelor’s degrees are in engineering technology, but they also include family and consumer
sciences, military technologies, nuclear, industrial radiology and biological technologies.
Medical technology degrees are not included.
           Table 5: Occupations of workers with an engineering bachelor’s degree

                             Share (%)                Wage ($)                      Patents
                       Natives Immigrants       Natives Immigrants        Natives      Immigrants
                         (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)            (5)             (6)
Managerial              28.7         23.8        54.1       53.5           0.23            0.52
Engineering,            38.3         25.6        40.6       42.4           0.24            0.35
architecture
Computer related         8.3         21.8        43.6         42.8         0.20           0.08
Science, math,           3.0          4.6        38.5         34.0         0.11           0.22
technology, health
except physician
Education                 2.2          3.3       33.2         38.6         0.18          0.18
Lawyer, physician         1.4          0.4       80.3         69.3         0.02            0
Other                    18.1         20.5       39.5         28.3         0.07          0.06
All                     100.0        100.0       44.9         41.9         0.19          0.22
Observations           32,322       13,991      32,322       13,991        6790          3131

Note: Weighted means from the 2003 National Survey of College Graduates (columns 5
and 6) and the 2009 and 2010 ACS (columns 1-4). Both samples contain workers holding an
engineering bachelor’s degree who are 64 or under and not self-employed or enrolled; the
ACS workers are in addition at least age 18, employed full year. American citizens born
abroad and workers born in U.S. territories are not included. Data on patents refer to patents
granted in the preceding five years; the NSCG definition of management is narrower than
that of the ACS.
  Table 6: Occupations of top and bottom 10% of workers with an engineering bachelor’s
                                        degree

                                      Top 10% earners           Bottom 10% earners
                                    Natives   Immigrants        Natives   Immigrants
                                      (1)          (2)            (3)         (4)
Managerial                           52.8         50.8           14.6        10.0
Engineering, architecture            18.2         17.6           23.7         5.5
Computer related                      4.9         13.5            5.5         5.0
Science, math, technology,            1.7          2.5            5.0         6.0
  health except physician
Education                              1.1           3.1           6.6            4.0
Lawyer, physician                      6.4           1.8           1.6            0.5
Other                                 14.8          10.7          43.0           69.1
All                                  100.0         100.0         100.0          100.0
Observations                         3441          1576          3041           1248

Note: Computed using survey weights. The sample contains non-enrolled workers ages 18-
64, employed full year but not self-employed, who are working in an engineering occupation
and hold an engineering bachelor’s degree. Data are for 2009 and 2010. American citizens
born abroad and workers born in U.S. territories are not included. The top and bottom 10%
are calculated separately for natives and immigrants, using weights.
                Table 7: Entry visa of engineering bachelor’s degree holders

                                  Full sample    Top 10% earners      Bottom 10% earners
                                       (1)             (2)                    (3)
Permanent residence                   33.4            27.7                   47.5
(green card)
Temporary visas
  Work                                17.8              18.8                   10.3
  Study/training                      35.4              48.6                   23.5
  Dependent                            7.1               3.1                    8.3
  Other                                6.3               1.7                   10.4
Observations                          3375              313                    249

Note: Weighted means from the 2003 National Survey of College Graduates. Samples
contain workers holding an engineering bachelor’s degree who are 64 or under and not self-
employed and not enrolled. American citizens born abroad and workers born in U.S.
territories are not included.
              Table 8: English proficiency of immigrant engineering workers

                                          Occupations             Bachelor’s degrees
                                      Share (%)   Wage ($)     Share (%)      Wage ($)
                                         (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)
A. Full samples
  Only English at home                   19.6          42.9        15.7            47.9
  Speaks English very well               61.6          41.9        62.2            43.9
  Speaks English less well               18.9          39.5        22.1            31.8
  All                                   100.0          41.7       100.0            41.9
  Observations                                  4640                      13,991
B. Top 10% earners
  Only English at home                   24.0          85.4        24.9            105.0
  Speaks English very well               61.6          79.5        64.4             99.2
  Speaks English less well               14.3          86.0        10.7             90.4
  All                                   100.0          81.9       100.0             99.7
  Observations                                  540                       1576
C. Bottom 10% earners
  Only English at home                   17.8          18.4         8.8            12.0
  Speaks English very well               57.5          17.7        41.7            11.7
  Speaks English less well               24.7          17.5        49.5            11.3
  All                                   100.0          17.8       100.0            11.5
  Observations                                  407                       1248

Note: Computed using survey weights. The sample contains immigrant non-enrolled
workers ages 18-64, employed full year but not self-employed, who are working in an
engineering occupation (columns 1 and 2) or hold an engineering bachelor’s degree (columns
3 and 4). Data are for 2009 and 2010. Speaks English less well is an aggregation of the
categories Speaks English well, not well and not at all.
                                          Table 9: Wage determinants for engineering workers

                                 (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)          (7)         (8)         (9)
A. Occupations
                              0.096***      0.003     -0.020***   -0.024***    -0.022***    0.011        0.010       0.003      -0.021**
                              (0.007)      (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.008)      (0.008)    (0.011)      (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)
R2                              0.01         0.11       0.15        0.31         0.31        0.31         0.33        0.37        0.40
B. Degrees
                              -0.092***   -0.139***   -0.134***   -0.140***    -0.134***   -0.019*      -0.007      -0.016*    -0.034***
                               (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)      (0.007)    (0.010)      (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)
R2                              0.01        0.06        0.08        0.16         0.17        0.19         0.37       0.42        0.43
Education                         --         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
Field, if bachelor’s              --          --         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
Age                               --          --          --         Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
Gender                            --          --          --          --          Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
English proficiency               --          --          --          --           --        Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
Detailed occupation               --          --          --          --           --         --          Yes         Yes         Yes
Firm type, industry               --          --          --          --           --         --           --         Yes         Yes
State                             --          --          --          --           --         --           --          --         Yes

Note: The table reports the immigrant dummy coefficient from least squares regressions on 25,295 observations (panel A) and 47,011
observations (panel B), weighted with survey weights. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. All regressions include a dummy for 2010
and dummies for American born abroad and born in U.S. territories. Education controls are seven dummies (panels A) or three dummies
(panels B), field of study 11 dummies (panel B) or a maximum of 38 dummies (panel A), English proficiency two dummies, age 8 dummies,
detailed occupation 13 dummies (panel A) or a maximum of 333 dummies (panel B), firm type of dummies for non-profit, federal
government, state government, local government, unpaid family worker, industry of a maximum of 267 dummies.
      Table 10: Wage determinants for engineering workers – 10th and 95th percentiles

                           (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
A. Occupations: 95th
                        0.065***    -0.009       0.020       0.017       0.042*      0.031
                        (0.015)     (0.016)     (0.015)     (0.015)     (0.022)     (0.022)
R2                        0.00        0.07        0.17        0.17        0.17        0.19
B. Degrees: 95th
                        -0.155***   -0.136***   -0.040**    -0.041**     0.030       0.023
                         (0.021)     (0.018)    (0.018)     (0.017)     (0.027)     (0.020)
R2                        0.00        0.06        0.14        0.15        0.15        0.28
C. Occupations: 10th
                        0.110***    -0.039***   -0.088***   -0.082***    0.001       0.002
                        (0.012)      (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.011)    (0.016)     (0.016)
R2                        0.00        0.10        0.18        0.18        0.18        0.20
D. Degrees: 10th
                        -0.271***   -0.284***   -0.327***   -0.303***   -0.096***   -0.035***
                         (0.012)     (0.010)     (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.016)     (0.013)
R2                        0.02        0.06        0.09        0.10        0.12        0.28
Education, field            --         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Age                         --          --         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Gender                      --          --          --         Yes         Yes         Yes
English proficiency         --          --          --          --         Yes         Yes
Detailed occupation         --          --          --          --          --         Yes

Note: The table reports the immigrant dummy coefficient from quantile regressions on
25,295 observations (panels A and C) and 47,011 (panels B and D), weighted with survey
weights. All regressions include a dummy for 2010 and dummies for American born abroad
and born in U.S. territories. See notes to Table 9 for a full description of the covariates.
                  Table 11: Effect of English proficiency on hourly wages

                                   (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)      (5)
A. Occupations, mean
 Speaks English very well       -0.027**      -0.014       -0.003       -0.003       --
                                 (0.012)      (0.012)     (0.012)      (0.012)
 Speaks English less well       -0.097***    -0.082***    -0.045**     -0.045**      --
                                 (0.018)      (0.020)     (0.019)      (0.019)
B. Degrees, mean
  Speaks English very well      -0.048***    -0.038***    -0.016**     -0.007      -0.018
                                 (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.011)     (0.010)     (0.011)
 Speaks English less well       -0.396***    -0.324***    -0.249***   -0.140***   -0.233***
                                 (0.016)      (0.016)      (0.016)     (0.014)     (0.016)
C. Degrees, 95th percentile
  Speaks English very well       -0.054*      -0.041       -0.053*     -0.013      -0.009
                                 (0.028)      (0.028)      (0.029)     (0.022)     (0.024)
 Speaks English less well       -0.296***    -0.259***    -0.311***   -0.105***   -0.144***
                                 (0.037)      (0.038)      (0.040)     (0.031)     (0.033)
D. Degrees, 10th percentile
 Speaks English very well       -0.069***    -0.076***    -0.044**    -0.034***      --
                                 (0.017)      (0.018)      (0.019)     (0.013)
 Speaks English less well       -0.568***    -0.428***    -0.313***   -0.226***      --
                                 (0.023)      (0.024)      (0.026)     (0.018)
Education, field, age, gender      Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes
Immigrant origin                    --          Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes
Age at arrival, quadratic           --           --          Yes         Yes        Yes
Detailed occupation                 --           --           --         Yes         --
Managerial dummy                    --            -           --          --        Yes

Note: The table reports the immigrant dummy coefficient from least squares regressions
(panels A and B) and quantile regressions (panels C and D) on 25,295 observations (panel A)
and 47,011 (panels B, C and D), weighted with survey weights. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses. All regressions include a dummy for 2010 and dummies for American born
abroad and born in U.S. territories. The omitted English category is speaks English only at
home. See notes to Table 9 for a full description of the covariates.
           Table 12: Wage distinctions by origin region – engineering occupations

                             (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
Immigrant from
India                     0.130***    -0.047***     0.018       0.020       0.036       0.013
                          (0.017)      (0.017)     (0.016)     (0.015)     (0.019)     (0.018)
China                     0.183***     -0.038**   -0.035**     -0.027       0.010      -0.021
                          (0.018)      (0.017)     (0.017)     (0.017)     (0.020)     (0.019)
Other East, Southeast,    0.108***      0.014      -0.008      -0.005       0.026     -0.033**
South Asia                (0.013)      (0.012)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.016)     (0.015)
Americas                  -0.064**    -0.102***   -0.095***   -0.094***   -0.074***   -0.083***
except Canada             (0.027)      (0.026)     (0.025)     (0.025)     (0.026)     (0.025)
UK, Ireland, Canada,      0.177***     0.124***    0.101***    0.101***     0.103      0.066***
Antipodes                 (0.024)      (0.025)     (0.023)     (0.023)     (0.023)     (0.022)
Western Europe             0.139**      0.048       0.019       0.020       0.035       0.006
                          (0.034)      (0.031)     (0.029)     (0.029)     (0.030)     (0.029)
Eastern Europe              0.039     -0.095***   -0.136***   -0.127***   -0.096***   -0.094***
                          (0.027)      (0.025)     (0.023)     (0.023)     (0.025)     (0.024)
Other                     0.081***     -0.040*    -0.075**    -0.075**    -0.057**    -0.075***
                          (0.025)      (0.024)     (0.024)     (0.024)     (0.025)     (0.024)
R2                           0.02        0.16        0.31        0.32        0.32        0.40
Education, field              --         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Age                           --          --         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Gender                        --          --          --         Yes         Yes         Yes
English proficiency           --          --          --          --         Yes         Yes
Other covariates              --          --          --          --          --         Yes

Note: The table reports the immigrant dummy coefficient from least squares wage
regressions on 25,295 observations. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. All regressions
include a dummy for 2010 and dummies for American born abroad and born in U.S.
territories. See notes to Table 9 for a full description of the covariates. China does not
include Hong Kong; Europe is defined as west of the Urals; Eastern Europe is defined as
European former Communist countries; the Antipodes comprise Australia and New
Zealand.
        Table 13: Wage distinctions by origin region – engineering bachelor’s degrees

                             (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
Immigrant from
India                      0.046***    -0.008      0.063***    0.063***    0.126***    0.037***
                           (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.013)     (0.012)
China                      0.002***   -0.133***   -0.141***   -0.113***     0.028     -0.034**
                           (0.016)     (0.017)     (0.016)     (0.017)     (0.020)     (0.015)
Other East, Southeast,    -0.111***   -0.129***   -0.165***   -0.162***   -0.047***   -0.065***
South Asia                 (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.015)     (0.012)
Americas                  -0.384***   -0.375***   -0.398***   -0.394***   -0.271***   -0.148***
except Canada              (0.018)     (0.017)     (0.017)     (0.017)     (0.018)     (0.015)
UK, Ireland, Canada,       0.191***    0.178***    0.141***    0.142***    0.145***    0.057***
Antipodes                  (0.022)     (0.022)     (0.021)     (0.021)     (0.021)     (0.018)
Western Europe             0.146***    0.058**      0.037       0.035      0.089***    0.046**
                           (0.026)     (0.026)     (0.024)     (0.024)     (0.025)     (0.022)
Eastern Europe            -0.284***   -0.316***   -0.367***   -0.339***   -0.189***   -0.107***
                           (0.020)     (0.020)     (0.020)     (0.020)     (0.022)     (0.018)
Other                     -0.156***   -0.198***   -0.229***   -0.226***   -0.158***   -0.104***
                           (0.019)     (0.019)     (0.019)     (0.018)     (0.020)     (0.016)
R2                           0.04        0.10        0.19        0.20        0.22        0.44
Education, field              --         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Age                           --          --         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Gender                        --          --          --         Yes         Yes         Yes
English proficiency           --          --          --          --         Yes         Yes
Other covariates              --          --          --          --          --         Yes

Note: The table reports the immigrant dummy coefficient from least squares hourly wage
regressions on 47,011 observations. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. All regressions
include a dummy for 2010 and dummies for American born abroad and born in U.S.
territories. See notes to Table 9 for a full description of the covariates. China does not
include Hong Kong; Europe is defined as west of the Urals; Eastern Europe is defined as
former Communist countries; the Antipodes comprise Australia and New Zealand.
            Table 14: 10th and 95th percentile wage distinctions by origin region

                               (1)             (2)                (3)             (4)
                                 95th percentile                    10th percentile
                          Occupations      Bachelor’s        Occupations      Bachelor’s
                                            degrees                            degrees
Immigrant from
India                        0.071**          -0.169***         0.198***         0.157***
                             (0.035)           (0.033)          (0.026)          (0.017)
China                         0.046           -0.254***         0.251***          0.000
                             (0.044)           (0.058)          (0.032)          (0.031)
Other East, Southeast,        0.036           -0.232***         0.136***        -0.239***
South Asia                   (0.029)           (0.036)          (0.021)          (0.019)
Americas                     -0.011           -0.295***        -0.116***        -0.722***
except Canada                (0.040)           (0.043)          (0.030)          (0.022)
UK, Ireland, Canada,         0.260***          0.415***         0.218***         0.157***
Australia, New Zealand       (0.055)           (0.071)          (0.041)          (0.037)
Western Europe               0.176***          0.387***         0.118**           0.012
                             (0.065)           (0.074)          (0.048)          (0.039)
Eastern Europe               -0.019           -0.352***          0.066          -0.462***
                             (0.056)           (0.058)          (0.042)          (0.031)
Other                        0.123***          -0.171           -0.065          -0.393***
                             (0.046)           (0.050)          (0.078)          (0.027)
R2                            0.00              0.01             0.01                0.06
Observations                 25,295            47,011           25,295              47,011

Note: The table reports the immigrant dummy coefficient from quantile regressions. All
regressions also include a dummy for 2010 and dummies for American born abroad and
born in U.S. territories. China does not include Hong Kong; Europe is defined as west of the
Urals; Eastern Europe is defined as European former Communist countries.
       Appendix Table: 1 Specific occupations of workers in engineering occupations

                                      Share (%)                       Wage ($)
                               Natives       Immigrants        Natives      Immigrants
                                  (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)
Architecture                      6.9             5.9           35.0           39.3
Aerospace                         8.1             6.9           44.0           44.8
Biomedical, agricultural          0.7             0.8           39.2           35.8
Chemical                          3.3             3.4           43.9           44.6
Civil                            15.9            14.1           36.6           40.4
Computer hardware                 2.4             5.0           39.0           44.2
Electrical                       11.9            16.1           39.5           43.3
Environmental                     2.0             1.5           37.1           37.2
Industrial                       10.4             7.4           32.7           34.6
Marine, naval architecture        0.7             0.4           36.1           29.5
Materials                         18              1.9           33.3           36.2
Mechanical                       12.3            10.3           34.0           35.9
Mining                            1.7             1.4           52.3           54.1
Nuclear, miscellaneous           21.9            25.1           39.3           45.0
All                             100.0           100.0           37.8           41.7
Observations                   20,316           4640           20,316          4640

Note: Computed using survey weights. The sample contains non-enrolled workers ages 18-
64, employed full year but not self-employed, who are working in an engineering occupation.
Data are for 2009 and 2010. American citizens born abroad and workers born in U.S.
territories are included in column 3 only. Based on a harmonization of 2009 and 2010
detailed occupation codes.
  Appendix Table 2: Detailed field of study of workers with engineering bachelor’s degree

                                     Share (%)                        Wage ($)
                               Natives      Immigrants         Natives      Immigrants
                                 (1)            (2)              (3)             (4)
General                          9.7           14.0             44.5            36.5
Aerospace                        3.2            1.2             48.4            42.4
Biological                       0.9            1.2             36.8            31.4
Agricultural                     0.5            0.3             36.4            32.3
Biomedical                       0.8            0.5             47.8            42.9
Chemical                         6.8            6.5             51.1            45.6
Civil                           12.3            9.5             43.3            39.8
Computer                         4.6            8.5             42.2            41.4
Electrical                      21.9           30.3             47.8            45.6
Engineering mechanics            0.9            0.8             47.5            42.2
Environmental                    0.9            0.4             39.5            38.2
Geological, geophysical          0.3            0.1             48.6            49.9
Industrial, manufacturing        5.0            3.5             43.4            40.2
Materials                        1.0            0.9             41.7            48.1
Mechanical                      19.8           16.2             45.0            43.3
Metallurgical                    0.5            0.7             47.0            43.4
Mining, mineral                  0.4            0.3             46.8            45.0
Marine, naval architecture       0.5            0.3             48.5            33.3
Nuclear                          0.6            0.3             53.6            51.7
Petroleum                        0.6            0.4             77.2            52.7
Miscellaneous                    2.0            1.5             41.8            30.0
All                            ~100.0         ~100.0            44.9            41.9
Observations                   32,322         13,991           32,322          13,991

Note: Computed using survey weights. The sample contains non-enrolled workers ages 18-
64, employed full year but not self-employed, who hold an engineering bachelor’s degree.
Data are for 2009 and 2010. American citizens born abroad and workers born in U.S.
territories are included in column 3 only. Columns 1 and 2 do not sum exactly to one,
because some workers have two bachelor’s degrees.
          Appendix Table 3: Means for engineering workers not given elsewhere

                                           Occupations            Bachelor’s degrees
                                     Native      Immigrants      Native     Immigrants
                                       (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)
Age                                   43.0           43.6         42.9          42.4
                                     (11.0)         (10.0)       (10.6)         (9.8)
Female                                0.13           0.17         0.13          0.17
Private for profit firm               0.85           0.87         0.81          0.86
Not for profit firm                   0.02           0.02         0.04          0.04
Federal employee                      0.07           0.04         0.08          0.03
State government employee             0.04           0.04         0.04          0.05
Local government employee             0.03           0.04         0.04          0.04
Unpaid family worker                  0.00           0.00         0.00          0.00
Age at arrival                          --           23.3           --          25.6
                                                    (10.2)                     (10.0)
Observations                         20,316          4640        32,322       13,991

Note: Computed using survey weights. The sample contains non-enrolled workers ages 18-
64, employed full year but not self-employed, who are working in an engineering occupation
(columns 1 and 2) or hold an engineering bachelor’s degree (columns 3 and 4). Data are for
2009 and 2010.
  Appendix Table 4: Effect of English proficiency on wages, engineering bachelor’s degree
                                         holders

                                        Mean                         95th percentile
                                   (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)             (5)
Speaks English very well          0.035       0.008       0.293***        0.076          0.138**
                                 (0.030)     (0.027)      (0.078)        (0.062)         (0.070)
 × age                          -0.0012*    -0.0004     -0.0082***      -0.0024*       -0.0037**
                                (0.0007)    (0.0006)     (0.0018)       (0.0014)        (0.0016)
Speaks English less well        -0.171***   -0.167***    -0.268**         0.102           0.158
                                 (0.054)     (0.045)      (0.131)        (0.105)         (0.118)
 × age                          -0.0019      0.0006     -0.0124***     -0.0052**       -0.0077***
                                (0.0012)    (0.0010)     (0.0029)       (0.0023)        (0.0026)
Education, field, age, gender      Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes
Immigrant origin                   Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes
Age at arrival, quadratic          Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes
Detailed occupation                 --         Yes           --            Yes              --
Management dummy                    --          --           --             --             Yes
English very well                -0.003      -0.003        0.047          0.003           0.025
  at age 30                      (0.013)     (0.012)      (0.034)        (0.027)         (0.031)
English very well               -0.028**     -0.011      -0.116***       -0.046*         -0.050*
  at age 50                      (0.014)     (0.012)      (0.032)        (0.026)         (0.029)
English less well               -0.227***   -0.149***     -0.104*        -0.053          -0.072
  at age 30                      (0.022)     (0.019)      (0.055)        (0.044)         (0.049)
English less well               -0.264***   -0.136***    -0.353***      -0.156***       -0.226***
  at age 50                      (0.019)     (0.016)      (0.043)        (0.035)         (0.039)

Note: The table reports coefficients from weighted least squares (columns 1 and 2) and 95th
percentile quantile (columns 3-5) regressions with 47,011 observations. All regressions
include a dummy for 2010 and dummies for American born abroad and born in U.S.
territories. The omitted English category is speaks English only at home. Age at arrival has
value zero for natives. See notes to Table 9 for a full description of the covariates.
