                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 BIRTHPLACE DIVERSITY AND ECONOMIC PROSPERITY

                                           Alberto Alesina
                                           Johann Harnoss
                                           Hillel Rapoport

                                        Working Paper 18699
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18699


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2013




We thank Amandine Aubry, Simone Bertoli, François Bourguignon, Frédéric Docquier, Jesús Fernández-Huertas
Moraga, Oded Galor, Frédéric Jouneau, Thierry Mayer, Yona Rubinstein, Joao Santos-Silva, Jacques
Silber, Sylvana Tenreyro, Nico Voigtlaender, participants at the 5th AFD-World Bank Conference
on Migration and Development, Paris, June 2012, the 1st CEMIR conference at CESifo, Munich, December
2012, the NBER Economics of Culture and Institutions Meeting, Cambridge, April 2013, the 10th
IZA Migration Meeting in Jerusalem, June 2013, and seminar audiences at PSE-SciencePo-Paris 1
(Paris Trade Seminar), Louvain (IRES), the Geneva Graduate Institute, Luxembourg, Milan, Hebrew
University, Tel-Aviv, EUI and IDC for comments and suggestions. We also thank Quamrul Ashraf
and Frédéric Docquier for sharing their datasets with us. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Alberto Alesina, Johann Harnoss, and Hillel Rapoport. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Birthplace Diversity and Economic Prosperity
Alberto Alesina, Johann Harnoss, and Hillel Rapoport
NBER Working Paper No. 18699
January 2013, Revised August 2015
JEL No. F22,F43,O1,O4

                                                ABSTRACT

We use recent immigration data from 195 countries and propose an index of population diversity based
on people's birthplaces. This new index is then decomposed into a size (share of foreign born) and
a variety (diversity of immigrants) component and is available for 1990 and 2000 disaggregated by
skill level. We show that birthplace diversity is largely uncorrelated with ethnic, linguistic, or genetic
diversity. Our main result is that the diversity of skilled immigration relates positively to economic
development (as measured by income and TFP per capita and patent intensity) even after controlling
for ethno-linguistic and genetic fractionalization, geography, trade, education, institutions and origin-effects
capturing income/productivity levels in the immigrants' home countries. We make progress towards
addressing endogeneity by specifying a gravity model to predict the share and diversity of immigration
based on exogenous bilateral variables. The results are robust across various OLS and 2SLS specifications
and suggestive of skill complementarities between native workers and immigrants, especially when
the latter come from richer countries at intermediate levels of cultural proximity.


Alberto Alesina                                        Hillel Rapoport
Department of Economics                                Department of Economics
Harvard University                                     Bar Ilan University
Littauer Center 210                                    52900 Ramat Gan, Israel
Cambridge, MA 02138                                    and QUIPPE, University of Lille
and IGIER                                              and also Center for International Development
and also NBER                                          Hillel.Rapoport@biu.ac.il
aalesina@harvard.edu

Johann Harnoss
EQUIPPE,
University of Lille,
and Harvard University
johann.harnoss@post.harvard.edu
1       Introduction
Population heterogeneity is increasing in virtually all advanced economies due to immigra-
tion. Foreign-born individuals now represent about ten percent of the workforce in OECD
countries, a threefold increase since 1960 and a twofold increase since 1990. High-skill mi-
gration is growing even faster, with a twofold increase during the 1990s alone.1 As a result,
the diversity of the skilled workforce (measured as the likelihood that two randomly-drawn
skilled workers have di¤erent countries of birth) in a typical OECD country has increased
by more than three percentage points (from .19 to .22) within just ten years.2
     What are the economic implications of such higher diversity? Theory suggests that di-
versity has positive and negative economic e¤ects. The former are due to complementarities
in production, diversity of skills, experiences and ideas (think of a Dixit Stiglitz production
function). The latter arise from potential con‡icts, disagreements about public policies, and
animosity between di¤erent groups. A vast literature has investigated these issues. The
empirical literature has so far focused on ethnic and linguistic fractionalization, which were
shown to exert negative e¤ects on economic growth in cross-country comparisons (Easterly
and Levine, 1997, Collier, 2001, Alesina et al., 2003, 2012), with the possible exception
of very rich countries (see Alesina and La Ferrara, 2005, for a discussion of these issues).
Ashraf and Galor (2013a,b) focus on genetic diversity and show that it exhibits an inverse
u-shaped relationship with income per capita. On balance the negative e¤ects of diversity
seem to dominate empirically, or to put it di¤erently, it has been hard to document the
positive economic e¤ects of diversity. This is the key objective of this paper.
     We examine the relationship between intrapopulation diversity in birthplaces and eco-
nomic prosperity. More speci…cally, we make four contributions. First, we construct and
discuss the properties of a new index of birthplace diversity. We build indicators of diver-
sity for the workforce of 195 countries in 1990 and 2000, disaggregated by skill/education
level, and computed both for the workforce as a whole and for its foreign-born component.
Empirically, ethno-linguistic and birthplace diversity are - somewhat surprisingly - almost
completely uncorrelated. Conceptually, ethnic, genetic and birthplace diversity also di¤er
as people born in di¤erent countries are likely to have been educated in di¤erent school sys-
tems, learned di¤erent skills, and developed di¤erent cognitive abilities. That may not be
the case for people of di¤erent ethnic origins born, raised and educated in the same country.
    1 See   Ozden et al. (2011) for a picture of the evolution of international migration over the last …fty years,
and Docquier and Rapoport (2012) for a focus on high-skill migration and its e¤ects on source and host
countries.
   2 That is, a 17-percent increase. 22 out of 27 OECD countries saw increases in the diversity of their

skilled workforce between 1990 and 2000 (the only exceptions being Estonia, Greece, New Zealand, Poland
and Slovakia).




                                                          2
    Second, we investigate the relationship between birthplace diversity and economic devel-
opment. We …nd that unlike ethnic/linguistic fractionalization, birthplace diversity remains
positively related to long-run income after controlling for many covariates. This positive rela-
tionship is stronger for skilled migrants (workers with college education) in richer countries.
In terms of magnitudes, increasing the diversity of skilled immigrants by one percentage
point raises long-run output by about two percent.
    Third, we make progress towards addressing endogeneity issues arising from selection
on unobservables and reverse causality. We show that our results are unlikely to be ex-
plained by positive selection on unobservables. To address reverse causality, we specify
a gravity model to predict the size and diversity of a country’s immigration using bilat-
eral geographic/cultural variables. We con…rm the robustness of our OLS …ndings in 2SLS
models.
    Fourth, we allow the e¤ect of diversity to vary with bilateral distance between immigrants
and natives along two dimensions: genetic/cultural distance, and income at origin. The
productive e¤ect of birthplace diversity is largest for immigrants from richer origin countries
and for immigrants from countries at intermediate levels of cultural proximity. That is, the
e¤ect of diversity is inversely u-shaped in terms of cultural distance between immigrant and
native workers. This suggests an optimal level of birthplace diversity in terms of cultural
proximity.3
    The current empirical evidence linking income and productivity di¤erences to birthplace
diversity is growing rapidly but is still limited when it comes to cross-country evidence.
Existing studies have focused mainly on the United States. Ottaviano and Peri (2006)
construct a measure of cultural diversity for the period 1970-1990 using migration data on
US metropolitan areas and …nd positive e¤ects on the productivity of native workers as
measured by their wages.4 Peri (2012) …nds positive e¤ects of the diversity coming from
immigration on the productivity of US states, a result he attributes to unskilled migrants
promoting e¢ cient task-specialization and adoption of unskilled-e¢ cient technologies, and
more so when immigration is diverse. Ager and Brückner (2013) study the link between
immigration, diversity and economic growth in the context of the United States about a
century ago, at a time now commonly referred to as "the age of mass migration" (Hatton
and Williamson, 1998).5 They …nd that fractionalization increases output while polarization
decreases it in US counties during the period 1870-1920. Cross-country comparisons include
   3 This   inverted u-curve for cultural proximity mirrors the results of Ashraf and Galor (2013a) on genetic
diversity.
   4 Bellini et al. (2013) apply the same methodology to European regions and …nd broadly consistent results

for Europe as well.
   5 See also Bandiera, Rasul and Viarengo (2013) and Abramitzky, Boustan and Eriksson (2012, 2013),

respectively, on the measurement of entry and return ‡ows and on migrants’self-selection.



                                                       3
Andersen and Dalgaard (2011), who …nd positive e¤ects of travel intensity on total factor
productivity which they attribute to knowledge di¤usion of temporary migrants, and Ortega
and Peri (2014), who analyze the connection between income per capita and migration in a
cross-section of countries. They focus on the growth e¤ects of openness and diversity of trade
vs. migration and …nd the share of immigration to be a stronger determinant of long run
output than trade. In contrast, we focus on the e¤ect of intrapopulation diversity, comparing
birthplace to other dimensions of diversity (ethnic, linguistic, genetic) and demonstrate the
positive e¤ect of the diversity arising from immigration (especially its high-skill component)
on income per capita.
    The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 brie‡y discusses theoretical chan-
nels and related literature on diversity and economic performance. Section 3 explains the
construction and analytical decomposition of our birthplace diversity index; we also explore
its descriptive features and patterns of correlation with other diversity/fractionalization in-
dices. In Section 4 we provide data sources, develop our empirical model, and describe OLS
results for birthplace diversity in a range of empirical speci…cations. In Section 5, we discuss
unobserved heterogeneity and reverse causality, showing that they are unlikely to explain
our results. In Section 6, we augment our birthplace diversity index to include bilateral
economic and cultural group distance between the native population and each immigrant
group. Section 7 concludes.


2     The literature
People born in di¤erent countries are likely to have di¤erent productive skills because they
have been exposed to di¤erent life experiences, di¤erent school and value systems, and thus
have developed di¤erent perspectives that allow them to interpret and solve problems di¤er-
ently. We use the term "birthplace diversity" to designate the dimension of intrapopulation
diversity arising from the heterogeneity in people’s birthplaces and posit that this source of
diversity is more likely to capture skill complementarity e¤ects than alternative dimensions
of diversity (e.g., ethnic or linguistic fractionalization). Alesina et al. (2000) formalize the
idea of skill complementarities using a Dixit-Stiglitz type production function where output
increases in the variety of inputs and inputs can be interpreted as di¤erent type of work-
ers. Their model thus allows for diversity to increase output without any counterbalancing
costs. Lazear (1999a,b) proposes a model of teams of workers where diversity brings bene-
…ts via production complementarities from relevant disjoint information sets and also costs
via barriers to communication; with decreasing marginal bene…ts and increasing marginal
costs, this suggests that there is an optimal degree of diversity. A related argument, also
brought forward by Lazear (1999b), is that diverse groups of immigrants tend to assimilate


                                               4
more quickly (in terms of learning the language of the majority) since they have stronger
incentives to do so. Hong and Page (2001) see two sources for the heterogeneity of people’s
minds: cognitive di¤erences between people’s internal perspectives (their interpretation of
a complex problem) as well as their heuristics (their algorithms to solve these problems).
They show theoretically that, under certain conditions, a group of cognitively diverse but
skill-limited workers can outperform a homogenous group of highly skilled workers. Fer-
shtman, Hvide and Weiss (2006) reach similar conclusions in a model where workers are
heterogeneous in terms of status concerns.6
   Empirically, diversity is commonly measured by ethno-linguistic fractionalization (East-
erly and Levine 1997, Alesina et al., 2003, Fearon, 2003, Desmet et al., 2012) and ethno-
linguistic polarization indices (Esteban and Ray, 1994, Reynal-Querol, 2002 and Montalvo
and Reynal-Querol, 2005). At a macro level, the costs of fractionalization have been es-
tablished empirically in particular for ethno-linguistic diversity. These studies began with
Easterly and Levine (1997), who show that ethnic fragmentation is associated with lower
economic growth, especially in Africa. Collier (1999, 2001) adds that ethnic fractionalization
is less detrimental in the presence of democratic institutions that mediate ethnic con‡ict,
It is, however, unclear if this observation is not a corollary of higher income as shown in
Alesina and La Ferrara (2005). Fearon and Laitin (2003) add that ethnic diversity alone
is not su¢ cient to explain the outbreak of civil war. Putnam (1995), and Alesina and La
Ferrara (2000, 2002) stress the role of trust, showing that individuals in racially diverse
cities in the US participate less frequently in social activities and trust their neighbors to a
lesser degree. The authors also …nd evidence that preferences for redistribution are lower in
racially diverse communities. This also extends to the provision of productive public goods
(Alesina, Baqir and Easterly, 1999). Alesina and Zhuravskaya (2011) stress the negative
e¤ect of ethnic segregation on the quality of government, while Alesina, Michalopoulos and
Papaioannou (2015) highlight the detrimental e¤ects of "ethnic inequality" (i.e., when eco-
nomic inequality and ethnic diversity go hand-in-hand). Esteban, Mayoral and Ray (2012)
distinguish con‡icts over public and private goods and …nd polarization to correlate posi-
tively with con‡ict on the former, and fractionalization to correlate positively with the latter
(see also Esteban and Ray, 2011). Ashraf and Galor (2013a) introduce a new dimension
of diversity, intrapopulation genetic heterozygosity. Genetic diversity is found to have a
long-lasting e¤ect on population density in the pre-colonial era as well as on contemporary
levels of development. More speci…cally, the authors …nd an inverted u-shaped relation-
ship between genetic diversity and income/productivity. Ashraf and Galor (2011) …nd that
cultural diversity (based on World Values Survey data) is positively correlated with con-
temporary development and suggest that cultural diversity facilitated the transition from
  6 See   Laitin and Jeon (2013) for a recent overview of social psychology research on the e¤ects of diversity.



                                                        5
agricultural to industrial societies,suggestive of the trade-o¤ between bene…cial forces of di-
versity expanding the production possibility frontier and detrimental ones leading to higher
ine¢ ciency and con‡ict.
   At the micro level, empirical studies of diverse teams in the management and organization
literature also …nd diversity to be a double-edged sword, with diversity (in terms of gender,
education, tenure, nationality) being often bene…cial for performance but also decreasing
team cohesion and increasing coordination costs (see O’Reilly et al., 1989, and Milliken
and Martins, 1996 . A study in the airline industry by Hambrick et al. (1996) …nds that
management teams heterogeneous in terms of education, tenure and functional background
react more slowly to a competitor’s actions, but also obtain higher market shares and pro…ts
than their homogeneous competitors. In an experimental study, Hoogendoorn and van Praag
(2012) set up a randomized experiment in which business school students were assigned to
manage a …ctitious business and increase outcome metrics like market share, sales and pro…ts
of their business. The authors …nd that more diverse teams (de…ned by parents’countries
of birth) outperform more homogeneous ones, but only if the majority of team members is
foreign. Finally, Kahane et al. (2013) use data on team composition of NHL teams in the
U.S. and …nd that teams with higher share of foreign (European) players tend to perform
better. They attribute this …nding both to skill e¤ects (better access to foreign talent) and
to skill complementarities among the group of foreign players; however, when players come
from too large a pool of European countries, team performance starts decreasing.
   Hjort (2014) analyzes productivity at a ‡ower production plant in Kenya and uses quasi-
random variation in ethnic team composition as well as natural experiments in this setting
to identify productivity e¤ects from ethnic diversity in joint production. He …nds evidence
for taste-based discrimination between ethnic groups, suggesting that ethnic diversity, in the
context of a poor society with deep ethnic cleavages, a¤ects productivity negatively. Brunow
et al. (2015) analyze the impact of birthplace diversity on …rm productivity in Germany.
They …nd that the share of immigrants has no e¤ect on …rm productivity while the diversity
of foreign workers does impact …rm performance positively (as does workers’ diversity at
the regional level). These e¤ects appear to be stronger for manufacturing and high-tech
industries, suggesting the presence of skill complementarities at the …rm level as well as
regional spillovers from workforce diversity. Parrotta et al. (2014) use a …rm level dataset of
matched employee-employer records in Denmark to analyze the e¤ects of diversity in terms
of skills, age and ethnicity on …rm productivity. They …nd that while diversity in skills
increases productivity, diversity in ethnicity and age decreases it. They interpret this as
showing that the costs of ethnic diversity outweigh its bene…ts. Interestingly, they also …nd
suggestive evidence that diversity is more valuable in problem-solving oriented tasks and in
innovative industries. Ozgen et al. (2013) match Dutch …rm level innovation survey data


                                              6
with employer/employee records and …nd that the diversity of immigrant workers increases
the likelihood of product and process innovations. Boeheim et al. (2012) …nd further micro
level evidence for the presence of production function complementarities using a linked
dataset of Austrian …rms and their workers during the period 1994-2005. Workers’ wages
increase with diversity and the e¤ect is stronger for white-collar workers and workers with
recent tenure.


3     An index of birthplace diversity
We base our birthplace diversity measure on the Her…ndahl-Hirschmann concentration in-
dex. Let si refer to the share in the total population of individuals born in country i with
i = 1; : : : ; I. In particular, i = 1 refers to natives.
    The fractionalization index Divpop may be expressed as:
                                        I
                                        X                         I
                                                                  X
                             Divpop =         si (1    si ) = 1     (si )2                       (1)
                                        i=1                       i=1

    This index measures the probability that two individuals drawn randomly from the entire
population have two di¤erent countries of birth. It uses information on relative group sizes
within a population to construct measures of diversity for the entire national population as
well as by skill category; in particular, in the empirical analysis we distinguish between high-
skill (for college educated workers) and low-skill diversity. It is important to stress that a key
characteristic of the birthplace-diversity measures introduced in this paper is that they treat
immigrants from the same country of origin as being identical to one another. The same
problem characterizes other group-based measures like ethnic or linguistic fractionalization
in which intragroup homogeneity is assumed for any given ethnic or linguistic group in
a national population. In particular, unlike the genetic diversity measure of Ashraf and
Galor (2013a), group-based fractionalization indices only pick up diversity that arises from
intergroup rather than intragroup heterogeneity in individual traits. In particular, the index
assumes that: i) all groups are culturally equidistant one from another; and ii) within a skill
group, immigrants have the same characteristics as the average native of their origin country.
We discuss these potentially important limitations in Section 5.1 on immigrants’selection
and Section 6 on group distance.
    Our measure of Divpop has two potentially independent margins that we intend to in-
vestigate empirically. First, the share of immigrants (1          s1 ), irrespective of their country
of origin; and second, the diversity arising from the variety and relative size of immigrant
groups (irrespective of their sizes relative to natives). We therefore decompose our diversity
index into a component that we call Divbetween (for "between natives and all immigrants"),


                                                   7
which captures the …rst margin, and a Divwithin component (for "within immigrant groups
only"), which captures the second margin.
   If all immigrants were born in one country i = 2 so that s1 + s2 = 1, then using (1) we
can de…ne:
                              Divbetween = s1 (1           s1 ) + (1          s1 ) s1                                   (2)

   This essentially calculates the Divpop index assuming that all migrants can be grouped
into one category (1 s1 ) - thus excluding all diversity contributed by the fact that migrants
tend to come from more than one origin country.
   We rewrite (2) to include Divbetween as follows:
                                                           I
                                                           X
                         Divpop = 2 s1 (1         s1 ) +     [si ((1                 si )      s1 )]                    (3)
                                                           i=2

   We can now de…ne
                                               I
                                               X
                                 Divwithin =     [si ((1             si )         s1 )]                                 (4)
                                               i=2

   so that Divpop is composed of two parts, Divbetween and Divwithin :

                                  Divpop = Divbetween + Divwithin                                                       (5)

     This decomposition does not separate clearly between size and variety e¤ects: Divwithin
                                                   PI
still depends on s1 - the share of natives -, since i=2 si = (1 s1 ). We thus rewrite the
Divwithin component so that it does not depend on s1 . We achieve this by de…ning sj as
the share of immigrants from country j in the total population of immigrants. It follows
              si
that sj =   (1 s1 )   where s1 is the share of natives (i = 1).
   We thus re-scale Divwithin using (4):
                               I
                                  "                                                #
                              X        si                ((1     si ) s1 )
                 Divwithin =                                                              (1        s1 )2               (6)
                              i=2
                                    (1    s1 )                 (1 s1 )

   and simplify to:
                                            J h
                                            X                       i
                              Divwithin =      sj        (1     sj ) (1                s1 )2                            (7)
                                            j=1
                                                                       PJ           h                      i
   Our result has a very intuitive interpretation: since                    j=1         sj     (1      sj ) is basically (1)
but applied to the population of immigrants, it is essentially a diversity index of immigrants
only, irrespective of the natives. We thus de…ne:
                                                  J h
                                                  X                           i
                                     Divmig =        sj         (1     sj )                                             (8)
                                                  j=1




                                                     8
     And rewrite (5)
                                Divpop = Divbetween + (1        s1 )2 Divmig                            (9)


     where (1        s1 )2 has an intuitive interpretation as scale parameter for Divmig .
     We can then rewrite (9) in terms of smig , the share of immigrants (de…ned as foreign-
born) and de…ne smig = (1             s1 ):

                            Divpop = 2 smig       (1    smig ) + (smig )2 Divmig                       (10)

     We have thus an expression of Divpop purely as a function of the size and diversity of
immigration.


4       Empirical analysis
4.1         Birthplace diversity data
Our computation of birthplace diversity indices relies on the Artuc, Docquier, Ozden and
Parsons (henceforth ADOP, 2015) data set which provides a comprehensive 195x195 ma-
trix of bilateral migration stocks disaggregated by skill category (with or without college
education) and gender for the years 1990 and 2000. Immigrants are de…ned as foreign-born
individuals aged 25+ at census or survey date. The dataset is based on a comprehensive
data collection e¤ort in the host countries. For few destinations (and even fewer in our
sample), o¢ cial census information is not available. ADOP (2015) thus rely on a gravity
model-based estimation of these cells.7 In our sample, only 10% of skilled immigrants are
estimated based on this methodology.8
     Three caveats are in order. First, illegal immigration is not accounted for in most
censuses, although in some cases (like in the US census) it is estimated. However, this
limitation is mitigated by the fact that we use data on immigration stocks, not ‡ows: most
illegal migrants eventually become legalized or return to their country of origin. Second,
immigrants who came as children are subsequently treated fully as immigrant workers (when
aged 25+). However, these children then grow up, socialize and go to school in the host
country, which puts a limit on the extent of variety in skills that they can contribute when
they integrate the labor force. We address this issue in a robustness check. Third, a
migrant is considered skilled independently of the location of college education, meaning
that skilled migrants may be heterogeneous in terms of human capital quality. We partly
    7 See   ADOP (2015) for more details.
    8 We    conduct a robustness check restricting our OLS and IV models to non-estimated observations only.
The results (available upon request) remain virtually unchanged.



                                                       9
address this issue by controlling for what we call "origin-e¤ects" and review implications for
our identi…cation in Section 5.


4.2     Descriptive statistics and correlations
Table 1a shows the weak bilateral correlations between ethnic, genetic and birthplace diver-
sity measures. The correlation between ethnic fractionalization and Divmig (all) is negative
at -.11 and close to zero for Divmig (skilled).9 Table 1b shows summary statistics, Table 1c
presents our data sources.
    There is ample variation in country level birthplace diversity: Canada, Italy, Israel,
Germany, Australia and the UK have high birthplace diversity of immigrants (Divmig ). The
United States rank only 18th in a list of countries with the highest immigration diversity
(at .92) due to relatively low diversity for unskilled immigration (0.84). Similarly low ranks
can be observed for Germany (rank 27, at .90) and Australia (rank 28, at .90). In terms
of Divmig (skilled), however, the USA is very near the top (at .97). Countries with lowest
overall immigration diversity are Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nepal, Syria and Iran (all lower
than .5). Neighboring country e¤ects seem to play a role: Ireland’s Divmig (.54 overall, .44
for the unskilled and .67 for the skilled) is still quite low due to dominant immigration from
the UK. Switzerland, Austria or Australia follow similar patterns. Generally, such e¤ects
are more prevalent for Divmig (unskilled). As a result, Divmig (skilled) tends to be higher
than Divmig (unskilled). This is consistent with migrants’ self-selection being driven by
net-of-migration-costs wage di¤erentials, where low migration costs (due to short distances
and high networks) mostly a¤ect low-skill migration.10
    Table 2 shows some multivariate correlations between ethnic, linguistic and genetic di-
versity (ancestry-corrected), birthplace diversity and income per capita. Unlike all other
dimensions of diversity, Divpop is positively correlated with income per capita (at PPP),
while ethnic and linguistic fractionalization are negatively correlated. Genetic diversity’s
e¤ect on income follows an inverted u-shape (Ashraf and Galor, 2013a). When we include
population birthplace diversity (Divpop ), coe¢ cients on the other diversity variables change
insigni…cantly. The inclusion of birthplace diversity, however, adds considerably to the pre-
dictive power of the model. We interpret this as indication that Divpop is correlated with and
jointly determined by many other factors, such as geography or the quality of institutions.
Interestingly, this seems to be more an issue for the diversity of the unskilled population,
and generally this is driven to a lower extent by the variety than by the size of immigration.
   9 This   also holds in …rst di¤erences: the correlation between changes in size and diversity of skilled
immigration 1990-2000 is low and even negative at -.14.
  1 0 See McKenzie and Rapoport (2010) and Bertoli (2010) for micro evidence on the role of migrant networks

in determining self-selection patterns, and Beine, Docquier and Ozden (2011) for macro evidence.



                                                     10
This point is further illustrated in models (6)-(8) where we use our decomposition analysis
and separate Divpop into Divbetween and Divwithin . The productive e¤ects of Divpop clearly
vary by skill level: Divpop (unskilled) is mostly driven by Divbetween , but the association of
Divpop (skilled) with income per capita runs mostly through Divwithin : Still, Divbetween and
Divwithin are not independent from each other, as both depend on smig (see equations 2
and 4 above). We thus proceed with a model that includes a large range of co-determinants
of birthplace diversity and income. We also clearly separate the size (smig ) and the variety
(Divmig ) dimensions of birthplace diversity.


4.3        Model speci…cation
To empirically investigate the relationship between birthplace diversity and economic de-
velopment, we specify the following model where our dependent variable y is a country’s
income per capita (GDP) at real PPP from the Penn World Tables 8.0 (Feenstra et al.,
2013):11

                          ln ykt   =       +   1   Divmig            kst   +       2       smig kst
                                       +   3       k    +        4     k   +       5       Xk
                                       +   6       kt   +        7        kt   +       8      kt   +   t   +e

   where         k   is a vector of fractionalization/diversity measures,                                  k   is a vector of climate
and geography characteristics, Xk is a vector of disease environment indices,                                             kt   is a vector
of controls for institutional development,                  kt   is a vector of trade and origin e¤ects,                           kt   is a
vector containing the country’s population size and schooling level, and                                           t   is a period …xed
e¤ect. We use indices s for skill groups (s=overall, skilled, unskilled), t for time periods
(1990, 2000) and k for countries.
   The results from our decomposition analysis as well as our initial correlation analyses
point to the need to separate Divbetween and Divwithin further into their components, the
share of immigrants, smig , and the diversity of immigrants, Divmig . Thus we include the
share and the diversity of immigrants evaluated at the means of the respective variables. To
facilitate the interpretation we standardize both variables with a mean of zero and standard
deviation of one. In the appendix we also test for interaction e¤ects between size and variety.
   Our baseline speci…cation starts with a parsimonious model based upon Table 2 where we
control for fractionalization/diversity indices (                    k)    only. We speci…cally include both ethnic
and linguistic fractionalization (from Alesina et al., 2003) and genetic diversity (ancestry-
adjusted) from Ashraf and Galor (2013a) since all three indices capture a potentially di¤erent
productive margin of diversity.12
 1 1 See   the online appendix for details on the de…nitions and sources for all variables.
 1 2 Following   Ashraf and Galor (2013a) we also include a squared term for genetic diversity.


                                                             11
    We add more controls, going for increasingly stringent speci…cations incorporating …rst
exogenous geographic/climatic controls only (our vector                k );   we follow the literature on the
                                             13
geographical determinants of income               in including a landlockedness dummy (from CEPII,
2010), absolute latitude and share of population living within 100km of an ice-free coast
(both from Gallup et al., 1998), average temperature and precipitation (World Bank, 2013),
as well as a set of regional …xed e¤ects for Latin America, Asia, Middle East and Northern
Africa (MENA), and Sub-Saharan Africa. We then add the semi-exogenous geographical
controls for the disease environment (Xk ), which include malaria, yellow fever and tubercu-
losis incidence (all from World Bank, 2013).
    We further extend the model to account for endogenous variables that co-determine
income and migration patterns. For institutional quality (                    kt ),   we use the revised com-
bined Polity-2 score from the Polity IV database (Marshall and Jaggers, 2012). This index
measures the degree of political competition and participation, the degree of openness of
political executives’ recruitment and the extent of executives’ constraints (Glaeser et al.,
2004). We also add dummies for British, French and Spanish ex-colonies as proxies for the
origins of the legal system (CEPII, 2010).
    Then comes our "trade and origin e¤ects" vector, (               kt ),   which contains controls for the
volume and structure of trade (namely real trade openness from PWT 8.0),14 measures of
trade diversity in imports and exports (based on Feenstra et al., 2005),15 and also includes a
weighted average of the GDP per capita (in PPP) of immigrants’origin countries. The trade
diversity indices are the goods market equivalents of Divmig , since import diversity is a proxy
for variety in (imported) intermediary goods. Controlling for trade is also necessary since
trade is determined by similar factors as migration (Ortega and Peri, 2014). Surprisingly
however, Divmig and variables of trade openness/diversity are not much correlated (+.08
for trade openness, +0.12 for trade diversity). Last, the "origin-e¤ects" variable captures
the income at origin of the average representative immigrant and - while not a proxy for
the selection of immigrants from each country of origin - correlates with immigrant groups’
ability to cover migration costs. Richer destination countries that draw on (relatively) richer
source countries should be able to attract a wider range of immigrant groups and have higher
immigrant diversity. Controlling for such origin-e¤ects allows us to account for di¤erences
in migrant backgrounds (and skills) and focus on the pure (birthplace) diversity e¤ect of
immigration. Finally, we include a vector (            kt )   containing education as captured by years
  1 3 See,   e.g., Hall and Jones (1999), Gallup et al. (1998), Rodriguez and Rodrik (2001), Sachs (2003),
Rodrik et al. (2004).
 1 4 We use the standard measure of trade volume: real trade openness (exports+imports) in percentage of

GDP in real PPP prices. This indicator correlates most robustly with GDP growth (Yanikkaya, 2003).
 1 5 This de…nition follows the literature on trade concentration. See, e.g., Kali et al. (2007) for the e¤ect

of trade concentration on income or Frankel et al. (1995) on transportation costs.



                                                      12
of education (Barro and Lee, 2013) and population size (U.N. Population Division, 2013).
   We end up with a highly structured model and a short panel of 120 countries with data
for 1990 and 2000. We made a signi…cant e¤ort to broaden our sample. The 120 countries
re‡ect the intersection of the ADOP (2015) data, which is available for 190 countries and
territories (195 origins, but no immigration data for …ve destinations), the PWT 8.0 data,
which does not contain GDP data for 26 of those, the education data (Barro and Lee,
2013) which is not available for 25 remaining countries and other data sources (primarily
Alesina et al. 2003 and Ashraf and Galor, 2013a) where missing data drops another 19
countries.16 Our full sample does not di¤er systematically from a broader sample at the
intersection of PWT 8.0 and ADOP (2015). Di¤erences in sample means are small (not
statistically signi…cant) for most variables, with two exceptions: the sample mean for smig
of skilled people is actually lower in our full sample than in the broader sample, and the
sample mean for Divmig is slightly higher (see the appendix for details). This re‡ects the
fact that we drop mainly small island states and territories that have very few skilled natives
and correspondingly higher smig (skilled) as well as experience immigration from few large
neighboring countries (leading to a lower Divmig ). Still, after these slight reductions of the
sample size, our full sample still covers 90% of all global migrants and 93.7% of all skilled
migrants.


4.4     OLS results
We estimate our model using an OLS estimator with standard errors clustered at the country
level to account for serial correlation of standard errors. Our results are presented in Tables
3-5. Table 3 shows the full model estimated in a sample of 120 countries. In Table 4, we split
our sample into two sub-samples of rich vs. poor countries and establish our main results.
In Table 5 we analyze the stability of our main coe¢ cients of interest by introducing groups
of controls sequentially as described above.
   Table 3 shows the full model results for our two margins of birthplace diversity, smig and
Divmig , and does so separately for each skill level (overall, high- and low-skill). Both the
size of immigration and its diversity correlate positively with income at the 1% statistical
signi…cance level. We report standardized coe¢ cients for our key variables of interest to
facilitate interpretation. Coe¢ cients for Divmig (skilled) are somewhat higher than those
for Divmig (unskilled), but this di¤erence is not statistically signi…cant. Once we control
for geographic variables (Michalopoulos 2012) ethnic and linguistic fractionalization con-
verge towards zero. Genetic diversity shows the expected inverted u-shaped pattern (Ashraf
and Galor, 2013a). Trade openness (Frankel and Romer, 1999), the quality of institutions
 1 6 Typical   countries that drop out of this sample are small island states or territories.




                                                        13
(Acemoglu et al. 2001, Glaeser et al., 2004) and the level of education correlate positively
with economic development. These …ndings are consistent with the argument that both
the birthplace diversity of migrants as well as the share of immigrants relate positively to
economic development.
    Table 4 shows sub-sample results for rich and poor countries (above or below median
GDP/capita in 1990). Given the theoretical arguments outlined in Section 2, we expect
the birthplace diversity (Divmig ) of skilled workers to capture production function comple-
mentarities to a higher degree than other diversity indices. These complementarities should
also be larger in countries closer to the technology frontier. Hence, our estimates for Divmig
(skilled) should be larger and more signi…cant in a subset of rich economies relative to Divmig
(unskilled) and relative to estimates in a poor country subsample. This is exactly what we
…nd. In the rich country subsample (column 2), our estimates for the standardized Divmig
(skilled) are now considerably magni…ed vis-a-vis the full sample and remain signi…cant at
the 1% level. When we conduct a horse-race of skilled and unskilled Divmig (column 4),
we …nd that our results for Divmig (skilled) continue to hold whereas the e¤ect of Divmig
(unskilled) are close to zero. In the poor country subsample (columns 5-8) we …nd no statis-
tically signi…cant results for birthplace diversity. These results are consistent with the view
that the economic value of birthplace diversity for countries closer to the technology frontier,
particularly that arising from the diversity of skilled immigrants.17 Interestingly, neither
ethnic fractionalization nor linguistic or genetic diversity correlate robustly with income for
these countries.
    Our identi…cation strategy is potentially exposed to omitted variables bias, since within-
country variation in Divmig is very low and is thus an insu¢ cient basis for identi…cation.18
To address this concern at least partially, we specify in Table 5 a range of models that
sequentially introduce our controls. We analyze the stability of our main coe¢ cients of
interest (on birthplace diversity of skilled immigrants) for rich countries (based on Table
4). Our estimates for Divmig (skilled) are stable across speci…cations. The coe¢ cient
increases when going from model (1) to model (2), where we add a host of geography
controls (including, most importantly, our set of regional …xed-e¤ects). All subsequent
model expansions do not substantially a¤ect our coe¢ cient estimates. In the last model
(column 6) we add population size and education controls, two variables that are positively
related to income and diversity. This slightly decreases the point-estimate for Divmig as this
likely takes out a small residual positive omitted variables bias. Interestingly, the relative
stability of our Divmig coe¢ cient is not mirrored in our results for smig (skilled). Here, the
 1 7 The   di¤erence in Divmig (skilled) between the rich and poor country subsample is signi…cant at the 1%
level (unlike the diversity of unskilled migrants).
  1 8 Still, we obtain qualitatively similar results in our rich country subsample when using country …xed

e¤ects (see Appendix).


                                                     14
coe¢ cient varies substantially across speci…cations. This suggests that - as we discuss below
- Divmig is less likely to be a¤ected by endogeneity issues than smig .
    To add more structure to the analysis, we follow Oster (2013) who proposes a simple
heuristic to calculate bounding values for unbiased coe¢ cients.19 The results following this
procedure indicate that any remaining omitted variables bias in our rich country subsample
model is negative but relatively small, as Oster’s bounding values for unbiased coe¢ cients
are higher but in close proximity to our OLS estimates (see Table 5, column 6).


4.5      Robustness
4.5.1        Patenting activity

We extend our model to patent data in order to shed more light on the productivity e¤ects
of Divmig (see Table 6). We de…ne average patent intensity as the average number of
patent applications per capita …led by country nationals and registered by national patent
o¢ ces. We obtain this data from the World Intellectual Property Organization (2010) for
the period 1995-2005 and construct this measure for 117 countries.20 We apply our baseline
model using all covariates on a year 2000 cross section. We …nd that the diversity of
immigrants - in particular that of skilled immigrants - is robustly positively related to
scienti…c innovation as measured by patenting activity. This holds both for measures of
patent applications and patents granted per capita. These results hold also in our subsample
of richer countries. We do not …nd similar e¤ects for the diversity of unskilled workers. We
take this as indication that the productivity-enhancing e¤ect of variety in backgrounds and
problem solving heuristics embedded in Divmig partly works through innovation.

4.5.2        Total factor productivity

GDP/capita at PPP is our main dependent variable and we interpret the results for birth-
place diversity as indicative of skill complementarities. Our interpretation implies that the
e¤ect of birthplace diversity should a¤ect GDP/capita through total factor productivity
(TFP). To test this proposition, we replace our measure of GDP by a measure of TFP per
capita from the Penn World Tables 8.0 (Feenstra et al., 2013). Table 7 shows the results.
In both the full sample as well as the rich country subsample, birthplace diversity of skilled
immigrants remains positive and highly robust (at 1%). This suggests that, consistently
with an interpretation of the results in terms of skill complementarities, birthplace diversity
  1 9 This   test relies on the assumption that selection on observables from a basic model towards a full model
is proportional to selection on unobservables.
   2 0 The sample thus includes all countries with patenting activity as covered by WIPO (2010). Hence, our

estimates are best interpreted as e¤ect on the intensive margin of patenting.




                                                        15
a¤ects income via total factor productivity.

4.5.3        Second-generation e¤ects

Immigration ‡ows are highly time persistent due to network e¤ects. This means that our
…rst-generation measure Divmig could capture also second/third-generation e¤ects of im-
migration, biasing our results. We thus construct a measure of Divmig in 1960 based on
data from Ozden et al. (2011) to obtain a lagged birthplace diversity index and add this
new index and a lagged share of immigration to our model (see Table 8).21 As can be seen
in Column 2, the birthplace diversity of immigration in 1960 is positive but not signi…cant
while the size of immigration in 1960 is positive and signi…cant when these lagged variables
are entered independently of their contemporaneous values. Importantly, our main results
for …rst-generation birthplace diversity and for immigration size remain positive and highly
signi…cant when past and present immigration size and diversity are entered jointly, with
point-estimates which are barely a¤ected. In particular, the magnitude of Divmig remains
virtually unchanged, despite the high positive correlation between Divmig today and in the
past (+0.66). This suggests that skilled diversity’s productive e¤ects in high income coun-
tries - our main …nding - operate primarily through …rst-generation e¤ects. This …nding
is fully consistent with the theoretical arguments outlined in Section 2. The lack of sig-
ni…cance of past diversity, on the other hand, is consistent with an interpretation in terms
of compensating e¤ects of birthplace and ethnic diversity (second-generation immigration
being a mix of the two).

4.5.4        Children immigrants

Our measure of Divmig counts all foreign-born workers as immigrants irrespective of the
duration of their stay in their host country. Immigrants arriving in the destination country
as children are - in terms of education and exposure to the destination country - probably
closer to being native than foreign. We thus compute Divmig and smig (skilled) at di¤erent
age-of-entry thresholds, using data for a subset of 29 OECD destination countries from Beine,
Docquier and Rapoport (2007). We …nd that our estimates for birthplace diversity are robust
to the exclusion of such special immigrant groups. We …nd somewhat lower estimates for
these corrected birthplace diversity measures (the di¤erence is not statistically signi…cant),
a fact that may be driven by attenuation bias due to counterfactual re-classi…cation of young
immigrants as natives.
  2 1 Note   that Ozden et al. (2011) do not provide a skill decomposition of immigration in 1960, we hence
rely on diversity of immigrants of all skill groups.




                                                       16
4.5.5       Outliers and alternative …xed e¤ects

In a last step, we test the robustness of our results to the introduction of alternative re-
gional …xed e¤ects as well as to excluding outliers (see Table 10). More speci…cally, Aus-
tralia, Canada and New Zealand have points-based immigration systems that select skilled
immigrants according to labor market needs. The United States attracts a huge part of
all skilled migrants in the world thanks to its large (pre and post tax) premium for skilled
labor (Grogger and Hanson, 2011). Controlling for these countries (in Column 3) or simply
dropping them from the sample (in Column 4) does not a¤ect our results. Likewise, this
also holds for OPEC countries. In addition, we test robustness to alternative sets of …xed
e¤ects to establish robustness for our within-geographic region estimator.22 Our results are
fully robust to these modi…cations.


5         Identi…cation
5.1        Unobserved heterogeneity
Our measures of Divpop and Divmig rely on the assumption that we cover representative
individuals for the respective emigrant populations at di¤erent origins, and that immigrants
across destinations are homogenous. Since we lack detailed information on these migrants
(apart from education, gender and age-of-entry), we cannot exclude the possibility that
migrants are positively self-selected from the home-country pool of skilled workers and also
positively sort themselves to high-income destinations.23
    In a …rst step, we use the ADOP (2015) dataset to calculate the relative degree of
selection per country of origin and destination based on observable skills. We calculate the
distribution of educational attainment (% of skilled) for the natives of any origin country
i from Barro and Lee (2013) and ADOP (2015) before emigration and immigration take
place. We then calculate the share of skilled emigrants from origin i to any destination k
and de…ne:                                             2                                      3
                                                 J          skilled migrantsjk
                                                 X           total migrantsjk
                         skill selectionk =            4                          smig   jk
                                                                                              5               (11)
                                                           skilled native bornj
                                                 j=1        total native bornj

    where k is an index for destination country, j for origin country, and smig                   jk   is the share
of immigrants from origin j over all immigrants to destination k in year t. This index
is a weighted average of immigrants’ skills relative to the skill distribution of their home
countries’native population. A value of 1 indicates that migrants from j to k are identical
in terms of observed skills to non-migrants, a value above 1 signals positive selection. The
 2 2 In   particular, we test for robustness to continental …xed e¤ects as employed by Ashraf and Galor (2013a).
 2 3 See   Grogger and Hanson (2011) for a deeper discussion on such sorting across destinations.



                                                           17
index may re‡ect skill-selective policies in destination countries as much as it re‡ects the
relative attractiveness of a destination country to skilled workers. Both aspects should be
correlated with selection on unobservables, since both are proxies for the relative return to
high skill, e¤ort and risk taking attitudes. Clearly, our index of skill selection is at best an
imperfect and noisy measure of the true degree of positive selection. Still, skill selection is
positively correlated with income/capita at destination (+.34), even more than our origin
e¤ects variable (+0.17) that accounts for destination countries’over-sampling of immigrants
from richer origins.
   We proceed by adding the index of skill selection to our full model (Table 11, columns
2 and 3). The index and our origin e¤ects variable both possess independent explanatory
power in a parsimonious model (column 2). This serves as indicative evidence that the
inclusion of these indices indeed mitigates the issue of migrant selection to some degree.
Column 3 shows full model results, indicating that once we condition on the full set of
controls, both indices lose their predictive power, while the coe¢ cient on our key variable of
interest Divmig remains robustly estimated and statistically signi…cant at the 1% level. The
estimate is slightly lower than in our base model, indicating the removal of a small positive
bias in our estimate.
   We test the robustness of our …ndings further by dropping countries with the highest
skill selection from our sample. These are Australia, Belgium, Canada, Singapore, United
Kingdom and the USA. Their relative attractiveness reveals a preference of highly skilled
(and, presumably, highly motivated) workers towards destinations with higher returns to
skill and e¤ort. Table 11, column (4) shows that our estimation does not depend on these
countries.
   In a second step, we employ an alternative indirect measure of selection. We use data
collected by Gallup market research reported in Espinova et al. (2011). These authors
report an index of net migration potential that is based on surveys of close to 348.000 adults
between 2007 and 2010 and available for 148 countries. The index is based on answers to
the question "Ideally, if you had the opportunity, would you like to move permanently to
another country, or would you prefer to continue living in this country?" and is de…ned as
the potential percentage increase in the destination country population. The index is thus
e¤ectively an indicator of attractiveness as it gives the potential share of immigration if there
were no constraints on migration. Besides the "usual suspects", countries like Botswana
and Malaysia make the TOP 20 due to their relative regional attractiveness. In addition
to controlling for this index (Table 11, column 5), we regress it on actual immigration
(smig ) and birthplace diversity (Divmig ) and add the residuals from these regressions to our
full model (columns 6 and 7). These residuals can be interpreted as the degree to which




                                               18
existing constraints to immigration both at origin and destination countries are binding.24
Constraints to emigration in the origin countries and constraints in destination countries
both serve to increase the extent of migrants’skill-selection. Throughout models (5) to (7),
we …nd our estimates for Divmig to remain robust at the 1% level, albeit at slightly lower
magnitudes. This suggests that our main OLS …ndings are robust to alternative indirect
measures of selection.
    In a third step, we use data provided by the OECD (2009) that capture the quality of
education in a range of OECD and non-OECD countries based on standardized (PISA) test
scores.25 Figure A3 in the appendix shows the distribution of countries’mean overall PISA
score for high school students at age 15. We re-compute our Divmig indices and exclude
countries of origin with scores exceeding the OECD average (e.g. Finland, Hong Kong,
Singapore). Countries that draw most heavily on such origins are - on average - more likely
to attract above average talent and thus have a higher chance to bene…t from "superstar"
e¤ects. Table 11, model (8) shows that the exclusion of these immigrants does not change
our results.
    Next, we use the full distribution of highly-skilled math- and science students (namely,
the share of pupils per country in the highest sextile bracket of math and science skills
worldwide - see appendix for more details). The quality of education around the world,
especially outside the OECD, is remarkably poor.26 Thus, very few countries have a deep
pool of highly skilled individuals. We formalize this insight by calculating the maximum
population in each country of origin that could theoretically be classi…ed as "highly-skilled"
in terms of mathematical skills. In essence, we apply the share of pupils in the top sextile
of math skills today to the entire population born in a given country (before emigration
and immigration), make very conservative assumptions (e.g., that the gap between rich and
poor countries’ educational quality is stable over time) where we encounter missing data
and compare that theoretical maximum of highly (math-) skilled people in each country
with the stock of actual (subsequent) emigration. The appendix provides more details on
the calculation. Given the very low numbers of highly skilled students outside the OECD,
the emigrant stock of skilled workers of many countries in the world greatly exceeds even an
optimistic hypothetical stock of highly math-skilled workers in these countries.27 In other
  2 4 In   line with our priors, in a basic model as in Table 11, column (2), both indices hold independent
explanatory power and correlate highly positively with income (available upon request).
  2 5 See www.oecd-ilibrary.org (PISA 2009 results at a glance).
  2 6 See Filmer, Hasan and Pritchett (2006), for an illustrative review of test score results. They report,

among many other examples, that "the average science score among students in Peru [is] equivalent to that
of the lowest scoring 5 percent of US students".
  2 7 See the appendix for a simulation. The …gures show that the vast majority of countries – even under

the assumption that all high-ability math/science students had left – mostly sent non- highly math-skilled
people abroad.



                                                      19
words, it is very unlikely for a rich country (with the possible exception of the mentioned
top few destinations) to attract highly-skilled migrants without specializing on just a few
countries with deep talent pools. Thus, for any not highly sought-after destination, more
Divmig necessarily implies less –not more –skill selection.
   We test the robustness of our estimates for Divmig by dropping all immigrants from ori-
gins with large pools of highly talented workers (i.e., with a ratio of math/science-talented
workers / skilled emigrants > 1) from our calculation of Divmig . We thus obtain a coun-
terfactual index of birthplace diversity that disregards potential "high quality" immigrant
groups (see Table 11, columns 9 and 10). Our estimates are very comparable in terms of
magnitude and signi…cance to our baseline Divmig index. This suggests that the inclusion of
immigrant groups with the highest likelihood for "superstar" backgrounds in our diversity
index does not observably drive our results.
   Overall, our baseline speci…cation remains fairly robust to empirical and conceptual
challenges to identi…cation arising from the issue of selection on unobservables. Our main
result for the diversity of skilled immigrants survives the introduction of an index of skill-
selection based on observable skills as well as various adjustments to exclude immigrants
from source countries that either possess deep "talent pools" (i.e., where the national average
score on the standardized PISA test exceeds the cross-country OECD average) or that are
not "highly-skilled constrained" (i.e., where the ratio of an imputed number of highly-
talented workers in math/sciences skills to the overall number of skilled emigrants is larger
than unity). It is therefore plausible that only a minor fraction of our overall e¤ect can be
explained by such selection. To the contrary, given that the pools of extra-ordinary high
achievers (with high cognitive abilities in science and math …elds) are relatively shallow, it
seems that drawing skilled immigrants from a wide range of countries (and thus attaining
a high Divmig ) is likely even correlated with a lower degree of selection of the best and the
brightest.


5.2    Reverse causality
Richer countries could attract a larger ‡ow of immigrants (resulting in a higher smig ) coming
from a wider range of origin countries (Divmig ) simply because they are richer. An initial
descriptive analysis shows that the pure bilateral correlation with income, particularly for
skilled immigrants, is higher for smig (+0.32) than for Divmig (+0.23). This is even more
prevalent in …rst di¤erences: changes in smig between 1990 and 2000 are clearly positively
associated with changes in income per capita (at 1% level), but changes in diversity are not
(the e¤ect is close to zero and is not estimated precisely). Indirect e¤ects from growth via
smig to Divmig appear also unlikely, since the correlation between a change in smig and a



                                               20
change in Divmig is clearly negative (-0.36, signi…cant at 5%).

5.2.1       A gravity model of migration and diversity

We construct instruments for the share and diversity of immigration on the basis of a gravity
model.28 In order to mitigate the problem of violation of the exclusion restriction, we use
only a very small subset of bilateral cultural and geographic variables. We thus specify a
parsimonious gravity model for bilateral migration:

                mjkst    =       +   1   P OP U LAT ION 1960k +                   2    DIST AN CEjkt
                             +   3   BORDERjkt +             4   OF F:LAN GU AGEjkt
                             +   5   ET H:LAN GU AGEjkt +                 6       COLON Yjkt
                             +   7   T IM E ZON Ejkt +           jt   +       t   +e                           (12)

mjkst is the bilateral immigration rate from origin country j to destination country k for
immigrants of skill level s in year t expressed in terms of the population of destination
country k. The choice of our model determinants follows the standard in the literature,29
with destination population size in 1960 as a lagged measure (we also run and report a model
excluding this variable), bilateral (geodesic) distance, common border, common o¢ cial and
ethnic minority languages (if language spoken by at least 9% of population in both countries),
time zone di¤erences and common colonial history (all from CEPII, available from Head et
al. 2010). We also add a vector of year ( t ) and origin-year …xed e¤ects (                       jt )   to account
for multilateral resistance (Anderson and Van Wincoop, 2003) that arises from time varying
common origin shocks to migration which in‡uence migrants’locations decisions (Bertoli and
Fernández-Huertas, 2013).30 We then predict bilateral migration using an OLS estimator
following Frankel and Romer (1999) for the canonical log-transformation of the gravity
equation and a PPML (pseudo-poisson maximum likelihood) estimator following Santos
Silva and Tenreyro (2006) to avoid the bias arising from this log-transformation.31
  2 8 We   build on the trade (e.g., Tinbergen, 1962, Frankel and Romer, 1999) and migration (e.g., Grogger
and Hanson, 2011, Beine et al., 2011) gravity literatures.
  2 9 See, Lewer and van den Berg 2008, Felbermayr et al. 2010, Mayda 2010, Grogger and Hanson 2011,

Beine, Docquier and Schi¤, 2013, Ortega and Peri, 2009 and 2013.
 3 0 While the use of origin FE largely su¢ ces to account for multilateral resistance in trade, Bertoli and

Fernández-Huertas (2013) show this to hold for migration only under more restrictive distributional assump-
tions.
  3 1 This bias is particularly salient with data that are heteroskedastic (e.g., due to many zero cells). Overall,

the degree of OLS bias relative to PPML depends on the underlying features of the data.




                                                        21
5.2.2        Instrumentation and identi…cation

Table 12a/b shows results for our gravity models. Generally, the models have su¢ ciently
high explanatory power and seem appropriately speci…ed (keeping in mind that they are
purposefully excluding potential determinants of destination countries’ productivity). All
estimates on the migration determinants have the expected sign: destination country pop-
ulation in 1960 and bilateral distance enter negatively. Skilled migration is less constrained
by migratory distance, as theory would predict, and is less a¤ected by border-e¤ects. The
cultural proximity variables (common colonial relationship and common o¢ cial/ethnic mi-
nority languages) both enter positively, as expected.
    We construct instruments for our two main variables of interest, skilled birthplace di-
versity and the share of skilled immigration, using the predicted bilateral migration shares
estimated from our PPML and OLS gravity models.32 We turn to comparing our instru-
ments for predicted diversity with actual Divmig (see Appendix Figure 2a). The correlation
between actual and predicted diversity is strong, suggesting a priori a strong instrument.
Furthermore, the instrument should be lower (higher) than actual diversity in richer (poorer)
countries. This is exactly what we …nd (see Appendix Figure 2b): a negative link between
GDP per capita at destination and the di¤erence between actual and predicted Divmig . We
take this as indication that our gravity model yields an instrument which takes out at least
a part of any small but endogenous component in the diversity-income relationship.
    Table 13 shows the …rst-stage results corresponding to our 2SLS models in Table 14.
Throughout the models (which start with one instrumented variable and extend to up to
three) we reject the null hypothesis of weak instruments both jointly (Kleibergen-Paap F-
test) and individually (Angrist-Pischke F-tests), as these statistics exceed the strictest or
(in model 3) second strictest Stock and Yogo (2005) critical values.33
    There are two issues that could a¤ect the validity of our identi…cation. First, bilateral
omitted variables could be correlated with bilateral migration and also with destination
country GDP/capita; for example bilateral trade with a rapidly growing trade partner such
as China could a¤ect the GDP (via TFP) of China’s neighboring trade partners. However,
Hsieh and Ossa (2011) …nd that China’s productivity growth has only very small positive
e¤ects on neighbor countries’TFP. We also account for such e¤ects econometrically by in-
cluding origin-year …xed e¤ects. Our trade controls should adequately capture any residual
aggregate bias. Second, relative bilateral geography variables (such as distance, common
  3 2 To   avoid violating the exclusion restriction via inclusion of a lagged measure of population size, we fully
rely on the more parsimonious model excluding this variable.
  3 3 As is well known, the Stock and Yogo (2002) critical values are are appropriate under homoskedasticity

only. We report heteroskedasticity-robust clustered standard errors, which tend to be higher than those
obtained under the assumption of homoskedasticity.




                                                         22
language or border contiguity) may be correlated with absolute (unilateral) geography vari-
ables, a point …rst raised in the context of trade gravity models by Rodriguez and Rodrik
(2001). We account for that by including a very broad set of geography and disease variables
into our second-stage baseline model, including the geographical …xed e¤ects as suggested
by these authors and conducting many robustness exercises on our geography variables.
The inclusion of geography variables in our main model also served to remove an apparent
negative omitted variables bias (see Table 5, column 2), suggesting that such an (unlikely)
remaining bias from geography variables if any, may increase (not decrease) our Divmig
estimates.

5.2.3     2SLS results

Table 14 shows results from our full model using the 2SLS estimator. We compare our
baseline OLS speci…cation in model (1) with alternative IV-speci…cations in models (2)-(4).
In (2), we …rst instrument solely our main variable of interest, Divmig , assuming that any
remaining endogeneity in our model (e.g., from smig ) is negligible. Then in (3), we relax
this assumption and also instrument for smig . We con…rm our prior OLS …ndings on skilled
Divmig at the 5% level in both models.34 The IV estimates appear very stable and somewhat
lower than our OLS estimates. This is closely in line with our expectation, namely that …rst,
the OLS model su¤ers (if at all) from a low negative omitted variables bias, and second, that
our OLS estimates may only mildly su¤er from a positive bias due to selection or reverse
causality. Our IV estimates con…rm these inferences to a large extent. The slightly lower
IV estimates suggest that the net e¤ect of these two biases was positive and relatively small
(less than 10% of the estimate). In other words, the positive bias from selection/reverse
causality exceeded the negative bias from omitted variables and (if at all) measurement
error. When instrumenting for the share of immigration (model 3), our estimates for smig
remain similar in magnitude but lose signi…cance. This suggests - in line with our discussion
of omitted variables and selection - that establishing causality for smig is a bigger challenge
than for Divmig .
    In model (4), we go one step further and also instrument for Divimports . We thus apply
our gravity model of migration determinants to trade, following Frankel and Romer (1999).
The strategy to obtain instruments from similar models is valid to the extent that the
model determinants for migration and trade are estimated di¤erentially. Table 12b shows
that this is indeed the case. Our Divmig estimate remains remarkably robust, but the overall
model is weakly identi…ed since the instruments for the diversity of trade and migration are
correlated. Needless to say, this approach is very demanding given the few degrees of freedom
  3 4 F-Tests   on the excluded instruments and the joint instruments are well above the respective Stock and
Yogo (2002) critical values.



                                                       23
in our model and correlation structure between instruments. Remarkably, our estimate for
Divmig remains similar in magnitude but - as expected - loses some statistical signi…cance
(it remains signi…cant at the 10% level). This serves as indication that any endogeneity bias
in our OLS model is small and unlikely to drive our main results.


6     Does cultural distance matter?
Is birthplace diversity more valuable if immigrants are culturally similar or come from
richer origin countries? So far, our index does not capture such characteristics and assumes
all groups to be equidistant from each other. We now expand this well-established but
restrictive notion of diversity to shed more light on the transmission channels.


6.1    An augmented birthplace diversity index
To incorporate group distance, we rely on Greenberg (1956) and expand our index in order
to include group distance by adding two group weights djk and ejk :
                                             J
                                             X
                      Divmig;augmented;k =         sj   (1   sj ) djk   ejk              (13)
                                             j=1

    j is an index of immigrant groups and djk and ejk are bilateral distance variables between
immigrants j and natives k. The augmented diversity index reduces to Divmig when all
groups are equidistant at djk = 1 and ejk = 1. Finding a distance variable for our index
of birthplace diversity requires two building blocks: …rst, input data for bilateral group
characteristics, and second, a mapping of these group characteristics to djk . As inputs,
we use bilateral population-weighted genetic distance (Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2009 and
Cavalli-Sforza et al., 1994) and a unilateral measure of GDP per capita (PPP) at origin
(PWT 8.0). We standardize these inputs for each destination and obtain vectors of genetic
distance as well as GDP at origin that range from 0 (min) to 1 (max).
    We specify a range of alternative functional forms for djk and ejk : This allows us to
create a limited set of alternative Divmig;augmented indices that model di¤erent hypotheses
(e.g., an index that over-weights immigrants from richer vs. poorer origins). We then
let these alternative indices run a "horse-race" by replacing our initial Divmig index with
these alternative speci…cations in our baseline model. The results from this horse race are
indicative of the productive role played by these distance vectors in the relationship between
Divmig and income/capita.
    To model the di¤erent functional forms of genetic distance into djk and GDP/capita into




                                              24
ejk we use a standard logistic function
                                                             2
                                           djk =              (   xjk )
                                                                                                          (14)
                                                    1+e
    where       is a parameter that ranges from -10 to +10 and xjk takes on standardized values
                                                                       35
of genetic distance (for djk ) and GDP/capita (for ejk ).                   The logistic function is convenient
for our purpose. It can be centered easily on djk = 1 for groups at average genetic proximity
(income) from the natives of a given per country and set to converge to two bounds 0 and 2.
In addition, by varying a single parameter , we can vary both the slope of the function and
the spread between genetically closer (poorer) and more distant (richer) groups. It assigns
djk and ejk values between 0 and 2 (centered on 1 for the theoretical case that all immigrant
groups are equidistant to natives). djk and ejk then act as group weights in the calculation of
Divmig;augmented . Larger absolute values of indicate a higher degree of relative over/under-
weighting. Augmented diversity indices based on                        > 0 overweight groups with higher
genetic distance (richer origins), those based on                  < 0 overweight closer groups (poorer
origins).The intuition is the following: if, say, genetically more distant (richer) groups were
more valuable in terms of explaining productivity di¤erences, weighting these groups with
djk > 1 and correspondingly giving a lower weight of djk < 1 to genetically closer (poorer)
groups should result in an augmented birthplace diversity index that has higher explanatory
power in our model than its inverse index, one where we overweight closer (poorer) groups.


6.2        Results
Table 15 shows coe¢ cients for Divmig (skilled) on a full range of alternative birthplace di-
versity indices at di¤erent combinations of             1   and   2.   First, we interpret unilateral e¤ects.
When holding GDP/capita constant (at                2   = 0), giving more weight to culturally closer
immigrants (       1   < 0) increases the predictive power of Divmig slightly - but excessively over-
weighting those diminishes the predictive power. In turn, overweighting culturally distant
groups (and thus relatively underweighting closer groups) clearly diminishes the e¤ect of
Divmig on income. This nonlinear, concave pattern for genetic/cultural distance appears to
be very stable (even to a large extent when varying income at origin). It suggests a trade-
o¤ between the productive costs and bene…ts of cultural distance. When holding genetic
distance constant at (        2   = 0), the e¤ect of Divmig increases somewhat linearly in income at
origin, but with a very small gradient than that of cultural proximity and also not monoton-
ically. This may suggest that the productive e¤ects of Divmig (skilled) are driven to a larger
extent by culture than by income. We however cannot conclude this with certainty since
this interpretation is based on marginal, not average e¤ects.
  3 5 We   use GDP/capita in origin countries only (not economic distance) to avoid including our dependent
variable in our regressor.


                                                        25
    Second, we look at interaction e¤ects. Moving from the center of Table 15 towards the
lower left corner (thus overweighting culturally closer immigrant groups and also overweight-
ing those from richer origins), the estimate on e.g., Divmig;augmented (                   1   =   2:5;   2    = 10)
increases signi…cantly (at 5% level) vs. the simple baseline index Divmig . This increase is
larger than any individual increase in either dimension (holding constant either                      1   or    2   at
zero). This suggests that a combination of culturally closer immigrants and richer origins
(potentially a proxy for higher skills) can be particularly valuable.


7     Conclusion
We construct an index of population diversity based on people’s birthplaces. This new
index, which we decompose into a size (share of foreign born) and a variety (diversity of
immigrants) component, is available for 195 countries in 1990 and 2000 disaggregated by skill
level. Our birthplace diversity measures are conceptually and empirically orthogonal to the
various measures of diversity previously explored in the literature (such as ethnic, linguistic
or genetic diversity). We …nd that the diversity of (and arising from) immigration relates
positively to measures of economic prosperity. This holds especially for skilled immigrants
in richer countries. Increasing the diversity of skilled immigration by one percentage point
increases long run economic output by about two percent.36 These results are robust to our
attempts to account for potential reverse causality and unobserved heterogeneity among
skilled immigrants. They are also robust to using various sub-samples (and de…nitions of
countries), to accounting for immigrants’age of entry or to second-generation e¤ects.
    Lastly, we extend our index of birthplace diversity and account for cultural and economic
distance between immigrants and natives. The productive e¤ects of birthplace diversity ap-
pear to be largest for immigrants originating from richer countries and from countries at
intermediate levels of cultural proximity. We interpret these …ndings as suggestive of the
trade-o¤s between communication and social costs of diversity and bene…ts in terms of pro-
duction function e¤ects that arise from skill complementarities. Hence, birthplace diversity
is an important determinant of economic prosperity that is conceptually, empirically and
economically di¤erent from other (e.g., ethnic, linguistic or genetic) dimensions of intrapop-
ulation diversity.
 3 6 For   a one standard deviation increase in birthplace diversity (skilled immigrants), this equals an increase
of about 25% in economic output.




                                                        26
8       References
    Abramitzky, R., L. Boustan and K. Eriksson (2012), "Europe’s Tired, Poor, Huddled
Masses: Self-selection and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration." American
Economic Review, 102(5): 1832-1856.
    Abramitzky, R., L. Boustan and K. Eriksson (2013), "Have the Poor Always Been Less
Likely to Migrate? Evidence from Inheritance Practices during the Age of Mass Migration.”
Journal of Development Economics, 102: 2-14.
    Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson and J. Robinson (2001), "The Colonial Origins of Comparative
Development: An Empirical Investigation." American Economic Review, 91(5): 1369-1401.
    Ager, P. and M. Brückner (2013), "Cultural Diversity and Economic Growth: Evidence
from the US during the Age of Mass Migration." European Economic Review, 64: 76–97.
    Alesina, A., R. Baqir and W. Easterly (1999), "Public Goods and Ethnic Divisions."
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(4): 1243-84.
    Alesina, A., A. Devleeschauwer, W. Easterly, S. Kurlat and R. Wacziarg (2003), "Frac-
tionalization." Journal of Economic Growth, 8(2): 155-194.
    Alesina, A. and E. La Ferrara (2000), "Participation in Heterogeneous Communities."
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(3): 847-904.
    Alesina, A. and E. La Ferrara (2002), "Who Trusts Others?" Journal of Public Eco-
nomics, 85(2): 207-234.
    Alesina, A. and E. La Ferrara (2005), "Ethnic Diversity and Economic Performance."
Journal of Economic Literature, 43(3): 762-800.
    Alesina, A., S. Michalopoulos, and E. Papaioannou (2015), "Ethnic Inequality." Journal
of Political Economy, forthcoming.
    Alesina, A., E. Spolaore, and R. Wacziarg (2000), "Economic Integration and Political
Disintegration." American Economic Review, 90(5): 1276-1296.
    Alesina, A. and E. Spolaore (2005), "The Size of Nations." MIT Press, 2005.
    Alesina, A. and E. Zhuravskaya (2011), "Segregation and the Quality of Government in
a Cross Section of Countries." American Economic Review, 101(5): 1872-1911.
    Andersen, T. and C.-J. Dalgaard (2011), "Flows of People, Flows of Ideas, and the
Inequality of Nations." Journal of Economic Growth, 16(1): 1-32.
    Anderson, J. and E. Van Wincoop (2003), "Gravity And Gravitas: A Solution To The
Border Puzzle." American Economic Review, 93(1): 170-192.
    Artuc, E., F. Docquier, C. Özden and C. Parsons (2015), "A Global Assessment of
Human Capital Mobility: The Role of non-OECD Destinations." World Development, 65:
6-26.
    Ashraf, Q. and O. Galor (2011), "Cultural Diversity, Geographical Isolation, and the



                                            27
Origin of the Wealth of Nations." NBER Working Paper No. 17640.
   Ashraf, Q. and O. Galor (2013a), "The Out of Africa Hypothesis, Human Genetic Diver-
sity and Comparative Economic Development." American Economic Review, 103(1): 1-46.
   Ashraf, Q. and O. Galor (2013b), "Genetic Diversity and the Origins of Cultural Frag-
mentation." American Economic Review, 103(3): 528–533.
   Bandiera, O., I. Rasul and M. Viarengo (2013): "The Making of Modern America: Migra-
tory Flows in the Age of Mass Migration." Journal of Development Economics, 102(May):
23-47.
   Barro, R. and J. Lee (2013), "A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in the World,
1950-2010." Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 104: 184-198.
   Beine, M., F. Docquier and H. Rapoport (2007), "Measuring International Skilled Mi-
gration: New Estimates Controlling For Age of Entry." World Bank Economic Review, 21:
249-254.
   Beine, M., F. Docquier and C. Özden (2011), "Diasporas." Journal of Development
Economics, 95(1): 30-41.
   Beine, M., F. Docquier and M. Schi¤ (2013), "Migration, Transfer of Norms and Home
Country Fertility." Canadian Journal of Economics, 46(4): 1406-1430.
   Bellini E., G. Ottaviano, D. Pinelli and G. Prarolo (2013): "Cultural Diversity and
Economic Performance: Evidence from European Regions"; in R. Crescenzi and R. Percoco,
eds.: Geography, Institutions and Regional Economic Performance, Advances in Spatial
Science, Berlin and Heidelberg: Springer Verlag: 121-141.
   Bertoli, S. (2010), "Networks, Sorting and Self-selection of Ecuadorian Migrants." An-
nales d’Economie et de Statistique, 97-98: 261-88.
   Bertoli, S. and J. Fernández-Huertas Moraga (2013), "Multilateral Resistance to Migra-
tion." Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 102: 79-100.
   Boeheim, R., G. Horvath and K. Mayr (2012), "Birthplace Diversity of the Workforce
and Productivity Spill-overs in Firms." WIFO Working Papers No. 438.
   Brunow, S., M. Trax and J. Suedekum (2015), "Cultural Diversity and Plant-level Pro-
ductivity." Regional Science and Urban Economics, 53: 85-96.
   Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., P. Menozzi and A. Piazza (1994), "The History and Geography of
Human Genes." Princeton University Press, Princeton.
   Collier, P. (1999), "On the Economic Consequences of Civil War." Oxford Economic
Papers, 51: 168-183.
   Collier, P. (2001), "Ethnic Diversity: An Economic Analysis of its Implications." Eco-
nomic Policy, 32: 129-166.
   Desmet, K., I. Ortuño-Ortín and R. Wacziarg (2012), "The Political Economy of Eth-
nolinguistic Cleavages." Journal of Development Economics, 97(2): 322-338.


                                            28
   Docquier, F. and H. Rapoport (2012), "Globalization, Brain Drain and Development."
Journal of Economic Literature, 50(3): 681-730.
   Easterly, W. and R. Levine (1997), "Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic
Divisions." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(4): 1203-1250.
   Espinova, N., J. Ray and R. Srinivasan (2011), "The World’s Potential Migrants."
Gallup.   Available from www.imi.ox.ac.uk/pdfs/the-worlds-potential-migrants.      Last ac-
cessed: 23 March 2015.
   Esteban, J. and E. Ray (1994), "On the Measurement of Polarization." Econometrica,
62(4): 819-51.
   Esteban, J. and E. Ray (2011), "Linking Con‡ict to Inequality and Polarization." Amer-
ican Economic Review, 101 (4): 1345-74.
   Esteban, J., L. Mayoral and E. Ray (2012), "Ethnicity and Con‡ict: An Empirical
Study." American Economic Review, 102(4): 1310-1342.
   Fearon, J. (2003), "Ethnic and Cultural Diversity by Country." Journal of Economic
Growth, 8(2): 195-222.
   Fearon, J. and D. Laitin (2003), "Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War." American Po-
litical Science Review, 97(1): 75-90.
   Feenstra, R., R. Lipsey, H. Deng, A. Ma and H. Mo (2005), "World Trade Flows: 1962-
2000." NBER Working Paper No. 11040.
   Feenstra, R., R. Inklaar and M. Timmer (2013), "The Next Generation of The Penn
World Table." Available for download at www.ggdc.net/pwt.
   Felbermayr, G., S. Hiller and D. Sala (2010), "Does Immigration Boost Per Capita
Income?" Economics Letters, 107(2): 177-179.
   Fershtman, C., H. Hvide and Y. Weiss (2006), "Cultural Diversity, Status Concerns and
the Organization of Work." Research in Labor Economics, 24: 3-38.
   Filmer, D. A. Hasan and L. Pritchett (2006), "A Millennium Learning Goal: Measuring
Real Progress in Education." Center for Global Development Working Paper 97.
   Frankel, J. and D. Romer (1999), "Does Trade Cause Growth?" The American Economic
Review, 89(3): 379-399.
   Frankel, J., E. Stein and S. J. Wei (1995), "Trading Blocs and the Americas: The Natural,
the Unnatural, and the Super-Natural." Journal of Development Economics, 47(1): 61-95.
   Gallup, J., J. Sachs and A. Mellinger (1998), "Geography and Economic Development,"
in Pleskovic, B. and J.E. Stiglitz (eds.), Annual World Bank Conference on Development
Economics, The World Bank: Washington, DC.
   Glaeser, E., R. La Porta and A. Shleifer (2004), "Do Institutions Cause Growth?" Journal
of Economic Growth, 9(4): 271-303.
   Greenberg, J. (1956), "The Measurement of Linguistic Diversity." Language, 32: 109-115.


                                            29
   Grogger, J. and G. Hanson (2011), "Income Maximization and the Selection and Sorting
of International Migrants." Journal of Development Economics, 95: 42-57.
   Hall, R. and C. Jones (1999), "Why do some Countries Produce so much more Output
per Worker than Others?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(1): 83-116.
   Hambrick, D., T. Seung Cho and M. J. Chen (1996), "The In‡uence of Top Manage-
ment Team Heterogeneity on Firms’Competitive Moves." Administrative Science Quarterly,
41(4): 659-684.
   Hatton, T. and J. Williamson (1998), "The Age of Mass Migration: Causes and Economic
Impact." Oxford : Oxford University Press.
   Head, K., T. Mayer and J. Ries (2010), "The Erosion of Colonial Trade Linkages after
Independence." Journal of International Economics, 81(1): 1–14.
   Hjort, J. (2014), "Ethnic Divisions and Production in Firms." Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 129, 4: 1899-1946.
   Hong, L. and S. Page (2001), "Problem Solving by Heterogeneous Agents." Journal of
Economic Theory, 97(1): 123-163.
   Hoogendoorn, S. and M. van Praag (2012), "Ethnic Diversity and Team Performance:
A Field Experiment." IZA Working Paper No. 6731.
   Hsieh, C. T. and R. Ossa (2011), "A Global View of Productivity Growth in China."
NBER Working Paper 16778, September 2011.
   Kahane, L., N. Longley and R. Simmons (2013), "The e¤ect of coworker heterogeneity
on …rm-level output: assessing the impacts of cultural and language diversity in the National
Hockey League." Review of Economics and Statistics, 95, 1: 302-314.
   Kali, R., F. Méndez and J. Reyes (2007), "Trade Structure and Economic Growth."
Journal of International Trade & Econ. Development, 16(2): 245-269.
   Laitin, D. D. and S. Jeon (2013), "Exploring Opportunities in Cultural Diversity."
Mimeo, Stanford University.
   Lazear, E. P. (1999a), "Globalisation and the Market for Teammates." Economic Jour-
nal, 109(454): 15-40.
   Lazear, E. P. (1999b), "Culture and Language." Journal of Political Economy, 107(6):
95-126.
   Marshall, M. and K. Jaggers (2012), "Polity IV Project: Political Regime Characteristics
and Transitions, 1800-2012." Center for International Development and Con‡ict Manage-
ment, University of Maryland.
   Mayda, A. (2010), "International Migration: A Panel Data Analysis of the Determinants
of Bilateral Flows." Journal of Population Economics, 23(4): 1249-1274.
   McKenzie, D. and H. Rapoport (2010), "Self-selection Patterns in Mexico-US Migration:
The Role of Migration Networks." Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(4): 811-821.


                                             30
   Michalopoulos, S. (2012), "The Origins of Ethnolinguistic Diversity." American Eco-
nomic Review, 102(4): 1508-1539.
   Milliken, F. J. and L. L. Martins (1996), "Searching for Common Threads: Understand-
ing the Multiple E¤ects of Diversity in Organizational Groups." Academy of Management
Review, 21(2): 402-433.
   Montalvo J. and M. Reynal-Querol (2005), "Ethnic Polarization, Potential Con‡ict and
Civil War." American Economic Review, 95(3): 796-816.
   O’Reilly, C., D. Caldwell and W. Barnett (1989), "Work Group Demography, Social
Integration, and Turnover." Admin. Science Quarterly, 34(1): 21-37.
   Oster, E. (2013), "Unobservable Selection and Coe¢ cient Stability: Theory and Valida-
tion." NBER Working Paper 19054.
   Ortega, F. and G. Peri (2009), "The Causes and E¤ects of International Migrations:
Evidence from OECD countries 1980-2005." NBER Working Paper 14833.
   Ortega, F. and G. Peri (2014), "Openness and Income: the Roles of Trade and Migra-
tion." Journal of International Economics, 92, 2: 231-51.
   Ottaviano, G. and G. Peri (2006), "The Economic Value of Cultural Diversity: Evidence
from U.S. Cities." Journal of Economic Geography, 6(1): 9-44.
   Ozden, C., C. Parsons, M. Schi¤ and T. Walmsley (2011), "Where on Earth is Every-
body? The Evolution of Global Bilateral Migration 1960–2000." The World Bank Economic
Review, 25(1): 12-56.
   Ozgen, C., P. Nijkamp and J. Poot (2013), "The Impact of Cultural Diversity on Firm:
Evidence from Dutch Micro Data." IZA Journal of Migration, 2, 18.
   Parrotta, P., D. Pozzoli, and M. Pytlikova (2014), "Does Labor Diversity A¤ect Firm
Productivity?" European Economic Review, 66: 144–179.
   Peri, G. (2012), "The E¤ect of Immigration on Productivity: Evidence from US States."
Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(1): 348-358.
   Putnam, R. D. (1995), "Bowling Alone: America’s Declining Social Capital." Journal of
Democracy, 6(1): 65-78.
   Reynal-Querol, M. (2002), "Ethnicity, Political Systems, and Civil Wars." Journal of
Con‡ict Resolution, 46(1): 29-54.
   Rodriguez, F. and D. Rodrik (2001), "Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A Skeptic’s
Guide to the Cross-National Evidence." NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 15: 261-338.
   Rodrik, D., A. Subramanian and F. Trebbi (2004), "Institutions Rule: The Primacy
of Institutions Over Geography and Integration in Economic Development." Journal of
Economic Growth, 9(2): 131-165.
   Sachs, J. (2003), "Institutions don’t Rule: Direct E¤ects of Geography on Per Capita
Income." NBER Working Paper No 9490.


                                            31
   Santos Silva, J. and S. Tenreyro (2006), "The Log of Gravity." The Review of Economics
and Statistics, 88(4): 641-658.
   Spolaore, E. and R. Wacziarg (2009), "The Di¤usion of Development." Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 124(2): 469-529.
   Stock, J. and M. Yogo (2005), "Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression."
In Donald Andrews and James H. Stock, eds. Identi…cation and Inference for Econometric
Models: Essays in Honor of Thomas Rothenberg, NY: Cambridge University Press.
   Tinbergen, J. (1962), "An Analysis of World Trade Flows." in Shaping the World Econ-
omy, edited by Jan Tinbergen. New York: Twentieth Century Fund.
   U.N. Population Division (2013): "World Population Prospects: The 2013 Revision."
availably at esa.un.org/wpp.
   U.N. Statistics Division (2013): "Comtrade Database." available at comtrade.un.org.
   World Intellectual Property Organization (2010), "World Intellectual Property Indica-
tors", http://www.wipo.int/ipstats/en/statistics/patents/.
   Yanikkaya, H. (2003), "Trade Openness and Economic Growth: A Cross-Country Em-
pirical Investigation." Journal of Development Economics, 72(1): 57-89.




                                           32
Table 1a: Bilateral correlations

        Variables, (n= 240, full sample)              (1)     (2)     (3)    (4)    (5)    (6)    (7)    (8)    (9)

  (1)   Ethnic fractionalization                     1,00
  (2)   Linguistic fractionalization                 0,76    1,00
  (3)   Genetic diversity                            0,12    0,22    1,00
  (4)   Birthplace diversity, population             0,12    0,11    0,23   1,00
  (5)   Share of immigration                         0,14    0,12    0,21   0,98   1,00
  (6)   Birthplace diversity, immigrants            -0,11   -0,12   -0,03   0,10   0,09   1,00
  (7)   Birthplace diversity, population, skilled    0,11    0,10    0,23   0,90   0,86   0,10   1,00
  (8)   Share of immigration, skilled                0,12    0,08    0,21   0,88   0,86   0,09   0,97   1,00
  (9)   Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled   -0,04   -0,10   -0,06   0,08   0,08   0,86   0,01   0,00   1,00




                                                            33
Table 1b: Summary statistics

 Variable                                                          n     mean     std. dev.     min       max


 GDP/capita, PPP (log)                                            240      8,55      1,25        5,39    11,04
 TFP, 1=USA (log)                                                 206     -0,60      0,58       -2,51      0,68
 Patent applications/capita                                       117   0,0002     0,0006     0,0000    0,0038
 Patents granted/capita                                           112   0,0001     0,0003     0,0000    0,0016
 Birthplace diversity, population, all                            240      0,14      0,18        0,00      0,88
 Birthplace diversity, population, skilled                        240      0,17      0,20        0,00      0,94
 Birthplace diversity, population, unskilled                      240      0,14      0,18        0,00      0,86
 Share of immigrants, all                                         240      0,09      0,13        0,00      0,73
 Share of immigrants, skilled                                     240      0,11      0,15        0,00      0,94
 Share of immigrants, unskilled                                   240      0,08      0,13        0,00      0,74
 Birthplace diversity, immigrants, all                            240      0,73      0,20        0,02      0,96
 Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled                        240      0,80      0,18        0,08      0,97
 Birthplace diversity, immigrants, unskilled                      240      0,72      0,21        0,02      0,96
 Birthplace diversity, immigrants, all, 1989 borders              240      0,71      0,25        0,00      1,00
 Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled, 1989 borders          240      0,78      0,23        0,00      1,00
 Birthplace diversity, immigrants, unskilled, 1989 borders        240      0,70      0,25        0,00      1,00
 Share of immigrants, skilled, > age 12                            58      0,08      0,08        0,00      0,28
 Share of immigrants, skilled, > age 18                            58      0,07      0,06        0,00      0,23
 Share of immigrants, skilled, > age 22                            58      0,06      0,05        0,00      0,22
 Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled, > age 12               58      0,87      0,11        0,47      0,97
 Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled, > age 18               58      0,87      0,11        0,47      0,97
 Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled, > age 22               58      0,87      0,11        0,48      0,97
 GDP/capita PPP (log), weighted av., all immigrants               240      8,41      0,95        6,32      9,95
 GDP/capita PPP (log), weighted av., skilled immigrants           240      8,72      0,78        6,32    10,13
 GDP/capita PPP (log), weighted av., unskilled immigrants         240      8,36      0.95        6,32    10,01
 Population size (log)                                            240      9,26      1,53        5,95    14,05
 Land area (log)                                                  240    12,22       1,91        6,47    16,65
 Landlocked (dummy)                                               240      0,22      0,41           0         1
 Ethnic fractionalization                                         240      0,44      0,25        0,00      0,93
 Linguistic fractionalization                                     240      0,40      0,29        0,00      0,92
 Genetic diversity (ancestry-adjusted)                            240      0,73      0,03        0,63      0,77
 Genetic diversity (a-a, squared)                                 240      0,53      0,04        0,39      0,59
 Years of schooling (log)                                         240      1,84      0,51       -0,10      2,54
 Absolute latitude                                                240      0,31      0,20        0,00      0,71
 Coastal population (%)                                           240      0,43      0,37        0,00      1,00
 Mean temperature (log)                                           240      2,65      0,81       -0,93      3,35
 Mean precipitation (log)                                         240      6,71      0,87        3,93      7,98
 Malaria incidence (%)                                            240      0,31      0,41        0,00      1,00
 Yellow fever presence (dummy)                                    240      0,43      0,50           0         1
 Tuberculosis incidence ('1000 %)                                 240   149,20     199,00           4     1407
 South East Asia (dummy) (World Bank)                             240      0,08      0,28           0         1
 Sub-Saharan Africa (dummy) (World Bank)                          240      0,25      0,43           0         1
 Latin America (dummy) (World Bank)                               240      0,13      0,34           0         1
 Trade openness in % of GDP, PPP                                  240      0,47      0,44        0,00      3,36
 Diversity of exports                                             240      0,81      0,15        0,20      0,96
 Diversity of imports                                             240      0,84      0,12        0,40      0,96
 Polity2 combined institutional quality                           240      3,12      6,84     -10,00     10,00
 British colony (dummy)                                           240      0,30      0,46           0         1
 French colony (dummy)                                            240      0,18      0,38           0         1
 Spanish colony (dummy)                                           240      0,14      0,35           0         1
 Land area in tropics (%)                                         222      0,43      0,47        0,00      1,00
 Agricultural suitability (mean)                                  222      0,46      0,24        0,00      0,96
 Agricultural suitability (standard deviation)                    222      0,19      0,09        0,00      0,41
 Elevation (mean)                                                 222      0,58      0,50        0,03      2,52
 Elevation (standard deviation)                                   222      0,37      0,38        0,01      1,91
 Property rights index                                            240      4,79      2,11           1         7
 Civil liberties index                                            240      4,57      1,68           1         7

                                                             34
Table 1c: Data sources

Variable Name                          Definition                                                                                Source

Income/Productivity (Y)
                                                                                                                                 Penn World Tables 8.0, Feenstra, Inklaar,
  GDP/capita                           log of GDP/capita in int. USD, PPP
                                                                                                                                 Timmer (2013)
                                                                                                                                 Penn World Tables 8.0, Feenstra, Inklaar,
  TFP                                  log of total factor productivity/capita, 1=USA
                                                                                                                                 Timmer (2013)
Migration & Diversity
                                       Herfindahl index of population (above age 24) based on country of origin (including
  Birthplace diversity(population)                                                                                               Own calculations, ADOP (2013)
                                       native born population). By skill level
                                       Herfindahl index of population (above age 24) based on country of origin (excluding       Own calculations, UN Pop. Division
  Birthplace diversity(immigrants)
                                       native born population). By skill level                                                   (2013), ADOP (2013)
  Share of immigration                 Sum of all immigrants / total population (above age 24), by skill level                   UN Pop. Division (2013), ADOP (2013)
                                       Definition of native extended to immigrants at ages of entry below age of 12, 18, 22,     Own calculations based on Beine,
  Age-of-entry cut off data
                                       respectively, indices recomputed                                                          Docquier, Rapoport (2007)
Market size controls
 Population size                       Population size, log                                                                      UN Pop. Division (2013)
 Area size                             Country area size in square kilometers, log                                               CEPII (2010), Head et al. (2010)
 Landlockedness                        Dummy = 1 if country is landlocked                                                        CEPII (2010), Head et al. (2010)
Education
 Years of schooling                    Years of schooling, population > 25 years, log                                            Barro and Lee (2013)
Origin effects
                                                                                                                                 Own calculations based on Penn World
  GDP/capita of immigrants             Weighted average of immigrants GDP/ capita at origin                                      Tables 8.0, Feenstra, Inklaar, Timmer
                                                                                                                                 (2013)
Trade openness
                                                                                                                                 Penn World Tables 8.0, Feenstra, Inklaar,
  Trade openness                       Exports and imports in % of GDP, at PPP
                                                                                                                                 Timmer (2013)
  Diversity of trade (exports)         Herfindahl index of export shares with all trade partners, in nominal USD. Missing data
                                                                                                                                 Own calculations, Feenstra (2005) and
                                       in 1990 for ex-soviet countries interpolated from next available year (usually 1992).
  Diversity of trade (imports)                                                                                                   COMTRADE (2013)
                                       Missing data for 3 African countries (BWA, NAM, SWZ) from Comtrade for 2000.
Fractionalization
  Ethnic fractionalization             Herfindahl index of ethnic group shares                                                   Alesina et al. (2003)
  Linguistic fractionalization         Herfindahl index of linguistic group shares                                               Alesina et al. (2003)
                                       Expected heterozygosity of a country's population, predicted by migratory distances
  (Predicted) genetic diversity        from East Africa and predicted pairwise genetic distance between ethnic groups within     Ashraf and Galor (2013)
                                       a country for population in 2000, ancestry-adjusted
Geography
 Absolute latitude                     Absolute latitude of capital/90                                                           Gallup, Sachs, Mellinger (1998)
 Coastal population (%)                % Population within 100km from ice-free coast, 1995                                       Gallup, Sachs, Mellinger (1998)
 Mean temperature (log)                Average temperature in celsius, 1961-1990, log                                            World Bank (2013)
 Mean precipitation (log)              Average precipitation in mm/year, 1961-1990, log                                          World Bank (2013)
 Malaria incidence (%)                 % of population with Malaria in 1994                                                      Gallup, Sachs, Mellinger (1998)
 Yellow fever presence (dummy)         Dummy, 1 if Yellow fever present in country                                               World Bank (2013)
 Tuberculosis incidence ('1000 %)      # of Tuberculosis cases per 100,000 population                                            World Bank (2013)

Institutions
                                       Combined Polity2- score -10: Most repressive, +10: Most democratic. Missing value
  Quality of institutions              for Kazakstan 1990 from 1991, for Kuweit in 1990 due to interregnum as average            PolityIV database, Marshall Jaggers (2012)
                                       1989-1991
  Property rights index                Index inverted, 7= most, 1=least rights                                                   Freedom House (2011)
  Civil liberties index                Index inverted, 7= most, 1=least liberties                                                Freedom House (2011)
  Colony dummy                         Equals 1 if country former british, french or spanish colony, respectively                CEPII (2010), Head et al. (2010)
Other variables
 Agricultural suitability (mean)         Mean of indicators for agricultural suitability across regions within country           Michalopoulos (2012)
                                         Standard deviation of indicators for agricultural suitability across regions within
  Agricultural suitability (st. deviation)                                                                                       Michalopoulos (2012)
                                         country
  Elevation (mean)                       Mean elevation across regions within country                                            Michalopoulos (2012)
  Elevation (standard deviation)         Standard deviation of elevation across regions within country                           Michalopoulos (2012)
  Land area in tropics (%)               % land area in geographical tropics                                                     Gallup, Sachs, Mellinger (1998)
  Continent fixed effects                Latin America, South-Saharan Africa and South-East Asia                                 World Bank (2013)
  Patent intensity                     Average of patents granted and applied for (1995-2005) per capita, respectively, in %     WIPO (2010)

Gravity model parameters
 Population size, 1960                 Population size, log                                                                      UN Pop. Division (2013)
 Bilateral distance                    Geodesic distance in km, log                                                              CEPII (2010), Head et al. (2010)
 Common official language              Dummy = 1 for pair with same official language                                            CEPII (2010), Head et al. (2010)
 Common ethnic language                Dummy = 1 for pair with language shared by at least 9% of populations                     CEPII (2010), Head et al. (2010)
 Common border                         Dummy = 1 for pair with common land border                                                CEPII (2010), Head et al. (2010)
 Colonial history                      Dummy = 1 for pair ever in colonial relationship                                          CEPII (2010), Head et al. (2010)
 Horizontal time diffence              Difference in time zones in hours                                                         CEPII (2010), Head et al. (2010)


                                                                                               35
Table 2: Dimensions of diversity: Ethnic/linguistic, genetic, birthplace diversity

                                                   (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)              (5)          (6)           (7)            (8)
Sample                                                                                        Full sample, year 2000
Dependent variable (log)                                                                           GDP/capita

Birthplace diversity (pop), all                                               3.327***
                                                                               (0.419)
Birthplace diversity (pop), skilled                                                          2.307***
                                                                                              (0.373)
Birthplace diversity (pop), unskilled                                                                       3.471***
                                                                                                             (0.446)
Birthplace diversity (within), all                                                                                          2.108
                                                                                                                           (1.844)
Birthplace diversity (between), all                                                                                       3.783***
                                                                                                                           (0.772)
Birthplace diversity (within), skilled                                                                                                  3.336***
                                                                                                                                         (0.479)
Birthplace diversity (between), skilled                                                                                                 1.688***
                                                                                                                                         (0.619)
Birthplace diversity (within), unskilled                                                                                                                  1.583
                                                                                                                                                         (2.293)
Birthplace diversity (between), unskilled                                                                                                               4.127***
                                                                                                                                                         (0.821)
Ethnic fractionalization                        -1.913***       -1.435**      -1.531***     -1.441***      -1.559***     -1.470***      -1.547***      -1.476***
                                                  (0.535)        (0.561)        (0.417)       (0.462)        (0.417)       (0.437)        (0.466)        (0.438)
Linguistic fractionalization                    -1.112***      -1.199***      -1.166***     -1.218***      -1.164***     -1.199***      -1.129***      -1.206***
                                                  (0.421)        (0.427)        (0.311)       (0.349)        (0.309)       (0.323)        (0.344)        (0.322)
Genetic diversity                                               448.8***       292.2***      356.0***       288.0***      280.2***       367.9***       270.8***
                                                                 (131.1)        (102.8)       (110.7)        (102.9)       (102.8)        (113.3)        (102.4)
Genetic diversity (squared)                                    -319.6***      -211.5***     -256.3***      -208.6***     -203.1***      -264.7***      -196.5***
                                                                 (93.02)        (73.23)       (78.78)        (73.32)       (73.25)        (80.55)        (72.99)

Observations                                       142            142            142           142             142           142           142            142
Adjusted R-squared                                0.325          0.367          0.563         0.487           0.567         0.561         0.489          0.567

Birthplace Diversity (Population) is a Herfindahl index of the population's intrapopulation diversity (including group of natives). Birthplace Diversity (between)
denotes the same index assuming all immigrant groups hail from one country of origin. Birthplace Diversity (within) is the additional birthplace diversity derived
from the variety of immigrants' origins. Between (between natives and immigrants)- and within-diversity (within groups of immigrants only) add up to the
overall birthplace diversity index of the population. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                               36
Table 3: Birthplace diversity and economic development
                                                                                  (1)          (2)           (3)
                       Sample                                                              Full sample
                       Dependent variable (log)                                            GDP/capita
                       Birthplace diversity, immigrants                       0.105***
                                                                              (0.0317)
                       Share of immigration                                   0.158***
                                                                              (0.0450)
                       Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled                            0.160***
                                                                                            (0.0505)
                       Share of immigration, skilled                                        0.186***
                                                                                            (0.0660)
                       Birthplace diversity, immigrants, unskilled                                        0.145***
                                                                                                          (0.0436)
                       Share of immigration, unskilled                                                    0.230***
                                                                                                          (0.0692)
                       Ethnic fractionalization                                   0.0735        0.0591        0.0694
                                                                                 (0.303)       (0.321)       (0.300)
                       Linguistic fractionalization                               -0.155       -0.0172        -0.169
                                                                                 (0.274)       (0.285)       (0.272)
                       Genetic diversity                                        239.1***      242.2***      236.6***
                                                                                 (87.34)       (88.41)       (87.30)
                       Genetic diversity (squared)                             -171.6***     -173.8***     -169.9***
                                                                                 (62.53)       (63.33)       (62.46)
                       Land area (log)                                            0.0523        0.0335        0.0584
                                                                                (0.0462)      (0.0481)      (0.0457)
                       Landlocked country                                        0.344**       0.354**       0.349**
                                                                                 (0.162)       (0.166)       (0.160)
                       Absolute latitude                                           1.083         0.958         1.049
                                                                                 (0.727)       (0.786)       (0.731)
                       Population within 100km from icefree coast (%)            0.558**       0.541**      0.582***
                                                                                 (0.214)       (0.238)       (0.208)
                       Mean temperature (log)                                     0.0745        0.0450        0.0757
                                                                                (0.0941)      (0.0968)      (0.0951)
                       Mean precipitation (log)                                   0.0281        0.0149        0.0208
                                                                                (0.0994)       (0.106)      (0.0992)
                       FE South-Saharan Africa                                    -0.396        -0.386        -0.399
                                                                                 (0.313)       (0.297)       (0.317)
                       FE Latin America                                           -0.378        -0.372       -0.386*
                                                                                 (0.232)       (0.246)       (0.231)
                       FE Asia                                                 -0.671***     -0.693***     -0.690***
                                                                                 (0.223)       (0.224)       (0.222)
                       FE North Africa / Middle East                             -0.0300        0.0580       -0.0668
                                                                                 (0.267)       (0.255)       (0.273)
                       Malaria incidence (%)                                    -0.485**      -0.500**      -0.482**
                                                                                 (0.221)       (0.230)       (0.220)
                       Yellow fever incidence (dummy if present)                   0.152         0.181         0.136
                                                                                 (0.148)       (0.151)       (0.148)
                       Tuberculosis incidence (%)                             -0.000411     -0.000399     -0.000425
                                                                             (0.000288)    (0.000290)    (0.000288)
                       Polity2 institutional quality index                       0.0164*     0.0183**        0.0160*
                                                                              (0.00837)     (0.00809)     (0.00843)
                       FE French colonizer                                       -0.0476       -0.0711       -0.0333
                                                                                 (0.115)       (0.120)       (0.113)
                       FE British colonizer                                       0.0140        0.0667        0.0189
                                                                                 (0.140)       (0.146)       (0.140)
                       FE Spanish colonizer                                      -0.0196       -0.0523       -0.0124
                                                                                 (0.141)       (0.154)       (0.142)
                       Trade openness (% of GDP at PPP)                         0.515***      0.551***      0.518***
                                                                                 (0.102)       (0.112)       (0.103)
                       Trade diversity of exports                                 0.0718         0.196        0.0533
                                                                                 (0.358)       (0.370)       (0.359)
                       Trade diversity of imports                                  0.136        0.0247         0.127
                                                                                 (0.394)       (0.414)       (0.396)
                       Average GDP/capita at immigrants' origin                   -0.107       -0.0810        -0.103
                                                                                (0.0793)      (0.0957)      (0.0758)
                       Years of schooling (log)                                 0.945***      0.972***      0.953***
                                                                                 (0.123)       (0.133)       (0.122)
                       Population size (log)                                      0.0789        0.103*        0.0763
                                                                                (0.0572)      (0.0570)      (0.0569)

                       Oster (2013)'s non-biased Div(Mig) coefficients
                       at R(max) = 0.9                                          0.074         0.115        0.063
                       at R(max) = 1                                            0.140         0.147        0.127

                       Observations                                                240          240         240
                       Adjusted R-squared                                        0.854         0.842       0.854
                       Standard errors clustered on the country level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                                     37
Table 4: Birthplace diversity and economic development – rich/poor country split samples

                                                        (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)         (5)             (6)        (7)            (8)
Sample                                                             > median GDP/capita                                     < median GDP/capita
Dependent variable (log)                                               GDP/capita                                              GDP/capita

Birthplace diversity, immigrants                     0.138***                                              0.0182
                                                     (0.0401)                                             (0.0669)
Share of immigration                                 0.430***                                             0.0699**
                                                     (0.0827)                                             (0.0287)
Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled                          0.260***                    0.227**                     0.00765                   -0.0741
                                                                   (0.0560)                   (0.0865)                     (0.0608)                  (0.117)
Share of immigration, skilled                                      0.291***                    0.00787                      -0.0539                 -0.144**
                                                                   (0.0980)                    (0.145)                     (0.0692)                 (0.0693)
Birthplace diversity, immigrants, unskilled                                      0.108***      -0.0278                                   0.0160      0.0885
                                                                                 (0.0377)     (0.0751)                                  (0.0646)     (0.128)
Share of immigration, unskilled                                                  0.423***     0.389***                                  0.0713**    0.143***
                                                                                 (0.0873)      (0.136)                                  (0.0273)    (0.0371)


Observations                                            120           120            120         120           120         120         120             120
Adjusted R-squared                                     0.717         0.700          0.713       0.747         0.724       0.713       0.727           0.738
All models include the full vector of controls (not shown). Standard errors clustered on the country level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



Table 5: Birthplace diversity (skilled) and economic development – rich country subsample

                                                                   (1)            (2)            (3)        (4)                        (5)           (6)
Sample                                                                                         > median GDP/capita
Dependent variable (log)                                                                           GDP/capita
Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled                       0.239***        0.269***      0.278***        0.277***           0.278***          0.260***
                                                                (0.0667)        (0.0605)      (0.0573)        (0.0537)           (0.0492)          (0.0560)
Share of immigration, skilled                                   0.225***        0.168**       0.193***         0.178*             0.229**          0.291***
                                                                (0.0694)        (0.0743)      (0.0715)        (0.0919)           (0.0887)          (0.0980)
Controls
   Fractionalization                                                x               x              x                 x                  x             x
   Climate & geography                                                              x              x                 x                  x             x
   Disease environment                                                                             x                 x                  x             x
   Institutions                                                                                                      x                  x             x
   Trade and openness                                                                                                                   x             x
   Education and population                                                                                                                           x
Oster (2013)'s non-biased Div(Mig) coefficients
at R(max) = 0.9                                                                                                                                     0.2674
at R(max) = 1                                                                                                                                       0.2730
Observations                                             120          120                         120               120                120            120
Adjusted R-squared                                      0.344       0.569                        0.617             0.619              0.697         0.700
Standard errors clustered on the country level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                           38
Table 6: Birthplace diversity and patent intensity

                                                         (1)                    (2)                   (3)                 (4)
Sample                                                       Full sample, 2000                          > median GDP/capita
                                                       # patent              # patent              # patent            # patent
Dependent variable (log)
                                                 applications/capita       grants/capita     applications/capita    grants/capita

Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled             0.490***               0.468**              0.493**               0.606**
                                                       (0.173)                (0.215)             (0.205)               (0.228)
Share of immigration, skilled                            0.244                  0.241            1.196***              1.277***
                                                       (0.212)                (0.218)             (0.368)               (0.370)
Ethnic fractionalization                                -0.621                 -0.279              -0.833                -0.570
                                                       (0.934)                (1.111)             (1.040)               (1.113)
Linguistic fractionalization                             0.171                 -0.283              -0.225                -0.316
                                                       (0.820)                (0.990)             (1.106)               (1.085)
Genetic diversity                                        2.300                  5.921              3.501                 10.97
                                                       (9.318)                (9.347)             (16.18)               (18.77)
Years of schooling (log)                               1.308**                1.227*               1.808                 2.136
                                                       (0.536)                (0.620)             (1.612)               (1.796)
Quality of institutions                                 0.0604                0.0551               0.131                 0.115
                                                      (0.0383)               (0.0407)             (0.103)               (0.108)


Observations                                             117                   112                   60                   60
Adjusted R-squared                                      0.813                 0.793                0.794                0.763
Patents: Average number of patents applied for (or granted, respectively) at national patent bureaus by the respective country's
nationals in the years 1995-2005 per capita (*1000, in logs), respectively, from WIPO (2010). All models include the full vector of
countrols. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


Table 7: Birthplace diversity and total factor productivity

                                                                             (1)                        (2)
Sample                                                                   Full sample           > median GDP/capita
Dependent variable (log)                                                 TFP/capita                TFP/capita

Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled                                   0.107**                    0.144***
                                                                           (0.0427)                    (0.0416)
Share of immigration, skilled                                               0.0232                       0.109
                                                                           (0.0428)                    (0.0671)

Observations
Adjusted R-squared                                                      206                        120
All models include the full vector of controls (not shown). Standard errors clustered on the country level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                 39
Table 8: Robustness to second-generation effects

                                                                   (1)             (2)            (3)
Sample                                                                    > median GDP/capita
Dependent variable (log)                                                      GDP/capita

Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled                        0.260***                       0.247***
                                                                 (0.0560)                       (0.0619)
Share of immigration, skilled                                    0.291***                        0.273**
                                                                 (0.0980)                        (0.115)
Birthplace diversity, immigrants, 1960                                          0.0952            0.0392
                                                                               (0.0821)         (0.0776)
Share of immigration, 1960                                                     0.0114**           0.0611
                                                                               (0.0557)         (0.0592)

Observations                                                       120            120             120
Adjusted R-squared                                                0.700          0.600           0.699
Birthplace diversity of immigrants and share of immigration calculated for 1960. All models include the
full vector of controls (not shown). Standard errors clustered on the country level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                            40
Table 9: Robustness to children immigrants

                                                                       (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)
Sample                                                                              > median GDP/capita
Dependent variable (log)                                                                 GDP/capita

Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled (no adjustment)           0.230**
                                                                    (0.0855)
Share of immigration, skilled                                        -0.0960
                                                                     (0.189)
Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled (above age 12)                           0.192**
                                                                                   (0.0710)
Share of immigration, skilled (above age 12)                                        -0.0526
                                                                                   (0.0887)
Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled (above age 18)                                         0.187**
                                                                                                 (0.0701)
Share of immigration, skilled (above age 18)                                                      -0.0284
                                                                                                 (0.0756)
Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled (above age 22)                                                        0.186**
                                                                                                                (0.0684)
Share of immigration, skilled (above age 22)                                                                     -0.0134
                                                                                                                (0.0668)

Observations                                                            58              58            58             58
Adjusted R-squared                                                    0.848           0.851          0.850         0.849
Birthplace diversity and share of immigration adjusted for migrants' age at entry into destination country. Modified
variables regard immigrants below thresholds as natives. Age-of-entry data available only for subset of countries (mostly
OECD), thus sample restricted to these. All models include the full set of controls (not shown). Standard errors clustered
on the country level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                            41
Table 10: Robustness to alternative fixed effects structures

                                                                  (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)
Sample                                                                                    > median GDP/capita
Dependent variable (log)                                                                      GDP/capita

Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled                      0.260***       0.259***      0.257***      0.247***    0.261***     0.257***
                                                               (0.0560)       (0.0559)      (0.0578)      (0.0553)    (0.0494)     (0.0591)
Share of immigration, skilled                                  0.291***       0.290***      0.284***      0.296***    0.285***     0.298***
                                                               (0.0980)       (0.0980)      (0.0966)       (0.104)    (0.0803)     (0.0888)
FE South-Saharan Africa                                         -0.0620        -0.0721       -0.0337        0.447
                                                                (0.382)        (0.384)       (0.405)       (0.594)
FE Latin America                                                 -0.575         -0.567        -0.538       -0.0891
                                                                (0.384)        (0.388)       (0.401)       (0.338)
FE Asia                                                          -0.199         -0.206        -0.209        -0.154
                                                                (0.180)        (0.180)       (0.185)       (0.211)
FE North Africa / Middle East                                   -0.0708        -0.0595       -0.0409       -0.0406
                                                                (0.246)        (0.252)       (0.258)       (0.307)
FE OPEC                                                                         0.0619        0.0740        0.122
                                                                               (0.184)       (0.186)       (0.203)
FE USA, CAN, AUS, NZL                                                                          0.108
                                                                                             (0.345)
FE Americas continent                                                                                                                -0.155
                                                                                                                                    (0.375)
FE Africa continent                                                                                                                  -0.214
                                                                                                                                    (0.411)
FE Asia continent                                                                                                                    -0.131
                                                                                                                                    (0.173)
FE Oceania continent                                                                                                                 -0.219
                                                                                                                                    (0.361)

Observations                                                      120            120           120           112         120          120
Adjusted R-squared                                               0.700          0.697         0.694         0.689       0.703        0.693
Column (1) shows our baseline results for comparison. Column (2) includes additional FE for OPEC countries. Column (3) adds a FE for
countries with skill selective policies and the US. Column (4) drops these countries from the sample. Column (5) excludes all fixed effects.
Column (6) shows robustness to an alternative specification of fixed effects using continents instread of geographic regions. Standard errors
clustered on the country level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                         42
                                                                                                                         (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)        (6)            (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)
     Sample                                                                                                                                                               > median GDP/capita
     Dependent variable (log)                                                                                                                                                 GDP/capita

     Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled                                                                        0.260***      0.229**     0.249***     0.301***     0.201***    0.240***     0.242***
                                                                                                                      (0.0560)     (0.0885)     (0.0585)     (0.0579)     (0.0546)    (0.0588)     (0.0529)
     Index of positive selection (based on observable skills)                                                                       0.273**      0.0511
                                                                                                                                    (0.128)     (0.0934)
     Weighted average GDP per capita at PPP at immigrant origins                                                                   0.574***       0.191
                                                                                                                                    (0.137)      (0.171)
     Index of net migration intentions (Gallup index)                                                                                                                   0.00277***
                                                                                                                                                                        (0.000992)
     Index of positive selection (based on residuals from regression of Gallup on share of immigration)                                                                              0.000905
                                                                                                                                                                                     (0.00113)
     Index of positive selection (based on residuals from regression of Gallup on birthplace diversity, migrants)                                                                                 0.00298***
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Table 11: Robustness to unobserved heterogeneity




                                                                                                                                                                                                  (0.00103)
     Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled, ex PISA > OECD mean score                                                                                                                                       0.226***
                                                                                                                                                                                                                (0.0587)
     Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled, ex PISA science skills in global top 16% > OECD                                                                                                                              0.253***




43
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (0.0543)
     Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled, ex PISA math skills in global top 16% > OECD                                                                                                                                              0.269***
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (0.0564)
     Share of immigration, skilled                                                                                    0.291***     0.240***     0.278***     0.285**      0.174**     0.248***      0.167**      0.248**     0.297***      0.239*
                                                                                                                      (0.0980)     (0.0693)     (0.0935)     (0.109)      (0.0711)    (0.0817)      (0.0747)     (0.0996)     (0.103)      (0.128)

     Full set of controls                                                                                                 x                         x            x            x           x            x            x            x            x

     Observations                                                                                                              120         120         120        108           114         114           114         120           120       120
     Adjusted R-squared                                                                                                       0.700       0.306       0.698      0.699         0.741       0.723         0.746       0.679         0.696     0.728
     Column (1) shows baseline results for comparison. Column (2) shows a model including an index of positive selection calculated as weighted average of immigrants' degree of positive selection on observables. The degree of positive
     selection is calculated as share of skilled immigrants to a destination country over share of skilled natives (those left behind plus emigrated, minus immigrants to that country). Value of 1 indicates that immigrants are drawn randomly
     from distribution of skills at home, higher value denotes positive selection on observable skill. Column (3) repeats the same exercise but conditions on the full vector of controls. Column (4) drops 6 countries that rank highest (above
     value of 5) in terms of positive selection. Column (5) adds Gallup (2012) index of "potential net migration" as control. Columns (6) and (7) add two indices based on regression residuals (regressions of the Gallup 2011 index on the
     Share of immigration and birthplace diversity of immigrants, respectively) as alternative controls. Column (8) excludes all immigrants from countries with higher mean PISA score than OECD average. Columns (9) and (10) exclude all
     immigrants from countries which are not "highly skilled constrained", meaning that the potential pool of extremely skilled people (highest sextile of PISA score for math and science, respectively) is larger than the sum of emigrants from
     this country. All models excl. (2) include the full vector of all covariates (not shown). Standard errors clustered on the country level.
     *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 12a: Gravity model determinants

Variable n = 69936                        Definition & source                                                    mean     std. dev.   min      max

Bilateral migration, all skill levels          ADOP (2013)                                                         2792    48435        0   6319139
Bilateral migration, skilled                   ADOP (2013)                                                          642    10292        0    919139
Bilateral migration, unskilled                 ADOP (2013)                                                         2150    41790        0   5400000
Bilateral migration, all skill levels, predicted                                                                   3294    52744        0   9144851
Bilateral migration, skilled, predicted        based on PPML gravity model                                          755     9010        0   1147379
Bilateral migration, unskilled, predicted                                                                          2539    44271        0   7626276
Population size, 1960, thousands               Population in 1960, CEPII (2010)                                   16200    61000       15    658000
Distance (km)                                  Geodesic distance in km between country centoids, CEPII (2010)      7827     4491        2     19781
Time difference (hours)                        Difference in time zone hours between country capitals, CEPII (2010) 5          3        0        12
Border contiguity                              dummy=1 if common land border                                          0        0        0         1
Colonial history                               dummy=1 if ever in colonial relationship                               0        0        0         1
Common official language                       dummy=1 if common offical langue                                       0        0        0         1
Common ethnic minority language                dummy=1 if common language spoken by > 7% of population                0        0        0         1




                                                                         44
Table 12b: Gravity model results

                                            (1)                 (2)             (3)                  (4)               (5)                (6)
Model                                      OLS                 OLS            PPML                 PPML               OLS              PPML
Sample                                   SKILLED             SKILLED         SKILLED              SKILLED            FULL               FULL
                                                                                                                 Bilateral trade    Bilateral trade
Dependent variable                        Bilateral migration rate (log)          Bilateral migration rate
                                                                                                                  share (log)            share

1960 population size at destination      -0.313***                             -6.95e-09                           -0.194***        4.11e-09***
                                           (0.112)                            (7.59e-09)                            (0.0503)         (9.64e-10)
Bilateral distance                       -1.332***            -1.322***     -0.000342***         -0.000323***      -1.060***       -0.002696***
                                           (0.233)              (0.235)       (0.000104)           (9.82e-05)       (0.0669)         (0.000485)
Common border                              0.796**             2.368***        0.973***            1.007***         0.983***          1.942***
                                           (0.367)              (0.307)          (0.242)             (0.178)         (0.130)           (0.228)
Colonial relationship                     2.767***             1.260***        1.091***             0.772**        1.156***           0.660***
                                           (0.424)              (0.369)          (0.209)             (0.322)         (0.103)           (0.216)
Common official language                    0.371               0.628*         1.234***            1.287***            0.192             0.571
                                           (0.340)              (0.349)          (0.258)             (0.272)         (0.210)           (0.548)
Common ethnic language                    1.297***               0.436         0.799***            0.926***          0.357**            -0.228
                                           (0.379)              (0.455)          (0.308)             (0.247)         (0.160)           (0.332)
Horizontal time difference                0.523***             0.465**          0.218**             0.189**           0.0259           0.175**
                                           (0.188)              (0.191)         (0.0895)            (0.0809)        (0.0594)          (0.0790)

Observations                                25,244        25,244            69,936               69,936           19,315                42,369
Adjusted R-squared                           0.311         0.275             0.300                0.285            0.687                 0.308
OLS model in logs, PPML model in levels. All models include period and origin-year fixed effects to account for multilateral resistance terms.
Standard errors clustered by destination country.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                           45
Table 13: 2SLS - first stage

Panel 1                                                   (1)                (2)                (3)             (4)               (5)           (6)
Sample                                                                                          > median GDP/capita
First stage regressions, dependent variable:            Div(Mig)          Div(Mig)              S(f)         Div(Mig)             S(f)       Div(trade)

Corresponds to Table 14:                               Model (2)                    Model (3)                                  Model (4)
PPML-predicted diversity (Mig), skilled                 4.708***          4.761***            -0.128          5.239***          0.0212       0.301***
                                                         (0.990)           (1.007)           (0.619)           (1.019)          (0.516)      (0.0718)
OLS-predicted share of immigration, skilled                                 4.409           10.12***            5.003          10.26***        0.284
                                                                           (3.453)           (2.428)           (3.407)          (2.360)       (0.267)
OLS-predicted diversity of imports                                                                              0.506            0.237       0.469***
                                                                                                               (1.079)          (0.668)       (0.119)
Instruments
  Predicted birthplace diversity, PPML                     x                  x                  x                x                x             x
  Predicted share of immigration, OLS                      .                  x                  x                x                x             x
  Predicted diversity of imports, OLS                      .                  .                  .                x                x             x

Kleibergen-Paap F-Test                                   16.62              6.632               6.632           4.568            4.568         4.568
Angrist-Pischke F-Test, Birthplace diversity                                8.332               8.332           7.283            7.283         7.283
Angrist-Pischke F-Test, Share of immigration                                6.786               6.786           5.024            5.024         5.024
Angrist-Pischke F-Test, Diversity of imports                                                                    7.037            7.037         7.037
Stock Yogo (10%/15% maximal IV size)                  16.36 / 8.96       7.03 / 4.58       7.03 / 4.58           n/a              n/a           n/a

Observations                                              120                120                 120             120              120           120
Adjusted R-squared                                       0.398              0.398               0.610           0.390            0.620         0.698
All models include the full vector of controls (not shown). Standard errors clustered on the country level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                             46
Table 14: 2SLS - second stage

Panel 1                                                  (1)                (2)               (3)                   (4)
Sample                                                                       > median GDP/capita
Dependent variable (log)                                                         GDP/capita
Estimator                                               OLS                2SLS             2SLS                   2SLS
Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled             0.260***            0.233**             0.235**             0.242*
                                                      (0.0560)            (0.108)              (0.107)            (0.124)
Share of immigration, skilled                         0.291***           0.289***               0.336              0.339
                                                      (0.0980)           (0.0884)              (0.278)            (0.272)
Years of schooling (log)                                -0.210             -0.209               -0.245             -0.248
                                                       (0.259)            (0.218)              (0.322)            (0.323)
Quality of institutions                                0.0133              0.0150              0.0187             0.0187
                                                      (0.0161)           (0.0155)             (0.0291)           (0.0290)
Instruments
  Predicted birthplace diversity, PPML                    .                   x                  x                   x
  Predicted share of immigration, OLS                     .                   .                  x                   x
  Predicted diversity of imports, OLS                     .                   .                  .                   x
Observations                                              120                 120                  120               120
Adjusted R-squared                                       0.700               0.493                0.430             0.492
Kleibergen-Paap F-Test                                      .                16.62                6.632             4.568
Angrist-Pischke F-Test, birthplace diversity                                                      8.332             7.283
Angrist-Pischke F-Test, share of immigration                                                      6.786             5.024
Angrist-Pischke F-Test, diversity of imports                                                                        7.037
Stock Yogo (10%/15% maximal IV size)                                      16.36 / 8.96         7.03 / 4.58           n/a
All models include the full vector of controls. Standard errors clustered on the country level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                               47
Table 15: Group distance, genetic/cultural distance and income at origin

                                                                                                              Dimension 1: Genetic distance

                                                                        θ1 < 0 - higher weight to closer groups                              θ1 > 0 - lower weight to closer groups
                                                                        -10         -7,5        -5          -2,5                 0           2,5         5          7,5         10

                                                              -10      0.0891        0.121    0.167    0.231                  0.282        0.216*         0.143*        0.120        0.116
                                  θ2 < 0 - lower weight to




                                                                       (0.100)      (0.112)  (0.131)  (0.160)                (0.170)       (0.113)      (0.0841)      (0.0737)     (0.0704)
                                       richer groups




                                                              -7,5      0.130        0.165    0.213   0.278*                0.316**       0.229**         0.148*       0.121*        0.116
                                                                       (0.101)      (0.113)  (0.132)  (0.157)                (0.153)       (0.100)      (0.0798)      (0.0723)     (0.0702)
  Dimension 2: Income at origin




                                                               -5      0.183*      0.219** 0.267** 0.326**                  0.339***      0.236***       0.154**       0.124*        0.118
                                                                      (0.0987)      (0.109)  (0.124)  (0.138)                (0.118)      (0.0837)      (0.0750)      (0.0712)     (0.0707)
                                                              -2,5    0.218***     0.245*** 0.281*** 0.315***               0.306***      0.226***       0.158**       0.128*        0.120
                                                                      (0.0804)     (0.0848) (0.0893) (0.0884)               (0.0737)      (0.0712)      (0.0723)      (0.0719)     (0.0731)
                                                                0     0.226***     0.241*** 0.257*** 0.270***               0.260***      0.214***       0.162**       0.134*        0.124
                                                                      (0.0600)     (0.0589) (0.0571) (0.0545)               (0.0560)      (0.0682)      (0.0741)      (0.0757)     (0.0781)
                                                              2,5     0.251***     0.260*** 0.269*** 0.272***               0.258***      0.218***       0.170**       0.140*        0.129
                                  θ2 > 0 - higher weight to




                                                                      (0.0612)     (0.0585) (0.0557) (0.0541)               (0.0585)      (0.0709)      (0.0783)      (0.0809)     (0.0838)
                                       richer groups




                                                                5     0.276***     0.283*** 0.288*** 0.287***               0.270***      0.228***       0.180**       0.147*        0.133
                                                                      (0.0667)     (0.0636) (0.0605) (0.0590)               (0.0631)      (0.0743)      (0.0823)      (0.0853)     (0.0882)
                                                              7,5     0.298***     0.304*** 0.308*** 0.306***               0.286***      0.242***       0.189**       0.152*        0.135
                                                                      (0.0710)     (0.0678) (0.0646) (0.0630)               (0.0666)      (0.0771)      (0.0853)      (0.0883)     (0.0910)
                                                               10     0.321***     0.326*** 0.329*** 0.325***               0.303***      0.256***       0.198**       0.156*        0.136
                                                                      (0.0744)     (0.0711) (0.0679) (0.0662)               (0.0693)      (0.0793)      (0.0874)      (0.0902)     (0.0925)



                                                                     Table shows coefficients and (country clustered) standard errors for standardized augmented diversity(mig) index in
                                                                     model with GDP/capita as dependent variable. Rich country subsample.
                                                                     Coefficients in bold indicate p< 0.05** in Wald test for equality of coefficients relative to θ =(0;0), clustered by country.




                                                                                                                      48
ONLINE APPENDIX




  Appendix – 1
Appendix Figure 1:   Correlations between ethnic, genetic and birthplace diversity
Appendix Figure 2:   Observed and predicted birthplace diversity
Appendix Figure 3:   PISA math test scores (mean and top percentiles)
Appendix Figure 4:   Population 25-65 age, math talent vs. total skilled emigration


Appendix Table 1:    Countries in sample
Appendix Table 2:    Sample means
Appendix Table 3:    Robustness to borders pre 1989
Appendix Table 4:    Robustness to emigration
Appendix Table 5:    Robustness to alternative fractionalization and polarization controls
Appendix Table 6:    Robustness to alternative geography controls
Appendix Table 7:    Robustness to alternative institution controls
Appendix Table 8:    Robustness to alternative estimators
Appendix Table 9:    Robustness to outliers
Appendix Table 10:   Split samples: High/low share of immigration and interaction effects




                                                  Appendix – 2
Appendix Figure 1: Correlations between ethnic, genetic and birthplace diversity indices, 2000




                                                Appendix – 3
Appendix Figure 2: Observed and predicted birthplace diversity




Appendix Figure 3: PISA test scores at mean and mode




                                               Appendix – 4
Appendix Figure 4: Population 25-65 age, math talent vs. total skilled emigration

Figures show countries with below median GDP/capita (PPP) in 1990 and ratio of hypothetical math talent (defined as
competence at global top standard) to skilled emigration to rich (above median GDP/capita) countries.

We conduct a simple simulation exercise to compare a country’s stock of skill emigrants with the number of potentially
highly skilled people in and outside of that country.

We proxy very high skill/talent using PISA test score data from OECD (2009), which is available for OECD and some
non-OECD countries. When data for a non-OECD country is not available, we interpolate the share of highly skilled
students as an average of the bottom quartile in the overall sample (share of students in top 16%: 0.076%). This
interpolation tends to be a rather generous assumption for many developing countries (see e.g. that this number is
observed for Indonesia, where it is essentially zero). We then calculate the number of people born in each country in the
age group 25-65 (which are eligible to work and covered in the ADOP, 2013) sample and apply the share of highly skilled
students to this number. As a result, we obtain the potential native highly (math) skilled population.

This is clearly an upper bound for the true potential since a) the true share of highly skilled in many countries is likely not
0.076% but closer to zero, and b) we implicitly assume that educational quality in developing countries vis-à-vis OECD
countries (that define top 16%) has not caught up at least relatively to OECD countries.

In a last step, we divide this talent potential by the number of skilled emigrants from the country. Very intuitively, we
thus obtain the maximum share of skilled emigrants per country could hypothetically be talented. We assume that
migrants out-select to emigrate with a probability of 1 conditional on being talented, thus ratio is thus obviously an upper
bound. Appendix Figure 4 shows the distribution of this ratio across developing countries.




                                                       Appendix – 5
Appendix – 6
Appendix Table 1: Countries in sample

Countries in full sample
Albania                                 Ecuador                            Latvia                 Russian Federation
Argentina                               Egypt                              Lesotho                Saudi Arabia
Armenia                                 Estonia                            Liberia                Senegal
Australia                               Fiji                               Lithuania              Sierra Leone
Austria                                 Finland                            Luxembourg             Singapore
Bahrain                                 France                             Malawi                 Slovakia
Bangladesh                              Gabon                              Malaysia               Slovenia
Belgium                                 Gambia                             Mali                   South Africa
Benin                                   Germany                            Mauritania             Spain
Bolivia, Plurinational State of         Ghana                              Mauritius              Sri Lanka
Botswana                                Greece                             Mexico                 Swaziland
Brazil                                  Guatemala                          Moldova, Republic of   Sweden
Bulgaria                                Honduras                           Mongolia               Switzerland
Burundi                                 Hungary                            Morocco                Syrian Arab Republic
Cambodia                                India                              Mozambique             Tajikistan
Cameroon                                Indonesia                          Namibia                Tanzania, United Republic of
Canada                                  Iran, Islamic Republic of          Nepal                  Thailand
Central African Republic                Iraq                               Netherlands            Togo
Chile                                   Ireland                            New Zealand            Trinidad and Tobago
China                                   Israel                             Niger                  Tunisia
Colombia                                Italy                              Norway                 Turkey
Congo                                   Jamaica                            Pakistan               Uganda
Congo, the Democratic Republic of the   Japan                              Panama                 Ukraine
Costa Rica                              Jordan                             Paraguay               United Kingdom
Croatia                                 Kazakhstan                         Peru                   United States
Cyprus                                  Kenya                              Philippines            Uruguay
Czech Republic                          Korea, Republic of                 Poland                 Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
Côte d'Ivoire                           Kuwait                             Portugal               Viet Nam
Denmark                                 Kyrgyzstan                         Qatar                  Zambia
Dominican Republic                      Lao People's Democratic Republic   Romania                Zimbabwe




                                                                   Appendix – 7
Appendix Table 2: Sample means


Variable                             year       n      mean    std. dev.     n      mean    std. dev.


                                            Extended sample (n=164)        Full sample (n=120)          t-test sample means
GDP/capita
                                     1990       44      8,16       1,27    120       8,50        1,18         0,125
                                     2000       44      8,30       1,30    120       8,61        1,32         0,182

Share of immigration (all)
                                     1990       44      0,10       0,15    120       0,09        0,14         0,767
                                     2000       44      0,10       0,14    120       0,09        0,13         0,499

Share of immigration (skilled)
                                     1990       44      0,15       0,16    120       0,10        0,15         0.052*
                                     2000       44      0,17       0,15    120       0,11        0,16        0.034**

Diversity of immigration (all)
                                     1990       44      0,73       0,19    120       0,72        0,21         0,754
                                     2000       44      0,71       0,20    120       0,75        0,19         0,300

Diversity of immigration (skilled)
                                     1990       44      0,76       0,16    120       0,79        0,19         0,235
                                     2000       44      0,75       0,17    120       0,80        0,18        0.085*




                                                     Appendix – 8
Appendix Table 3: Robustness to borders pre 1989

We also address the potential endogeneity in the definition of migrant groups. For example, we count Slovaks in the
Czech Republic as immigrants, although these people have lived jointly together in the same country, Czechoslovakia,
until 1993. We proceed by coding these groups as natives in such cases (other cases include, e.g., former Soviet or
Yugoslavian Republics). This results in lower birthplace diversity of the population (driven by the now lower share of
foreign-born) but higher diversity of immigration in countries where such "virtual" immigration has been substantial. Our
results for skilled diversity are robust at somewhat lower magnitudes (reflecting attenuation bias) and similar statistical
significance. We restrict this robustness check to the cross section of 2000 data due to substantial measurement error in
the immigrant origin data for migrants from the Soviet Republic in 1990. Our results are also robust to grouping all EU
countries. This indicates that the size of nations in Europe does not drive our results (available upon request).

                                                                        (1)             (2)
Sample                                                                   Full sample, 2000
Dependent variable (log)                                                    GDP/capita

Birthplace diversity, skilled                                        0.270***
                                                                     (0.0727)
Share of immigration, skilled                                        0.567***       0.681***
                                                                      (0.118)        (0.143)
Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled (border-adjusted)                          0.204**
                                                                                    (0.0916)

Observations                                                            60             60
Adjusted R-squared                                                     0.777         0.740
Birthplace diversity adjusted for border changes post 1989. All models include the full set of
controls (not shown). Year 2000 cross section. Standard errors clustered on the country level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                      Appendix – 9
Appendix Table 4: Robustness to emigration

Are diversity of emigration and immigration related? We apply equation (8) to data on emigrant groups per country of
origin and find that both diversity variables are actually not substantially correlated (at +0.07). Thus, when entering both
indices as well as the share of skilled emigrants and immigrants jointly, we find our initial results for skilled immigration
diversity to hold at the 1% robustness level. Independently of immigration, the diversity of skilled emigrants also has a
positive effect (at 5% significance) on home country incomes (see columns 2 and 3). This result can be driven by benefits
of knowledge exchange from a wide set of countries as well as (in a reverse causality argument) by the fact that in richer
countries, credit constraints are less binding and allow for diversifying the set of emigration destinations.

                                                           (1)            (2)           (3)
 Sample                                                          > median GDP/capita
 Dependent variable (log)                                            GDP/capita
 Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled              0.260***                     0.240***
                                                        (0.0560)                     (0.0572)
 Share of immigration, skilled                          0.291***                     0.318***
                                                        (0.0980)                      (0.111)
 Birthplace diversity, emigrants, skilled                              0.201**        0.225**
                                                                       (0.0887)      (0.0861)
 Share of emigration, skilled                                          -0.228**       -0.0718
                                                                       (0.0988)      (0.0812)

 Observations                                              120            120            120
 Adjusted R-squared                                       0.700          0.647          0.742
 All models include the full vector of controls (not shown). Standard errors clustered on the
 country level.




                                                     Appendix – 10
Appendix Table 5: Robustness to alternative fractionalization and polarization controls

We also check whether our results are stable to alternative specifications of fractionalization and polarization. In a first
step, we include a measure of ethnic polarization, a predictor of conflicts (see Section 2). We construct this index of
ethnic polarization by applying Alesina et al. (2003)'s ethnic group size data to the polarization index developed in
Reynal-Querol (2002) and Montalvo and Reynal-Querol (2005). We re-compute the index from these authors using
Alesina et al.'s (2003) data for consistency with the ethnic fractionalization measure and, more importantly, to broaden
the available data. Our results for birthplace diversity remain fully robust when accounting for this index while ethnic
polarization shows the expected negative sign (column 2). In a second step, we exclude different sets of fractionalization
indices from our model to verify robustness to such exclusions. We find our results for birthplace diversity to remain
virtually unchanged to any such permutation (columns 3-5).

                                                   (1)            (2)            (3)         (4)               (5)
 Sample                                                                  > Median GDP/capita
 Dependent variable (log)                                                   GDP/capita

 Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled      0.260***       0.227***       0.264***       0.260***       0.259***
                                                (0.0560)       (0.0527)       (0.0527)       (0.0536)       (0.0527)
 Share of immigration, skilled                  0.291***       0.253***       0.289***       0.225**        0.203**
                                                (0.0980)       (0.0918)       (0.0973)       (0.0899)       (0.0861)
 Ethnic polarization                                           -1.178**
                                                                (0.526)
 Ethnic fractionalization                         -0.158          1.195
                                                 (0.370)        (0.816)
 Linguistic fractionalization                                  -1.178**
                                                                (0.526)
 Genetic diversity                                -0.349         -0.301        -0.456*
                                                 (0.374)        (0.347)        (0.235)
 Genetic diversity, squared                       -270.3         -301.0         -287.0         -289.5
                                                 (196.9)        (196.4)        (175.7)        (180.7)

 Observations                                      120            120            120            120            120
 Adjusted R-squared                               0.700          0.720          0.703          0.693          0.693
 All models include the full set of additional controls (not shown). Standard errors clustered on the country level.
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                         Appendix – 11
Appendix Table 6: Robustness to additional geographic determinants of fractionalization

We add further geography controls to our full model as suggested by Rodriguez and Rodrik (2001) who highlight the
importance of robustness to alternative geography specifications in regressions of economic growth or income. This
model extends our full model by five additional variables, the share of tropics (in % of land area), indicators of mean and
variation in agricultural suitability as well as indicators of elevation and variation in elevation as suggested by
Michalopoulos (2012) to account for deeper geographical origins of fractionalization. Our findings (available due to data
limitations for 53 out of our 60 rich countries) for skilled diversity of immigrants remain fully robust. We conduct a
similar check replacing our Polity IV variable for the quality of institutions with measures from Freedom House (see
following table).

                                                           (1)           (2)
Sample                                                    > median GDP/capita
Dependent variable (log)                                       GDP/capita

Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled                0.260***       0.216***
                                                         (0.0560)        (0.0582)
Share of immigration, skilled                            0.291***        0.154**
                                                         (0.0980)        (0.0766)
Land area in tropics (%)                                                 -0.888**
                                                                          (0.417)
Agricultural suitability (mean)                                            -0.533
                                                                          (0.386)
Agricultural suitability (standard deviation)                               0.734
                                                                          (0.680)
Elevation (mean)                                                        -0.558***
                                                                          (0.185)
Elevation (standard deviation)                                            0.0772
                                                                          (0.405)

Observations                                                120            106
Adjusted R-squared                                         0.700          0.779
Model (1) for reference only. Model (2) includes - in addition to the full vector of
controls - also two indices of average agricultural suitability (mean and standard
deviation across regions), a control for % land area in the geographical tropics as
well as two indices for elevation across regions (mean and standard deviation).
Standard errors clustered on the country level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                      Appendix – 12
Appendix Table 7: Alternative institution controls

                                                              (1)              (2)
Sample                                                         > median GDP/capita
Dependent variable (log)                                           GDP/capita
Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled                  0.260***           0.184***
                                                           (0.0560)           (0.0539)
Share of immigration, skilled                              0.291***           0.258***
                                                           (0.0980)           (0.0748)
Quality of institutions                                     0.0133
                                                           (0.0161)
Civil liberties index                                                         -0.245***
                                                                               (0.0821)
Property rights index                                                          0.00824
                                                                               (0.0572)

Observations                                                  120                120
Adjusted R-squared                                           0.700              0.743
All models include - in addition to the full set of controls - two indices of property
rights protection and civil liberties from Freedom House (2011). Standard errors
clustered on the country level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


Appendix Table 8: Robustness to alternative estimators

                                                            (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)
Sample                                                                  > median GDP/capita
Dependent variable (log)                                                      GDP/capita
                                                          OLS         Cross section Cross section Country fixed
Model
                                                          model          1990          2000          effects
Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled                0.260***       0.198**          0.270***     0.107
                                                         (0.0560)       (0.0749)         (0.0727)    (0.150)
Share of immigration, skilled                            0.291***         0.154          0.567***    -0.0501
                                                         (0.0980)        (0.118)          (0.118)    (0.186)

Observations                                                120          60              60            120
Adjusted R-squared                                         0.700        0.646          0.777          0.875
All models include the full set of controls. Model (4) exludes non time varying controls. Standard errors in
models (1) and (4) clustered on the country level. Standard errors in models (2) and (3) heteroskedasticity-
robust. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                      Appendix – 13
Appendix Table 9: Robustness to outliers

                                                             (1)                    (2)                    (3)                   (4)                  (5)
Sample                                                                                           > median GDP/capita
Dependent variable (log)                                                                             GDP/capita
                                                                            excl. highest decile   excl. lowest decile  excl. highest decile  excl. lowest decile
Model                                                 OLS base model              diversity             diversity      share of immigration share of immigration

Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled                 0.260***              0.248***                0.118**               0.230***               0.277***
                                                          (0.0560)              (0.0559)               (0.0488)               (0.0576)               (0.0567)
Share of immigration, skilled                             0.291***              0.319***               0.463***                0.167*                0.290***
                                                          (0.0980)               (0.114)                (0.117)               (0.0888)               (0.0964)

Observations                                                 120                   108                    108                    108                     108
Adjusted R-squared                                          0.700                 0.676                  0.743                  0.701                   0.706
Specification (1) shows baseline model for comparison. Models (2) and (4) exclude 10% largest observations, models (3) and (5) 10% of smallest
observations on birthplace diversity of immigrants and share of immigrants, respectively. All models include the full set of controls. Standard
errors clustered by country. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



Appendix Table 10: Split samples: High/low share of immigration, interaction effects

                                                                                             (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)
Sample                                                                                                             > median GDP/capita
Dependent variable (log)                                                                                                GDP/capita
                                                                                          OLS base     > median share of < median share of
                                                                                                                                                 Interactions
Model                                                                                      model          immigrants        immigrants
Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled                                                 0.260***         0.420***             0.166*       0.239***
                                                                                          (0.0560)          (0.107)           (0.0833)       (0.0527)
Share of immigration, skilled                                                             0.291***          0.252*             -0.0916       0.397***
                                                                                          (0.0980)          (0.143)            (0.339)       (0.0960)
Birthplace diversity, immigrants, unskilled                                                                                                                0.114***
                                                                                                                                                           (0.0369)
Share of immigration, unskilled                                                                                                                            0.405***

Birthplace diversity, immigrants, skilled * share of immigration, skilled                                                                     0.107**
                                                                                                                                             (0.0409)
Birthplace diversity, immigrants, unskilled * share of immigration, unskilled                                                                               0.0810
                                                                                                                                                           (0.0511)

Observations                                                                                  120               60                 60          120           120
Adjusted R-squared                                                                           0.700            0.778              0.862        0.715         0.716
All models include the full set of controls (not shown). Standard errors clustered on the country level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                     Appendix – 14
