                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                ADAPTING TO CLIMATE CHANGE
 THE REMARKABLE DECLINE IN THE U.S. TEMPERATURE-MORTALITY
                                           RELATIONSHIP OVER THE 20TH CENTURY

                                              Alan Barreca
                                               Karen Clay
                                           Olivier Deschenes
                                           Michael Greenstone
                                            Joseph S. Shapiro

                                          Working Paper 18692
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w18692


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       January 2013




  Deschenes is the corresponding author and can be contacted at olivier@econ.ucsb.edu. We thank
  Daron Acemoglu, Robin Burgess, our discussant Peter Nilsson, conference participants at the “Climate
  and the Economy” Conference and seminar participants at the UC Energy Institute for their comments.
   We thank Jonathan Petkun for outstanding research assistance. Barreca's research efforts were supported
  by RAND's Postdoctoral Training Program in the Study of Aging. Shapiro gratefully acknowledges
  support from an EPA STAR fellowship.

  At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
  Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18692.ack

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
  reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
  NBER publications.

  © 2013 by Alan Barreca, Karen Clay, Olivier Deschenes, Michael Greenstone, and Joseph S. Shapiro.
  All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
  permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Adapting to Climate Change: The Remarkable Decline in the U.S. Temperature-Mortality
Relationship over the 20th Century
Alan Barreca, Karen Clay, Olivier Deschenes, Michael Greenstone, and Joseph S. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 18692
January 2013
JEL No. I10,I12,I18,Q54

                                             ABSTRACT

Adaptation is the only strategy that is guaranteed to be part of the world's climate strategy. Using the
most comprehensive set of data files ever compiled on mortality and its determinants over the course
of the 20th century, this paper makes two primary discoveries. First, we find that the mortality effect
of an extremely hot day declined by about 80% between 1900-1959 and 1960-2004. As a consequence,
days with temperatures exceeding 90°F were responsible for about 600 premature fatalities annually
in the 1960-2004 period, compared to the approximately 3,600 premature fatalities that would have
occurred if the temperature-mortality relationship from before 1960 still prevailed. Second, the adoption
of residential air conditioning (AC) explains essentially the entire decline in the temperature-mortality
relationship. In contrast, increased access to electricity and health care seem not to affect mortality
on extremely hot days. Residential AC appears to be both the most promising technology to help poor
countries mitigate the temperature related mortality impacts of climate change and, because fossil
fuels are the least expensive source of energy, a technology whose proliferation will speed up the rate
of climate change.


Alan Barreca                                        Michael Greenstone
206 Tilton Hall                                     MIT Department of Economics
Tulane University                                   50 Memorial Drive, E52-359
New Orleans, LA                                     Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
70118                                               and NBER
abarreca@tulane.edu                                 mgreenst@mit.edu

Karen Clay                                          Joseph S. Shapiro
Heinz College                                       MIT Department of Economics
Carnegie Mellon University                          50 Memorial Drive, E52-391
5000 Forbes Avenue                                  Cambridge, MA 02142
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                                WWW: http://economics.mit.edu/grad/shapiroj
and NBER                                            shapiroj@mit.edu
kclay@andrew.cmu.edu

Olivier Deschenes
Department of Economics
2127 North Hall
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
olivier@econ.ucsb.edu
                                               I. Introduction

        The accumulation of greenhouse gases (GHGs) in the atmosphere threatens to fundamentally
alter our planet’s climate in a relatively short period of geological time. There are three possible
approaches to confronting this defining challenge. The first is mitigation, which involves a coordinated
reduction in emissions by countries around the globe. The prospects for such a policy do not look highly
likely in at least the next decade, due to the failure of the Copenhagen climate conference to produce
such action and the continued failures by the United States and several other large emitting countries to
institute programs of verified emissions reductions. The second is to undertake a program of geo-
engineering or climate engineering that involves the deliberate manipulation of the Earth’s climate to
counteract the greenhouse gas induced changes in the climate. These solutions remain scientifically
unproven and involve a host of international governance issues that appear at least as challenging as
reaching agreement on reducing emissions. For example, which country gets to set the global change in
temperature?
        The third approach is adaptation, and, in light of the practical difficulties of the first two, it is the
only one guaranteed to be part of the world’s climate strategy. Adaptation, according to the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), is defined as "adjustment in natural or human
systems in response to actual or expected climatic stimuli or their effects, which moderates harm or
exploits beneficial opportunities" (IPCC 2007). Ultimately, climate change’s impacts will depend on the
sensitivity of our well-being to changes in climate and on the cost of adapting to climate change.
However, knowledge on the ability to adapt to large-scale climate or environmental changes and its
costs is poor for several reasons, not the least of which is an absence of real-world data. As such,
identifying strategies that can help reduce the human health costs of climate change through adaptation
is now recognized as a global research priority of the 21st century (WHO 2008; NIEHS 2010). This need is
especially great in developing countries where high temperatures can cause dramatic changes in life
expectancy (Burgess et al. 2011).
        This paper provides the first large-scale empirical evidence on long-run adaptation strategies to
reduce the human health costs of the temperature increase associated with climate change. Specifically,
we relate monthly mortality rates to daily temperatures using historical data for the U.S. and study the
evolution of the temperature-mortality relationship over a century long time scale. The goal is to use
the U.S. historical experience to draw lessons for adaptation in current day developing countries. The
United States is particularly well suited for studying the relationship between temperature and


                                                       1
mortality, as it has both wide variation in average temperature and high quality data spanning the entire
20th century.
        The empirical analysis is divided into two parts. The first uncovers a dramatic change in the
temperature-mortality relationship over the course of the 20th century. We document a greater than
80% reduction in the mortality effect of exposure to very high temperatures. For example, the estimates
suggest that during the 1960-2004 period days with an average temperature exceeding 90°F, relative to
a day in the 60-69°F range, lead to approximately 600 premature fatalities annually. However, if the
temperature-mortality relationship from before 1960 still prevailed, there would have been about 3,600
premature fatalities annually from days with an average temperature exceeding 90°F. At the same time,
the mortality effect of cold temperatures declined by a substantially smaller amount.            In effect,
residents of the U.S. adapted in ways that leave them almost completely protected from extreme heat.
        The second part of the analysis aims to uncover the sources of this change in the relationship
between high temperatures and mortality. We focus attention on the proliferation of three health-
related innovations in the 20th century United States. Specifically, we quantify the role of residential
electricity, increased access to health care, and the introduction of residential air conditioning (AC) in
muting the temperature-mortality relationship. There are good reasons to believe that these
innovations mitigated the health consequences of hot temperatures (in addition to providing other
benefits). Electrification enabled a wide variety of innovations including fans and later air conditioning.
Increased access to health care allowed both preventative treatment and emergency intervention (e.g.,
intravenous administration of fluids in response to dehydration) (Almond, Chay and Greenstone 2007).
Air conditioning made it possible to reduce the stress on people’s thermoregulatory systems during
periods of extreme heat. The salience of the results is underscored by the fact that a substantial fraction
of the world’s poor currently have limited access to these three modifiers.
        The empirical results point to air conditioning as a central determinant in the reduction of the
mortality risk associated with high temperatures during the 20th century. We find that electrification
(represented by residential electrification) and access to health care (represented by doctors per capita)
are not statistically related to changes in the temperature mortality relationship. However, the diffusion
of residential air conditioning after 1960 is related to a statistically significant and economically
meaningful reduction in the temperature-mortality relationship at high temperatures. Indeed, the
adoption of residential air conditioning explains essentially the entire decline in the relationship
between mortality and days with an average temperature exceeding 90°F.



                                                    2
        Two sets of additional results lend credibility to the findings about the importance of air
conditioning.   First, the protective effect of residential AC against high temperature exposure is
substantially larger for populations that are more vulnerable: We find that the reductions in heat-
related mortality are the largest for more vulnerable members of the population (i.e., infants,
individuals age 65 or older, and blacks relative to whites). Second, residential AC significantly lessened
mortality rates due to causes of death that are physiologically and epidemiologically related to high
temperature exposure (e.g., cardiovascular and respiratory diseases). In contrast, residential AC had
little effect on causes of death where there is no known physiological or epidemiological relationship
with high temperature exposure (e.g., motor vehicle accidents).
        The analysis is conducted with the most comprehensive set of data files ever compiled on
mortality and its determinants over the course of the 20th century in the United States or any other
country. The mortality data come from the newly digitized state-by-month mortality counts from the
United States Vital Statistics records, which is merged with newly collected data at the state level on the
fraction of households with electricity and air conditioning and on the number of doctors per capita.
These data are matched to daily temperature data.
        In the absence of a proper controlled experiment, the paper's empirical challenge is to causally
estimate the changing relationship between mortality and daily temperatures and the role of the three
health related innovations. To this end, our results are derived from the fitting of rich and flexible
models for the temperature-mortality relationship based on monthly mortality rates at the state level
and daily temperature records for the period 1900-2004. The baseline specification includes state-by-
month (e.g., Illinois and July) fixed effects and year-by-month (e.g., 1927 March) fixed effects.
Consequently, the estimates are purged of permanent differences in the level and seasonality of
mortality across states and national changes in the seasonality of mortality. After adjustment for these
fixed effects, the estimates are identified from the presumably random deviations from long-run state-
by-month temperature distributions that remain after non-parametric adjustment for national
deviations in that year-by-month's temperature distribution. The primary results are also adjusted for a
quadratic time trend that is allowed to vary at the state-by-month level and state-level per capita
income that is allowed to have a differential effect across months. Finally, the preferred models control
for current and past exposure to temperature, so the estimates are robust to short-term mortality
displacement or “harvesting”.
        Although there are important differences between developing countries today and the United
States in the first half of the 20th century, there are also striking similarities. As just two examples,

                                                    3
current life expectancy in India and Indonesia are roughly equal to the life expectancy in the United
States in 1940. Further, the penetration rates of residential air conditioning in the U.S. in 1940 and
these countries today are similar, practically de minimis. This paper's results suggest that greater use of
air conditioning in these countries would significantly reduce mortality rates both today and in the
future as the planet warms. As just one measure of the stakes, the typical Indian experiences 33 days
annually where the temperature exceeds 90°F and this is projected to increase by as much as 100 days
by the end of the century (Burgess et al. 2011). While the greater use of air conditioning is likely to
reduce mortality, it will also speed up the rate of climate change as long as fossil fuels continue to be the
dominant source of energy.
        The paper proceeds as follows. Section II presents the conceptual framework where we review
the physiological relationship that links temperature and health, and the mechanisms that link the
modifiers to the temperature-mortality relationship. Section III describes the data sources and reports
summary statistics. Section IV presents the econometric models, and Section V describes the results.
Section VI interprets the estimates and Section VII concludes.


                                           II. Conceptual Framework


        This section reviews evidence on the temperature-mortality relationship, discusses the three
innovations that we focus on, and briefly addresses the welfare effects of the innovations.


A. The Temperature-Mortality Relationship
        The human body can cope with exposure to temperature extremes via thermoregulatory
functions. Specifically, temperature extremes trigger an increase in the heart rate to increase blood flow
from the body to the skin, which can lead to sweating in hot temperatures or shivering in cold
temperatures. These responses allow individuals to pursue physical and mental activities within certain
temperature ranges. However, exposure to temperatures outside these ranges or exposure to
temperature extremes for prolonged periods of time endangers human health and can result in
mortality.
        An extensive literature has documented a non-linear relationship between temperature and
mortality. Hot temperatures are associated with excess mortality due to cardiovascular, respiratory, and
cerebrovascular diseases (see, e.g., Basu and Samet 2002 for a review). For one, hot temperatures are
associated with increases in blood viscosity and blood cholesterol levels. Exposure to cold days has also

                                                     4
been found to be a risk factor for mortality (e.g., Deschenes and Moretti 2009). In particular from
cardiovascular stress due to changes in blood pressure, vasoconstriction, and an increase in blood
viscosity (which can lead to clots), as well as levels of red blood cell counts, plasma cholesterol, and
plasma fibrinogen (Huynen et al. 2001). For these reasons, the empirical model allows for a non-linear
relationship between daily temperatures and mortality.


B. Three Innovations
        We focus on three important technological and public-health innovations of the 20th century
United States that are widely believed to affect heat-related mortality. They are: access to health care;
electricity; and residential air conditioning. Utilization and availability of these innovations varied across
states and over time, which aid identification of their effects on the temperature-mortality relationship.
Importantly, these innovations have yet to be fully implemented in many developing countries. In
principle, the results from this study can be used by policymakers to more efficiently allocate resources
across alternative adaptation approaches.
        Access to Health Care. Health care has two interrelated effects on heat-related mortality. First,
access raises health capital overall in the most vulnerable populations – the young, the sick, and the old.
For example, in the early 20th century, physician-led vaccinations and public health campaigns helped
maintain a healthier population. 1 In later periods, more effective drugs and other medical interventions
helped manage diseases such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and kidney disease (Davis et al 2003).
Healthier populations may better tolerate the additional stress from exposure to temperature extremes.
The second is to address heat-related events as they happened (Kovats et al 2004).
        The returns to health care changed drastically over the century. Our model allows the effects of
access to health care to vary over time. The pre-World War II era experienced dramatic improvements
in public health, so overall population health improved. Hospitals, however, had fairly limited scope for
addressing heat-related morbidity. They could cool patients with heat exhaustion or heat stroke using
air conditioning or ice. In some cases, they could also rehydrate them. The science of treating heat-
related illnesses was not well developed, so patients did not necessarily survive. Further, the knowledge
of how to effectively treat heart attacks, which were common during high heat, was yet to come.
        The post-World War II era saw many advances that could plausibly affect mortality. Population
health improved further. For example, on the heart attack front, there were advances in blood pressure


1
  Vaccination campaigns involved smallpox, polio, diphtheria, and whooping cough. Public health campaigns
involved hookworm, malaria, and pasteurization of milk.

                                                      5
medication in the late 1950s and beta blockers were discovered in the 1960s. Hospital treatment of
heat-related illness progressed as well due to advances in intravenous and oral rehydration and
improvements in treatment protocols for heart attacks (Rosamond et al 1998).
        Access to Electricity. Residential access to electricity can modify the impact of temperature
extremes on health in several ways. First, electricity facilitated indoor plumbing, thereby allowing indoor
toilets, showers, and faucets. Historians have linked outdoor toilets (“privies”) to hookworm, dysentery,
typhoid, and enteritis (Brown 1979). 2 Piped water also lets families use sinks for washing hands, which
could help prevent the spread of bacteriological and viral conditions whose spread varies with
temperature. Increasing the accessibility of drinking water can also decrease dehydration episodes
during hot weather spells. This is particularly important since dehydration is a common co-morbidity
associated with infectious disease, especially for the young.
        Second, electricity allowed for the refrigeration of food. Refrigeration postponed spoilage and
associated food poisoning during heat. This is more important during high temperatures, when bacterial
growth and spoilage occur most quickly. In 1940, 56 percent of urban homes with electricity and a third
of Rural Electric Administration customers had a refrigerator (Kline 2002, p. 336). Refrigeration also
permitted households to expand their diets. For example, many sharecroppers in the early 20th century
South frequently ate fatback, cornmeal, and molasses. This diet may have contributed to pellagra and to
undernourishment of pregnant women and infants. The refrigeration that electricity provides allows for
increases in the vitamin, iron, and protein content of diets (Brown 1980).
        Third, electricity permitted artificial temperature control by fans and electric heaters. Fans
provided an early alternative to air conditioning. Electric heating also provided a clean alternative to
coal, gas, or oil-fired heaters, with no associated household pollution. Moreover, electric heating pads
for cold and for treating illness experienced rapid sales growth during urban electrification in the 1920s
(Tobey 1996). By allowing for better inside thermal control during cold and hot spells, electrification
could contribute to lowering excess morality associated with temperature extremes.
        Residential Air Conditioning. Thermoregulation is the physiological process by which core body
heat produced through metabolism and absorbed from ambient temperatures is dissipated to maintain
a body temperature of near 37°C or 98.6°F. A rise in the temperature of the blood by less than 1°C

2
  In many rural areas, electricity facilitated the adoption of indoor plumbing. Brown (1998, p. 68) writes:
“Many observers felt electrical service would be necessary to overcome the poor state of rural health in the United
States. Improper sanitary conditions associated with the use of the outhouse, or “privy,” and the water well were
significantly responsible for the higher infant-mortality rate and the higher mortality and morbidity rates of the
rural population. The high rate of hookworm infestation, often reaching 30 to 40 percent in southern states, was
linked directly to the lack of indoor bathrooms.”

                                                        6
activates heat receptors that begin the process of thermal regulation by increasing blood flow in the skin
to initiate thermal sweating (Bouchama and Knochel 2002). Heat-related illness results from the body’s
inability to dissipate heat produced by metabolic activity. Due to the strong connection between
ambient temperature and heat-related illness, air conditioning is probably the most prominent
technology used to reduce the risks of heat stress. Indeed, access to AC at home or in cooling centers is
often at the top of the list of medical guidelines to treat and prevent heat-related illness (CDC 2012). 3


C. Welfare Consequences
         The estimation of the full welfare impacts of these three modifiers is a topic of considerable
interest. Following the canonical Becker-Grossman health production model (Grossman 2000) would
require information on how these technological advances impact mortality and morbidity rates, as well
as the monetized value of changes in behavior and defensive investments (e.g., the availability of
medical care might allow individuals to work outside on hot days). This paper will provide evidence on a
subset of these benefits—namely the impact on mortality in response to temperature extremes. For this
reason, it will only provide a partial estimate of the benefits of these technologies and cannot be used in
isolation to conduct a cost-benefit analysis of whether particular regions should invest in electricity,
hospitals, or air conditioners as a strategy to adapt to climate change.


                                        III. Data and Summary Statistics


        The empirical exercise is conducted with the most comprehensive set of data files ever compiled
on mortality and its determinants over the course of the 20th century in the United States or any other
country. This section describes the data sources and presents summary statistics.


A. Data Sources
         Vital Statistics Data. The data used to construct mortality rates at the state-year-month level for
the 1900-2004 period come from multiple sources. Mortality data are not systematically available in
machine-readable format before 1959. For the years prior to 1959, state-year-month death counts were
digitized from the Mortality Statistics of the United States annual volumes. The unit of analysis is the
state-month data, because these are the most temporally disaggregated mortality data available for the


3
  Rogot et al. (1992) report cross-tabulations of in-home AC status and mortality and finds that mortality is reduced
in summer months among the population with residential AC.

                                                         7
pre-1959 period. 4 For the period 1959 to 2004, our mortality data come from the Multiple Cause of
Death files. These data have information on state and month of death for the universe of deaths in the
United States. However, geographic information on state of residence in not available in the public
domain files starting in 2005, which explains why our sample stops in 2004. We then combine the
mortality counts with estimated population to derive a monthly mortality rate (per 100,000
population).5 The final sample consists of all available state-year-month observations for the continental
United States. Per capita income is only available for 1929 onwards (Bureau of Economic Analysis 2012).
Thus, many specifications focus on the 1929-2004 period.
         There are three important caveats regarding the mortality data. First, to the best of our
knowledge, mortality counts by state, year, month, and demographic group (e.g., over 65 years old,
under 1 year, etc.) are not available prior to 1959. As a result, our baseline analysis focuses on the all-
age mortality rate, although we control for the population shares in four age groups in all our regression
models. For the 1959-2004 period we can construct mortality rates at the state-year-month level for
various demographic groups. Second, for the same period, the cause of death is available and we will
separately explore the relationship between temperature and causes of death that are plausibly related
to high temperatures (e.g., cardiovascular and respiratory deaths) versus causes of death that are
unrelated to temperature (e.g., motor vehicle accidents). Third, there are no data available at state-
year-month level that identifies vital events separately for rural and urban populations. As such, we
control for urban population shares in all specifications to account for the possibility that urbanization is
spuriously correlated with temperature changes.
        Weather Data. The weather station data are drawn from the National Climatic Data Center
(NCDC) Global Historical Climatology Network-Daily (GHCN-Daily), which is an integrated database of
daily climate summaries from land surface stations that are subjected to a common set of quality
assurance checks. According to the NCDC, GHCN-Daily contains the most complete collection of U.S.




4
  States began reporting mortality statistics for the first time at different points in the early 1900s. For example,
only 11 states reported mortality data in 1900, but 36 states were reporting by 1920. Texas was the last state to
enter the vital statistics system in 1933. See Appendix Table 1 for the year in which each state enters the vital
statistics registration system. No vital statistics data were reported in 1930.
5
  Our population estimates come from two sources: For the post-1968 period, we have annual estimates from the
National Cancer Institute. For the pre-1968 period, we linearly interpolate population estimates using the
decennial Census (Ruggles et al. 2010).

                                                         8
daily climate summaries available. The key variables for the analysis are the daily maximum and
minimum temperature as well as the total daily precipitation. 6, 7
        To construct the monthly measures of weather from the daily records, we select weather
stations that have no missing records in any given year. On average between 1900 and 2004 there are
1,800 weather stations in any given year that satisfy this requirement, with around 400 stations in the
early 1900s and around 2,000 stations by 2000. The station-level data is then aggregated to the county
level by taking an inverse-distance weighted average of all the measurements from the selected stations
that are located within a fixed 300km radius of each county’s centroid. The weight given to the
measurements from a weather station is inversely proportional to the squared distance to the county
centroid, so that closer stations are given more weight. Finally, since the mortality data are at the state-
month level, the county-level variables are aggregated to the state-month level by taking a population-
weighted average over all counties in a state, where the weight is the county-year population. 8 This
ensures that the state-level temperature exposure measure corresponds to population exposure, which
reduces measurement error and attenuation bias.
        Doctors Per Capita. We have collected state-by-decade counts of physicians from the decennial
censuses of 1900 to 2000 (Ruggles et al. 2010). The 1900, 1980, 1990, and 2000 censuses are 5%
samples, and the 1910, 1920, 1930, 1940, 1950, 1960, and 1970 are 1% samples. We construct
physicians per 1,000 by dividing the physician counts by the total population. 9 Finally, we linearly
interpolate the rates across the census years.
        Electrification Data. We collected information on the share of U.S. households with electricity
for the years between 1929 and 1959. We focus on this period because per capita income data are
available for these years, and electrification coverage was nearly 100% by 1959. The electrification data
come from digitized reports of the Edison Electric Institute and its predecessor, the National Electric
Light Association.10 These reports list the number of electricity customers by state and year. To our

6
  Wind speed can also affect mortality, especially in conjunction with temperature. Importantly for our purposes,
there is little evidence that wind chill factors (a non-linear combination of temperature and wind speed) perform
better than ambient temperature levels in explaining mortality rates (Kunst et al. 1994).
7
  Unfortunately, daily humidity data are not available in the GHCN-Daily data. Using U.S. data from the 1973-2002
period, Barreca (2012) shows that controlling for humidity has little impact on aggregate estimates of the effect of
temperature on mortality since temperature and humidity are highly collinear. As such, the absence of humidity
data is unlikely to be an important concern here. Nevertheless, we consider a model where precipitation and
temperature are interacted.
8
  County-year populations are linearly interpolated between each decennial census.
9
  The occupational codes are based on 1950 definitions for consistency across censuses.
10
   The data are from: The Electric Light and Power Industry (1929-1935); The Electric Light and Power Industry in
the United States (1936-1951); Electric Utility Industry in the United States (1952-1957); Electric Utility Industry

                                                         9
knowledge, these are the most comprehensive data available on electricity for this time period. For
example, the U.S. Census Bureau’s (1975) standard reference, Historical Statistics of the United States,
uses these data. The denominator of the electrification rate (i.e., the number of occupied dwellings)
comes from the decennial U.S. Census of Population. 11
        Residential AC Data. For 1960-1980, the air conditioning data come from the U.S. Census of
Population. To our knowledge, this is the most detailed data available for this period. For later years, we
use data reported in Biddle (2008) and in American Housing Surveys. We construct state-year AC
coverage by linearly interpolating the missing data years. 12


B. Summary Statistics
        Weather and Mortality Rate Statistics. The bars in Figure 1 depict the average annual
distribution of daily mean temperatures across ten temperature-day categories over the 1900-2004
period. The daily mean is calculated as the average of the daily minimum and maximum.                        The
temperature categories represent daily mean temperatures less than 10°F, greater than 90°F, and the
eight 10°F wide bins in between. The height of each bar corresponds to the mean number of days of
exposure per year for the average person. In terms of “hot” temperatures, the average person is
exposed to about 20 days per year with mean temperatures between 80°F and 89°F and 1 day per year
where the average temperature exceeds 90°F. 13
        These ten bins form the basis for a simple semi-parametric modeling of temperature in
equations for mortality rates that we use throughout this paper. The only substantive restriction is that
the temperature-day bins restrict the marginal effect of temperature on mortality to be constant within
10°F ranges. Further, the station level temperature data is binned and then the binned data is averaged
as described above; this approach preserves the daily variation in temperatures, which is important

Statistics in the United States (1958-1959). Bailey and Collins (2011) use these same data to investigate the role
that electrification played in the post-World War II baby boom. The Census of Electrical Industries provides
another possible electricity data source. We chose not to use these data for several reasons: They are only
available every five years; much of the state data do not distinguish domestic or residential from commercial and
industrial customers; and some state-year cells are suppressed or combined for confidentiality reasons.
11
   The 1940, 1950, and 1960 data come from Haines (2010). For 1930 only, we digitize housing data from a printed
volume of the 1930 census. The 1930 census did not record the number of occupied dwellings. However, the 1930
census does record the number of “homes,” as distinct from the number of “dwellings.” In the Historical Statistics
of the United States (US Census 1975), the 1930 census count of “homes” is equated with the number of “occupied
housing units.”
12
    As shown in Appendix Figure 3, our out-of-sample interpolations are highly correlated with independent
estimates from other national surveys.
13
   Days where the daily average temperature exceeds 90°F are indeed hot. The average minimum and maximum
daily temperature on such days are 80°F and 106°F, respectively.

                                                       10
given the considerable nonlinearities in the temperature-mortality relationship (Barreca 2012,
Deschenes and Greenstone 2011).
        Table 1 summarizes the mortality rates and temperature variables for the whole U.S. and by
Census region. To highlight differences over time, we report averages separately for the 1900-1959 and
1960-2004 periods. Over the 1900-1959 period the average annual mortality rate was 1,111 per 100,000
population, and this rate declined to an average of 885.8 over 1960-2004.
        Temperatures were increasing over our sample period. Nationally, the average number of
exposure days with daily average temperatures ranging from 80-89°F is 23.3 over 1900-1959 and 26.0
over 1960-2004. There is sizable geographical variation around the national average. Average exposure
to 80-89 °F days in the South is about 50 days per year but only 7 in the Northeast.
        There was also an increase in >90°F days over the two sample periods. There were 0.5 days and
1.1 day per year in the 1900-1959 and the 1960-2004 periods. The national mean masks important
geographical variation. For example, there was almost no exposure in Northeast and little exposure in
the Midwest to >90°F days. The South and West have the highest number of >90 °F days. About two-
thirds of the increase in the >90°F days category in the West between the two periods reflects the
relative increase in population in the hotter regions of the West. 14 Although the primary specifications
in the below analysis are weighted to reflect contemporaneous population, the qualitative findings for
the 1960-2004 period are unchanged by when each state’s observation is weighted by its average
population from the 1900-1959 period.
        Modifiers of the Temperature-Mortality Relationship. Table 2 summarizes the trends in the three
modifiers of the temperature-mortality relationship. It is evident that there is both geographic and time
variation in the rate of diffusion of the modifiers or technologies. The subsequent analysis exploits this
variation, while also adjusting for likely confounders.
        Doctors Per Capita. Through the 1930s, the number of physicians per capita actually declined as
the medical profession focused on training fewer individuals to a higher standard. This change was
recommended in the influential 1910 Flexner Report. As Table 2 illustrates, the number of physicians
per capita was relatively constant through 1960, at which point it began to rise (Blumenthal 2004). The
current average is 2.9 doctors per 1,000 population.




14
  The average annual number of days experienced by the average person in the West during the 1960-2004 period
is 2.28 when the average population during the 1900-59 period is used as the weight, rather than the
contemporaneous population.

                                                     11
        Electrification. Table 2 reports estimates of the share of U.S. households with access to
electricity from the early 1900s to 2000. Only 20% of households in the South had electricity by 1920,
while more than 70% of households in the West and Northeast had access to electricity in 1920. By the
early 1960s, essentially all households in the U.S. had access to electricity. Thus, estimates of the impact
of electrification in modifying how temperatures affect health will be identified from variation in
adoption rates in the pre-1960 period.
        Residential Air Conditioning. Table 2 illustrates the fraction of households with residential AC in
the United States. Prior to the mid-1950s, the share of households with AC was negligible, even though
residential AC had been developed and marketed since the late 1920s. At the same time, many office
buildings, movie theaters and shops offered AC to their patrons, so a large share of the population was
likely aware of the benefits of this technology. In 1960, about 10% of U.S. households had a room or
central AC. Following a 1957 regulatory change that allowed central AC systems to be included in FHA-
approved mortgages, central air conditioning became more common (Ackermann 2002). By 1980, 50%
of households lived in homes with AC and by 2004 this had increased to 87%.
        Table 2 also highlights some of the key geographical differences in residential AC adoption.
Although Western and Southern states were slower to receive electricity, they were quicker to adopt
AC. Residential AC is more likely to offer indoor comfort and possibly health benefits to a resident of a
warm climate than to a resident of a more moderate climate.


                                         IV. Econometric Approach


        The regression models are identified by plausibly random inter-annual variation in state by
month temperature distributions. Specifically, we estimate versions of the following equation:




where log(Ysym) is the log of the monthly mortality rate in state s, year y, and month m. The vector of
control variables, Xsy, includes log per-capita income, the share of the population living in urban areas,
and the share of the state population in one of four age categories: infants (0-1); 1-44; 45-64; and 65+




                                                    12
years old. 15 The vector also includes interactions of log per capita income with calendar month to
account for the possibility that changes in annual income provide relatively greater health benefits
across months of the year. 16 Further, the preferred specification includes a quadratic time trend that is
allowed to vary at the state-month level to control for smooth changes in the state-by-month mortality
rate across years. These trends will control for local factors that affect mortality (possibly in a seasonal
manner), such as air pollution.
         The specification also includes a full set of state-by-month fixed effects (αsm) and year-month
fixed effects (γym). The state-by-month fixed effects are included to absorb differences in seasonal
mortality (which is the largest in the winter months and smallest in the summer months) across states in
a way that is correlated to climatic seasonality. They control for all unobserved state-by-month time
invariant determinants of the mortality rate, so, for example, fixed differences in hospital quality or the
level of health capital will not confound the weather variables. The year-by-month fixed effects control
for idiosyncratic changes in mortality outcomes that are common across states (e.g., the introduction of
Medicare and Medicaid).
         The variables LOWPsym and HIGHPsym are indicators for unusually high or low amounts of
precipitation in the current state-year-month. More specifically, these are defined as indicators for
realized monthly precipitation that is less than the 25th (LOWPsym) or more than the 75th (HIGHPsym)
percentiles of the 1900-2004 average monthly precipitation in a given state-month. In the interest of
space, we do not report the estimated coefficients.
         The variables of central interest are the measures of temperature TMEANsymj. These TMEAN
variables are constructed to capture exposure to the full distribution of temperature and are defined as
the number of days in a state-year-month where the daily mean temperature is in the jth of the 10 bins
used in Figure 1. In practice, the 60°F – 69°F bin is the excluded group, so the coefficients on the other
bins are interpreted as the effect of exchanging a day in the 60°F – 69°F bin for a day in other bins. The
primary functional form restriction implied by this model of temperature exposure is that the impact of
the daily mean temperature on the monthly mortality rate is constant within 10°F degree intervals. The
choice of 10 temperature bins represents an effort to allow the data, rather than parametric
assumptions, to determine the mortality-temperature relationship, while also obtaining estimates that
are precise enough that they have empirical content.

15
   There is no data available at state-year-month level that identifies vital events separately for rural and urban
populations. As such, we control for urban population shares in all specifications to account for the possibility that
urbanization is spuriously correlated with temperature changes.
16
   Data on annual per capita income is only available from 1929 onwards.

                                                         13
        We also use a more parsimonious model that focuses entirely on the upper and lower tails of
the daily temperature distribution. Specifically, we focus on four temperature-bin variables: the number
of days below 40°F; the number of days between 80°F and 89°F; and the number of days above 90°F.
Thus, the number of days in the 40°F – 79°F bin is the excluded category here. This choice of degree-
days bins is informed by the estimated response function linking mortality and the 10 temperature-day
bins. As we show below, estimates of the θ parameters associated with high daily temperatures (i.e.,
80°F – 89°F and >90°F) are very similar to the 4 and 10 bin approaches, so the more parsimonious
approach does not materially affect the conclusions.
        Importantly, the preferred empirical estimates account for inter-temporal mortality
displacement, or “harvesting”, of persons who are ill and already near death. One potential concern is
that periods of unusually high temperature lead to short-term spikes in daily or weekly mortality that
are followed by several days of below trend mortality. Therefore, examining the day-to-day correlation
between mortality and temperature will overstate the substantive effect of temperature on life
expectancy. In addition, the possibility of delayed effects can also confound the day-to-day temperature
mortality association. To address this empirical issue, the preferred specification includes an exposure
window of 2 months, which includes the month a mortality event is registered and the previous month.
This is a longer exposure window than in most of the previous literature, but, as we find below, the
choice of 1 or 2 months for the exposure window does not qualitatively change the main results. 17
Longer exposure windows are examined as a robustness check.
        Two additional econometric issues bear noting. First, the standard errors are clustered at the
state level, which allows the errors within states to be arbitrarily correlated over time. Second, we
estimate the models using GLS, where the weights correspond to the square root of the
contemporaneous state population. The estimates of mortality rates from large population states are
more precise, so GLS corrects for heteroskedasticity associated with these differences in population size.
Further, the GLS results reveal the impact on the average person, rather than on the average state.
        Finally, to quantify the contribution of each specific innovation to the change in the
temperature-mortality relationship, Equation (1) is augmented by interacting the temperature variables
with state-by-year measures of log doctors per capita, the fraction of households with electricity, and
the fraction of households with residential AC. The main effects for these variables are also included in


17
  Most papers in the epidemiology literature consider displacement windows of less than 3 weeks. Deschenes and
Moretti (2009) use a window of one month in their baseline specification, Barreca (2012) uses a two-month
exposure window, and Deschenes and Greenstone (2011) implicitly use a window of up to one year.

                                                     14
the specification. We posit that the coefficients on the interaction terms will be negative at the extreme
temperature categories. A negative coefficient would be interpreted as evidence that the diffusion of a
particular modifier reduced a population’s relative vulnerability to temperature extremes. In particular,
the modifier variables are expected to play a key role in dampening the mortality effects of high
temperatures (e.g. days >90°F). Further, some of the interactions should not affect mortality due to low
temperatures and the coefficients on these interactions (e.g., AC * days <40°F) serve as robustness
checks.


                                                 V. Results


A. Estimates of the Temperature-Mortality Relationship
          Daily Mean Temperatures.      Figure 2 (a) presents estimates of the temperature-mortality
relationship from the fitting of the 10 bin version of Equation (1) to data from 1900-2004. The
temperature exposure window is 1 month. The specification includes all the control variables described
in the econometrics section (except per capita income because it is only available from 1929 onwards):
state-by-month fixed effects; year-by-month fixed effects; and a quadratic time trend that is allowed to
vary at the state-by-month level. The figure plots the regression coefficients associated with the
temperature-day bins (i.e., the θj’s) where the 60°F – 69°F temperature bin is the reference (omitted)
category. 18   That is, each coefficient measures the estimated impact of one additional day in
temperature bin j on the log monthly mortality rate, relative to the impact of one day in the 60°F – 69°F
range.
          The figure confirms that mortality risk is highest at the temperature extremes, and particularly
so for temperatures above 90°F. The point estimates underlying the response function indicate that
exposure to one day above 90°F increases the mortality rate by approximately 1.1% (i.e., 0.011 log
mortality points), while exposure to the 80°F – 89°F category increases the mortality rate by about 0.3%.
Cold temperatures also lead to excess mortality: The coefficients associated with the lowest three
temperature bins range from 0.5% to 0.7%. All estimates associated with temperature exposures above
80°F and below 50°F are statistically significant at the 5% level. This U-shaped relationship is consistent
with previous temperature-mortality research (see Deschenes 2012 and NIEHS 2010 for reviews of the
literature), although these are the first comprehensive estimates of the temperature-mortality

18
  A normalization is needed since the number of days in a given month is constant and the temperature-day bins
always sum to that constant.

                                                     15
relationship over the entire 20th century. The estimates in Figure 2 (a) also motivate the more
parsimonious approach to modeling temperature with 4 bins instead of 10.
        Figure 2 (b) plots estimates based on the same specification as 2 (a), except that controls for
interactions between log per capita income and month are added to the model. Since the data on per
capita income are only available from 1929 onwards, the sample period is 1929-2004. Comparison
between Figures 2 (a) and (b) make it evident that the estimates are robust to controlling for log per
capita income.
        Figures 2 (c) and (d) illustrate how temperature-mortality has changed over time. Specifically,
they plot the estimated coefficients on the temperature variables from the fitting of a version of
Equation (1) on data for the 1920-1959 and 1960-2004 periods. The estimates are adjusted for the
same controls as in Figure 2 (b). The “breakpoint” of 1960 was chosen because 100% of households had
electricity but a small fraction had residential AC as of 1960.
        Two key results emerge from Figures 2 (c) and (d). First, there is a sharp decline in the mortality
impact of high temperature days (especially those above 90°F) after 1960. Second, there is a smaller
decline at low temperatures.
        Figure 3 explores the decline in the mortality impact of temperature days above 90°F in greater
detail. Specifically, it estimates the temperature-mortality relationship based on the 10 bins and
preferred specification of Equation (1) for 20-year periods: 1900-1919, 1920-1939, 1940-1959, 1960-
1979, and 1980-04. Two sets of estimates are reported. Estimates denoted by the red line (triangle
markers) are based on models that exclude month*log per capita income interactions (but include all
other controls, fixed effects and interactions described along Equation [1]). Estimates denoted by the
blue line (blue markers) are based on models that add month*log per capita income interactions to the
specification. The latter specification can only be estimated from 1929 onwards, so effectively the first
period for is 1929-1939.
        The key results are as follows: First, the inclusion or exclusion of month*log per capita income
interactions is inconsequential for the evolution of the relationship between high temperatures (days
exceeding 90°F) and mortality. Second, the estimated effect of temperature-days exceeding 90°F
remains roughly constant at around 0.025-0.03 log mortality points (so about a 2.5-3% effect on the
mortality rate) from 1900 to 1959, and then begins a sharp decline over the period 1960-2004. As we
substantiate below, this decline coincides with the diffusion of residential AC in the United States.
        Table 3 provides an opportunity to precisely summarize the qualitative impressions from Figures
2 and 3. It reports estimates from the version of Equation (1) that models temperature with four

                                                     16
temperature-bin variables: the number of days below 40°F; the number of days between 80°F – 89°F;
and the number of days above 90°F (the number of days with mean temperature between 40°F – 79°F is
excluded). This simpler functional form is motivated by the estimates in Figure 2 that suggested that the
θj’s were approximately equal in the below 40°F and 40°F - 79°F categories. In Panel [A], the exposure
window is the current month’s temperature only as in Figures 2 and 3. Panel [B] reports cumulative
dynamic estimates based on models that control for two months of temperature exposure. The
cumulative dynamic estimates allow the effect of the temperature bins to differ in the current and
previous months and then we sum each the coefficients of each temperature-day bin variable from the
current and previous months. In the robustness analysis below we extend the displacement window to
four months.
         All estimates in Table 3 are derived from the preferred specification of Equation (1) that includes
the full set of covariates, state*month fixed effects, year*month fixed effects, and a quadratic time
trend that is allowed to vary at the state*month level. The four columns of Table 3 correspond to the
different estimation periods: 1900-2004, 1929-2004, 1900-1959, and 1960-2004. The specifications
underlying the estimates in columns (2) - (4) include controls for log per capita income interacted with
month.
         The results in Panel A of Table 3 confirm the above findings that temperature extremes increase
mortality risk and that there was a dampening in the temperature mortality relationship over time. For
example, over the course of the 20th century, the exchange of a day in the range of 40°F - 79°F for one
with a mean temperature above 90°F leads to a 1.1 percent increase in annual mortality. A comparison
of columns (3) and (4) reveals that this effect declined by more than 80% between the 1929-1959 and
1960-2004 periods (from 2.43% to 0.47%). Exposure to temperature-days between 80-89°F and
temperature-days below 40°F also leads to statistically significant increases in mortality, but the effects
are much smaller. Further, the impacts of temperatures in these ranges declined after 1959, but the
declines were more modest than the decline for >90°F days; this is true both in levels and percentage
declines, which were 60% for 80°F – 89°F days and 40% for temperature-days below 40°F).
         Panel B uses a two-month exposure window and is, therefore, more robust to near-term
mortality displacement. The estimates in Panel B are generally slightly smaller in absolute terms than
those in Panel A, indicative of some degree of near-term displacement or measurement error. However,
it is clear that the 95% confidence intervals for the Panel A and B estimates all overlap. Nonetheless, the
magnitudes of the >90°F temperature-day exposure on mortality remain large and all are statistically
significant at the 5% level. In addition, the decline in the mortality effect of these days is also greater

                                                     17
than 80% after 1959. 19 We proceed with the two-month exposure window for the remainder of this
paper since the model better addresses near-term displacement.
        Minimum and Maximum Temperatures. Table 4 reports on a specification that includes daily
minimum and maximum temperatures but is otherwise identical to the one used in columns (2) - (4) of
Table 3. This specification allows for an examination of potential non-linear effects at temperature
extremes missed in the mean temperature analyses. 20 There is a large decline in the effects of daily
minimum temperatures above 80°F in the later period; for example, the coefficient declines from
0.0208 to 0.0010, or a decline of roughly 90%. The impact of days above 100°F declined from 0.45% to
0.14%, or a nearly 70% decline. Thus, using diurnal temperatures, we confirm our core findings above
that there was a dampening of the temperature-mortality relationship at high temperatures.
        In interpreting the results in Table 4, it is important to note that minimum temperatures are
typically achieved at nighttime, as opposed to daytime for maximum temperatures. One potential
explanation of these results is that the reduction in the mortality impact of high temperatures is due to
changes in health-producing behaviors at home, instead of the workplace. It therefore seems plausible
that increased usage of residential AC led to reduced thermal stress at night. However, varying daily
minimum temperature while holding daily maximum temperature constant also leads to changes in the
spread of temperatures, humidity, and rainfall, which might affect mortality independent of the daily
minimum. We investigate the role of residential AC in the below.
        Heterogeneity by Region. Table 5 estimates the temperature-mortality relationship by census
region. One hypothesis is that areas that are more accustomed to temperature extremes may have
adapted better, and thus, have a muted temperature-mortality relationship. For example, the
populations of these regions may have adopted different technologies (e.g. better insulation) or are
more familiar with the need for proper hydration.
        There is substantial heterogeneity in the estimated effects of extreme temperatures on
mortality across regions. For example, the impact of temperature-days exceeding 90°F is largest in the
Midwest region, where exposure is relatively infrequent. Similarly, exposure to cold temperature days
leads to larger mortality impacts in the South region, where again exposure is infrequent. The estimates
for temperature-days >90°F in the Northeast are statistically imprecise since such days were extremely

19
   Malaria cannot explain the dampening of the temperature mortality relationship. Malaria was mostly confined
to the South by 1920 (Maxcy 1923). Also, the South had nearly eradicated malaria by 1940 (Barreca et al. 2012).
The fact that we observe a dampening of the temperature-mortality relationship both: a) outside the South, and b)
after 1940, suggests that malaria’s eradication cannot account for the majority of our estimates.
20
   Results are similar when we control for daily minimum and maximum temperature-bins in the same regression
models or if these variables enter in separate regression models.

                                                       18
rare (the average number of such days in the Northeast region is about 0.05 – or 1 day per 20 years. The
decline in the mortality impacts of >90°F days across the Midwest, South, and West are similar to our
core estimates in Table 3. That is, the structural change in the temperature-mortality relationship
appears similar across the different regions of the United States.
         Robustness tests. Table 6 probes the robustness of the estimated effect of >90°F days on
mortality. We vary the control variables, subsamples, and fixed effects. The estimates are derived from
the full 1929-1959 and 1960-2004 samples when information on per capita income is available. The
columns report the estimated coefficients for the two sample periods. Estimates in Table 6 are based on
the models with a two-month exposure window.
         The first row reproduces the baseline estimates from Table 3. 21 Row 2 replaces the state-by-
month quadratic time trends with state-by-year fixed effects.                 Row 3 returns to the baseline
specification, but uses a four-month exposure window and reports the corresponding cumulative
estimate. Rows 4 and 5 stratify the sample by median per capita income.22 Row 6 is similar to our core
model (row 1), but add controls for state-year estimates of the fraction living on farms, the fraction
black, and the fraction of state residents born in a different state.23 We include them as controls
because changes in exposure to temperature extremes in the workplace (i.e., farming), differential
access to health care by race (Almond, Chay and Greenstone 2007), and changes in migration patterns
may confound the measured change in the temperature-mortality relationship. The estimates are
robust to all of these alterations to the baseline model.
         The specification in row 7 allows the impact of >90°F temperature-days on mortality to
parametrically change over time (separately for the 1929-1959 and 1960-2004 samples) by adding
interactions of calendar year with each of the temperature variables. The temperature-by-year trends
capture the effect of all confounders that lead to a gradual reduction of the mortality effect of high
temperature-days, for example the gradual improvement in air quality in the United States from the
early 1970s onwards. The marginal effect reported in the table shows that our baseline estimates are
not driven by such omitted factors.
        The row 8 specification adds interactions between the temperature variables and the
precipitation variables (LOWP and HIGHP) and reports the marginal effects evaluated at the sample

21
   In this baseline specification, the coefficient associated with “low” monthly precipitation (deviation from state-
month average in the lowest tercile) is statistically significant at 0.0027 (se = 0.0007). The coefficient on “high”
monthly precipitation is smaller and statistically insignificant (-0.0003).
22
   The medians are calculated over all sample years (and weighted by population), so the assignment of a state to a
below or above median group remains constant across all years.
23
   All of these variables are obtained from Decennial population censuses and interpolated across census years.

                                                         19
means. This addresses the possibility of temperature effects that depend on the degree of humidity, as
warmer and wetter days are generally humid. This leads is no meaningful change in the effects of >90°F
days.
         Row 9 is based on the same specification as row 1, except it includes leads of the temperature
variables in addition to the values for the current and previous month. We include leads as a “placebo”
test: Any significant difference in the estimates from the “with leads” and “without leads” models would
be an indication of the main results being driven by trends or factors that we fail to control for. Our
estimates pass this placebo test. Also, F-tests indicate that the leads do not enter the models
significantly. 24
         Finally, in row 10 we consider the impact of “heat waves”, which are defined as 3 consecutive
days or more where the average temperature exceeds 90°F. Specifically, we replace the temperature
variables with the number of episodes of 3 days in a row of <40°F, 80°F – 89°F, and >90°F. On average,
heat waves occur once every 8.3 years (the sample average is 0.12 heat waves per year). This analysis is
motivated by the prior epidemiological literature which found that exposure to consecutive days of high
temperature has a stronger effect on mortality than exposure to “isolated” high temperature days. Our
estimates in row 9 confirm this finding and also support the key finding of a large reduction in the
mortality effect of high temperature exposure after 1960. The estimated coefficient for the mortality
effect of heat waves declines from 13.5% before 1960 to 1.8% after 1959, which is a reduction of 87%.
         In sum, our robustness checks support the hypothesis that there was a significant dampening of
the temperature-mortality relationship. 25 Further, this dampening was relatively greater at high
temperatures. The next subsection explores the roles of increased access to health care, residential
electricity, and residential air conditioning (AC) in muting the temperature-mortality relationship.




24
  The F-statistics testing that the lead coefficients on number of days below 40°F, number of days between 80°F –
89°F, and number of days above 90°F are 0.57 (column 1) and 2.09 (column 2), with p-values of 0.64 and 0.11,
respectively.
25
   We also performed other robustness analyses that are not reported here due to space limitations. Specifically,
we have re-estimated the baseline specification for 1960-2004 using 1940 population weights (as opposed to
annual population weights for all sample years). The year 1940 was chosen as it pre-dated the central city to
suburban areas mobility that began in the 1950s (see e.g., Baum-Snow 2007). Such mobility could confound our
estimates if urban heat island effects are important enough, and if suburban mobility reduces high temperature
exposure (see Arnfield 2003 for a review of urban heat island studies). The estimates from regressions weighted
by the fixed 1940 population are the same as those reported in row 1 of Table 6, so central city to suburban
mobility is unlikely to be a driver of the results presented here. Alternatively, we also introduced interactions
between population density and the temperature variables in the baseline model. These interactions fail to enter
statistically significantly in all estimated models.

                                                       20
B. The Impact of the Modifiers of the Temperature-Mortality Relationship
         Table 7 reports on a specification that adds the main effects for the three modifiers and their
interactions with the three daily temperature variables to the parsimonious temperature specification.
All of the standard controls used in Table 3 Panel B are included. For brevity, the table only reports the
effect of temperature-days >90°F and the coefficients on the interactions of this variable with the
modifiers. These coefficients are most relevant for the impacts of climate change, but the corresponding
coefficients for the other temperature variables are reported in Appendix Tables 5 and 6.
         Panel A focuses on the period 1929-1959, and Panel B analyzes the 1960-2004 data. The cutoff
date is 1960, since in 1960 virtually all households in the United States had access to electricity and few
households had air conditioning. For this reason, the estimated modifying effect of electrification is only
reported in Panel A (sample years 1929-1959), and the estimated modifying effect of residential AC is
only reported in Panel B (sample years 1960-2004). The protective effect of doctors per capita is
measured in both samples. We consider specifications with the effect of each modifier individually as
well as jointly.
         Over the period 1929-1959, the modifiers appear to have little measurable effect on mortality.
The effect of doctors in columns (1a) and (3a) is negative, but not significant and small. The estimated
effect of electricity in columns (2a) and (3a) is positive, which is perversely signed as it indicates that
electricity increased the mortality impact of high temperature days. These estimates are of a substantial
magnitude but would not be judged to be statistically significant by conventional criteria. Appendix
Table 6 shows that electrification leads to a statistically significant decline in cold-related mortality (i.e.,
mortality due to temperature-days less than 40°F).
         Over the period 1960-2004, air conditioning appears to have had a sizeable and statistically
significant negative effect on mortality. The effect of doctors remains negative, but not significant and
small. The estimates in columns (2b) and (3b) suggest that each 10 percentage point increase in
residential AC ownership decreased the high temperature mortality effect by 0.002, or roughly 10
percent of the effect of a >90°F temperature day in the pre-1960 period. Put another way, the
regressions imply that if residential AC increased from covering none of the population to covering 59%
of the population (the average share of the population with residential AC in our sample) but everything
else remained fixed, the effect of temperature-days >90°F on log mortality rates would have fallen by
0.0140 (= 0.59*0.0237). By contrast, in Table 3, the actual decline in the effect of temperature-days
>90°F on log mortality rates between the periods 1900-1959 and 1960-2004 is 0.0162 (= 0.0195-0.0033).



                                                      21
Hence, residential AC alone can explain about 86 percent of the decline in extreme heat’s effect on
mortality during the 20th century. 26
         Tables 8 and 9 present the modifier analysis by age group, by race, and by cause of death. Table
8 provides support for the hypothesis that there is a strong protective effect of the modifiers in
vulnerable populations. The estimates in column (3), which are adjusted for doctors per capita, show
that the effects of air conditioning in mitigating the mortality impact of days with temperatures
exceeding 90°F are large and statistically significant for infants and the elderly. The infant estimates are
consistent with the hypothesis that infants’ thermoregulatory systems are not yet fully functional
(Knobel and Holditch-Davis 2007). The Table 9 entries suggest that the protective effect of residential
AC against days with temperatures exceeding 90°F is larger for blacks than whites, although the 95%
confidence intervals overlap.
         Table 10 provides support that the protective effects of AC are operating through reduced
exposure to heat stress. We find that AC reduces the impacts of >90°F days on cardiovascular-related
and respiratory-related mortality. In contrast, there is no significant effect on fatalities due to motor
vehicle accidents or infectious disease, suggesting that the AC results do not simply reflect a trend in
mortality.    We do find that AC reduces the impacts of >90°F days on neoplasm mortality. In
supplementary analysis (not reported), we found this result to be driven entirely by the 65-74 age
group, and so the result is only salient to a very specific population.


                                                 VI. Interpretation


         The paper’s results can be interpreted in several lights. Perhaps the most straightforward is to
turn these changes in mortality rates into more concrete or meaningful measures. During the 1929-
1959 period, the United States population was on average 142.5 million and the typical American
experienced 1.03 day per year where the temperature exceeded 90°F. Taking the estimates in Table 3
Panel B literally, there were approximately 1,600 premature fatalities annually due to high temperatures
in this period. The available data do not allow for a precise calculation of the loss in life expectancy, but
due to the choice of the specification these were not gains of a few days or weeks: all were of a


26
   We also experimented with a specification that adds a year trend interaction to each of the temperature
variables’ main effects, in addition to the modifier interactions. The resulting estimate of the heat-protective effect
of residential AC remains significant and is similar in magnitude of the ones reported in Table 7. Thus the estimates
of the protective effect of residential AC in Table 7 are unlikely to be driven by unobserved factors that lead to a
gradual reduction of the mortality effect of high temperature-days.

                                                          22
minimum of two months. It seems reasonable to presume that the loss of life expectancy for infants
(recall Table 8) was substantially longer than two months, perhaps even full lives. Obviously, the
number of saved lives would be larger if the impact of days in the 80°F – 89°F range were included in
this calculation.
        By comparison, during the 1960-2004 period, there were on average 232.2 million Americans
and they faced an average of 1.14 days with temperatures above 90°F. The analogous calculation using
the estimates in Table 3 Panel suggests that there were roughly 600 premature fatalities annually due to
high temperatures in this period. If the earlier period’s mortality impact of hot days prevailed over 1960-
2004, the annual number of premature fatalities would have been about 3,600.
        What role did air conditioning play in this dramatic reduction in vulnerability to hot temperature
days? Using our estimates of the protective effect of residential AC on days exceeding 90°F from Table 7
we find that the diffusion of residential AC during the 1960-2004 led to an avoidance of 3,300 annual
premature fatalities. It is apparent that residential air conditioning has a tremendous positive impact on
well being.
        A second way to illustrate these results is to underscore how air conditioning has positioned the
United States to be well adapted to the temperature-related mortality impacts of climate change. 27
State of the art climate change models with business as usual scenarios predict that the United States
will have 42.3 additional days per year where the temperature exceeds 90°F by end of the century (see
e.g., Deschenes and Greenstone 2011). If residential AC adoption were at the 1960 rate of adoption and
population was at 2004 levels, then the 1960-2004 Table 7 estimates suggest that the increase in >90°F
days would cause an additional 59,000 deaths annually by the end of the century. However, at 2004
rates of residential AC adoption, the null hypothesis that additional extremely hot days would have no
impact on mortality cannot be rejected with the available estimates.
        While residential AC appears to provide U.S. residents with great protection against
temperature-related mortality, many other countries are currently vulnerable; this is especially the case
for poor countries in the tropics. As just one measure of the stakes, the typical Indian experiences 33
days annually where the temperature exceeds 90°F and this is projected to increase by as much as 100
days by the end of the century (Burgess et al. 2011). Indeed, using data from 1957-2000, Burgess et al.
(2011) find that one additional day above 90°F, compared to a day in the 60°F – 69°F range, increases



27
   Of course, residential air conditioning will not be protective for many other manifestations of climate change,
including sea level rise and the possibility of stronger hurricanes.

                                                       23
the annual mortality rate in India by about 1%, which is roughly 20 times the corresponding response in
the United States during essentially the same period.
        Are this paper's results instructive for today's poor countries which will need to adapt to climate
change? It is challenging to apply results from one country and period to another one in a different
period when culture, technology, and many other factors differ. However, climate change is regarded as
the biggest global health threat of the 21st century (Lancet 2009) and it is critical to develop effective
and efficient adaptation strategies, especially for today's poor countries.
        Table 11 indicates that there are some striking similarities between the United States before
1960 and developing countries today. For example, life expectancy at birth in the United States in 1940
was 63, compared to 65 and 68 in India and Indonesia now, respectively. Infant mortality rates per
1,000 are also comparable, with the U.S. at 47 in 1940, and India and Indonesia at 50 and 27,
respectively.
        Further, the levels of the three modifiers in the historical United States are comparable to
today’s developing countries. Similarly, the fraction of the residential population with electricity was
74% in 1940 in the United States, compared to approximately 65-66% in both India and Indonesia today.
The number of physicians per 1,000 population was higher in the 1940 United States than in India or
Indonesia today; however, the medical technologies were potentially worse in the 1940s United States
compared to modern day developing countries. Perhaps most importantly given this paper's results, it is
striking that no individual had access to residential AC in the United States in 1940, which is qualitatively
similar to India and Indonesia today. The correspondence in AC rates is even greater in rural areas,
which is home to 72% of Indians and 54% of Indonesians.
        The similarity between the United States before 1960 and many developing countries today
suggests that the greater use of air conditioning in these countries would significantly reduce mortality
rates both today and in the future. Consequently, a primary finding of this paper is that the wider use of
residential air conditioning should be near the top of the list of adaptation strategies in response to
climate change-induced warming of the planet.
        At the same time, the greater use of residential air conditioning will speed up the rate of climate
change because fossil fuels (e.g., coal and natural gas) that cause climate change are the most
inexpensive sources of energy. Further, the abundant supply of coal and dramatic increase in the supply
of inexpensive natural gas in the last few years due to advances in unconventional drilling mean that in
the absence of a significant global price on greenhouse gas emissions, they are likely to remain the
cheapest source of energy for the foreseeable future. It therefore seems that residential AC is both the

                                                     24
most promising technology to help poor countries mitigate the temperature related mortality impacts of
climate change and a technology whose proliferation will speed up the rate of climate change. In many
respects, this underscores the complicated nature of trying to mitigate the rate of climate change when
any solution requires reductions in greenhouse gas emissions by countries with very different income
levels.


                                              VII. Conclusion


          Using the most comprehensive set of data files ever compiled on mortality and its determinants
over the course of the 20th century in the United States or any other country, this paper makes two
primary discoveries. First, we document a remarkable decline in the mortality effect of temperature
extremes: The impact of a day with a mean temperature exceeding 90°F on mortality rates has declined
by about 80% over the course of the 20th century in the United States, with almost the entire decline
occurring after 1960. For example, the estimates suggest that during the 1960-2004 period days with an
average temperature exceeding 90°F, relative to a day in the 60°F – 69°F range, lead to approximately
600 premature fatalities annually. However if the temperature-mortality relationship from before 1960
still prevailed, there would have been about 3,600 premature fatalities annually from days with an
average temperature exceeding 90°F.
          Second, the empirical results point to air conditioning as a central determinant in the reduction
of the mortality risk associated with high temperatures during the 20th century.            We find that
electrification (represented by residential electrification) and access to health care (represented by
doctors per capita) are not statistically related to changes in the temperature-mortality relationship.
However, the diffusion of residential air-conditioning after 1960 is related to a statistically significant
and economically meaningful reduction in the temperature-mortality relationship at high temperatures.
Indeed, the adoption of residential air conditioning explains essentially the entire decline in the
relationship between mortality and days with an average temperature exceeding 90°F.
          Beyond the usual concerns about drawing causal inferences from observational data, there is an
important caveat to this study worth noting. The empirical models are identified by monthly variation in
weather, rather than a permanent change in climate. Responses to monthly temperature shocks will
likely be different than the responses to gradual climate changes. Absent random assignment of
climates across population, however, there is no empirical research design that can fully address this
limitation. Nevertheless we believe our approach provides meaningful information since the transition

                                                     25
between the “historical” and “new” climates will not be discrete and temperature distributions will
converge to their new equilibrium levels through a series of high-frequency shocks.
        It is increasingly clear that adaptation is the one response to climate change that is guaranteed
to be part of the entire world's climate strategy. The stakes for identifying affordable and effective
adaptation strategies are high, especially for many of today's poor countries who are expected to bear
the brunt of the effects of climate change. While higher temperatures pose a severe risk to human
health, climate change is likely to compromise human welfare in many other ways, including the
multitude of consequences from sea level rise, altered agricultural yields from changes in climate, and
damages from more powerful hurricanes and storms. This paper's largest goal is to stimulate research
into identifying efficient adaptation strategies that can be deployed in locations that are vulnerable to
climate change.




                                                   26
References

Ackerman, M. (2002) Cool Comfort: America’s Romance with Air Conditioning, Smithsonian Institute
Press, Washington, DC.

Almond, Douglas, Chay, Kenneth Y. and Michael Greenstone. 2007. “Civil Rights, the War on Poverty,
and Black-White Convergence in Infant Mortality in the Rural South and Mississippi,” MIT Department of
Economics Working Paper No. 07-04. Available at SSRN: http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.961021

Arnfield, A. John. 2003 "Two decades of urban climate research: a review of turbulence, exchanges of
energy and water, and the urban heat island." International Journal of Climatology 23(1): 1-26.

Bailey, Martha J. and William J. Collins. 2011. “Did Improvements in Household Technology Cause the
Baby Boom? Evidence from Electrification, Appliance Diffusion, and the Amish,” American Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics. 3(2): 181-217.

Barreca, Alan 2012. “Climate Change, Humidity, and Mortality in the United States,” Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management. 63(1): 19-34.

Barreca, Alan, Price Fishback, and Shawn Kantor. 2012. "Agricultural Policy, Migration, and Malaria in
the United States in the 1930s." Explorations in Economic History 49(4): 381-398.

Baum-Snow, N. 2007. “Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
122(2): 775-805.

Basu, Rupa and Jonathan M. Samet. 2002. “Relation Between Elevated Ambient Temperature and
Mortality: A Review of the Epidemiologic Evidence.” Epidemiologic Review. 24 (December): 190-202.

Biddle, Jeff. 2008. “Explaining the spread of residential air conditioning, 1955-1980.” Explorations in
Economic History 45(4): 402-423.

Blumenthal, David. 2004. “New Steam from an Old Cauldron – The Physician Supply Debate.” New
England Journal of Medicine 350: 1780-1787.

Bouchama, A., and Knochel, J. P. 2002. “Heat Stroke,” New England Journal of Medicine, 346(25): 1978-
1988.

Brown, D. Clayton. 1979. “Health of Farm Children in the South, 1900-1950.” Agricultural History 53(1):
170-187.

Brown, D. Clayton. 1980. Electricity for Rural America: The Fight for the REA. Westport, CT: Greenwood
Press.

Brown, D. Clayton. 1998. “Modernizing Rural Life: South Carolina’s Push for Public Rural Electrification.”
The South Carolina Historical Magazine 99(1): 66-85.

Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2012. "Personal Income Summary." Accessed May 22, 2012 from:
http://www.bea.gov/iTable/iTable.cfm?ReqID=70&step=1&isuri=1&acrdn=4

                                                    27
Burgess, Robin, Olivier Deschenes, David Donaldson, and Michael Greenstone 2011. "Weather and
Death in India: Mechanisms and Implications for Climate Change," Mimeograph, MIT Department of
Economics.

Center for Disease Control. (CDC) 2012. “Ten Great Public Health Achievements -- United States, 1900-
1999.” Accessed on August 16, 2012: http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00056796.htm

Center for Disease Control. (CDC) 2012. Accessed on November 27, 2012:
http://emergency.cdc.gov/disasters/extremeheat/elderlyheat.asp

Davis, Robert E., Paul C. Knappenberger, Patrick J. Michaels, and Wendy M. Novicoff. 2003. “Changing
heat-related mortality in the United States.” Environmental Health Perspectives 111(14): 1712-1718.

Deschenes, Olivier. 2012. “Climate Change, Human Health, and Adaptation: A Review of the Empirical
Literature” NBER Working Paper No. 18345

Deschenes, Olivier, and Michael Greenstone. 2011. “Climate Change, Mortality, and Adaptation:
Evidence from Annual Fluctuations in Weather in the U.S.” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 3(4): 152-185

Deschenes, Olivier, and Enrico Moretti. 2009. “Extreme Weather Events, Mortality and Migration.”
Review of Economics and Statistics 91(4): 659-681.

Grossman, Michael. 2000. “The Human Capital Model.” In Handbook of Health Economics: Volume 1A,
edited by Anthony J. Culyer and Joseph P. Newhouse. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Haines, Michael R., and Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research. Historical,
Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-2002. ICPSR02896-v3. Ann Arbor, MI:
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 2010-05-21.
doi:10.3886/ICPSR02896.v3

Huynen, Maud M.T.E., Pim Martents, Dieneke Schram, Matty P. Weijenberg, and Anton E. Kunst. 2001.
“The Impact of Heat Waves and Cold Spells on Mortality Rates in the Dutch Population.” Environmental
Health Perspectives. 109 (May): 463-70.

International Panel on Climate Change Working Group II. 2007. Climate Change 2007: Impacts,
Adaptation and Vulnerability. Published for the International Panel on Climate Change.

Knobel, R., and Holditch‐Davis, D. 2007. “Thermoregulation and Heat Loss Prevention After Birth and
During Neonatal Intensive‐Care Unit Stabilization of Extremely Low‐Birthweight Infants,” Journal of
Obstetric, Gynecologic, & Neonatal Nursing, 36(3): 280-287.

Kunst, Anton E., Feikje Groenhof, and Johan P. Mackenbach. 1994. “The Association between Two
Windchill Indices and Daily Mortality Variation in The Netherlands.” American Journal of Public Health.
84 (November): 1738-1742.


                                                   28
Maxcy, Joseph. 1923. “The Distribution of Malaria in the United States as Indicated by Mortality
Reports.” Public Health Reports, vol. 38, no. 21, pp. 1125-1138.

National Cancer Institute, U.S. Population Estimates 1968-2005. Downloaded March 2008 from
/http://seer.cancer.gov/popdata/download.htmlS.

National Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences 2010: “A Human Health Perspective On Climate
Change,” Accessed September 2010. http://www.niehs.nih.gov/health/docs/climatereport2010.pdf

Rogot, E., P. Sorlie and E. Backlund 1992. “Air-Conditioning and Mortality in Hot Weather,” American
Journal of Epidemiology. 136(1): 106-116

Ruggles, Steven, J. Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B. Schroeder, and
Matthew Sobek. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota, 2010.

US Census. 1975. Historical Statistics of the United States. Washington, DC.

World Health Organization. 2003. Climate Change and Human Health – Risks and Responses. Published
by World Health Organization.

World Health Organization (WHO). 2012. “Diarrhoeal disease”. Accessed on August 15, 2012:
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs330/en/index.htm




                                                   29
Figure 1: Distribution of Daily Average Temperatures, 1900-2004

                70
                60
    Number of Days Per Year
    20   30     40
                10
                0      50




                              <10   10-19 20-29 30-39 40-49 50-59 60-69 70-79 80-89         >90
                                               Daily Average Temperature (F)

Notes: Figure 1 shows the historical average distribution of daily mean temperatures across 10 temperature-day
bins. Each bar represents the average number of days per year in each temperature category over 1900-2004,
weighted by the total population in a state-year.




                                                          30
Figure 2: Estimated Temperature-Mortality Relationship

(a) 1900-2004
                   0.04      0.03
     Log Monthly Mortality Rate
   0.00   0.01     0.02
                   -0.01




                                    <10   10-19   20-29   30-39 40-49 50-59 60-69          70-79   80-89   >90
                                                          Daily Average Temperature (F)

                                                              Estimate               95% C.I.



(b) 1929-2004, Model controls for log per capita income
                   0.04      0.03
     Log Monthly Mortality Rate
   0.00   0.01     0.02
                   -0.01




                                    <10   10-19   20-29   30-39 40-49 50-59 60-69          70-79   80-89   >90
                                                          Daily Average Temperature (F)

                                                              Estimate               95% C.I.




                                                                                31
Figure 2: Estimated Temperature-Mortality Relationship (Continued)

(c) 1929-1959
                   0.04      0.03
     Log Monthly Mortality Rate
   0.00   0.01     0.02
                   -0.01




                                    <10   10-19   20-29   30-39 40-49 50-59 60-69          70-79   80-89   >90
                                                          Daily Average Temperature (F)

                                                              Estimate               95% C.I.



(d) 1960-2004
                   0.04      0.03
     Log Monthly Mortality Rate
   0.00   0.01     0.02
                   -0.01




                                    <10   10-19   20-29   30-39 40-49 50-59 60-69          70-79   80-89   >90
                                                          Daily Average Temperature (F)

                                                              Estimate               95% C.I.


Notes: Figure 2 plots the response function between log monthly mortality rate and average daily temperatures,
obtained by fitting Equation (1). The response function is normalized with the 60°F – 69°F category set equal to
zero so each estimate corresponds to the estimated impact of an additional day in bin j on the log monthly


                                                                                32
mortality rate relative to the mortality rate associated with a day where the temperature is between 60°F – 69°F.
Dependent variable is log monthly mortality rate. Temperature exposure window defined as one month, and 10
temperature-day bin variables are included in the model. All regressions are weighted by the relevant population
and include age group specific population shares, urban population share, year×month fixed effects, state×month
fixed effects and state×month quadratic time trends. The estimates underlying Figure 2 (b), (c), and (d) add
month×log per capita income interactions to the specification. Standard errors clustered on state. See the text for
more details.




                                                        33
Figure 3: Estimated Impact of Mortality Impact of Temperature-Days Above 90°F, by 20 Year Period

               .04     .03
    Log Mortality Rate
       .01     0.02
               -.01




                   1900-19      1920-39             1940-59               1960-79               1980-04
                                                     Year

                             Model without Income                            Model with Income
                             95% C.I. (model with income)


Notes: Dependent variable is log monthly mortality rate. Temperature exposure window defined as one month,
and 10 temperature-day bin variables are included in the model. Estimates denoted by the red line (triangle
markers) are based on models that exclude month*log per capita income interactions. Estimates denoted by the
blue line (blue markers) are based on models including month*log per capita income interactions. All regressions
are weighted by the relevant population and include age group specific population shares, urban population share,
year×month fixed effects, state×month fixed effects and state×month quadratic time trends. Regression estimated
separately by time period. Standard errors clustered on state.




                                                       34
Table 1: Summary Statistics on Vital Statistics and Exposure to Temperature Extremes
                        All-Age Mortality Rate:                Annual Days With Mean Temperature:
                                                     <40° F    <40° F  80-89° F  80-89° F > 90° F          > 90° F
                          1900-59     1960-04       1900-59   1960-04 1900-59     1960-04 1900-59         1960-04

A. All States:            1,110.5      885.8          85.6      73.7       23.3       26.0       0.54      1.14

B. By US Census Region:
1. Northeast            1,245.0        963.7         112.6      109.2      7.3         7.9       0.04      0.05

2. Midwest                1086.9       915.4         119.4      120.6      15.0       11.0       0.46      0.15

3. South                  1,010.6      888.8          40.5      37.7       50.0       54.8       0.84      0.78

4. West                   1038.6       754.4          50.6      35.2       8.9        15.5       1.19      4.27

Notes: All statistics are weighted by the relevant population. US Census regions are defined as follows: Northeast
= CT, MA, ME, NH, NJ, NY, PA, RI, VT; Midwest = IA, IL, IN, KS, MI, MN, MO, ND, NE, OH, SD, WI; South = AL, AR, DC,
DE, FL, GA, KY, LA, MD, MS, NC, OK, SC, TX, VA, WV; West = AZ, CA, CO, ID, MT, NM, NV, OR, UT, WA, WY.




                                                        35
Table 2: Summary Statistics on the Modifiers of the Temperature-Mortality Relationship
                           Number of Doctors        Share of Households With             Share of Households
                                  Per                    With Electricity                  With Residential
                            1000 Population                                               Air Conditionning

                          1920    1960     2004      1920     1960     2004       1920     1960     1980       2004

A. All States:            1.28    1.33     2.90       0.52    1.00     1.00       0.00      0.12    0.55       0.87

B. By US Census Region:
1. Northeast              1.25    1.76     3.88       0.75    1.00     1.00       0.00      0.10    0.43       0.74

2. Midwest                1.27    1.18     2.67       0.58    1.00     1.00       0.00      0.11    0.54       0.93

3. South                  1.21    1.05     2.74       0.20    1.00     1.00       0.00      0.18    0.73       1.00

4. West                   1.62    1.52     2.59       0.71    1.00     1.00       0.00      0.07    0.38       0.72

Notes: All statistics are weighted by the relevant population. US Census regions are defined as follows: Northeast
= CT, MA, ME, NH, NJ, NY, PA, RI, VT; Midwest = IA, IL, IN, KS, MI, MN, MO, ND, NE, OH, SD, WI; South = AL, AR, DC,
DE, FL, GA, KY, LA, MD, MS, NC, OK, SC, TX, VA, WV; West = AZ, CA, CO, ID, MT, NM, NV, OR, UT, WA, WY.




                                                        36
Table 3: Estimates of the Impact of High and Low Temperatures on Log Monthly Mortality Rate

                                                                  Sample:
                                        1900-2004         1929-2004     1929-1959             1960-2004
                                           (1)               (2)           (3)                   (4)
A. 1 Month Exposure Window

Number of Days Above 90°F                0.0114*           0.0110*           0.0243*           0.0047*
                                         (0.0030)          (0.0029)          (0.0028)          (0.0010)

Number of Days Between 80-89°F           0.0030*           0.0024*           0.0048*           0.0018*
                                         (0.0004)          (0.0003)          (0.0004)          (0.0002)

Number of Days Below 40°F                0.0029*           0.0029*           0.0039*           0.0024*
                                         (0.0003)          (0.0003)          (0.0007)          (0.0002)

B. 2 Months Exposure Window
(Cumulative Effect)

Number of Days Above 90°F                0.0089*           0.0086*           0.0195*           0.0033*
                                         (0.0026)          (0.0027)          (0.0030)          (0.0009)

Number of Days Between 80-89°F           0.0019*           0.0012*           0.0030*           0.0011*
                                         (0.0004)          (0.0003)          (0.0005)          (0.0002)

Number of Days Below 40°F                0.0042*           0.0041*           0.0059*           0.0034*
                                         (0.0004)          (0.0004)          (0.0008)          (0.0003)

Year*Month Fixed Effects                     y                 y                 y                y
State*Month Fixed Effects                    y                 y                 y                y
State*Month Quad Time Trends                 y                 y                 y                y
Month*Income Interactions                    n                 y                 y                y
Notes: Dependent variable is log monthly mortality rate. Regressions weighted by the relevant population and
include group specific population shares and urban population share in addition to the fixed effects and
interactions listed in the bottom of the table. Standard errors clustered on state. Sample sizes are 52,956 in
column (1), 44,028 in column (2), 17,568 in column (3) and 26,460 in column (4). Stars denote p-value < 0.05.




                                                     37
Table 4: Estimates of the Impact of High and Low Temperatures on Log Monthly Mortality Rate –
Separate Effects for Daily Minimum and Maximum

                                                                          Sample:
                                                    1929-2004            1929-1959            1960-2004
                                                       (1)                  (2)                  (3)
A. Daily Minimum Temperature

Number of Days Above 80°F                             0.0035              0.0208*               0.0010
                                                     (0.0018)             (0.0069)             (0.0008)

Number of Days Between 70-79°F                        0.0005              0.0027*               0.0007
                                                     (0.0007)             (0.0007)             (0.0006)

Number of Days Below 30°F                            0.0040*              0.0067*              0.0025*
                                                     (0.0007)             (0.0013)             (0.0004)
B. Daily Maximum Temperature

Number of Days Above 100°F                           0.0034*              0.0045*              0.0014*
                                                     (0.0008)             (0.0014)             (0.0006)

Number of Days Between 90-99°F                        0.0007               0.0000               0.0005
                                                     (0.0008)             (0.0006)             (0.0003)

Number of Days Below 50°F                             0.0004               0.0007              0.0017*
                                                     (0.0007)             (0.0010)             (0.0004)

Year*Month Fixed Effects                                 y                    y                    y
State*Month Fixed Effects                                y                    y                    y
State*Month Quad Time Trends                             y                    y                    y
Month*Income Interactions                                y                    y                    y
Notes: Dependent variable is log monthly mortality rate. Temperature exposure window defined as 2 months.
Regressions are weighted by the relevant population. All regressions include age group specific population shares,
urban population share, year×month fixed effects, state×month fixed effects, state×month quadratic time trends,
and month×log per capita income interactions. Standard errors clustered on state. Sample sizes are 43,934 in
column (1), 17,474 in column (2), and 26,411 in column (3). Stars denote p-value < 0.05.




                                                       38
Table 5: Estimates of the Impact of High and Low Temperatures on Log Monthly Mortality Rate,
By U.S. Census Region
                     Number of Days                   Number of Days                  Number of Days
                       Below 40°F                    Between 80-89F°                    Above 90°F
                 1929-1959 1960-2004              1929-1959 1960-2004             1929-1959 1960-2004
                    (1a)        (1b)                 (2a)        (2b)                (3a)        (3b)

1. Northeast       0.0054*        0.0025*          0.0032*        0.0031*           -0.0133         0.0284
                   (0.0010)       (0.0004)         (0.0008)       (0.0007)          (0.0217)       (0.0194)

2. Midwest         0.0038*        0.0019*          0.0030*        0.0029*           0.0280*         0.0056
                   (0.0010)       (0.0002)         (0.0006)       (0.0005)          (0.0036)       (0.0032)

3. South           0.0102*        0.0047*          0.0024*        0.0006*           0.0128*         0.0029
                   (0.0014)       (0.0007)         (0.0005)       (0.0002)          (0.0014)       (0.0017)

4. West             0.0024        0.0045*           0.0046         0.0013           0.0119*        0.0033*
                   (0.0021)       (0.0010)         (0.0028)       (0.0017)          (0.0058)       (0.0014)


Notes: Dependent variable is log monthly mortality rate. Temperature exposure window defined as 2 months.
Regressions weighted by the relevant population and estimated separately by US Census region. All regressions
include age group specific population shares, urban population share, year×month fixed effects, state×month fixed
effects, state×month quadratic time trends, and month×log per capita income interactions. US Census regions are
defined as follows: Northeast = CT, MA, ME, NH, NJ, NY, PA, RI, VT; Midwest = IA, IL, IN, KS, MI, MN, MO, ND, NE,
OH, SD, WI; South = AL, AR, DC, DE, FL, GA, KY, LA, MD, MS, NC, OK, SC, TX, VA, WV; West = AZ, CA, CO, ID, MT,
NM, NV, OR, UT, WA, WY. Standard errors clustered on state. Stars denote p-value < 0.05.




                                                       39
Table 6: Estimated Impact of Mortality Impact of Temperature-Days Above 90°F, Alternative Samples
and Specifications

                                                                         Sample:
                                                             1929-1959             1960-2004
                                                                (1)                   (2)

1. Baseline (Table 3, Panel B)                                0.0195*               0.0033*
                                                              (0.0030)              (0.0009)

2. Controls for State*Year Fixed Effects                      0.0185*               0.0041*
                                                              (0.0035)              (0.0011)

3. Exposure Window of 4 Months                                0.0200*                0.0007
                                                              (0.0035)              (0.0015)

4. Log Real Per Capita Income Below Median                    0.0187*               0.0059*
                                                              (0.0035)              (0.0018)

5. Log Real Per Capita Income Above Median                    0.0175*               0.0025*
                                                              (0.0062)              (0.0006)

6. Including Fraction Black, Fraction Living on Farm,         0.0197*               0.0033*
Fraction Movers as Additional Controls                        (0.0029)              (0.0009)

7. Allowing for Temperature*Year Trends                       0.0188*               0.0039*
                                                              (0.0028)              (0.0010)

8. Including Temperature*Rainfall Interactions                0.0180*               0.0040*
                                                              (0.0033)              (0.0010)

9. Including Leads of Temperature Variables                   0.0193*               0.0035*
                                                              (0.0031)              (0.0009)

10. Impact of 3 Consecutive Days > 90°F                       0.1353*               0.0181*
                                                              (0.0224)              (0.0052)
Notes: Dependent variable is log monthly mortality rate. Temperature exposure window defined as 2 months. All
regressions include age group specific population shares, urban population share, year×month fixed effects,
state×month fixed effects, state×month quadratic time trends, and month×log per capita income interactions.
Standard errors clustered on state. Stars denote p-value < 0.05.




                                                        40
Table 7: Interaction Effects between ‘Modifiers’ and Number of Days > 90°F

                                                 [A] Sample: 1929-1959                    [B] Sample: 1960-2004

                                          (1a)           (2a)        (3a)          (1b)           (2b)        (3b)

Number of Days Above 90°F               0.0195*        0.0194*     0.0194*       0.0037*        0.0099*     0.0096*
                                        (0.0027)       (0.0031)    (0.0029)      (0.0006)       (0.0023)    (0.0025)



Number of Days Above 90 ° F ×           -0.0024           ---      -0.0019       -0.0044           ---      -0.0013
Log Doctors Per Capita                  (0.0066)                   (0.0074)      (0.0038)                   (0.0025)

Number of Days Above 90 ° F ×              ---          0.0138      0.0138          ---            ---            ---
Share with Residential Electricity                     (0.0085)    (0.0102)

Number of Days Above 90 ° F ×              ---            ---            ---        ---         -0.0237*    -0.0226*
Share with Residential AC                                                                       (0.0063)    (0.0072)

 Year*Month Fixed Effects                     y           y             y             y            y            y
 State*Month Fixed Effects                    y           y             y             y            y            y
 State*Month Quad Time Trends                 y           y             y             y            y            y
 Month*Income Time Trends                     y           y             y             y            y            y
Notes: Dependent variable is log monthly mortality rate. Temperature exposure window defined as 2 months.
Number of temperature-day variables for days < 40°F, 80-90°F, and >90°F and their interactions with log doctors
per capita, share with residential electricity, and share of residential AC are included. Regressions are weighted by
the relevant population and include age group specific population shares and urban population share in addition to
the fixed effects and interactions listed in the bottom of the table. Standard errors clustered on state. Stars denote
p-value < 0.05.




                                                           41
Table 8: Estimated Interaction Effects Between Log Doctors Per Capita, Share of Households with
Residential AC, and Number of Days > 90°F, By Age Group, 1960-2004

                                                  (1)               (2)                (3)
Age 0-1
Number of Days Above 90 ° F                     0.0040            0.0121*           0.0148*
                                               (0.0031)           (0.0030)          (0.0036)

Number of Days Above 90 ° F ×                   0.0079               ---             0.0119
Log Doctors Per Capita                         (0.0099)                             (0.0100)

Number of Days Above 90 ° F ×                     ---             -0.0274          -0.0386*
Share with Residential AC                                         (0.0179)          (0.0164)

Age 1-44
Number of Days Above 90 ° F                    0.0060*             0.0054            0.0042
                                               (0.0026)           (0.0031)          (0.0032)

Number of Days Above 90 ° F ×                  -0.0047               ---            -0.0071
Log Doctors Per Capita                         (0.0039)                             (0.0050)

Number of Days Above 90 ° F ×                     ---              0.0005            0.0052
Share with Residential AC                                         (0.0172)          (0.0176)

Age 45-64
Number of Days Above 90 ° F                    0.0017*            0.0088*           0.0038*
                                               (0.0008)           (0.0011)          (0.0021)

Number of Days Above 90 ° F ×                  -0.0078               ---            -0.0074
Log Doctors Per Capita                         (0.0048)                             (0.0054)

Number of Days Above 90 ° F ×                     ---            -0.0179*           -0.0077
Share with Residential AC                                         (0.0020)          (0.0067)

Age 65+
Number of Days Above 90 ° F                    0.0034*            0.0117*           0.0107*
                                               (0.0012)           (0.0046)          (0.0047)

Number of Days Above 90 ° F ×                  -0.0065               ---            -0.0065
Log Doctors Per Capita                         (0.0064)                             (0.0059)

 Number of Days Above 90 ° F ×                         ---           -0.0287*        -0.0240*
 Share with Residential AC                                            (0.0095)        (0.0118)
Notes: Dependent variable is age-specific log monthly mortality rate. Average mortality rates per 1000 population
are: 15.0 (0-1), 1.2 (1-44), 8.9 (45-64), 52.8 (65+). Temperature exposure window defined as 2 months. Regressions
weighted by the relevant population and estimated separately by age group. Number of temperature-day variables
for days < 40°F, 80-90°F, and >90°F and their interactions with log doctors per capita and share of residential AC
are included. All regressions include age group specific population shares, urban population share, year×month
fixed effects, state×month fixed effects, state×month quadratic time trends, and month×log per capita income
interactions. Standard errors clustered on state. Stars denote p-value < 0.05.


                                                        42
Table 9: Estimated Interaction Effects Between Log Doctors Per 1000 Population, Share of Households
with Residential AC, and Number of Days > 90°F, By Race, 1960-2004


                                                    (1)                (2)                (3)
White Population
Number of Days Above 90 ° F                      0.0023*            0.0076*            0.0077*
                                                 (0.0006)           (0.0017)           (0.0019)

Number of Days Above 90 ° F ×                    -0.0002               ---              0.0005
Log Doctors Per Capita                           (0.0021)                              (0.0018)

Number of Days Above 90 ° F ×                       ---             -0.0197*          -0.0198*
Share with Residential AC                                            (0.0053)          (0.0059)

Black Population
Number of Days Above 90 ° F                      0.0131*            0.0274*            0.0112*
                                                 (0.0041)           (0.0056)           (0.0023)

Number of Days Above 90 ° F ×                     0.0030               ---              0.0010
Log Doctors Per Capita                           (0.0093)                              (0.0044)

Number of Days Above 90 ° F ×                       ---             -0.0477*          -0.0302*
Share with Residential AC                                            (0.0126)          (0.0070)

Notes: Dependent variable is race-specific log monthly mortality rate. Average mortality rates per 1000 population
are: 9.1 (white), 8.8 (black). Temperature exposure window defined as 2 months. Regressions weighted by the
relevant population and estimated separately by race. Number of temperature-day variables for days < 40°F, 80-
90°F, and >90°F and their interactions with log doctors per capita and share of residential AC are included. All
regressions include age group specific population shares, urban population share, year×month fixed effects,
state×month fixed effects, state×month quadratic time trends, and month×log per capita income interactions.
Standard errors clustered on state. Stars denote p-value < 0.05.




                                                          43
Table 10: Estimated Interaction Effects Between Log Doctors Per 1000 Population, Share of
Households with Residential AC, and Number of Days > 90°F, By Cause of Death, 1960-2004

                                                      (1)                 (2)                 (3)
Cardiovascular Disease
Number of Days Above 90 ° F                        0.0026*             0.0088*             0.0090*
                                                   (0.0008)            (0.0022)            (0.0026)
Number of Days Above 90 ° F ×                      -0.0003                ---               0.0009
Log Doctors Per Capita                             (0.0037)                                (0.0040)
Number of Days Above 90 ° F ×                         ---             -0.0226*            -0.0230*
Share with Residential AC                                              (0.0052)            (0.0069)

Neoplasms
Number of Days Above 90 ° F                        -0.0006             0.0030*             0.0036*
                                                   (0.0007)            (0.0010)            (0.0012)

Number of Days Above 90 ° F ×                       0.0012                ---              0.0033*
Log Doctors Per Capita                             (0.0016)                                (0.0011)

Number of Days Above 90 ° F ×                         ---             -0.0123*            -0.0149*
Share with Residential AC                                              (0.0028)            (0.0025)

Respiratory Disease
Number of Days Above 90 ° F                         0.0024              0.0182              0.0169
                                                   (0.0028)            (0.0099)            (0.0097)

Number of Days Above 90 ° F ×                      -0.0047                ---              -0.0031
Log Doctors Per Capita                             (0.0058)                                (0.0067)
Number of Days Above 90 ° F ×                         ---             -0.0569*             -0.0526
Share with Residential AC                                              (0.0255)            (0.0264)

Notes: Dependent variable is cause-specific log monthly mortality rate. Average mortality rates per 1000
population are: 4.1 (cardiovascular disease), 1.9 (neoplasms), 0.6 (respiratory disease), 0.2 (infectious disease), 0.2
(motor-vehicle accidents). Temperature exposure window defined as 2 months. Regressions weighted by the
relevant population and estimated separately by cause of death. Number of temperature-day variables for days <
40°F, 80-90°F, and >90°F and their interactions with log doctors per capita and share of residential AC are
included. All regressions include age group specific population shares, urban population share, year×month fixed
effects, state×month fixed effects, state×month quadratic time trends, and month×log per capita income
interactions. Standard errors clustered on state. Stars denote p-value < 0.05.




                                                            44
Table 10: Estimated Interaction Effects Between Log Doctors Per 1000 Population, Share of
Households with Residential AC, and Number of Days > 90°F, By Cause of Death, 1960-2004
(continued)



                                                      (1)                 (2)                 (3)

Infectious Disease                                 -0.0059             -0.0070             -0.0113
Number of Days Above 90 ° F                        (0.0058)            (0.0147)            (0.0165)



Number of Days Above 90 ° F ×                      -0.0251                ---              -0.0345
Log Doctors Per Capita                             (0.0220)                                (0.0268)

Number of Days Above 90 ° F ×                         ---              -0.0066              0.0169
Share with Residential AC                                              (0.0403)            (0.0484)

Motor Vehicle Accidents
Number of Days Above 90 ° F                         0.0055              0.0077              0.0081
                                                   (0.0027)            (0.0070)            (0.0064)

Number of Days Above 90 ° F ×                       0.0048                ---               0.0073
Log Doctors Per Capita                             (0.0078)                                (0.0086)

Number of Days Above 90 ° F ×                         ---              -0.0160             -0.0228
Share with Residential AC                                              (0.0131)            (0.0156)
Notes: Dependent variable is cause-specific log monthly mortality rate. Average mortality rates per 1000
population are: 4.1 (cardiovascular disease), 1.9 (neoplasms), 0.6 (respiratory disease), 0.2 (infectious disease), 0.2
(motor-vehicle accidents). Temperature exposure window defined as 2 months. Regressions weighted by the
relevant population and estimated separately by cause of death. Number of temperature-day variables for days <
40°F, 80-90°F, and >90°F and their interactions with log doctors per capita and share of residential AC are
included. All regressions include age group specific population shares, urban population share, year×month fixed
effects, state×month fixed effects, state×month quadratic time trends, and month×log per capita income
interactions. Standard errors clustered on state. Stars denote p-value < 0.05.




                                                            45
Table 11: Comparison of Vital Statistics and Modifiers of Temperature-Mortality Relationship in
Historical United States, Contemporary United States, and Contemporary India and Indonesia
                                                    United States:                   India:        Indonesia:
                                                        1940         2004           2009/10         2009/10
Basic vital statistics
Life expectancy at birth                                 63          80                65              68

Infant mortality rate (per 1,000)                        47           7                50              27

All age mortality rate (per 1,000)                      11.0         8.0              8.1             7.1

Modifiers of temperature-mortality relationship
Physicians per 1,000 population                          1.3         2.9              0.65            0.29

Fraction of population with access to electricity       0.74          1               0.66            0.65

Fraction of population with residential AC                0          0.85             0.02            NA

Notes: Data for India and Indonesia taken from the World Bank Indicators Database. Data for US from study
sample. “NA” stands for not available.




                                                         46
                                  APPENDIX: ONLY FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION


Appendix Table 1: Year of Entry of States in Vital Statistics Registration System

           State                              Region                         Entered sample
      1    Connecticut                        Northeast                           1900
      2    District of Columbia               South                               1900
      3    Indiana                            Midwest                             1900
      4    Maine                              Northeast                           1900
       5   Massachusetts                      Northeast                           1900
       6   Michigan                           Midwest                             1900
       7   New Hampshire                      Northeast                           1900
       8   New Jersey                         Northeast                           1900
       9   New York                           Northeast                           1900
      10   Rhode Island                       Northeast                           1900
      11   Vermont                            Northeast                           1900
      12   California                         West                                1906
      13   Colorado                           West                                1906
      14   Maryland                           South                               1906
      15   Pennsylvania                       Northeast                           1906
      16   South Dakota*                      Midwest                             1906
      17   Washington                         West                                1908
      18   Wisconsin                          Midwest                             1908
      19   Ohio                               Midwest                             1909
      20   Minnesota                          Midwest                             1910
      21   Montana                            West                                1910
      22   North Carolina                     South                               1910
      23   Utah                               West                                1910
      24   Kentucky                           South                               1911
      25   Missouri                           Midwest                             1911
      26   Virginia                           South                               1913
      27   Kansas                             Midwest                             1914
      28   South Carolina                     South                               1916
      29   Tennessee                          South                               1917
      30   Illinois                           Midwest                             1918
      31   Louisiana                          South                               1918
      32   Oregon                             West                                1918
      33   Delaware                           South                               1919
      34   Florida                            South                               1919
      35   Mississippi                        South                               1919
      36   Nebraska                           Midwest                             1920
      37   Georgia*                           South                               1922
      38   Idaho                              West                                1922
      39   Wyoming                            West                                1922
      40   Iowa                               Midwest                             1923
      41   North Dakota                       Midwest                             1924
      42   Alabama                            South                               1925
      43   West Virginia                      South                               1925
      44   Arizona                            West                                1926
      45   Arkansas                           South                               1927
      46   Oklahoma                           South                               1928
      47   Nevada                             West                                1929
      48   New Mexico                         West                                1929
      49   Texas                              South                               1933
                                  APPENDIX: ONLY FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION


Appendix Figure 1: Physicians per 1,000 Population
    4
    3
    2
    1
    0




        1900              1920              1940              1960              1980                  2004
                                                       Year

Notes: Data taken from the decennial censuses from 1900 to 2000 and represent state-by-decade counts of
physicians per 1,000 population, linearly interpolated across census years. See the text for more details. [Delete
this phrase in all fig/tabs??]
                                                             APPENDIX: ONLY FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION


Appendix Figure 2: Fraction of U.S. Households with Electricity

                                           1
   Share of US Households with Electricity
        .2      .4      .6
                         0       .8




                                               1900   1920         1940           1960        1980          2000
                                                                           Year

                                                        US (national estimate)           US (sample data)


Notes: The U.S. national average of household share with electricity comes from the “Historical Statistics of the
United States” publication, which reports only national mean. The 1929-1959 state-year sample data comes from
annual statistical reports from the Edison Electric Institute and its predecessor, the National Electric Light
Association, and from the US Census of Population. See the text for more details.
                                                               APPENDIX: ONLY FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION


Appendix Figure 3: Fraction of U.S. Households with Air Conditioning

                                            1
    Share of Households with Air Conditioning
    0      .2     .4       .6      .8




                                                1900    1920           1940            1960 1970 1980 1990        2004
                                                                                Year

                                                       US (national estimate)             US (from Census w/ imputes)
                                                       Texas (from Census)                Pennsylvania (from Census)


Notes: The national estimate of the fraction of households with residential AC in the United States (black dashed
line) is based on data from Biddle (2008), our tabulations from the U.S. Census files for 1960-80, and various
American Housing Surveys for the 1990s and 2000s. Census data taken from 1960-1980 censuses. See the text for
more details.
                                APPENDIX: ONLY FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION


Appendix Table 2: Estimates of the Impact of High and Low Temperatures on Log Monthly Mortality
Rate, by Age Group, 1960-2004
                              Number of Days                Number of Days                Number of Days
                                Below 40°F                  Between 80-89°F                 Above 90°F

                                      (1)                           (2)                           (3)

Infants (0-1)                      0.0020*                        0.0010                        0.0043
                                   (0.0008)                      (0.0010)                      (0.0038)

1-44                                0.0001                       0.0023*                       0.0056*
                                   (0.0008)                      (0.0006)                      (0.0026)

45-64                              0.0022*                        0.0005                        0.0012
                                   (0.0004)                      (0.0004)                      (0.0009)

65-99                              0.0040*                       0.0008*                        0.0030
                                   (0.0004)                      (0.0004)                      (0.0017)

Implied All-Age                    0.0024*                       0.0011                        0.0043*
Estimate                           (0.0005)                      (0.0007)                      (0.0017)

Pooled Estimate                    0.0034*                       0.0011*                       0.0033*
(From Table 3, Panel B)            (0.0003)                      (0.0002)                      (0.0009)

Notes: Exposure window defined as 60 days. Regressions weighted by the relevant population and estimated
separately by age group. All regressions include year×month fixed effects, state×month fixed effects, state×month
quadratic time trends, and month×log per capita income interactions. Standard errors clustered on state. Stars
denote p-value < 0.05.
                                APPENDIX: ONLY FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION


Appendix Table 3: Estimates of the Impact of High and Low Temperatures on Log Monthly Mortality
Rate, by Race, 1960-2004
                              Number of Days                Number of Days                Number of Days
                                Below 40°F                  Between 80-89°F                 Above 90°F

                                      (1)                           (2)                           (3)

White                              0.0033*                       0.0007*                       0.0023*
                                   (0.0003)                      (0.0002)                      (0.0006)

Black                              0.0039*                       0.0021*                       0.0130*
                                   (0.0007)                      (0.0004)                      (0.0037)

Pooled Estimate                    0.0033*                       0.0011*                       0.0034*
(From Table 3, Panel B)            (0.0009)                      (0.0002)                      (0.0003)

Notes: Exposure window defined as 60 days. Regressions weighted by the relevant population and estimated
separately by race. All regressions include year×month fixed effects, state×month fixed effects, state×month
quadratic time trends, and month×log per capita interactions. Standard errors clustered on state. Stars denote p-
value < 0.05.
                                APPENDIX: ONLY FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION


Appendix Table 4: Estimates of the Impact of High and Low Temperatures on Log Monthly Mortality
Rate, by Cause of Death, 1960-2004
                                 Number of Days             Number of Days             Number of Days
                                   Below 40°F               Between 80-89°F              Above 90°F

                                         (1)                        (2)                        (3)

All Causes (Table 3, Panel B)         0.0033*                    0.0011*                    0.0034*
                                      (0.0009)                   (0.0002)                   (0.0003)

Cardiovascular Disease                0.0042*                    0.0009*                    0.0026*
                                      (0.0004)                   (0.0003)                   (0.0008)

Neoplasms                              0.0003                     0.0001                    -0.0005
                                      (0.0003)                   (0.0002)                   (0.0007)

Respiratory Disease                   0.0077*                     0.0017                     0.0021
                                      (0.0010)                   (0.0013)                   (0.0029)

Infectious Disease                    0.0052*                     0.0006                    -0.0077
                                      (0.0014)                   (0.0015)                   (0.0049)

Motor Vehicle                         -0.0089*                    0.0016                     0.0053
Accidents                              (0.0013)                  (0.0010)                   (0.0033)

Notes: Exposure window defined as 60 days. Regressions weighted by the relevant population and estimated
separately by cause of death. All regressions include year×month fixed effects, state×month fixed effects,
state×month quadratic time trends, and month×log per capita interactions. Standard errors clustered on state.
Stars denote p-value < 0.05.
                                 APPENDIX: ONLY FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION


Appendix Table 5: Interaction Effects between ‘Modifiers’ and Number of Days between 80-89°F

                                                [A] Sample: 1929-1959                    [B] Sample: 1960-2004

                                          (1a)          (2a)        (3a)          (1b)           (2b)        (3b)

Number of Days Between 80-89°F          0.0030*       0.0030*     0.0030*       0.0012*        0.0022*     0.0022*
                                        (0.0005)      (0.0005)    (0.0005)      (0.0003)       (0.0003)    (0.0003)



Number of Days Between 80-89 ° F × 0.0012                ---       0.0014       -0.0025*          ---       0.0002
Log Doctors Per Capita             (0.0010)                       (0.0012)      (0.0010)                   (0.0005)

Number of Days Between 80-89 ° F ×        ---          0.0018      0.0013          ---            ---            ---
Share with Residential Electricity                    (0.0011)    (0.0013)

Number of Days Between 80-89 ° F ×        ---            ---            ---        ---         -0.0052*    -0.0054*
Share with Residential AC                                                                      (0.0010)    (0.0010)

 Year*Month Fixed Effects                    y            y             y             y            y           y
 State*Month Fixed Effects                   y            y             y             y            y           y
 State*Month Quad Time Trends                y            y             y             y            y           y
 Month*Income Time Trends                    y            y             y             y            y           y
Notes: Dependent variable is log monthly mortality rate. Temperature exposure window defined as 2 months.
Number of temperature-day variables for days <40°F, 80-90°F, and >90°F and their interactions with log doctors
per capita, share with residential electricity, and share of residential AC are included. Regressions are weighted by
the relevant population. Standard errors clustered on state. Stars denote p-value < 0.05.
                                     APPENDIX: ONLY FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION


Appendix Table 6: Interaction Effects between ‘Modifiers’ and Number of Days <40°F

                                                 [A] Sample: 1929-1959                   [B] Sample: 1960-2004

                                           (1a)          (2a)        (3a)         (1b)           (2b)        (3b)

Number of Days Below 40°F                0.0061*       0.0065*     0.0065*      0.0034*        0.0034*     0.0035*
                                         (0.0009)      (0.0008)    (0.0008)     (0.0003)       (0.0003)    (0.0003)



Number of Days Below 40 ° F ×            -0.0021*         ---      -0.0005      -0.0012           ---      -0.0013
Log Doctors Per Capita                   (0.0008)                  (0.0005)     (0.0011)                   (0.0005)

Number of Days Below 40 ° F ×              ---         -0.0137*    -0.0134*        ---            ---            ---
Share with Residential Electricity                     (0.0018)    (0.0017)

Number of Days Below 40 ° F ×              ---            ---            ---       ---         -0.0005     -0.0001
Share with Residential AC                                                                      (0.0010)    (0.0010)

 Year*Month Fixed Effects                    y            y             y             y            y           y
 State*Month Fixed Effects                   y            y             y             y            y           y
 State*Month Quad Time Trends                y            y             y             y            y           y
 Month*Income Time Trends                    y            y             y             y            y           y
Notes: Dependent variable is log monthly mortality rate. Temperature exposure window defined as 2 months.
Number of temperature-day variables for days <40°F, 80-90°F, and >90°F and their interactions with log doctors
per capita, share with residential electricity, and share of residential AC are included. Regressions are weighted by
the relevant population. Standard errors clustered on state. Stars denote p-value < 0.05.
