NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INDUSTRIAL POLICY AND DOWNSTREAM EXPORT PERFORMANCE
Bruce Blonigen
Working Paper 18694
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18694

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2013

This research was supported by the World Bank's Knowledge for Change Program (KCP) Trust Fund.
I also thank Ann Harrison for her personal encouragement to develop this project, as well as excellent
comments from Maggie Chen, Doug Golin, Michael Finger, Caroline Freund, Bernard Hoekman, Amit
Khandewal, Justin Yufi Li, Nick Sly, Romain Wacziarg, and Shang-jin Wei. Nathan Yoder provided
excellent research assistance. All remaining errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Bruce Blonigen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Industrial Policy and Downstream Export Performance
Bruce Blonigen
NBER Working Paper No. 18694
January 2013
JEL No. F13,F14,H25,H81
ABSTRACT
Industrial policies (IPs) include such varying practices as production subsidies, export subsidies, and
import protection, and are commonly used by countries to promote targeted sectors. However, such
policies can have significant impacts on sectors other than those targeted by the IPs, particularly when
the target sector produces goods that are key inputs to downstream sectors. Surprisingly, there has
been little systematic analysis of how IPs in targeted sectors affect other sectors of the economy. Using
a new hand-collected database of steel-sector IP use in major steel-producing countries from 1975
through 2000, this paper examines whether steel-sector IPs have a significant impact on the export
competitiveness of the country’s other manufacturing sectors, particularly those that are significant
downstream users of steel. I find that a one-standard-deviation increase in IP presence leads to a 3.6%
decline in export competitiveness for an average downstream manufacturing sector. But this effect
can be as high as 50% decline for sectors that use steel as an input most intensively. These general
negative effects of IPs are primarily due to export subsidies and non-tariff barriers, particularly in
less-developed countries.

Bruce Blonigen
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
and NBER
bruceb@uoregon.edu

1.	  Introduction	  
	  
Industrial	  policies	  (IPs)	  to	  nurture	  an	  industry	  may	  be	  motivated	  by	  a	  number	  of	  
reasons.	  	  The	  first	  may	  be	  an	  infant	  industry	  argument	  that	  the	  country	  will	  have	  a	  
comparative	  advantage	  in	  the	  sector	  once	  firms	  in	  the	  sector	  are	  provided	  help	  to	  overcome	  
entry	  barriers,	  particularly	  in	  an	  industry	  where	  economies	  of	  scale	  or	  learning-­‐by-­‐doing	  
effects	  are	  important.1	  	  Second,	  an	  industry	  may	  be	  seen	  as	  a	  gateway	  industry,	  where	  its	  
development	  brings	  crucial	  knowledge	  and	  technologies	  that	  provide	  easier	  entry	  into	  the	  
production	  of	  more	  complex	  and	  skill-­‐intensive	  manufactured	  goods,	  spurring	  economic	  
development.	  	  Finally,	  a	  domestic	  industry	  may	  be	  protected	  from	  import	  competition	  
because	  a	  country	  feels	  the	  domestic	  industry	  can	  better	  provide	  specialized	  products	  and	  
service	  to	  local	  downstream	  industries	  than	  import	  sources.	  
On	  the	  other	  hand,	  IPs	  to	  encourage	  domestic	  production	  often	  involve	  practices,	  
such	  as	  protection	  from	  imports,	  which	  can	  substantially	  raise	  the	  domestic	  price	  of	  an	  
industry’s	  goods.	  	  This	  raises	  input	  costs	  to	  downstream	  sectors	  and	  can	  significantly	  hinder	  
their	  development	  and	  hurt	  economic	  growth.	  	  While	  such	  effects	  may	  be	  seen	  as	  the	  short-­‐
run	  cost	  to	  protect	  an	  infant	  industry,	  Miyagiwa	  and	  Ohno	  (1999)	  show	  that	  sectors	  can	  
become	  dependent	  long-­‐run	  on	  IPs	  and	  remain	  uncompetitive,	  unless	  the	  government	  has	  
quite	  a	  bit	  of	  information	  and	  can	  credibly	  commit	  to	  discontinue	  the	  IPs	  after	  an	  
appropriate	  time	  period.	  	  This	  can	  lead	  to	  long-­‐run	  competitive	  issues	  for	  the	  downstream	  
industries	  as	  well,	  as	  seen	  in	  this	  quote	  from	  a	  recent	  article	  on	  South	  Africa,	  a	  long-­‐run	  user	  
of	  extensive	  IPs	  in	  the	  steel	  sector:	  
“South	  Africa’s	  manufacturing	  sector…	  has	  performed	  poorly	  over	  the	  past	  10	  years	  
…	  	  One	  of	  the	  reasons	  for	  this	  is	  monopolistic	  provision	  and	  pricing	  of	  key	  inputs	  
into	  manufacturing,	  including	  steel.	  	  Almost	  80%	  of	  steel	  sales	  in	  South	  Africa	  are	  
directed	  at	  the	  manufacturing	  and	  construction	  sectors.	  In	  addition,	  basic	  iron	  and	  
steel	  are	  significant	  inputs	  into	  one	  of	  the	  chosen	  sectors	  of	  the	  second	  Industrial	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1	  Melitz	  (2005)	  provides	  a	  formal	  model	  with	  learning-­‐by-­‐doing	  effects	  and	  shows	  how	  quotas	  can	  be	  
more	  likely	  to	  be	  welfare-­‐enhancing	  in	  such	  circumstances	  than	  tariffs	  or	  production	  subsidies.	  
	  

1	  

Policy	  Action	  Plan	  (IPAP2)	  —	  metals	  fabrication,	  capital	  and	  transport	  equipment.	  
Government	  thus	  has	  a	  strong	  interest	  in	  ensuring	  South	  Africa	  gets	  iron	  and	  steel	  at	  
competitive	  prices.”(Financial	  Mail,	  March	  12,	  2010,	  
http://www.fm.co.za/Article.aspx?id=103522)	  
	  
Using	  a	  new	  hand-­‐collected	  database	  of	  steel-­‐sector	  IP	  use	  in	  major	  steel-­‐producing	  
countries,	  this	  paper	  examines	  whether	  steel-­‐sector	  IPs	  have	  a	  significant	  impact	  on	  the	  
export	  competitiveness	  of	  the	  country’s	  other	  manufacturing	  sectors,	  particularly	  those	  that	  
are	  significant	  downstream	  users	  of	  steel.	  	  Steel	  products	  are	  a	  significant	  input	  to	  many	  
sectors	  of	  the	  economy,	  particularly	  the	  manufacturing	  and	  construction	  sectors,	  and	  are	  
particularly	  important	  in	  the	  production	  of	  investment	  goods	  and	  infrastructure.	  	  Thus,	  
availability	  and	  quality	  of	  steel	  products	  can	  play	  a	  major	  role	  in	  the	  productivity	  and	  
growth	  of	  a	  country.	  	  This	  is	  likely	  a	  major	  reason	  why	  the	  steel	  sector	  has	  been	  a	  significant	  
focus	  of	  industrial	  policy	  in	  both	  developed	  and	  developing	  economies	  throughout	  the	  
history	  of	  the	  industry.	  	  	  	  
The	  paper’s	  empirical	  strategy	  is	  to	  use	  the	  combination	  of	  cross-­‐country	  variation	  
in	  steel-­‐sector	  IPs	  and	  cross-­‐sectoral	  variation	  in	  the	  importance	  of	  steel	  as	  inputs	  to	  
identify	  the	  effect	  of	  such	  policies	  on	  a	  sector’s	  export	  growth.	  	  I	  examine	  the	  effect	  on	  
exports,	  versus	  other	  performance	  measures	  of	  downstream	  sectors,	  such	  as	  output	  growth,	  
because	  of	  the	  wide	  availability	  and	  consistent	  measurement	  of	  export	  data	  across	  
countries	  and	  sectors.	  	  In	  addition,	  export	  activity	  is	  also	  seen	  as	  an	  important	  indicator	  of	  
growth	  and	  development.	  	  Unlike	  studies	  of	  input	  tariffs,	  there	  is	  a	  wide	  range	  of	  different	  
IPs	  that	  countries	  may	  employ.	  	  These	  include	  non-­‐tariff	  barriers	  (such	  as	  voluntary	  
restraint	  agreements	  (VRAs))	  that	  should	  have	  similar	  effects	  to	  input	  tariffs	  of	  raising	  
domestic	  prices	  on	  the	  inputs	  and	  hurting	  downstream	  export	  competitiveness.	  	  But	  they	  
also	  include	  domestic	  production	  subsidies	  and	  grants	  that	  could	  lower	  prices	  of	  steel	  and	  

	  

2	  

help	  export	  competitiveness	  of	  downstream	  sectors.	  	  This	  makes	  the	  issue	  of	  the	  general	  
effect	  of	  IPs	  on	  downstream	  competitiveness	  an	  important	  empirical	  one.	  
Across	  a	  sample	  of	  21	  steel-­‐producing	  countries	  from	  1975	  through	  2000,	  spanning	  
both	  developed	  and	  less-­‐developed	  economies,	  I	  find	  strong	  evidence	  that	  steel-­‐sector	  IPs	  
have	  a	  significant	  negative	  impact	  on	  the	  export-­‐performance	  of	  downstream	  industries.	  	  I	  
find	  that	  a	  one-­‐standard-­‐deviation	  increase	  in	  IP	  presence	  leads	  to	  a	  3.6%	  decline	  in	  export	  
competitiveness	  for	  an	  average	  downstream	  manufacturing	  sector.	  	  But	  this	  effect	  can	  be	  as	  
high	  as	  50%	  for	  sectors	  that	  use	  steel	  as	  an	  input	  most	  intensively.	  	  My	  results	  also	  suggest	  
that	  this	  effect	  is	  solely	  driven	  by	  the	  less-­‐developed	  countries	  in	  my	  sample.2	  	  Exploring	  the	  
heterogeneous	  effects	  of	  different	  types	  of	  IP	  policies,	  I	  find	  that	  export	  subsidies	  and	  
import	  protection	  policies	  have	  the	  most	  harmful	  effects	  on	  downstream	  export	  
competitiveness.	  	  Government	  production	  subsidies	  and	  grants	  have	  a	  significant	  positive	  
effect,	  but	  its	  magnitude	  is	  much	  smaller	  than	  the	  negative	  impacts	  of	  the	  other	  IPs.	  
The	  paper	  proceeds	  first	  with	  a	  review	  of	  a	  prior	  literature	  that	  has	  focused	  almost	  
exclusively	  on	  the	  effects	  of	  import	  tariff	  protection	  on	  downstream	  industries,	  not	  the	  
broader	  range	  of	  IPs	  that	  this	  paper	  will	  examine.	  	  Prior	  studies	  are	  also	  invariably	  single-­‐
country	  level	  studies,	  unlike	  this	  one,	  which	  analyzes	  the	  extent	  to	  which	  these	  effects	  vary	  
across	  different	  types	  of	  countries.	  	  The	  literature	  review	  is	  followed	  by	  section	  3,	  which	  
lays	  out	  an	  empirical	  strategy	  for	  identification	  of	  the	  effect	  of	  IPs	  on	  downstream	  export	  
competitiveness	  and	  section	  4,	  which	  details	  the	  data	  used	  for	  analysis.	  	  Section	  5	  provides	  
econometric	  estimates	  and	  section	  6	  concludes.	  	  	  
	  
	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
2	  Less-­‐developed	  countries	  in	  my	  sample	  are	  the	  largest	  steel-­‐producing	  ones	  of	  Argentina,	  Brazil,	  

Mexico,	  South	  Africa,	  South	  Korea,	  Spain,	  Taiwan,	  and	  Turkey.	  The	  developed	  countries	  in	  my	  sample	  
are	  Canada,	  Japan,	  New	  Zealand,	  and	  a	  number	  of	  European	  countries	  that	  are	  major	  producers	  of	  
steel.	  

	  

3	  

2.	  Literature	  review	  
Despite	  an	  immense	  literature	  on	  the	  effects	  of	  trade	  protection	  policies,	  there	  are	  
relatively	  few	  studies	  that	  have	  examined	  the	  effects	  of	  protection	  on	  downstream	  sectors.	  	  
Hoekman	  and	  Leidy	  (1992)	  and	  Sleuwaegen	  et	  al.	  (1998)	  introduce	  a	  theory	  of	  cascading	  
protection,	  whereby	  trade	  protection	  in	  an	  upstream	  sector	  induces	  a	  greater	  likelihood	  of	  
trade	  protection	  in	  downstream	  sectors,	  and	  detail	  conditions	  under	  which	  cascading	  
protection	  is	  more	  likely.	  	  Feinberg	  and	  Kaplan	  (1993)	  is	  the	  only	  study	  to	  empirically	  
examine	  this	  hypothesis	  directly	  and	  finds	  evidence	  that	  U.S.	  AD	  and	  CVD	  cases	  are	  more	  
likely	  in	  an	  industry	  when	  an	  upstream	  industry	  has	  been	  successful	  in	  garnering	  AD	  and	  
CVD	  protection.	  	  A	  couple	  other	  papers	  have	  examined	  whether	  AD	  or	  safeguard	  protection	  
leads	  to	  significant	  downstream	  effects.	  	  Krupp	  and	  Skeath	  (2002)	  look	  at	  downstream	  
effects	  from	  U.S.	  AD	  investigations	  as	  well,	  and	  find	  that	  such	  import	  protection	  has	  
significant	  negative	  impacts	  on	  production	  in	  the	  downstream	  industries.	  	  Liebman	  and	  
Tomlin	  (2007)	  conduct	  an	  event	  study	  of	  stock	  market	  reactions	  to	  U.S.	  steel	  safeguard	  
events	  on	  both	  steel	  producers	  and	  major	  steel	  consumers,	  including	  firms	  in	  
transportation,	  metal	  fabrication,	  and	  construction.	  	  They	  find	  there	  were	  significant	  
negative	  effects	  on	  downstream-­‐users	  of	  steel	  form	  the	  U.S.	  steel	  safeguard	  actions,	  though	  
secondary	  regressions	  do	  not	  find	  a	  link	  between	  the	  cost	  share	  of	  steel	  in	  these	  sectors	  and	  
these	  downstream	  effects.	  
	  

Computable	  general	  equilibrium	  (CGE)	  models	  often	  model	  input-­‐output	  linkages	  

and	  can	  then	  provides	  estimates	  of	  economic	  impacts	  across	  many	  sectors	  from	  trade	  
liberalization	  in	  a	  particular	  sector.	  	  For	  example,	  de	  Melo	  and	  Tarr	  (1990)	  estimate	  the	  
welfare	  effects	  of	  quotas	  in	  the	  U.S.	  steel,	  auto	  and	  apparel	  and	  textile	  sectors	  with	  a	  CGE	  
model.	  	  Among	  their	  findings	  is	  that	  simultaneous	  removal	  of	  quotas	  in	  these	  three	  sectors	  
actually	  leads	  to	  employment	  and	  output	  gains	  in	  the	  automobile	  sector,	  which	  they	  explain	  

	  

4	  

as	  due	  to	  the	  lower	  steel	  prices	  enjoyed	  by	  autos	  after	  quota	  removal	  in	  steel.	  	  Francois	  et	  al.	  
(1996)	  is	  another	  example	  of	  a	  CGE	  exercise	  where	  input-­‐output	  linkages	  are	  important	  for	  
highlighted	  results.	  	  The	  study	  examines	  the	  effects	  of	  the	  Jones	  Act,	  which	  restricts	  the	  
provision	  of	  domestic	  cabotage	  services	  (transport	  of	  goods	  between	  domestic	  ports)	  in	  the	  
U.S.	  to	  domestic	  carriers	  only.	  	  Since	  cabotage	  is	  an	  important	  upstream	  sector	  for	  so	  many	  
other	  sectors	  in	  the	  economy,	  their	  analysis	  provides	  not	  only	  an	  overall	  welfare	  estimate	  
from	  removing	  the	  Jones	  Act	  restrictions,	  but	  also	  the	  output,	  employment,	  export,	  and	  
import	  effects	  for	  the	  many	  downstream	  sectors	  in	  the	  economy.	  	  A	  final	  example	  is	  USITC	  
(1989),	  which	  explores	  the	  effects	  of	  U.S.	  steel	  VRAs	  on	  downstream	  users	  of	  steel.	  	  With	  an	  
estimated	  tariff	  equivalent	  of	  the	  VRAs	  around	  4%	  for	  their	  focus	  years,	  they	  find	  only	  
modest	  effects	  on	  downstream	  output,	  employment,	  and	  exports.	  
A	  limitation	  of	  CGE	  models	  is	  that	  one	  has	  to	  come	  up	  with	  an	  estimate	  of	  the	  market	  
distortion	  that	  relies	  to	  some	  extent	  on	  information	  outside	  of	  the	  model.	  	  While	  this	  is	  not	  
as	  problematic	  with	  explicit	  tariffs,	  it	  is	  more	  difficult	  for	  non-­‐tariff	  distortions.3	  	  For	  
example,	  the	  Francois	  et	  al.	  (1996)	  study	  found	  that	  outside	  estimates	  of	  the	  price	  wedge	  
due	  to	  the	  Jones	  Act	  distortion	  ranged	  from	  100%	  to	  300%,	  and	  thus	  present	  the	  reader	  
with	  three	  scenarios	  of	  possible	  effects.	  	  This	  contrasts	  with	  the	  empirical	  regression	  
analysis	  I	  use	  in	  this	  paper	  to	  estimate	  an	  average	  effect	  of	  various	  non-­‐tariff	  IPs	  in	  my	  data	  
sample	  through	  variables	  simply	  indicating	  the	  presence	  of	  such	  policies.	  
	  

More	  recently,	  a	  number	  of	  studies	  have	  used	  micro-­‐level	  data	  to	  examine	  the	  

impact	  of	  lower	  input	  prices	  from	  tariff	  liberalization	  on	  firm-­‐	  or	  plant-­‐level	  productivity.	  	  	  
Using	  Indonesian	  data,	  Amiti	  and	  Konings	  (2007)	  finds	  that	  lower	  input	  tariffs	  leads	  to	  
productivity	  gains	  of	  downstream	  firms	  (not	  just	  better	  competitiveness	  from	  lower	  input	  
costs),	  and	  that	  these	  productivity	  gains	  from	  input	  liberalization	  are	  greater	  than	  those	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3	  Of	  course,	  estimation	  of	  tariff	  effects	  still	  requires	  estimates	  (outside	  the	  model)	  of	  key	  elasticities	  
and	  related	  parameters,	  which	  is	  another	  common	  critique	  of	  CGE	  model	  analysis.	  

	  

5	  

from	  liberalization	  of	  the	  output	  market.	  	  Topalova	  and	  Khandelwal	  (2011)	  finds	  similar	  
results	  using	  Indian	  data.	  	  Goldberg	  et	  al	  (2010a;	  2010b)	  focuses	  on	  how	  lower	  input	  tariffs	  
lead	  to	  the	  introduction	  of	  new	  input	  varieties,	  which	  proves	  to	  also	  be	  an	  important	  source	  
of	  downstream	  productivity	  gains	  in	  the	  sample	  of	  Indian	  plants	  they	  examine.	  	  Chavassus-­‐
Lozza	  et	  al.	  (2010)	  uses	  firm-­‐level	  data	  of	  French	  food	  processing	  firms	  and	  examines	  the	  
impact	  of	  input	  tariff	  liberalization	  on	  downstream	  export	  firm	  behavior.	  	  They	  develop	  a	  
model	  that	  suggests	  that	  input	  liberalization	  may	  help	  the	  high-­‐productivity	  exporting	  firms	  
at	  the	  expense	  of	  the	  lower-­‐productivity	  exporters,	  and	  their	  empirical	  analysis	  finds	  that	  
input	  liberalization	  leads	  to	  significant	  exit	  of	  the	  lowest	  productivity	  exporters.	  
Relative	  to	  this	  previous	  literature,	  this	  study	  has	  two	  main	  con	  
tributions.	  	  First,	  unlike	  previous	  studies,	  I	  examine	  the	  effects	  of	  an	  entire	  array	  of	  
IPs,	  not	  just	  tariffs,	  on	  the	  economic	  performance	  of	  downstream	  industries.	  	  Thus,	  I	  analyze	  
a	  much	  fuller	  set	  of	  policies	  that	  distort	  market	  outcomes,	  as	  well	  as	  examine	  heterogeneity	  
in	  the	  effect	  of	  these	  various	  IPs.	  	  Second,	  I	  do	  this	  in	  the	  context	  of	  a	  panel	  of	  countries,	  not	  
just	  a	  single	  country.	  	  Previous	  studies	  have	  been	  single-­‐country	  studies	  of	  firm-­‐	  or	  plant-­‐
level	  data,	  which	  focus	  exclusively	  on	  less-­‐developed	  countries,	  such	  as	  Chile,	  India,	  and	  
Indonesia.	  	  I	  make	  the	  trade-­‐off	  of	  exploring	  more	  aggregate	  product-­‐level	  data,	  but	  across	  a	  
variety	  of	  countries	  –	  both	  developed	  and	  less-­‐developed.	  	  The	  steel	  sector	  has	  been	  subject	  
to	  significant	  and	  changing	  IP	  policies	  across	  many	  countries,	  allowing	  analysis	  of	  
heterogeneous	  effects	  across	  different	  types	  of	  countries	  in	  a	  consistent	  framework.	  	  
	  
3.	  Empirical	  specification	  
As	  a	  starting	  point,	  one	  can	  estimate	  the	  impact	  of	  IPs	  on	  downstream	  export	  
performance	  with	  the	  following	  empirical	  specification:	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   Tcit = β1IPct + β 2 StShcit + β3 (IPct × StShci ) + β 4GDPct + ηi + ηc + ηt + ε cit 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  (1)	  	  	  	  

	  

6	  

where	   Tcit is	  the	  log	  of	  the	  value	  of	  country	  c’s	  exports	  in	  year	  t	  in	  sector	  i,	   IPct 	  is	  a	  country-­‐
time	  measure	  of	  steel	  sector	  IPs, StShci 	  is	  the	  share	  of	  steel	  in	  sector	  i’s	  output	  in	  country	  c	  
in	  time	  t,	   GDPct is	  a	  country-­‐time	  measure	  of	  GDP,	  the η terms	  are	  country-­‐,	  sector-­‐,	  and	  
time-­‐fixed	  effects,	  and	   ε cit is	  a	  mean-­‐zero	  error	  term.4	  	  The	  focus	  would	  obviously	  be	  on	  the	  
third	  term	  on	  the	  right-­‐hand	  side	  and	  the	  sign	  and	  significance	  of	   β3 ,	  with	  a	  positive	  sign	  
suggesting	  that	  IPs	  have	  helped	  export	  competitiveness	  and	  a	  negative	  sign	  indicating	  that	  
they	  have	  had	  a	  deleterious	  effect.	  	  	  
I	  choose	  to	  estimate	  a	  specification	  that	  is	  simpler,	  but	  even	  more	  demanding	  on	  the	  
data	  than	  equation	  (1),	  for	  identification:	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   Tcit = β1 (IPct × StShci ) + ηic + ηct + ε cit 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  (2)	  
In	  equation	  (2),	  I	  replace	  the	  country-­‐,	  sector,	  and	  time-­‐fixed	  effects	  with	  sector-­‐country	  and	  
country-­‐time	  fixed	  effects, ηic and	   ηct ,	  respectively.	  	  The	  country-­‐time	  fixed	  effects	  ( ηct )	  
subsume	  the	  independent	  effects	  of	  the	  IP	  and	  GDP	  terms	  on	  exports,	  as	  well	  as	  any	  other	  
observed	  or	  unobserved	  country-­‐time	  effects	  on	  exports,	  such	  as	  exchange	  rate	  movements.	  	  
The	  sector-­‐country	  fixed	  effects	  ( ηic )	  subsumes	  the	  independent	  effect	  of	  the	  steel	  share	  
term	  ( StShci ),	  as	  well	  as	  any	  other	  observed	  or	  unobserved	  sector-­‐country	  effects	  on	  
exports,	  such	  as	  country-­‐specific	  endowments	  that	  determine	  the	  underlying	  long-­‐run	  
comparative	  advantage	  of	  a	  country’s	  sector.	  
Endogeneity	  concerns	  seem	  fairly	  minimal	  with	  this	  specification.	  	  The	  steel-­‐share	  is	  
an	  input-­‐output	  relationship,	  which	  is	  related	  to	  technological	  requirements	  of	  production.	  	  
The	  use	  of	  these	  input-­‐output	  relationships	  from	  the	  final	  year	  of	  sample	  (2000),	  when	  IP	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
4	  This	  specification	  (and	  associate	  identification	  strategy)	  is	  analagous	  to	  that	  used	  by	  Rajan	  and	  

Zingales	  (1998)	  and,	  more	  recently,	  Manova	  (2008).	  	  In	  their	  settings,	  they	  use	  heterogeneity	  in	  
external	  financial	  dependence	  across	  sectors	  to	  identify	  the	  effects	  of	  financial	  policies	  and	  events	  at	  
the	  national	  level	  on	  growth.	  	  Here,	  I	  use	  heterogeneity	  in	  a	  sectors’	  requirements	  of	  steel	  inputs	  to	  
examine	  the	  impact	  of	  national-­‐level	  IPs	  on	  downstream	  export	  competitiveness.	  	  	  	  

	  

7	  

presence	  was	  lowest	  for	  most	  countries,	  further	  ensures	  the	  likely	  exogeneity	  of	  this	  
variable	  across	  the	  many	  years	  in	  the	  sample.	  	  The	  decision	  on	  IPs	  in	  the	  steel	  sector	  are	  
also	  likely	  reasonably	  exogenous	  to	  exporting	  behavior	  in	  other	  sectors.	  	  As	  the	  quote	  in	  the	  
introduction	  from	  South	  Africa	  suggests,	  policymakers	  are	  unlikely	  to	  consider	  extra-­‐
sectoral	  consequences	  very	  much	  when	  making	  sectoral	  policy	  decisions.	  	  Third	  factors,	  
such	  as	  GDP	  growth	  of	  the	  economy	  or	  exchange	  rate	  movements	  could	  induce	  spurious	  
correlation	  from	  omitted	  variable	  bias,	  but	  these	  will	  be	  controlled	  for	  with	  the	  use	  of	  
country-­‐time	  and	  sector-­‐country	  fixed	  effects.	  
	  

	  

4.	  Data	  
There	  are	  three	  important	  sources	  of	  information	  that	  I	  use	  to	  implement	  estimation	  
of	  the	  empirical	  specification	  in	  equation	  (2):	  industrial	  policy	  measures,	  export	  data,	  and	  
data	  on	  the	  importance	  of	  steel	  in	  the	  manufacture	  of	  various	  downstream	  sectors.	  
	  

The	  dependent	  variable	  is	  the	  value	  of	  country	  c’s	  exports	  in	  year	  t	  in	  sector	  i.	  	  These	  

data	  come	  from	  the	  United	  Nation’s	  COMTRADE	  database	  (retrieved	  via	  the	  World	  Bank’s	  
World	  Integrated	  Trade	  Solution	  (WITS)	  database)	  at	  the	  5-­‐digit	  Standard	  International	  
Trade	  Classification	  (SITC),	  Revision	  1,	  level	  for	  the	  years	  1975	  through	  2000.	  	  I	  drop	  the	  
steel	  sector	  from	  my	  sample,	  as	  my	  focus	  is	  on	  the	  effect	  of	  steel	  IPs	  on	  downstream	  sector	  
competitiveness,	  which	  should	  have	  the	  opposite	  effect	  as	  that	  on	  the	  steel	  sector	  itself.	  	  As	  
discussed	  below,	  the	  sample	  of	  countries	  is	  determined	  by	  the	  availability	  of	  IP	  data.	  	  Given	  
the	  skewness	  of	  the	  data,	  I	  take	  the	  natural	  log	  of	  the	  export	  variable.5	  	  
	  

The	  key	  independent	  variable	  is	  the	  interaction	  of	  the	  IP	  measure	  and	  the	  input	  

share	  of	  steel	  in	  a	  sector.	  	  I	  begin	  by	  describing	  my	  measure	  of	  IPs	  ( IPct ),	  as	  it	  was	  the	  most	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
5	  I	  add	  the	  value	  of	  “1”	  to	  each	  trade	  value	  before	  logging	  so	  that	  I	  do	  not	  lose	  observations	  with	  zero	  
trade	  in	  my	  sample.	  

	  

8	  

difficult	  to	  collect,	  and	  limitations	  in	  its	  availability	  put	  tighter	  constraints	  on	  the	  data	  
sample	  than	  the	  other	  data	  necessary	  for	  estimation.	  	  Simply	  put,	  there	  is	  no	  common	  
source	  of	  data	  on	  various	  countries’	  IPs	  in	  various	  sectors.	  	  And	  this	  is	  typically	  true	  even	  
when	  searching	  at	  an	  individual	  country	  level.	  	  I	  was	  able	  to	  overcome	  this	  with	  respect	  to	  
steel	  sector	  IPs	  by	  relying	  on	  three	  main	  sources	  of	  information.	  	  The	  first	  is	  Howell	  et	  al.	  
(1988),	  which	  is	  a	  rich	  source	  of	  information	  with	  well-­‐documented	  case-­‐study	  information	  
on	  steel-­‐sector	  IPs	  for	  the	  major	  steel-­‐producing	  countries	  going	  back	  through	  the	  decades	  
prior	  to	  the	  late	  1980s.	  	  In	  order	  to	  have	  data	  beyond	  the	  late	  1980s,	  I	  had	  to	  supplement	  
with	  other	  sources.	  
The	  first	  supplemental	  source	  comes	  from	  a	  European	  Commission	  publication,	  
European	  Commission	  Report	  on	  Competition	  Policy,	  which	  provides	  information	  on	  IPs	  
across	  sectors	  for	  the	  member	  European	  countries,	  many	  of	  which	  are	  important	  world	  
steel	  producers.	  	  This	  source	  allowed	  me	  to	  supplement	  up	  to	  the	  year	  2000	  for	  these	  
countries.	  	  A	  second	  supplemental	  source	  of	  information	  comes	  from	  the	  detailed	  reports	  on	  
foreign	  government	  subsidization	  programs	  published	  in	  the	  U.S.	  Federal	  Register	  by	  the	  
International	  Trade	  Administration	  (ITA)	  of	  the	  U.S.	  Department	  of	  Commerce	  in	  their	  
notices	  of	  their	  U.S.	  countervailing	  duty	  (CVD)	  investigations.	  	  The	  U.S.	  steel	  industry	  has	  
been	  a	  major	  user	  of	  antidumping	  and	  CVD	  investigations	  since	  1980	  against	  virtually	  all	  
countries	  exporting	  steel	  to	  the	  United	  States.	  	  In	  a	  CVD	  investigation,	  the	  ITA	  investigates	  
any	  and	  all	  government	  programs,	  policies,	  and	  other	  interventions	  that	  may	  constitute	  
government	  subsidization	  of	  an	  industry.	  	  Their	  reports	  document	  their	  findings	  on	  these	  
programs,	  including	  a	  short	  history	  of	  the	  policy	  going	  back	  in	  time,	  including	  the	  initiation	  
of	  the	  program.	  	  This	  detail	  in	  ITA	  reports,	  which	  includes	  a	  timeline	  of	  various	  programs,	  is	  
crucial	  for	  my	  use	  here.	  	  	  

	  

9	  

A	  critical	  feature	  of	  the	  history	  of	  U.S.	  steel	  CVD	  investigations	  is	  that	  the	  steel	  
industry	  has	  been	  very	  comprehensive	  in	  filing	  these	  CVD	  cases	  across	  virtually	  all	  import	  
sources,	  particularly	  in	  three	  distinct	  time	  periods.	  	  The	  first	  time	  period	  was	  the	  early	  
1980s,	  when	  hundreds	  of	  AD	  and	  CVD	  cases	  were	  filed	  and	  ultimately	  led	  to	  the	  imposition	  
of	  comprehensive	  VRAs	  on	  U.S.	  imports	  of	  steel.	  	  The	  second	  time	  period	  was	  after	  the	  VRAs	  
were	  allowed	  to	  expire	  in	  1992,	  which	  was	  quickly	  followed	  by	  (again)	  hundreds	  of	  AD	  and	  
CVD	  cases.	  	  A	  final	  period	  was	  in	  the	  late	  1990s,	  after	  the	  Asian	  Financial	  Crisis	  led	  to	  a	  
significant	  import	  surge	  of	  “cheap”	  steel,	  sending	  many	  U.S.	  steel	  firms	  into	  bankruptcy	  by	  
2000.	  	  This	  period	  also	  saw	  scores	  of	  AD	  and	  CVD	  cases	  filed	  by	  the	  U.S.	  steel	  industry.	  	  
These	  three	  events	  then	  give	  us	  a	  fairly	  comprehensive	  snapshot	  of	  non-­‐U.S.	  government	  IPs	  
through	  the	  ITA	  CVD	  reports	  accompanying	  the	  investigations.	  	  Blonigen	  and	  Wilson	  (2010)	  
provide	  more	  detail	  on	  U.S.	  CVD	  activity	  in	  the	  steel	  sector	  and	  similarly	  use	  the	  ITA	  reports	  
to	  construct	  measures	  of	  foreign	  government	  subsidization,	  which	  they	  then	  use	  to	  estimate	  
the	  impacts	  of	  such	  foreign	  subsidization	  on	  the	  U.S.	  steel	  industry.	  
	  

I	  use	  these	  three	  sources	  of	  information	  to	  categorize	  the	  annual	  presence	  of	  various	  

steel-­‐sector	  IPs	  in	  21	  major	  steel-­‐producing	  countries	  from	  1975	  through	  2000.6	  	  	  In	  
particular,	  I	  create	  indicator	  variables	  for	  the	  presence	  of	  the	  following	  IPs	  in	  a	  country’s	  
steel	  sector	  in	  a	  given	  year:	  	  1)	  export	  subsidies,	  2)	  government	  production	  subsidies	  
(typically	  in	  the	  form	  of	  grants	  or	  favorable	  loans),	  3)	  government	  ownership,	  4)	  national	  or	  
regional	  cartel	  arrangements,	  and	  5)	  non-­‐tariff	  barriers	  on	  imports,	  such	  as	  voluntary	  
restraint	  agreements	  (VRAs).	  	  While	  there	  is	  sometimes	  information	  that	  relates	  to	  the	  
magnitude	  of	  the	  IP	  (e.g.,	  whether	  government	  ownership	  is	  full	  or	  partial),	  it	  is	  not	  
reported	  in	  a	  consistent	  or	  frequent	  enough	  fashion	  to	  employ	  in	  my	  sample	  of	  countries	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
6	  The	  countries	  are	  Argentina,	  Austria,	  Belgium,	  Brazil,	  Canada,	  Finland,	  France,	  Germany,	  Italy,	  

Japan,	  Luxembourg,	  Mexico,	  the	  Netherlands,	  New	  Zealand,	  South	  Africa,	  South	  Korea,	  Spain,	  Sweden,	  
Taiwan	  (1989-­‐2000	  only),	  Turkey,	  and	  the	  United	  Kingdom.	  	  

	  

10	  

and	  years.	  	  For	  my	  base	  specifications,	  I	  use	  a	  measure	  of	  total	  IP	  presence	  that	  adds	  up	  
these	  five	  IP	  indicator	  variables,	  but	  then	  later	  examine	  whether	  there	  are	  differences	  in	  the	  
effects	  across	  these	  various	  types	  of	  IPs.	  	  	  
Table	  1	  provides	  descriptive	  statistics	  of	  these	  IP	  indicator	  variables.	  	  As	  one	  can	  
see,	  IP	  usage	  is	  quite	  high	  for	  this	  sample	  of	  countries.	  	  Each	  type	  of	  IP	  is	  present	  in	  at	  least	  
22%	  of	  my	  sample’s	  observations,	  with	  government	  grants	  or	  loans	  (69%),	  non-­‐tariff	  
measures	  (65%)	  and	  government	  ownership	  (57%)	  each	  present	  in	  over	  half	  of	  the	  
observations.	  	  The	  sample	  also	  displays	  rich	  variation	  in	  IP	  presence	  over	  time	  and	  across	  
countries.	  	  Figure	  1	  displays	  the	  average	  number	  of	  steel	  IP	  types	  present	  in	  countries	  over	  
time.	  	  It	  averages	  around	  2.5	  out	  of	  5	  possible	  IP	  program	  types	  at	  the	  beginning	  of	  the	  
sample	  in	  1975,	  rises	  to	  above	  3	  by	  the	  mid-­‐1980s,	  then	  sees	  a	  significant	  drop	  in	  the	  late	  
1980s	  to	  around	  2.	  	  By	  the	  end	  of	  the	  sample	  the	  average	  number	  of	  steel	  IP	  types	  per	  
country	  is	  less	  than	  1.5.	  	  Figure	  2	  displays	  the	  substantial	  variation	  in	  the	  presence	  of	  IPs	  
across	  countries	  during	  the	  sample	  years.	  	  	  	  On	  one	  side	  is	  Taiwan	  and	  New	  Zealand	  with	  0	  
and	  0.5	  annual	  steel	  IPs.	  	  In	  contrast,	  the	  main	  developed	  European	  countries	  (Belgium,	  
France,	  Germany,	  and	  Italy),	  average	  3.5	  or	  more	  annual	  steel	  IP	  types	  during	  the	  sample	  
years.	  	  There	  is	  no	  discernible	  correlation	  between	  the	  presence	  of	  IPs	  and	  the	  development	  
level	  of	  the	  country.	  
	  

Data	  on	  the	  input	  share	  of	  steel	  in	  a	  sector	  ( StShci )	  comes	  from	  country-­‐level	  input-­‐

output	  tables	  available	  from	  the	  OECD	  Structural	  Analysis	  (STAN)	  database.	  	  These	  data	  are	  
reported	  on	  an	  infrequent	  basis,	  with	  the	  €
most	  recent	  data	  coming	  from	  the	  year	  2000	  for	  
most	  of	  the	  countries	  in	  my	  sample.	  	  Importantly,	  the	  STAN	  database	  provides	  these	  data	  at	  
a	  consistent	  level	  of	  detail	  (48	  sectors)	  for	  each	  country.	  	  Given	  the	  limited	  data	  availability,	  
I	  apply	  the	  steel	  share	  of	  input	  usage	  for	  each	  sector	  taken	  from	  these	  country-­‐specific	  
input-­‐output	  tables	  from	  the	  year	  2000	  to	  all	  the	  years	  in	  my	  sample,	  making	  the	  common	  

	  

11	  

assumption	  that	  these	  input-­‐output	  ratios	  are	  fixed	  within	  a	  country.	  	  	  Across	  my	  sample	  the	  
input	  share	  of	  steel	  in	  a	  sector	  ranges	  from	  0.00	  to	  0.43,	  with	  a	  mean	  of	  0.03	  and	  a	  standard	  
deviation	  of	  0.06.	  
	  

I	  create	  the	  main	  independent	  variable	  by	  multiplying	  the	  total	  IP	  measure	  with	  the	  

input	  share	  of	  steel	  ( IPct × StShci ).	  	  Greater	  IPs	  in	  steel	  should	  decrease	  export	  
competitiveness,	  particularly	  for	  sectors	  that	  use	  steel	  more	  intensively.	  	  For	  consistency	  
with	  the	  dependent	  variable	  and	  ease	  of	  interpreting	  coefficient	  estimates,	  I	  also	  take	  the	  
natural	  log	  of	  this	  interaction	  term,	  though	  all	  my	  statistical	  results	  below	  are	  qualitatively	  
identical	  when	  I	  do	  not	  take	  natural	  logs	  of	  my	  variables.	  	  Since	  there	  are	  a	  number	  of	  
observations	  with	  zeros	  for	  each	  of	  these	  variables	  being	  interacted,	  I	  also	  add	  the	  value	  of	  
“1”	  to	  each	  variable	  before	  interacting	  and	  taking	  natural	  logs.	  	  Table	  2	  provides	  descriptive	  
statistics	  for	  these	  two	  variables.	  	  	  	  	  
	  

On	  a	  final	  note,	  the	  Trade	  Analysis	  and	  Information	  System	  (TRAINS)	  database,	  

available	  through	  the	  WITS	  database	  of	  the	  World	  Bank,	  has	  country-­‐	  and	  sectoral-­‐level	  
data	  on	  import	  tariffs	  and	  non-­‐tariff	  measures	  (NTMs)	  which	  could	  be	  of	  potential	  use	  as	  
measures	  of	  IPs.	  	  Unfortunately,	  the	  years	  of	  coverage	  of	  the	  NTM	  measures	  was	  of	  much	  
too	  limited	  availability	  to	  useful	  for	  this	  sample	  of	  countries	  and	  years.	  	  There	  is	  also	  a	  
question	  of	  controlling	  for	  input	  tariffs.	  	  Tariff	  protection	  is	  ubiquitous	  amongst	  the	  
countries	  during	  this	  time	  period,	  so	  an	  indicator	  variable	  will	  not	  have	  any	  necessary	  
variation	  for	  identification.	  	  The	  TRAINS	  dataset	  has	  steel-­‐sector	  tariff	  data	  for	  only	  about	  	  
1/6	  of	  my	  sample’s	  observations,	  which	  covers	  primarily	  developed	  countries	  in	  the	  latter	  
third	  of	  my	  sample.	  	  Inclusion	  of	  an	  input	  tariff	  variable	  interacted	  with	  the	  input	  share	  of	  
steel	  in	  a	  sector	  has	  virtually	  no	  impact	  the	  estimated	  IP	  effect,	  though	  this	  is	  not	  a	  
representative	  portion	  of	  my	  sample.	  	  	  
	  

	  

12	  

5.	  Results	  

	  

Column	  1	  of	  Table	  3	  provides	  results	  when	  I	  estimate	  equation	  (2)	  using	  the	  full	  
sample	  of	  319,419	  annual	  observations	  across	  21	  countries	  from	  1975	  through	  2000.	  	  F-­‐
statistics	  reject	  the	  hypothesis	  that	  the	  set	  of	  country-­‐industry	  and	  country-­‐time	  fixed	  
effects	  are	  jointly	  zero	  at	  the	  1%	  significance	  level	  and	  the	  R-­‐squared	  of	  the	  equation	  is	  0.87.	  	  
My	  focus	  variable,	  the	  interaction	  of	  an	  IP	  presence	  measure	  with	  the	  input	  share	  of	  steel	  in	  
the	  sector	  is	  estimated	  to	  be	  approximately	  -­‐2.2	  and	  highly	  statistically	  significant.	  	  This	  is	  
consistent	  with	  the	  hypothesis	  that	  IPs	  raise	  costs	  to	  downstream	  industries	  and	  harm	  their	  
export	  competitiveness.	  	  	  	  
Given	  how	  we	  have	  specified	  the	  variables	  in	  logarithms,	  the	  elasticity	  of	  export	  
value	  with	  respect	  to	  the	  IP	  presence	  variable	  can	  be	  calculated	  as	  the	  coefficient	  on	  the	  
interaction	  term	  times	  the	  log	  of	  one	  plus	  the	  steel	  input	  share.	  	  Thus,	  for	  an	  average	  steel	  
input	  share	  industry	  where	  steel	  accounts	  for	  3%	  of	  input	  costs,	  the	  relevant	  elasticity	  is	  	  
-­‐0.066.	  	  This	  means	  that	  a	  one-­‐standard	  deviation	  change	  in	  IP	  presence	  (54%)	  is	  associated	  
with	  a	  3.6%	  lower	  export	  value.	  	  Of	  course,	  some	  of	  the	  downstream	  sectors	  have	  steel	  input	  
shares	  as	  high	  as	  0.43	  in	  the	  sample	  (namely,	  Fabricated	  Metal	  Products	  in	  South	  Africa),	  for	  
which	  the	  estimates	  suggest	  that	  a	  one-­‐standard	  deviation	  increase	  in	  IP	  presence	  is	  
associated	  with	  a	  51.1%	  lower	  export	  value.	  	  As	  a	  robustness	  check,	  I	  also	  estimated	  
equation	  (2)	  in	  levels	  (not	  logarithms)	  and	  get	  quantitatively	  similar	  estimates	  of	  these	  
marginal	  effects.	  	  In	  summary,	  there	  is	  strong	  evidence	  that	  IPs	  have	  a	  statistically	  and	  
economically	  significant	  deleterious	  average	  effect	  on	  the	  export	  competitiveness	  of	  
downstream	  industries.	  	  	  
5.1.	  Heterogeneity	  across	  countries	  
It	  is	  interesting	  to	  examine	  whether	  there	  is	  systematic	  heterogeneity	  in	  these	  
effects	  across	  different	  types	  of	  countries.	  	  A	  common	  distinction	  is	  developed	  versus	  less-­‐

	  

13	  

developed	  countries	  (LDCs).	  	  One	  might	  expect	  that	  governments	  of	  LDCs	  have	  less	  
resources	  to	  analyze	  the	  effects	  of	  policies,	  and	  therefore	  may	  apply	  IPs	  in	  such	  a	  way	  that	  
they	  create	  more	  harmful	  effects	  for	  downstream	  industries.	  	  In	  columns	  2	  and	  3	  of	  Table	  3,	  
I	  separate	  the	  sample	  into	  developed	  countries	  and	  LDCs	  and	  find	  evidence	  consistent	  with	  
this	  hypothesis.	  	  The	  elasticity	  of	  downstream	  export	  competitiveness	  with	  respect	  to	  the	  
degree	  of	  IP	  presence	  continues	  to	  be	  negative	  and	  is	  70%	  larger	  in	  absolute	  value,	  while	  
the	  elasticity	  for	  developed	  countries	  is	  positive,	  though	  quite	  small	  in	  magnitude.	  	  Another	  
distinction	  I	  examine	  is	  the	  effect	  for	  Asian	  countries.	  	  There	  seems	  to	  be	  a	  popular	  notion	  
that	  Asian	  countries	  were	  particularly	  effective	  and	  intelligent	  in	  their	  use	  of	  IPs	  with	  
respect	  to	  their	  manufacturing	  sector.	  	  However,	  estimates	  in	  column	  4	  of	  Table	  3	  suggest	  
that	  IP	  use	  in	  the	  three	  Asian	  countries	  in	  my	  sample	  (Japan,	  South	  Korea,	  and	  Taiwan)	  
were	  just	  as	  harmful	  to	  downstream	  export	  competitiveness	  as	  the	  sample	  of	  LDCs.	  
To	  examine	  heterogeneity	  across	  countries	  further	  and	  address	  any	  worry	  that	  one	  
or	  two	  countries	  may	  be	  driving	  results,	  Table	  4	  provides	  estimates	  of	  the	  IP	  effect	  when	  I	  
run	  my	  specification	  for	  each	  country’s	  observations	  separately.7	  	  Of	  the	  20	  countries,	  16	  
show	  a	  negative	  effect	  of	  steel	  IPs	  on	  downstream	  sectors’	  export	  competitiveness,	  with	  9	  of	  
these	  statistically	  significant	  at	  standard	  confidence	  levels	  despite	  relatively	  small	  numbers	  
of	  observations.	  	  	  
	  
5.2.	  Export	  values	  versus	  export	  quantities	  
	  

Export	  value	  is	  a	  product	  of	  price	  and	  quantity.	  	  Thus,	  the	  results	  to	  this	  point	  using	  	  

export	  value	  as	  the	  dependent	  variable	  may	  confound	  the	  effect	  of	  steel	  IPs	  on	  downstream	  
export	  prices	  and	  quantities.	  	  On	  one	  hand,	  one	  would	  expect	  that	  higher	  input	  costs	  would	  
affect	  downstream	  sectors’	  quantities	  much	  more	  than	  prices	  if	  these	  downstream	  sectors	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
7	  We	  cannot	  identify	  this	  coefficient	  for	  Taiwan	  as	  it	  never	  had	  steel	  IPs	  present	  during	  the	  sample	  
years.	  

	  

14	  

face	  highly	  competitive	  export	  sectors	  and/or	  produce	  relatively	  homogeneous	  goods	  (e.g.,	  
Cournot	  oligopoly).	  	  	  If	  this	  is	  true,	  then	  the	  effect	  of	  IPs	  on	  downstream	  export	  values	  is	  
primarily	  the	  effect	  of	  IPs	  on	  downstream	  export	  quantities.	  	  However,	  if	  firms	  in	  the	  export	  
sector	  have	  market	  power,	  they	  may	  adjust	  prices	  as	  well	  as	  quantities	  in	  response	  to	  
higher	  input	  costs.	  	  Raising	  prices	  in	  response	  to	  higher	  input	  costs	  could	  mean	  that	  export	  
value	  does	  not	  fall	  (in	  percentage	  terms)	  as	  does	  export	  quantity.	  	  Another	  possibility	  is	  that	  
higher	  steel	  input	  costs	  cause	  adjustments	  in	  the	  downstream	  sector	  (such	  as	  substitution	  
to	  lower-­‐quality	  substitute	  inputs	  for	  steel)	  that	  may	  affect	  prices	  more	  than	  quantities.	  	  In	  
this	  case,	  export	  value	  may	  fall	  (as	  prices	  are	  lowered)	  more	  than	  export	  quantity.	  	  	  
The	  COMTRADE	  data	  I	  use	  has	  quantity	  data	  for	  almost	  99%	  of	  the	  observations.	  	  
Thus,	  in	  Table	  5	  I	  rerun	  the	  specifications	  in	  Table	  3	  using	  the	  log	  of	  export	  quantity	  of	  the	  
downstream	  sector	  rather	  than	  the	  log	  of	  export	  value.	  	  In	  the	  overall	  sample	  (estimates	  in	  
column	  1),	  the	  coefficient	  of	  interest	  is	  not	  much	  different	  when	  measuring	  exports	  in	  
quantities	  (-­‐1.86)	  versus	  in	  value	  (-­‐2.24).	  	  The	  lower	  coefficient	  in	  the	  quantity	  regression	  
suggests	  that	  the	  effect	  of	  steel	  IPs	  has	  a	  stronger	  effect	  in	  lowering	  prices	  of	  exports	  in	  the	  
downstream	  sector	  than	  in	  lowering	  quantities.	  	  The	  difference	  is	  even	  more	  
inconsequential	  when	  I	  split	  the	  sample	  into	  developed	  and	  less-­‐developed	  countries.	  	  The	  
effect	  of	  IPs	  is	  insignificant	  for	  the	  developed	  countries	  in	  my	  sample	  regardless	  of	  whether	  
I	  measure	  exports	  in	  quantities	  or	  values,	  and	  almost	  identical	  in	  magnitude	  for	  the	  sample	  
of	  less-­‐developed	  countries.	  	  An	  interesting	  difference	  emerges	  in	  the	  Asian	  sample,	  
however.	  	  The	  much	  larger	  coefficient	  in	  the	  export	  values	  regression	  suggests	  that	  
downstream	  sectors’	  export	  prices	  fall	  much	  more	  than	  export	  quantities	  due	  to	  steel	  IPs.	  	  
As	  mentioned,	  one	  possible	  reason	  for	  this	  may	  be	  substitution	  into	  alternative	  inputs.	  
	  

	  

15	  

5.3.	  Heterogeneity	  across	  IP	  types	  
A	  final	  analysis	  I	  undertake	  is	  to	  estimate	  separate	  effects	  of	  various	  IP	  programs.	  	  
For	  these	  purposes,	  I	  group	  IPs	  into	  four	  different	  composite	  categories:	  1)	  Export	  
subsidies,	  2)	  Government	  production	  subsidies,	  3)	  Government	  ownership	  of	  production,	  4)	  
Cartel	  arrangements,	  and	  5)	  Non-­‐tariff	  import	  protection.	  	  Standard	  trade	  theory	  would	  
suggest	  that	  export	  subsidies	  and	  non-­‐tariff	  import	  protection	  should	  raise	  domestic	  prices	  
of	  steel,	  hurting	  downstream	  sectors’	  export	  competitiveness.	  	  Likewise,	  cartel	  
arrangements	  in	  steel,	  if	  effective,	  should	  raise	  the	  domestic	  price	  of	  steel.	  	  On	  the	  other	  
hand,	  government	  subsidization	  should	  lower	  steel	  prices	  and	  help	  downstream	  sectors’	  
export	  competitiveness.	  	  Its	  ambiguous	  whether	  government	  ownership	  would	  have	  an	  
impact	  per	  se,	  as	  government	  ownership	  is	  often	  linked	  with	  less	  efficient	  management,	  but	  
may	  also	  include	  implicit	  subsidization	  of	  operations.	  
	  

Columns	  1	  and	  2	  of	  Table	  6	  provide	  the	  separate	  estimates	  of	  these	  five	  types	  of	  IP	  

programs	  for	  the	  full	  sample	  and	  for	  LDCs	  in	  my	  sample,	  respectively.	  	  	  Results	  are	  quite	  
consistent	  across	  the	  full	  sample	  and	  that	  of	  the	  less-­‐developed	  countries,	  and	  the	  signs	  
accord	  well	  with	  theory.	  	  	  Export	  subsides	  and	  non-­‐tariff	  barriers	  have	  large	  negative	  and	  
statistically	  significant	  effects	  on	  export	  competitiveness.	  	  The	  magnitude	  of	  these	  effects	  is	  
similar	  to	  that	  found	  for	  the	  overall	  effect	  of	  all	  IPs.	  	  The	  harmful	  effect	  of	  non-­‐tariff	  barriers	  
is	  estimated	  to	  be	  particularly	  large	  in	  less-­‐developed	  countries,	  with	  a	  coefficient	  around	  	  
-­‐7.0,	  which	  is	  over	  three	  times	  larger	  than	  that	  of	  the	  other	  negative	  IP	  effects.	  	  In	  contrast,	  I	  
estimate	  a	  positive	  effect	  of	  government	  subsidies	  and	  grants	  on	  export	  competitiveness,	  
though	  the	  magnitude	  of	  these	  effects	  is	  significantly	  smaller	  (0.475	  in	  the	  full	  sample	  and	  
0.859	  for	  the	  less-­‐developed	  country	  sample),	  and	  only	  statistically	  significant	  for	  the	  less-­‐
developed	  countries.	  	  Government	  ownership	  has	  a	  negative	  and	  significant	  effect	  in	  the	  full	  

	  

16	  

sample,	  but	  is	  not	  statistically	  significant	  for	  the	  less-­‐developed	  countries.	  	  Finally,	  cartel	  
arrangements	  do	  not	  have	  any	  statistically	  significant	  effects	  in	  either	  sample.	  	  	  	  
	  
5.4.	  Further	  robustness	  checks	  
I	  undertook	  a	  number	  of	  additional	  robustness	  tests.	  	  	  First,	  I	  experimented	  with	  a	  
variety	  of	  lags	  of	  my	  focus	  variable,	  the	  interaction	  of	  IPs	  with	  the	  share	  of	  steel	  in	  the	  
downstream	  sector.	  	  There	  is	  no	  evidence	  of	  lagged	  effects,	  indicating	  that	  the	  impact	  of	  IPs	  
on	  downstream	  export	  competitiveness	  is	  quite	  immediate.	  	  	  I	  also	  explored	  heterogeneity	  
of	  the	  IP	  effect	  across	  sectors.	  	  While	  the	  effect	  is	  a	  bit	  stronger	  in	  the	  sectors	  that	  use	  steel	  
most	  (fabricated	  metals,	  machinery,	  and	  transport	  equipment),	  it	  has	  a	  significant	  average	  
negative	  impact	  even	  for	  the	  sectors	  that	  have	  below-­‐average	  use	  of	  steel	  inputs.	  	  Finally,	  I	  
split	  my	  sample	  into	  years	  prior	  to	  1990	  and	  years	  after	  1990,	  since	  there	  is	  a	  fairly	  
significant	  drop	  in	  IP	  use	  after	  the	  late	  1980s.	  	  I	  estimate	  a	  negative	  and	  significant	  effect	  of	  
IPs	  in	  both	  periods,	  though	  the	  effect	  is	  about	  50%	  larger	  in	  the	  earlier	  period.	  

	  
6.	  Conclusion	  
Throughout	  history,	  governments	  have	  used	  IPs	  to	  guide	  the	  development	  of	  key	  
sectors	  in	  their	  economies	  and	  spur	  general	  economic	  development.	  	  However,	  many	  of	  the	  
IPs	  typically	  used	  will	  raise	  prices	  of	  the	  protected	  sector	  in	  the	  country,	  potentially	  hurting	  
the	  competitiveness	  and	  development	  of	  the	  downstream	  sectors	  that	  use	  the	  protected	  
sectors’	  products	  as	  inputs.	  	  Nevertheless,	  governments	  often	  make	  extensive	  use	  of	  IPs	  on	  
sectors	  that	  are	  key	  inputs	  in	  the	  economy,	  presumably	  because	  the	  IPs	  will	  lead	  to	  a	  highly	  
competitive	  sector	  in	  the	  long-­‐run	  that	  no	  longer	  needs	  IPs	  and	  deliver	  low-­‐cost	  inputs	  to	  
the	  rest	  of	  the	  economy.	  

	  

17	  

	  

Despite	  the	  large	  stakes	  involved	  we	  don’t	  know	  very	  much	  about	  how	  IPs	  affect	  

other	  sectors,	  particularly	  the	  downstream	  sectors	  that	  rely	  on	  their	  products	  for	  inputs.	  	  	  
The	  prior	  literature	  has	  focused	  exclusively	  on	  tariffs.	  	  In	  contrast,	  this	  paper	  examines	  a	  full	  
range	  of	  IP	  programs	  that	  were	  used	  by	  various	  steel-­‐producing	  countries	  during	  my	  
sample	  period	  from	  1975-­‐2000.	  	  The	  evidence	  I	  find	  suggests	  that	  IPs	  have	  a	  statistically	  
and	  economically	  harmful	  effect	  on	  the	  export	  competitiveness	  of	  downstream	  sectors	  after	  
controlling	  for	  a	  full	  set	  of	  country-­‐industry	  and	  country-­‐time	  fixed	  effects.	  	  These	  effects	  
are	  driven	  primarily	  by	  the	  LDCs	  in	  my	  sample,	  and	  estimates	  suggest	  that	  export	  
subsidization	  and	  non-­‐tariff	  import	  protection	  are	  the	  primary	  IPs,	  leading	  to	  reduced	  
export	  competitiveness	  of	  the	  downstream	  sectors.	   	  

	  

18	  

References	  
Amiti,	  Mary,	  and	  Jozef	  Konings.	  (2007)	  “Trade	  Liberalization,	  Intermediate	  Inputs,	  and	  
Productivity:	  Evidence	  from	  Indonesia,”	  American	  Economic	  Review,	  Vol.	  97(5):	  1611-­‐38.	  
	  
Blonigen,	  Bruce	  A.,	  and	  Wesley	  W.	  Wilson	  (2010)	  “Foreign	  Subsidization	  and	  Excess	  
Capacity,”	  Journal	  of	  International	  Economics,	  Vol.	  80(2):	  200-­‐11.	  
	  
Chevassus-­‐Lozza,	  Emmanuelle,	  Carl	  Gaigne,	  Leo	  Le	  Mener.	  (2010)	  “Does	  Input	  Trade	  
Liberalization	  Boost	  Downstream	  Firms’	  Exports?	  Theory	  and	  Firm-­‐level	  Evidence,”	  Mimeo.	  
	  
de	  Melo,	  Jaime,	  and	  David	  Tarr.	  (1990)	  “Welfare	  Costs	  of	  Quotas	  in	  Textiles,	  Steel,	  and	  
Autos,”	  Review	  of	  Economics	  and	  Statistics,	  Vol.	  72(3):	  489-­‐97.	  
	  
Feinberg,	  Robert	  M.,	  and	  Seth	  Kaplan.	  (1993)	  “Fishing	  Downstream:	  The	  Political	  Economy	  
of	  Effective	  Administered	  Protection,”	  Canadian	  Journal	  of	  Economics,	  Vol.	  26(1):	  150-­‐8.	  
	  
Francois,	  Joseph	  F.,	  Hugh	  M.	  Arce,	  Kenneth	  A.	  Reinert,	  and	  Joseph	  E.	  Flynn.	  (1996)	  
“Commercial	  Policy	  and	  the	  Domestic	  Carrying	  Trade,”	  Canadian	  Journal	  of	  Economics,	  Vol.	  
29(1):	  181-­‐98.	  
	  
Francois,	  Joseph,	  and	  Julia	  Woerz.	  (2008).	  “Producer	  Services,	  Manufacturing	  Linkages,	  and	  
Trade.”	  Journal	  of	  Industry,	  Competition	  and	  Trade,	  8(3–4):	  199–229.	  
	  
Goldberg,	  Pinelopi,	  Amit	  Khandelwal,	  Nina	  Pavcnik,	  and	  Petia	  Topalova.	  (2010)	  ‘‘Imported	  
Intermediate	  Inputs	  and	  Domestic	  Product	  Growth:	  	  Evidence	  from	  India,’’	  Quarterly	  Journal	  
of	  Economics,	  Vol.	  125:	  1727–67.	  
	  
Hoekman,	  Bernard	  M.,	  and	  Patrick	  P.	  Leidy.	  (1992)	  “Cascading	  Contingent	  Protection,”	  
European	  Economic	  Review,	  Vol.	  36(4):	  883-­‐92.	  
	  
Howell,	  Thomas	  R.	  (1988)	  Steel	  and	  the	  State:	  Government	  Intervention	  and	  Steel’s	  
Structural	  Crisis.	  	  Boulder,	  Colorado:	  Westview	  Press.	  
	  
Konings,	  Jozep,	  and	  Hylke	  Vandenbussche.	  (2009)	  “Antidumping	  Protection	  Hurts	  
Exporters:	  Firm-­‐Level	  Evidence	  from	  France,”	  Mimeo.	  
	  
Krupp,	  Corinne	  M.,	  and	  Susan	  Skeath.	  	  (2002)	  “Evidence	  on	  the	  Upstream	  and	  Downstream	  
Impacts	  of	  Antidumping	  Cases,”	  The	  North	  American	  Journal	  of	  Economics	  and	  Finance,	  Vol.	  
13(2):	  163-­‐78.	  
	  
Manova,	  Kalina.	  (2008)	  “Credit	  Constraints,	  Equity	  Market	  Liberalizations,	  and	  
International	  Trade,”	  Journal	  of	  International	  Economics,	  76(1):	  33-­‐47.	  
	  
Melitz,	  Marc	  J.	  (2005)	  “When	  and	  How	  Should	  Infant	  Industries	  Be	  Protected?”	  Journal	  of	  
International	  Economics,	  Vol.	  66(1):	  177-­‐96.	  
	  
Miyagiwa,	  Kaz,	  and	  Yuka	  Ohno.	  (1999)	  “Credibility	  of	  Protection	  and	  Incentives	  to	  
Innovate,”	  International	  Economic	  Review,	  Vol.	  40(1):	  143-­‐63.	  
	  

	  

19	  

Rajan,	  Raghuram	  G.,	  and	  Luigi	  Zingales.	  (1998)	  “Financial	  Dependence	  and	  Growth,”	  
American	  Economic	  Review,	  Vol.	  88(3):	  559-­‐86.	  
	  
Sleuwaegen,	  Leo,	  Rene	  Belderbos,	  and	  Clive	  Jie-­‐A-­‐Joen.	  (1998)	  “Cascading	  Contingent	  
Protection	  and	  Vertical	  Market	  Structure,”	  International	  Journal	  of	  Industrial	  Organization,	  
Vol.	  16(6):	  697-­‐718.	  
	  
Topalova,	  Petia,	  and	  Amit	  Khandelwal.	  (2011)	  “Trade	  Liberalization	  and	  Firm	  Productivity:	  
The	  Case	  of	  India,”	  Review	  of	  Economics	  and	  Statistics,	  Vol.	  93(3):	  995-­‐1009.	  
	  
U.S.	  International	  Trade	  Commission.	  (1989)	  The	  Effects	  of	  the	  Steel	  Voluntary	  Restraint	  
Agreements	  on	  U.S.	  Steel-­‐Consuming	  Industries:	  Report	  to	  the	  Subcommittee	  on	  Trade	  of	  the	  
House	  Committee	  on	  Ways	  and	  Means	  on	  Investigation	  No.	  332-­‐270	  Under	  Section	  332	  of	  the	  
Tariff	  Act	  of	  1930.	  Washington,	  DC:	  U.S.	  International	  Trade	  Commission,	  Publication	  No.	  
2182.	  	  
	  

	  

20	  

	  
Table	  1	  
Descriptive	  statistics	  for	  the	  IP	  indicator	  variables	  
Standard	  
	  
Mean	  
deviation	  
Minimum	   Maximum	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Export	  subsidies	  
0.22	  
0.42	  
0	  
1	  
Government	  production	  subsidies	  
0.69	  
0.46	  
0	  
1	  
Government	  ownership	  
0.57	  
0.50	  
0	  
1	  
Cartel	  arrangements	  
0.36	  
0.48	  
0	  
1	  
Non-­‐tariff	  barriers	  
0.65	  
0.48	  
0	  
1	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Total	  IPs	  
2.49	  
1.35	  
0	  
5	  
Notes:	  Statistics	  based	  on	  the	  full	  sample	  of	  319,419	  observations.	  	  The	  total	  IPs	  variable	  is	  a	  sum	  
of	  the	  five	  indicator	  IP	  variables	  for	  each	  observation.	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Table	  2	  
Descriptive	  statistics	  for	  dependent	  variable	  and	  main	  independent	  variable	  
Standard	  
	  
Mean	  
deviation	  
Minimum	   Maximum	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Log	  of	  export	  value	  
7.46	  
3.14	  
0	  
16.76	  
Log(1+	  Steel	  industrial	  policies)	  ×	  
Log(1+	  Steel	  input	  share)	  
0.03	  
0.07	  
0	  
0.57	  
Notes:	  Statistics	  based	  on	  the	  full	  sample	  of	  319,419	  observations.	  	  

	  

21	  

	  
Table	  3	  
Steel	  industrial	  policies	  have	  significant	  negative	  impacts	  on	  	  
downstream	  sectors'	  export	  competitiveness	  measure	  in	  export	  value	  
Less-­‐
Developed	  
developed	  
Asian	  
	  
Full	  sample	  
countries	  
countries	  
countries	  
Log(1+	  Steel	  industrial	  policies)	  ×	  
Log(1+	  Steel	  input	  share)	  
-­‐2.242	  
0.199	  
-­‐3.390	  
-­‐3.395	  
	  
(0.025)	  
(0.038)	  
(0.043)	  
(0.041)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Country-­‐industry	  fixed	  effects	  
Yes	  
Yes	  
Yes	  
Yes	  
Country-­‐year	  fixed	  effects	  
Yes	  
Yes	  
Yes	  
Yes	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
F-­‐statistic	  
55.36	  
245.76	  
327.12	  
361.86	  
(p-­‐value)	  
(0.000)	  
(0.000)	  
(0.000)	  
(0.000)	  
Observations	  
319419	  
206363	  
113056	  
42483	  
Notes:	  Dependent	  variable	  is	  the	  log	  of	  the	  value	  of	  a	  sector’s	  exports.	  	  Standard	  errors,	  clustered	  by	  
country-­‐industry	  pair,	  are	  in	  parentheses.	  
	  

	  

22	  

	  

	  

Table	  4	  	  
Country-­‐by-­‐country	  effect	  of	  steel	  IPs	  on	  downstream	  	  
sectors'	  export	  competitiveness	  	  
	  
Estimated	  	  
Number	  of	  
IP	  effect	  
observations	  

	  
	  
Argentina	  
	  
	  
Austria	  
	  
	  
Belgium	  
	  
	  
Brazil	  
	  
	  
Canada	  
	  
	  
Finland	  
	  
	  
France	  
	  
	  
Germany	  
	  
	  
Italy	  
	  
	  
Japan	  
	  
	  
Luxembourg	  
	  
	  
Mexico	  
	  
	  
Netherlands	  
	  
	  
New	  Zealand	  
	  

	  

3.676	  
(1.718)	  

14430	  
	  

4.839	  
(1.004)	  

14982	  
	  

-­‐0.920	  
(0.952)	  

16833	  
	  

-­‐1.046	  
(1.038)	  

16545	  
	  

-­‐2.933	  
(1.552)	  

11355	  
	  

-­‐0.333	  
(1.147)	  

15388	  
	  

-­‐2.288	  
(0.776)	  

16981	  
	  

-­‐4.527	  
(2.608)	  

18230	  
	  

-­‐1.710	  
(0.704)	  

16974	  
	  

0.817	  
(0.458)	  

17800	  
	  

-­‐4.908	  
(1.118)	  

16339	  
	  

-­‐4.275	  
(0.898)	  

15448	  
	  

-­‐0.308	  
(0.831)	  

16775	  
	  

1.505	  
(1.421)	  

13382	  
	  

23	  

	  
South	  Africa	  
-­‐0.768	  
12383	  
	  
(0.548)	  
	  
	  
South	  Korea	  
-­‐20.791	  
16758	  
	  
(2.027)	  
	  
	  
Spain	  
-­‐0.474	  
16846	  
	  
(0.726)	  
	  
	  
Sweden	  
-­‐1.320	  
14575	  
	  
(2.445)	  
	  
	  
Turkey	  
-­‐2.692	  
12721	  
	  
(0.601)	  
	  
	  
United	  Kingdom	  
-­‐1.839	  
16746	  
	  
(0.825)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Notes:	  The	  table	  reports	  the	  coefficient	  on	  variable	  Log	  (Steel	  industrial	  
policies	  ×	  Steel	  input	  share)	  when	  estimating	  equation	  (2)	  for	  a	  particular	  
country’s	  observations.	  

	  

24	  

	  
Table	  5	  
Steel	  industrial	  policies	  have	  significant	  negative	  impacts	  on	  downstream	  	  
sectors'	  export	  competitiveness	  measured	  in	  export	  quantity	  
Less-­‐
Developed	  
developed	  
Asian	  
	  
Full	  sample	  
countries	  
countries	  
countries	  
Log(1+	  Steel	  industrial	  policies)	  ×	  
Log(1+	  Steel	  input	  share)	  
-­‐1.860	  
0.465	  
-­‐3.449	  
-­‐1.979	  
	  
(0.032)	  
(0.377)	  
(0.046)	  
(0.685)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Country-­‐industry	  fixed	  effects	  
Yes	  
Yes	  
Yes	  
Yes	  
Country-­‐year	  fixed	  effects	  
Yes	  
Yes	  
Yes	  
Yes	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
2
R 	  
0.85	  
0.88	  
0.78	  
0.77	  
F-­‐statistic	  
21.10	  
15.43	  
34.51	  
3.78	  
(p-­‐value)	  
(0.000)	  
(0.000)	  
(0.000)	  
(0.000)	  
Observations	  
291911	  
191586	  
100325	  
40977	  
Notes:	  Dependent	  variable	  is	  the	  log	  of	  the	  quantity	  of	  a	  sector’s	  exports.	  	  Standard	  errors,	  clustered	  
by	  country-­‐industry	  pair,	  are	  in	  parentheses.	  
	  

	  

25	  

	  
	  
Table	  6	  	  
Negative	  impacts	  of	  steel	  IPs	  on	  downstream	  sectors'	  export	  
competitiveness	  by	  IP	  types	  
	  
Less-­‐
developed	  
Full	  	  
	  
countries	  
sample	  
	  
Log(1+EXPORT	  SUBSIDIES)	  ×	  
-­‐2.130	  
-­‐1.962	  
Log(1+Steel	  input	  share)	  
	  
(0.320)	  
(0.344)	  
	  
	  
	  
Log(1+GOVERNMENT	  
PRODUCTION	  SUBSIDIES)	  ×	  
0.475	  
0.859	  
Log(1+Steel	  input	  share)	  
	  
(0.283)	  
(0.341)	  
	  
	  
	  
Log(1+GOVERNMENT	  
OWNERSHIP)	  ×	  Log(1+Steel	  input	  
share)	  
-­‐1.446	  
0.443	  
	  
(0.296)	  
(0.394)	  
	  
	  
	  
Log(1+CARTELS)	  ×	  Log(1+Steel	  
input	  share)	  
-­‐0.029	  
-­‐0.254	  
	  
(0.328)	  
(0.477)	  
	  
	  
	  
Log(1+NON-­‐TARIFF	  IMPORT	  
PROTECTION)	  ×	  Log(1+Steel	  input	  
-­‐2.841	  
-­‐7.041	  
share)	  
	  
(0.465)	  
(0.668)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Country-­‐industry	  fixed	  effects	  
Yes	  
Yes	  
Country-­‐year	  fixed	  effects	  
Yes	  
Yes	  
	  
	  
	  
2
R 	  
0.87	  
0.80	  
F-­‐statistic	  
52.93	  
49.11	  
(0.000)	  
(0.000)	  
(p-­‐value)	  
Observations	  
319419	  
113056	  
Notes:	  Dependent	  variable	  is	  the	  log	  of	  the	  value	  of	  a	  sector’s	  
exports.	  	  Standard	  errors,	  clustered	  by	  country-­‐industry	  pair,	  are	  in	  
parentheses.	  
	  

	  

26	  

	  

27	  

	  

	  

	  

28	  

