                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE ALLOCATION OF TALENT AND U.S. ECONOMIC GROWTH

                                          Chang-Tai Hsieh
                                            Erik Hurst
                                          Charles I. Jones
                                          Peter J. Klenow

                                        Working Paper 18693
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18693


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2013




We are grateful to Raquel Fernandez, Kevin Murphy, and seminar participants at Boston College,
Boston University, Brown, Chicago, Columbia, CREI, Duke, Harvard, LSE, Michigan, MIT, an NBER
EFG meeting, Penn, Princeton, Stanford, Toronto, UBC, UCLA, USC and Yale for helpful comments,
and to Huiyu Li and Gabriel Ulyssea for excellent research assistance. Hsieh and Hurst acknowledge
support from the University of Chicago's Booth School of Business, and Klenow from the Stanford
Institute for Economic Policy Research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Chang-Tai Hsieh, Erik Hurst, Charles I. Jones, and Peter J. Klenow. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Allocation of Talent and U.S. Economic Growth
Chang-Tai Hsieh, Erik Hurst, Charles I. Jones, and Peter J. Klenow
NBER Working Paper No. 18693
January 2013
JEL No. J70,O40

                                            ABSTRACT

Over the last 50 years, there has been a remarkable convergence in the occupational distribution between
white men, women, and blacks. We measure the macroeconomic consequences of this convergence
through the prism of a Roy model of occupational choice in which women and blacks face frictions
in the labor market and in the accumulation of human capital. The changing frictions implied by the
observed occupational convergence account for 15 to 20 percent of growth in aggregate output per
worker since 1960.


Chang-Tai Hsieh                                    Charles I. Jones
Booth School of Business                           Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago                              Stanford University
5807 S Woodlawn Ave                                655 Knight Way
Chicago, IL 60637                                  Stanford, CA 94305-4800
and NBER                                           and NBER
chsieh@chicagoBooth.edu                            chad.jones@stanford.edu

Erik Hurst                                         Peter J. Klenow
Booth School of Business                           Department of Economics
University of Chicago                              579 Serra Mall
Harper Center                                      Stanford University
Chicago, IL 60637                                  Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER                                           and NBER
erik.hurst@chicagobooth.edu                        Pete@Klenow.net
       2                           HSIEH, HURST, JONES, AND KLENOW



1. Introduction

Over the last 50 years, there has been a remarkable convergence in the occupational
distribution between white men and women and blacks. For example, in 1960, 94 per-
cent of doctors and lawyers were white men. By 2008, the fraction was just 62 percent.
Similar changes occurred throughout the economy over the last fifty years, particularly
among highly-skilled occupations.1
       This paper measures the macroeconomic consequences of the changes in the labor
market outcomes of white women, black men, and black women over the last fifty years
through the prism of a Roy (1951) model of occupational choice. We assume that ev-
ery person is born with a range of talents across all possible occupations and chooses
the occupation with the highest return. Differences in the occupational distribution
between men and women can be driven by differences in the distribution of talent be-
tween groups. Rendall (2010), for example, shows that brawn-intensive occupations
(such as construction) in the U.S. are dominated by men, and that changes in the re-
turns to brawn- vs. brain-intensive occupations can explain changes in the occupa-
tional distribution of women vs. men since 1960; see also Pitt, Rosenzweig and Hassan
(2012). Relatedly, Goldin and Katz (2002) and Bertrand, Goldin and Katz (2010) provide
evidence that innovations in contraception and increased labor market flexibility for
women had important effects on the occupational choices of women.
       However, other forces may also play an important role. Consider the world that
Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O’Connor faced when she graduated from Stanford
Law School in 1952. Despite being ranked third in her class, the only private sector job
she could get immediately after graduating was as a legal secretary (Biskupic, 2006).
Such barriers might explain why white men dominated the legal profession at that time.
And the fact that private law firms are now more open to hiring talented female lawyers
might explain why the share of women in the legal profession has increased dramati-
cally over the last fifty years. Similarly, the Civil Rights movement of the 1960s is surely
important in explaining the change in the occupational distribution of blacks.2
   1
     These statistics are based on the 1960 Census and the 2006-2008 American Community Surveys. We
discuss the sample in more detail below. A large literature provides more extensive documentation of
these facts. See Blau (1998), Blau, Brummund and Liu (2012), Goldin (1990), Goldin and Katz (2012), and
Smith and Welch (1989) for assessments of this evidence.
   2
     See Donohue and Heckman (1991) for an assessment of the effect of federal civil rights policy on the
economic welfare of blacks.
                                   THE ALLOCATION OF TALENT                                         3


       To capture these forces, we make several changes to the canonical Roy framework.
First, we allow for the possibility that each group faces different occupational frictions
in the labor market. We model these frictions as a group/occupation-specific “tax”
on earnings that drives a wedge between a group’s marginal product in an occupa-
tion and their take home pay. One interpretation of these “taxes” is that they represent
preference-based discrimination as in Becker (1957). For example, one reason why pri-
vate law firms would not hire Justice O’Connor is that the law firms’ partners (or their
customers) viewed the otherwise identical legal services provided by female lawyers as
somehow less valuable.3
       Second, we allow for frictions in the acquisition of human capital. We model these
frictions as a group-specific tax for each occupation on the inputs into human capital
production. These human capital frictions could represent the fact that some groups
were restricted from elite higher education institutions, that black public schools are
underfunded relative to white public schools, that there are differences in prenatal or
early life health investments across groups, or that social forces steered certain groups
towards certain occupations.4
       Finally, we allow for changes in the returns to skill across occupations. If these
changes are common to all groups, then they will not affect the occupations of men
and women differently. However, some technological changes may be group-specific.
The innovations related to contraception mentioned earlier are a prime example.
       In our augmented Roy model, all three forces — barriers to occupational choice,
relative ability across occupations, and relative returns to occupational skills — will af-
fect the occupational distribution between groups. To make progress analytically, we
follow McFadden (1974) and Eaton and Kortum (2002) and assume that talent obeys
an extreme value distribution. This assumption gives us two key results. First, we

   3
      Consistent with the Becker (1957) interpretation, Charles and Guryan (2008) show that relative black
wages are lower in states where the marginal white person is more prejudiced (against blacks).
    4
      Here is an incomplete list of the enormous literature on these forces. Karabel (2005) documents how
Harvard, Princeton, and Yale systematically discriminated against blacks, women, and Jews in admissions
until the late 1960s. Card and Krueger (1992) documents that public schools for blacks in the U.S. South
in the 1950s were underfunded relative to schools for white children. See Chay, Guryan and Mazumder
(2009) for evidence on the importance of improved access to health care for blacks. See Fernandez (2012)
and Fernandez, Fogli and Olivetti (2004) on the role of social forces in women’s occupational choice.
Goldin and Katz (2002), Bailey (2006), Bertrand, Goldin and Katz (2010), and Bailey, Hershbein and Milleri
(2012) document that innovations related to contraception had important consequences for female labor
market outcomes and educational attainment. Fernandez and Wong (2011) stress rising divorce rates as a
force behind women’s rising labor force participation and educational attainment.
   4                           HSIEH, HURST, JONES, AND KLENOW



get a closed-form expression relating the share of a group in an occupation to the
occupation-specific frictions faced by the group. Second, the average wage gap be-
tween groups turns out to be the same in all occupations: smaller barriers in an occu-
pation lead to a selection effect in which less talented people choose that occupation,
and these two forces exactly net out in the model. As a result, frictions specific to an
occupation show up in quantities rather than prices in that occupation. These two re-
sults allow us to back out the occupation-specific frictions for each group from data
on occupational shares and average wages. Using data from the decadal U.S. Censuses
and the American Community Surveys, we find that the occupational frictions faced by
women and blacks decreased substantially over the last fifty years.
   We then embed the Roy model in general equilibrium. This allows us to estimate
the effect of our three forces (occupational barriers, talent distribution, occupation-
specific technical change) on aggregate productivity. We find that changes in occupa-
tional barriers facing blacks and women can explain 15 to 20 percent of aggregate wage
growth between 1960 and 2008. Furthermore, essentially all of the gain is driven by the
movement of women into high-skilled occupations. We also entertain the possibility
that occupational frictions are unchanged and instead some group-specific techno-
logical changes drive the changing occupational allocation. Under this scenario, the
aggregate wage gains from the changing occupational allocation are similar, but the
allocation itself may be efficient.
   In addition, we find that real wages increased from our highlighted mechanisms
by roughly 40% for white women, roughly 60% for black women, and roughly 45% for
black men, but fell by about 5% for white men. The reduction in frictions can thus
account for essentially all of the narrowing of the wage gap between blacks and women
vs. white men. Also, we find that about 75 percent of the rise in women’s labor force
participation is attributable to the decline in occupational frictions.
   The paper proceeds as follows. The next section lays out the basic model of occu-
pational choice. In Section 3, we provide micro evidence for one of the key predictions
of our sorting model. We then use our framework to measure the frictions in occupa-
tional choice between blacks and women versus white men in Section 4. In Section 5,
we explore the macroeconomic consequences of the changes in occupational frictions
                                    THE ALLOCATION OF TALENT                                           5


across groups. We offer some closing thoughts in the final section.5



2. Occupational Sorting and Aggregate Productivity

We start with the occupational choice decision. The economy consists of a continuum
of people working in N possible occupations, one of which is the home sector. Each
person possesses an idiosyncratic ability in each occupation — some people are good
economists while others are good nurses. The basic allocation to be determined in this
economy is how to match workers with occupations.


2.1. People

Individuals are members of different groups, such as race and gender, indexed by g. A
person with consumption c and leisure time 1 − s gets utility


                                              U = cβ (1 − s)                                               (1)


where s represents time spent on human capital accumulation, and β parameterizes
the tradeoff between consumption and time spent accumulating human capital.
       Each person works one unit of time in an occupation indexed by i. Another unit
of time — think “when young” — is divided between leisure and schooling. A person’s
human capital is produced by combining time s and goods e. The production function
for human capital in occupation i is


                                           h(e, s) = h̄ig sφi eη .                                         (2)


Note that we will omit subscripts on individual-specific variables (such as s and e in
this case) to keep the notation clean. The elasticity of human capital with respect to
time, φi , however, does have a subscript to emphasize that this elasticity varies across
   5
    Several recent papers are worth noting for related contributions. Ellison and Swanson (2010) show
that high-achieving girls in elite mathematical competitions are more geographically concentrated than
high-achieving boys, suggesting many girls with the ability to reach these elite levels are not doing so.
Cavalcanti and Tavares (2007) use differences in wage gaps across countries in a macro model to measure
the overall costs of gender discrimination and find that it is large. Albanesi and Olivetti (2009b) study the
gender earnings gap in a model of home production, while Dupuy (2012) studies the evolution of gender
gaps in world record performances in sport. Beaudry and Lewis (2012), looking across cities, suggest that
much of the change in the gender wage gap can be explained by a change in the relative price of skills.
   6                          HSIEH, HURST, JONES, AND KLENOW



occupations. As we discuss below, this plays a key role in generating wage differences
across occupations.
   The parameter h̄ig allows for potentially different efficiency in human capital accu-
mulation across groups. We have two interpretations in mind for h̄ig . One is that family
background (e.g., nutrition and health care) could differ across groups, thereby affect-
ing the human capital payoff to investments in schooling quantity and quality. Cunha,
Heckman and Schennach (2010) provide evidence of such complementarity between
early and later human capital investments. A second interpretation is that women’s
childbearing may disrupt human capital investment, a force that could change over
time with fertility and technology. For example, Goldin and Katz (2002) and Bertrand,
Goldin and Katz (2010) provide evidence that innovations in contraception had impor-
tant effects on the timing of childbearing and, in turn, the education and occupational
choices of women.
   In addition, we allow for two other frictions. The first affects human capital choices.
                                   h that is applied to the goods e invested in human
We model this friction as a “tax” τig
capital and that varies across both occupations and groups. We think of this tax as rep-
resenting forces that affect the cost of acquiring human capital for different groups in
                                     h might represent discrimination against blacks
different occupations. For example, τig
or women in admission to universities, or differential allocation of resources to pub-
lic schools attended by black vs. white children, or parental liquidity constraints that
affect children’s education. Additionally, it can represent the differential investments
made toward building up math and science skills in boys relative to girls.
   The second friction we consider occurs in the labor market. A person in occupation
                                          w )w where w denotes the wage per efficiency
i and group g is paid a wage equal to (1−τig  i       i
                                                       w is that it represents preference-
unit of labor paid by the firm. One interpretation of τig
based discrimination by the employer or customers as in Becker (1957).
   Consumption equals labor income less expenditures on education:

                                     w                      h
                           c = (1 − τig )wǫh(e, s) − e(1 + τig ).                      (3)


Note that pre-distortion labor income is the product of the wage received per efficiency
unit of labor, the idiosyncratic talent draw ǫ in the worker’s chosen occupation, and the
individual’s acquired human capital h.
                                 THE ALLOCATION OF TALENT                                             7


   Given an occupational choice, the occupational wage wi , and idiosyncratic ability ǫ
in the occupation, each individual chooses c, e, s to maximize utility:


       U (τ w , τ h , h̄, w, ǫ) = max (1 − s)cβ s.t. c = (1 − τig
                                                               w                      h
                                                                  )wǫh(e, s) − e(1 + τig ).               (4)
                               c,e,s


This yields the following for the amount of time and goods spent on human capital:

                                                          1
                                             s∗i =
                                                       1 + 1−η
                                                           βφi

                                                                               1
                                                   w )w h̄ sφi ǫ
                                                                            ! 1−η
                                            η(1 − τig  i ig i
                              e∗ig (ǫ) =                    h
                                                       1 + τig

Time spent accumulating human capital is increasing in φi . Individuals in high φi oc-
cupations acquire more schooling and have higher wages to compensate them for the
                                              h , and τ h do not affect s because they
time spent on schooling. Forces such as wi , τig       ig

have the same effect on the return and on the cost of time. In contrast, these forces
change the returns of investment in goods in human capital (relative to the cost) with
an elasticity that is increasing in η. These expressions hint at why we use both time and
goods in the production of human capital. Goods are needed so that distortions to hu-
man capital accumulation matter. As we show below, time is needed to explain average
wage differences across occupations.
   After substituting the expression for human capital into the utility function, we get
the following expression for indirect utility in occupation i:

                                                                                                 β
                                                               1−η                            ! 1−η
                                        wi sφi i (1   − si )    β ǫi ·   η η (1   −   η)1−η
                 U (τig , wi , ǫi ) =                                                                     (5)
                                                                τig

Here, we define τig as a “gross” tax rate that summarizes the frictions:

                                                      h )η
                                                (1 + τig    1
                                        τig ≡          w ·      .                                         (6)
                                                 1 − τig   h̄ig

                                    h )η are observationally equivalent in our setup (in
   It turns out that h̄ig and (1 + τig
particular if e is unobserved). This occurs despite the fact that they may have very dif-
ferent implications for efficiency. Given that it does not matter at all for our quantitative
   8                           HSIEH, HURST, JONES, AND KLENOW



                                           h could have this alternative interpretation.
results, we set h̄ig = 1 recognizing that τig


2.2. Occupational Skills

Turning to the worker’s idiosyncratic talent, we borrow from McFadden (1974) and
Eaton and Kortum (2002). We assume each person gets an iid skill draw ǫi from a
Fréchet distribution in each occupation:


                                  Fig (ǫ) = exp(−Tig ǫ−θ ).                                (7)


The parameter θ governs the dispersion of skills, with a higher value of θ corresponding
to smaller dispersion. We assume that θ is common across occupations and groups.
The parameter Tig , however, can potentially differ. Across occupations, differences in
T ’s are easy to understand. For example, talent is easy to come by in some occupations
and scarce in others. The way we formulate the model, the differences in T ’s across oc-
cupations (for all groups) will be isomorphic to the sector-specific productivities that
we introduce below. When we observe very few individuals in a given occupation, it
could be that talent for this occupation is scarce or that this occupation is less produc-
tive than other occupations.
   More important for our purposes is the potential that the T ’s differ across groups
within a given occupation. We allow for this possibility between men and women but
not between blacks and whites. Specifically, in some occupations, brawn may be a
desirable attribute. If men are physically stronger than women on average, then one
would expect to observe more men in occupations requiring more physical strength,
such as firefighting or construction. To account for this, Tig may be higher in these
occupations for white and black men relative to white and black women.


2.3. Occupational choice

The occupational choice problem reduces to picking the occupation that delivers the
highest value of Uig . Given talent draws are iid from an extreme value distribution,
the highest utility can also be characterized by an extreme value distribution, a result
reminiscent of McFadden (1974). The overall occupational share can then be obtained
by aggregating the optimal choice across people, as we show in the next proposition.
                                         THE ALLOCATION OF TALENT                                         9


(Proofs of the propositions are given in the online appendix.)

Proposition 1 (Occupational Choice):                        Let pig denote the fraction of people in group
g that work in occupation i. Aggregating across people, the solution to the individual’s
occupational choice problem leads to

                                                                                                1−η
                                                                       1/θ
                                        θ
                                      w̃ig                           Tig wi sφi i (1 − si )      β
                     pig = PN                        where w̃ig ≡                                     .       (8)
                                            θ
                                      s=1 w̃sg
                                                                                    τig

       Equation (8) says that occupational sorting depends on w̃ig , which is the overall
reward that someone from group g with the mean talent obtains by working in occupa-
tion i, relative to the power mean of w̃ for the group over all occupations.6 The occu-
pational distribution is driven by relative returns and not absolute returns: forces that
only change w̃ for all occupations have no effect on the occupational distribution. This
reward depends on mean talent in the occupation Tig , the post-friction wage per effi-
                                             wig
ciency unit in the occupation                τig ,   and the amount of time spent accumulating human
capital by a person in that occupation si .7 Technological change affect occupational
choice through the price per unit of skill, wi . For example, technological innovations
in the home sector emphasized by Greenwood, Seshadri and Yorukoglu (2005) can be
viewed as a decline in wi in the home sector.
       The sorting model then generates the average quality of workers in an occupation
for each group. We show this in the following proposition:

Proposition 2 (Average Quality of Workers): For a given group, the average quality of
workers in each occupation, including both human capital and talent, is

                                                                                                1
                                               "                            η           1 # 1−η
                                                            wi (1 − τiw )
                                                        
                                                                                   Ti      θ
                             E [hi ǫi ] = γ η η sφi i                                                         (9)
                                                              1 + τih              pig

                     1        1
where γ ≡ Γ(1 −      θ   ·   1−η )   is related to the mean of the Fréchet distribution for abilities.

       Notice that average quality is inversely related to the share of the group in the occu-
pation pig . This captures the selection effect. For example, the model predicts that only
   6
   See Luttmer (2008) for a similar result.
   7
   Notice that human capital enters twice, once as a direct effect on efficiency units and once indirectly,
capturing the fact that a person who gets a lot of education has lower leisure.
   10                           HSIEH, HURST, JONES, AND KLENOW



the most talented female lawyers (such as Sandra Day O’Connor) would have chosen to
be lawyers in 1960. And as the barriers faced by female lawyers declined after 1960, less
talented female lawyers moved into the legal profession and thus lowered the average
quality of female lawyers.
   Next, we compute the average wage for a given group in a given occupation — the
model counterpart to what we observe in the data.


Proposition 3 (Occupational Wage Gaps): Let wageig denote the average earnings in
occupation i by group g. Its value satisfies

                                                                     N
                                                                                  ! θ1 · 1−η
                                                                                          1
                                                                     X
                            w
             wageig ≡ (1 − τig )wi E [hi ǫi ] = (1 − si )−1/β γ η̄           θ
                                                                           w̃sg                .   (10)
                                                                     s=1


In turn, the occupational wage gap between any two groups is the same across all occu-
pations. Specifically,
                                                             1
                                                 P θ ! θ1 · 1−η
                                wageig             s w̃sg
                                          =     P θ             .                                  (11)
                              wagei,wm           s w̃s,wm


   Equation (10) states that average earnings for a given group differs across occupa-
tions only because of the first term, (1 − si )−1/β . Occupations in which schooling is
especially productive (a high φi and therefore a high si ) will have higher average earn-
ings, and that is the only reason for differences across occupations in the model. Aver-
age earnings are no higher in occupations where a group faces less discrimination or a
better talent pool or a higher wage per efficiency unit. The reason is that each of these
factors leads lower quality workers to enter those jobs. This composition effect exactly
offsets the direct effect on earnings when the distribution of talent is Fréchet. Because
of the selection effect, the wage gap between two groups is the same for all occupations.
   The exact offset due to selection is a feature of the Fréchet distribution, and we
would not expect this feature to hold more generally. However, the general point is
that when the selection effect is present, the wage gap is a poor measure of the frictions
(or absolute advantage) faced by a group in a given occupation. Such frictions lower
the wage of the group in all occupations, not just in the occupation where the group
encounters the friction. In the empirical section, we will examine the extent to which
changes in the occupational distortions account for the narrowing of wage gaps.
                              THE ALLOCATION OF TALENT                            11


   Putting together the equations for the occupational share and the wage gap, we get
the propensity of a group to work in an occupation:

                                                    −θ             −θ(1−η)
                                                            wageg
                                        
                       pig      Tig          τig
                             =                                                      (12)
                     pi,wm     Ti,wm        τi,wm           wagewm

   Equation (12) states that the propensity of a group to work in an occupation (relative
to white men) depends on three terms: relative mean talent in the occupation (arguably
equal to one for many occupations), the relative occupational friction, and the average
wage gap between the groups. From Proposition 2, the wage gap itself is a function of
the distortions faced by the group and the price of skills in all occupations. With data
on occupational shares and wages, we can measure a composite of relative mean talent
and occupational frictions. This will be the key equation we take to the data.



2.4. Aggregate Productivity

To close the model, we assume a representative firm produces aggregate output Y from
labor in N occupations:
                                             N
                                                            !1/ρ
                                             X
                                     Y =       (Ai Hi )ρ                            (13)
                                             i=1

where Hi denotes the total efficiency units of labor and Ai is the exogenously-given
productivity in occupation i. In turn, Hi is defined as

                             G
                             X
                      Hi =         qg pig · E [hig ǫig | Person chooses i] .        (14)
                             g=1


where qg denotes the total number of people in group g. Hi is the product of average
human capital and the number of people in the occupation, summed over groups.



2.5. Equilibrium

A competitive equilibrium in this economy consists of individual choices {c, e, s}, an
occupational choice by each person, total efficiency units of labor in each occupation
Hi , final output Y , and an efficiency wage wi in each occupation such that
  1. Given an occupational choice, the occupational wage wi , and idiosyncratic ability
    12                                 HSIEH, HURST, JONES, AND KLENOW



      ǫ in that occupation, each individual chooses c, e, s to maximize utility:


            U (τ w , τ h , w, ǫ) = max (1 − s)cβ s.t. c = (1 − τig
                                                                w                      h
                                                                   )wǫh(e, s) − e(1 + τig ).                          (15)
                                  c,e,s



   2. Each individual chooses the occupation that maximizes his or her utility: i∗ =
                   w , τ h , w , ǫ ), taking {τ w , τ h , w , ǫ } as given.
      arg maxi U (τig   ig    i i              ig ig       i i

   3. A representative firm hires Hi in each occupation to maximize profits:

                                           N
                                                                !1/ρ         N
                                           X                                 X
                                       max   (Ai Hi )ρ                   −           wi Hi                            (16)
                                       {Hi }
                                                 i=1                         i=1


   4. The occupational wage wi clears the labor market for each occupation:

                                       G
                                       X
                               Hi =           qg pig · E [hig ǫig | Person chooses i] .                               (17)
                                        g=1



   5. Total output is given by the production function in equation (13).
The equations characterizing the general equilibrium are given in the next result.

Proposition 4 (Solving the General Equilibrium): The general equilibrium of the model
is {pig , Hisupply , Hidemand , wi } and Y such that
   1. pig satisfies equation (8).

   2. Hisupply aggregates the individual choices:

                                                                                                N
                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                             ! θ1 · 1−η −1
                                                                                       w )θ−1
                                                                                 (1 − τig
         Hisupply                      si )(θ(1−η)−1)/β sθφ
                                                                X                               X
                    = γ η̄wiθ−1 (1 −                     i
                                                            i
                                                                        qg Tig         h )ηθ
                                                                                                        θ
                                                                                                      w̃sg
                                                                  g
                                                                                 (1 + τig       s=1
                                                                                                                      (18)

   3. Hidemand satisfies firm profit maximization:

                                                                           1
                                                                  Aρi
                                                                        1−ρ
                                               Hidemand   =                      Y                                    (19)
                                                                  wi


   4. wi clears each occupational labor market: Hisupply = Hidemand .

   5. Total output is given by the production function in equation (13).
                                 THE ALLOCATION OF TALENT                         13


   Note that we have modeled the barriers as taxes driving a wedge between the wages
paid by firms and those received by women and blacks (or between education spend-
ing by women and blacks and the education output sold by firms). For this reason firms
earn zero profits. One could equivalently think of the taxes as rents earned by discrim-
inating firms. Alternatively, we could have assumed firms both discriminate against
women and blacks and discriminate in favor of white men such that these rents are
zero in each occupation even in the absence of taxes. Our results are robust to this
alternative.



2.6. Intuition

To develop intuition, consider the following simplified version of the model. First, as-
sume only two groups, men and women, and assume men face no distortions. Sec-
ond, assume ρ = 1 (occupations are perfect substitutes) so that wi = Ai . With this
assumption, the production technology parameter pins down the wage per unit of hu-
man capital in each occupation. In addition, τig affects the average wage and occupa-
tional choices of group g but have no effect on other groups. Third, assume φi = 0 (no
schooling time) and Tig = 1 (mean occupational talent is the same for every group). Ag-
gregate output is then equal to the sum of wages paid to men and wages paid to women
(gross of the labor market friction):

                                                               wagew
                                 Y = qm · wagem + qw ·                              (20)
                                                               1 − τw
               PN   piw τiw
where τ w ≡     i=1 1−τiw     denotes the earnings-weighted average of the labor market
friction facing women.
   The average wages of men and women, respectively, are given by:

                                              N
                                                          ! 1θ · 1−η
                                                                  1
                                              X
                                   wagem =          Aθi                             (21)
                                              i=1


                                        N 
                                                                   ! 1θ · 1−η
                                                                           1

                                            Ai (1 − τ w ) θ
                                        X                
                                                           i
                              wagew =                                               (22)
                                        i=1
                                              (1 + τih )η

The average male wage is a power mean of the occupational productivity terms and
      14                                HSIEH, HURST, JONES, AND KLENOW



is not affected by the occupational distortions facing women (this is driven by the as-
sumption that ρ = 1). The average wage of women is a power mean of the occupational
productivities and distortions.
      To see the effect of the distortions, assume τ h = 0 and that 1 − τiw and Ai are jointly
log-normally distributed. The average female wage is then equal to:

                     N
                                 ! 1θ · 1−η
                                         1
                     X                             1                   1 θ−1
  ln wagew = ln            Aθi                +       · ln (1 − τ w ) − ·    · Var(ln(1 − τiw )).   (23)
                                                  1−η                  2 1−η
                     i=1


The first term says that the average female wage is increasing in the power mean of
occupational productivities. The second term states that the average female wage is
decreasing in the weighted average of the labor market frictions, and more so the higher
is η (the greater the importance of goods for human capital). The third term says that
the average female wage is decreasing in the dispersion of 1 − τ w , and more so the
greater the importance of goods for human capital.
      This simple example shows the fundamental effects of labor market frictions in our
model. Both the mean and dispersion of τw reduce productivity and lower the aver-
age female wage. The productivity losses come from two sources: underinvestment in
human capital (tied to weighted mean levels of τw ) and misallocation of female talent
across occupations (tied to the dispersion of τw across occupations).
      Though we will not impose these simplifying assumptions, with this motivation in
mind we will later isolate the potential productivity loss due to the misallocation of
talent versus underinvestment in human capital for all groups facing discrimination.



3. Empirically Evaluating the Occupational Sorting Model

3.1. Data

We use data from the 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 Decennial Censuses and the
2006-2008 American Community Surveys (ACS).8 We make four restrictions to the data.
First, we restrict the sample to white men (wm), white women (ww), black men (bm)
and black women (bw). These will be the four groups we analyze in the paper. Second,
  8
    When using the 2006-2008 ACS data, we pool all three years together and treat them as one cross
section. Henceforth, we refer to the pooled 2006-2008 sample as the 2008 sample.
                                   THE ALLOCATION OF TALENT                                         15


we only include individuals between the ages of 25 and 55. This restriction focuses the
analysis on individuals after they finish schooling and prior to retirement. Third, we
exclude individuals on active military duty. Finally, we exclude individuals who report
being unemployed (not working but searching for work). Our model is not well suited to
capture transitory movements into and out of employment. Appendix Table B.1 reports
the summary statistics of our sample.9
       A key to our analysis is a consistent definition of occupations over time. First, we
treat the home sector as a separate occupation. We define a person who is not currently
employed or who works less than ten hours per week as working in the home sector.
Those who are employed but usually work between ten and thirty hours per week are
classified as being part-time workers. We split the sampling weight of part-time work-
ers equally between the home sector and the occupation in which they are working.
Individuals working more than thirty hours per week are considered to be working full-
time in an occupation outside of the home sector. Second, we define the non-home
occupations using the roughly 70 occupational sub-headings from the 1990 Census oc-
cupational classification system.10 Appendix Table B.2 reports the 67 occupations we
analyze. Some samples of the occupational categories are “Executives, Administrators,
and Managers”, “Engineers”, “Natural Scientists”, “Health Diagnostics”, “Health Assess-
ment”, and “Lawyers and Judges”.11 To assess robustness, we also use a more detailed
classification of occupations into 340 occupations defined consistently since 1980 as
well as 20 broad occupational groups defined consistently since 1960.
       We measure earnings as the sum of labor, business, and farm income in the previous
year. For earnings we restrict the sample to individuals who worked at least 48 weeks
during the prior year, with more than 1000 dollars of earnings (in 2007 dollars) in the
previous year, and who worked on average more than 30 hours per week. We define
the hourly wage as total annual earnings divided by total hours worked in the previous
year.12

   9
     For all analysis in the paper, we apply the sample weights available in the different surveys.
  10
     http://usa.ipums.org/usa/volii/99occup.shtml. We use the 1990 occupation codes as our basis be-
cause the 1990 codes are available in all Census and ACS years since 1960. We start our analysis in 1960, as
this is the earliest year for which the 1990 occupational crosswalk is available.
  11
     Appendix Table B.3 gives a more detailed description of some of these occupational categories.
  12
     We impute the average wage in the home sector from the group composition and average schooling of
individuals in the home sector, assuming that the relationship between income and these characteristics
are the same in the home sector as in the market sector.
       16                         HSIEH, HURST, JONES, AND KLENOW



3.2. Occupational Sorting and Wage Gaps By Group

We begin by documenting the degree of convergence in the occupational distribution
between white men and the other groups over the last fifty years. We measure similarity
in the occupational distribution with the following index:

                                                  N
                                            1X
                                   Ψg ≡ 1 −    |pi,wm − pig |                                     (24)
                                            2
                                                 i=1


       Ψg is a function of the sum across occupations of the absolute value of the difference
in the propensity of the group relative to white men in the occupation. We normalize
the index so that Ψg = 0 implies no overlap in the occupational distribution and Ψg = 1
implies an identical occupational distribution between the group and white men.
       Panel A of Table 1 presents the occupational similarity index for white women, black
men, and black women for all members of each group and separately for less-educated
(high school degree or less) and highly-educated individuals (more than high school).13
       A few things of note from this table. First, each group saw substantial occupa-
tional convergence relative to white men between 1960 and 2008. Second, the timing of
the convergence differed between women and black men. The occupations of women
(both black and white) converged towards those of white men over the entire time pe-
riod, while those of black men converged largely prior to 1980. Third, convergence in
occupations is largely driven by highly-educated individuals in each group, with very
little convergence for the less-educated. This pattern is particularly striking among
white women. In 1960, there were substantial occupational differences both between
high educated white women and high educated white men, and between low educated
white women and low educated white men. Low educated white men worked primarily
in construction and manufacturing, while low educated white women worked primar-
ily as secretaries or in low skilled services like food service. High educated white men in
1960 were spread out across many high skilled occupations, while high educated white
women worked primarily as teachers and nurses. Between 1960 and 2008, the occu-
pations of higher educated white men and women converged dramatically, while oc-
cupational similarity between lower educated white men and women remained largely

  13
    We exclude the home sector in the estimates shown in Table 1, but broad patterns are very similar –
particularly the index for white women — when the home sector is included.
                                THE ALLOCATION OF TALENT                                        17




Table 1: Occupational Similarity and Conditional Wage Gaps Relative to White Men




 Note: Panel A of the table reports our occupational similarity index for white women, black men,
 and black women relative to white men in 1960, 1980, and 2008. The occupational similarity index
 runs from zero (no overlap with the occupational distribution for white men) and one (identical
 occupational distribution to white men). The index is also computed separately for higher edu-
 cated and lower educated individuals in the different groups. Panel B reports the difference in log
 wages between the groups and white men. The entries come from a regression of log wages on
 group dummies and controls for potential experience and hours worked per week. The regression
 only includes a sample of individuals working full time.
       18                           HSIEH, HURST, JONES, AND KLENOW



unchanged. Today, low skilled women still primarily work in services and office support
occupations, while low skilled men still primarily work in construction and manufac-
turing.14
       A strong prediction of our model is that the convergence in the occupational distri-
bution documented in Table 1 will narrow the wage gap in all occupations. Moreover, it
should not have a larger effect on the wage gap in an occupation where relative propen-
sities converged versus one where relative propensities remain unchanged. We begin to
examine these predictions in Panel B of Table 1. As is well known, wages of women have
converged with those of white men over the last fifty years. What is perhaps less well
known is that the wage convergence is exactly the same for less-educated women as
for more educated women. From 1960 to 2008, the wage gap between highly-educated
women and comparable white men narrowed by 29 log points. Over the same time
period, the wage gap between less-educated women and white men narrowed by 26
log points, despite the fact that the gap in the occupational distribution between less-
educated women and white men remained essentially unchanged. This is exactly what
our model predicts: changes in the τig ’s for white women in high φ occupations results
in entry and lower average quality of women in these occupations and exit and higher
average quality in low φ occupations. The overall wage for women increases due to the
improved allocation, but by the same magnitude in the high φ as in the low φ occupa-
tions.15
       Figure 1 provides additional evidence that the wage gap in an occupation is uncor-
related with the frictions in that occupation. Specifically, the figure plots the (log) wage
gap of white women relative to white men in an occupation against the relative propen-
sity to work in that occupation pi,ww /pi,wm in 1980. A white woman was 65 times more
likely than a white man to work as a secretary, but only 1/7 as likely to work as a lawyer.
Given this enormous variation, the difference in the wage gaps between these two oc-

  14
      Blau, Brummund and Liu (2012) documents similar results pertaining to the occupational conver-
gence of women relative to men by education.
   15
      For black men, the wage gap evolved similarly for less vs. more educated individuals from 1960 to
1980. After 1980, however, there was little change in occupational similarity for either high or low skilled
black men, and there was no change in the wage gap for high skilled black men. The wage gap for low
skilled black men, however, continued to narrow after 1980. This may be due to the rapid decline in labor
market participation of low skilled black men during the last thirty years, if it was not random. As currently
formulated, our model would not predict such a trend. However, as we discuss in Section 5, the change
in labor market outcomes for black men between 1980 and 2008 do not materially affect our estimates of
aggregate productivity gains.
                                           THE ALLOCATION OF TALENT                                                                                19


                Figure 1: Occupational Wage Gaps for White Women in 1980

            Occupational wage gap (logs)
                0.6
                                                       Doctors

                 0.5                                  Farm Mgrs
                                                                       Managers
                                                            Supervisor(P)      Sales
                                                            Lawyers Textile Mach.             Computer Tech
                 0.4                                           Mgmt Related
                                                                                    Prod. Inspectors
                                             Other Vehicle                                                  Info. Clerks
                            Metal Work        Misc. Repairer     Food                                              Financial Clerk
                                          Engineers                     Other Techs        Insurance      Misc. Admin                Secretaries
                                                    Architects                Fabricators
                 0.3                     Plant Operator      Eng. TechsScience Techs
                                                                            Clerks                   Records
                               Construction                     Science        Arts/Athletes
                                                      Wood Work Math/CompSci                             Private Hshld
                                               Police                     Freight                               Nurses
                                                               Mail                                              Health Service
                        Firefighting    Motor Vehicle                      Professors Textiles
                 0.2         Mechanics
                                                                  Cleaning
                                                 Wood Mach. Agriculture
                                                                                               Health Techs
                                                                                                           Print Mach.
                                  Extractive    Elec. Repairer Guards                                   Librarians
                                                                                                    Food Prep
                                                                                  Therapists
                 0.1                       Forest
                                                                                               Teachers



                  0
                                                          Farm Work
                                                                               Social Work
               −0.1
                        1/64               1/16                  1/4                1            4       16        64
                                                                                          Relative propensity, p(ww)/p(wm)

        Note: The figure shows the relationship between the (log) occupational wage gap for white
        women compared to white men and the relative propensity to work in the occupation
        between white women and white men, pi,ww /pi,wm .



cupations is remarkably small. White women secretaries earned about 33 percent less
than white men secretaries in 1980, while the gap was 41 percent for lawyers. Looking
across the 67 occupations, there is no systematic relationship between the wage gap
and the relative propensity in the occupation.16 The patterns in other years and for
other groups were quite similar.17
    Figure 2 provides similar evidence over time, again for white women relative to
white men. This figure shows that the change in the wage gap from 1960 to 2008 is
also uncorrelated with the change in the relative propensities to work in the occupa-
tion. For example, the relative fraction of white women who are doctors increased by
144 percent between 1960 and 2008. For nurses, in contrast, the relative fraction who
  16
     The coefficient from a regression of the occupational wage gap on log pi,ww /pi,wm was 0.002 with a
standard error of 0.008 and an adjusted R-squared of essentially zero. For interpretation, the standard
deviation of the independent variable was 1.96 and the mean of the dependent variable was -0.31. The
regression weighted occupations by the share of all workers (across all groups) in the occupation. Albanesi
and Olivetti (2009b) find similar evidence using the PSID.
  17
     There is, however, a relationship between the occupational wage gaps and the average earnings of
individuals in the occupations. On average, high income occupations tended to have larger wage gaps.
Nonetheless, the magnitude of this correlation was almost always small. For example, in 2006-2008, white
working women had about a 3 percentage point larger wage gap relative to white men in response to a
one-standard deviation increase in occupational log income. As seen from Table 1, the average wage gap
was 26 percentage points.
   20                                        HSIEH, HURST, JONES, AND KLENOW



        Figure 2: Change in Occupational Wage Gaps for White Women,1960–2008

              Change in log wage gap, 1960−2008
                 0.6

                                                                                                                                          Firefighting
                  0.4
                                                                                                          Farm Mgrs
                                                                                     Farm Work
                                                                                                                             Wood Mach.
                  0.2
                                                                          Agriculture                                 Metal Proc.
                                                                                            Personal Service
                    0                                 Office Machine
                                                                                    Teachers
                                                                               Fabricators
                                                                                                  Cleaning Social Work
                                                                                                                         Freight
                           Computer Tech                                                         Health Service
                                                                                                              Eng. Techs Mail
                                                                        Prod. Inspectors                                      Science           Insurance
                                           Textiles      Food Prep              Math/CompSci     Professors                     Doctors
                 −0.2                                              Librarians    Secretaries
                                                                                                 Arts/Athletes Construction
                                                                                                                 Elec. Repairer
                                                                                                                                      Guards
                                                                                                                                        Engineers
                                                                                 Sales                 Supervisor(P)                       Other
                                                                 Health Techs                                 Managers
                                                                                          Nurses
                                                                                                                 Plant Operator
                 −0.4
                                                                                                         Records                             Lawyers

                                                                                                                                    Architects
                 −0.6

                 −0.8
                   −3               −2                  −1                   0          1          2        3         4
                                                                                  Change in log p(ww)/p(wm), 1960−2008

        Note: The figure shows the relationship between the change in (log) occupational wage
        gap for white women compared to white men between 1960 and 2008 and the change in
        the relative propensity to work in the occupation between white women and white men,
        pi,ww /pi,wm , over the same time period.



are white women decreased by 52 percent. Yet the relative wage gap between white
men and white women narrowed by 20 to 30 log points in both occupations. From the
perspective of the model, the weak relationship between wages gaps and propensities
is not surprising. Within the model, the relative propensity, not the wage gap, reveals
frictions facing a group in an occupation.



4. Estimating the Frictions

Motivated by our model, we now use data on occupational propensities and average
wage gaps to infer the frictions. Specifically, given equations (12) and (11), we can
define the composite friction measure for each group (relative to white men) in each
occupation as:

                                                           1                            − 1                             −(1−η)
                                                                                                          wageg
                                                                       
                              τig            Ti,wm             θ                 pig             θ
                  τ̂ig ≡                                           =                                                                             .          (25)
                            τi,wm             Ti,g                          pi,wm                       wagewm

   This equation has the following interpretation. If a group is either underrepresented
in an occupation or if it faces a large average wage gap, the right-hand side will be high.
                               THE ALLOCATION OF TALENT                             21


The model can explain this in one of two ways (on the left side): either the group faces
a large composite barrier, or it has a relatively low mean talent in that occupation (e.g.
women in occupations where brute strength is important). We observe the right-hand
side of this equation in the data and therefore use it to back out the average relative
distortion (or talent) between groups, τ̂ig .
   To implement this calculation, we require estimates of θ and η. The parameter θ
governs the dispersion of talent. Given the occupational choice model above, the dis-
persion of wages across people within an occupation-group obeys a Fréchet distribu-
tion with the shape parameter θ(1 − η): the lower is this shape parameter, the more
wage dispersion there is within an occupation. Wage dispersion therefore depends
on the dispersion of talent (governed by 1/θ) and amplification from human capital
(governed by 1/(1 − η)). In particular, the coefficient of variation of wages within an
occupation-group in our model satisfies:

                                                   2
                             Variance    Γ(1 − θ(1−η)  )
                                   2 =                2 − 1.                       (26)
                              Mean                1
                                         Γ(1 − θ(1−η) )

   To estimate θ(1−η), therefore, we look at wage dispersion within occupation-groups.
We take residuals from a cross-sectional regression of log worker wages on 66x4 occupation-
group dummies. These span the 66 market occupations and the four groups of white
men, white women, black men, and black women. The wage is the hourly wage, and
the sample includes both full-time and part-time workers. The dummies should cap-
ture the impact of schooling (φi levels) on average wages in an occupation, as well as
the wage gaps created by frictions (the average τig across occupations). We calculate
the mean and variance across workers of the exponent of these wage residuals. We
then numerically solve equation (26) for θ(1 − η). Sampling error is minimal because
there are 300-400k observations per year for 1960 and 1970 and 2-3 million per year for
1980 onward. The point estimates for θ(1 − η) average 3.12. They drift down over time,
from 3.3 in 1960 to 2.9 in 2008, consistent with rising residual wage inequality.
   We are concerned that this way of estimating θ wrongly attributes all of the dis-
persion of wages within occupation-groups to comparative advantage. We thus make
several adjustments, all of which serve to reduce residual wage dispersion. First, we
compress the variance of the residuals by 14% to reflect an estimate of transitory wage
   22                             HSIEH, HURST, JONES, AND KLENOW



movements from Guvenen and Kuruscu (2009). Second, we compress the variance
another 4% for the share of wage variance exlained by AFQT scores in Rodgers and
Spriggs (1996). Temporary wage differences across workers are not a source of enduring
comparative advantage, and AFQT scores are arguably correlated with absolute ability.
Third, we control for individual education, hours worked, and potential experience in
the Census data. A worker’s education might be correlated with absolute advantage
across many occupations, there could be compensating differentials associated with
the workweek, and experience is not the same as lifelong comparative advantage.
   These adjustments cumulatively explain 25% of wage variation within occupation-
groups. Attributing the remaining 75% of wage dispersion to comparative advantage,
we arrive at a baseline value of θ(1 − η) = 3.44. We also explore the sensitivity of our
results to alternate values. When computing our counterfactuals in Section 5, we show
results where we set θ(1 − η) such that only 50%, 25% or 10% of wage dispersion within
occupation-groups is due to comparative advantage.
   The parameter η denotes the elasticity of human capital with respect to educa-
tion spending. Related parameters have been discussed in the literature, for example
by Manuelli and Seshadri (2005) and Erosa, Koreshkova and Restuccia (2010). In our
model, η will equal the fraction of output spent on human capital accumulation. Ab-
sent any solid evidence on this parameter, we set η = 1/4 in our baseline and explore
robustness to η = 0 and η = 1/2. This parameter affects the level of the τig parameters,
but little else in our results.
   Figure 3 presents our estimates of τ̂ig for white women for a select subset of our
occupations. Consider the results for white women in the “home” occupation in 1960.
Despite white women being 7 times as likely to work in the home sector as white men,
we estimate τ̂ig for white women in that sector to be just below 1 (0.99) — that is, we
estimate zero frictions in the home sector for these women. This implies that white
women in 1960 did not have an absolute advantage over white men in the home sector.
In essence, we find that white women were choosing the home sector because they
were facing disadvantages in other occupations.
   Figure 3 shows that τ̂ig is close to 1 for white women in the home sector in all years
of our analysis. This suggests women did not move out of the home sector because
they lost any absolute advantage in the home sector. Instead, our results suggest that
                                      THE ALLOCATION OF TALENT                                               23


                        Figure 3: Estimated Barriers (τ̂ig ) for White Women

                   Barrier measure, τ
                     5



                        4
                                                                Construction
                                             Lawyers
                        3


                                                                   Doctors
                        2

                                                     Teachers
                            Home
                        1
                                                                 Secretaries
                        1960   1965   1970    1975     1980     1985   1990    1995   2000   2005     2010
                                                                                                    Year

            Note: Author’s calculations based on equation (25) using Census data and im-
            posing θ = 3.44 and η = 1/4.




women moved into market occupations due to declining barriers in the market. Below
we will show that changes in the productivity of the home sector relative to the market
sector for all groups also contributed to women exiting the home sector. To preview
our results, we find that changing productivity at home versus in the market explains
roughly 25 percent of the movement of white women out of the home sector. The re-
maining 75 percent is due to changes in the τ̂ig in the market sector.
    The remainder of the results from Figure 3 highlight that the τ̂ig ’s for white women
changed dramatically in certain occupations. For example, the τ̂ig for white women
lawyers and doctors in 1960 ranged from 3.0 to 3.5. Interpreting these as labor market
frictions, it’s as if women lawyers in 1960 received only 1/3 of their marginal products.
The low participation of white women in these occupations in 1960 causes us to infer
high values of τ̂ig .
    Interestingly, the τ̂ig for white women teachers is also greater than one in 1960.
While white women were 1.7 times more likely than white men to work as teachers, this
propensity is more than offset by the overall wage gap in 1960, where women earned
about 0.57 times what men earned. If white women were not facing some friction or
lower absolute advantage in the teacher occupation, our model predicts there should
have been an even higher fraction ending up as teachers in 1960.
   24                          HSIEH, HURST, JONES, AND KLENOW



   Contrast this with secretaries. A white woman in 1960 was 24 times more likely to
work as a secretary than was a white man. The model explains this enormous discrep-
ancy by assigning a τ̂ig of 0.76 for white women secretaries. A τ below 1 is like a subsidy,
so the model says either white women had an absolute advantage as secretaries, or
there was discrimination that encouraged women into this profession. White women
also had very high τ̂ig values in the construction, firefighting and vehicle mechanic pro-
fessions, which could reflect frictions or low Tig for women if physical strength was im-
portant in these occupations.
   For lawyers, and doctors, the τ̂ig ’s fell from around 3.0 to 1.4 between 1960 and 2008.
School teachers also saw a substantial fall in their average τ̂ig from 1.4 to around 1.
While barriers facing white women fell in many skilled professional occupations, their
τ̂ig values did not change much for low skilled occupations. This is particularly true
after 1980. For example, the estimated τ̂ig for white women barely changed (or rose)
for secretaries or construction workers between 1980 and 2008. Yet the τ̂ig ’s for doctors,
lawyers, and teachers continued to fall during this period. These results are consistent
with our earlier evidence that occupational convergence from 1980–2000 was primarily
among high skilled individuals.
   The τ̂ig ’s for black men — for these same select occupations — are shown in Figure 4.
A similar overall pattern emerges, with the τ̂ig ’s being substantially above 1 in general in
1960, but falling through 2008. Still, they remained above 1 by 2008, especially for the
high-skilled occupations, suggesting barriers remain. Unlike for white women, almost
the entire change in the τ̂ig for black men occurred prior to 1980. The plots for black
women look like a combination of those for white women and black men.
   Figure 5 presents the mean and variance of τ̂ig across occupations for each group
over time. The left panel shows the average τ̂ig falling over time for each of the groups.
For women, the decline in average τ̂ig occurred throughout the period. For black men,
the decline was concentrated prior to 1980. The right panel of Figure 5 shows that,
in 1960, the τ̂ig ’s were also dispersed across occupations for blacks and (especially)
women. This dispersion leads to misallocation of talent across occupations. If there
were no dispersion in the τ̂ig ’s across occupations for each group, there would be no
misallocation of talent. All groups would have the same occupational distributions.
The dispersion in the τ̂ig ’s leads to different occupational choices for each group – and
                                  THE ALLOCATION OF TALENT                                             25


                       Figure 4: Estimated Barriers (τ̂ig ) for Black Men

               Barrier measure, τ
                  2


                 1.8
                                                     Lawyers
                 1.6              Doctors


                 1.4
                                               Teachers                        Construction
                 1.2
                                                          Secretaries
                  1              Home


                 0.8
                  1960    1965    1970      1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005      2010
                                                                                              Year


misallocation if the distribution of talent (Ti,g ’s) and efficiency in accumulating human
capital (same h̄ig ’s) are the same in each group. The decline in the mean τ̂ig for the
groups can also explain some of U.S. productivity growth over the last half century. The
extent to which the changing τ̂ig ’s contribute to productivity growth depends on the
root causes. We turn to these issues next.



5. Estimating Productivity Gains

5.1. Parameter Values and Exogenous Variables

The key parameters of the model — assumed to be constant over time — are η, θ, ρ, and
β. We discussed the estimation and assumptions for η (the elasticity of human capital
with respect to goods invested) and θ (the parameter governing the dispersion of talent)
above. The parameter ρ governs the elasticity of substitution among our 67 occupations
in aggregating up to final output. We have little information on this parameter and
choose ρ = 2/3 for our baseline value, which implies an elasticity of substitution of 3
between occupations. We explore robustness to a wide range of values for ρ.
   The parameter β is the geometric weight on consumption relative to time in an indi-
vidual’s utility function (1). As schooling trades off time for consumption, wages must
increase more steeply with schooling in equilibrium when people value time more (i.e.
when β is lower). We choose β = 0.693 to match the Mincerian return to schooling
       26                                        HSIEH, HURST, JONES, AND KLENOW



                                       Figure 5: Means and Variances of τ̂ig Over Time

        Average τ across occupations                                 Variance of log τ
         2.5


                                                                      0.3



            2

                                Black Women                           0.2
                White Women
                                                                                                          Black Women

          1.5                                                                               White Women
                        Black Men                                     0.1
                                                                                Black Men




             1                                                        0
            1960       1970            1980   1990   2000     2010    1960          1970        1980         1990        2000     2010
                                                            Year                                                                Year


         Note: The left panel shows the average level of τ̂ by group, weighted by total earnings in each
         occupation in 2008. The right panel shows the variance of log τ̂ , weighted in the same way.




across occupations, which averages 12.7% across the six decades.18 Our results are es-
sentially invariant to this parameter, as documented later.
       As our model is static, we infer exogenous variables separately for each decade. In
each year, we have 6N variables to be determined. For each of the i = 1, . . . , N occu-
pations these are Ai , φi , and τig , where g stands for white men, white women, black
women, or black men. We also allow population shares of each group qi to vary by
year to match the data. To begin, we normalize average ability to be the same in each
occupation-group (Tig = 1). Differences in ability across occupations (Ti ) are isomor-
phic to differences in the production technology Ai . Across groups within an occupa-
tion, we think the natural starting point is no differences in mean ability in any occu-
pation; this assumption will be relaxed in our robustness checks. Additionally, we set
τi,wm = 1 in all occupations. This restriction implies that white men face no occupa-
tional barriers. Again, we think this is a natural benchmark to consider.19 Finally, we

  18
       Workers must be compensated for sacrificing time to schooling the more they care about time relative
                                                                                                                        −1
to consumption. The average wage of group g in occupation i is proportional to (1 − si ) β . If we take a
log linear approximation around average schooling s̄, then β is inversely related to the Mincerian return
to schooling across occupations (call this return ψ): β = (ψ(1 − s̄))−1 . We calculate s as average years
of schooling divided by a pre-work time endowment of 25 years, and find the Mincerian return across
occupations ψ from a regression of log average wages on average schooling across occupation-groups,
with group dummies as controls. We then set β = 0.693, the simple average of the implied β values
across years. This method allows the model to approximate the Mincerian return to schooling across
occupations.
  19
     Our results are robust to instead setting the τi,wm such that wages equal output in each occupation.
                                    THE ALLOCATION OF TALENT                                      27


normalize the h̄ig ’s to be one for all groups in all occupations. As discussed above, the
                               h ’s. Even though the magnitude of the productivity gains
h̄ig ’s are isomorphic to the τig
are the same, however, the underlying economic mechanisms differ under in the two
cases. We discuss the h̄ig interpretation in greater depth below.
       To identify the values of the 6N forcing variables in each year, we match the follow-
ing 6N moments in the data, decade by decade (numbers in parentheses denote the
number of moments):

(4N − 4) The fraction of people from each group working in each occupation,
               pig . (Fewer than 4N moments because the pig sum to one for each
               group.)
         (N ) The average wage in each occupation.
         (N ) The assumption that τi,wm = 1 in each occupation.
          (3) Average wage gaps across all occupations between white men and each
               of our 3 other groups.
          (1) Average years of schooling in one occupation.

       As shown above, the 3N τ̂ig variables are easy to identify from the data given our
setup. Assuming that τi,wm = 1, Tig = 1, and h̄ig = 1, the τig ’s for the other groups
                                                                                 h )η
                                                                            (1+τig
are easy to infer using equation (25). But recall that τig ≡                      w .
                                                                              1−τig     From the data we
currently have, we cannot separately identify the           τh   and   τw   components of τ . That is,
we cannot distinguish between human capital barriers and labor market barriers. We
                                                                              w ’s are
proceed by considering two polar cases. At one extreme, we assume all of the τig
                                   h . At the other extreme, we set all of the τ h = 0 and
zero, so that τig solely reflects τig                                           ig
            w ’s are responsible for the τ ’s. In short, we either assume only human
assume the τig
capital barriers (the τ h case) or only labor market barriers (the τ w case).
       The Ai levels and the relative φi ’s across occupations involve the general equilib-
rium solution of the model, but the intuition for what pins down their values is clear.
We already noted that Ai is observationally equivalent to the mean talent parameter in
each occupation Ti . The level of Ai helps determine the overall fraction of the popu-
lation that works in each occupation. We also noted that φi is the key determinant of
average wage differences across occupations. Thus, the data on employment shares
and wages by occupation pin down the values of Ai and φi .20
  20
       From wages in each occupation, we can infer the relative values of φi across occupations. But we
    28                             HSIEH, HURST, JONES, AND KLENOW



5.2. Productivity Gains

Given our model, parameter values, and the forcing variables we infer from the data,
we can now answer one of the key questions of the paper: how much of overall growth
from 1960 to 2008 can be explained by the changing labor market outcomes of blacks
and women during this time period?
    In answering this question, the first thing to note is that output growth in our model
is a weighted average of earnings growth in the market sector and in the home sector.
Earnings growth in the market sector can be measured as real earnings growth in the
census data. Deflating by the NIPA Personal Consumption Deflator, real earnings in the
census data grew by 1.32 percent per year between 1960 and 2008.21 We impute wages
in the home sector using the relationship between average earnings and average edu-
cation across market occupations and from wage gaps by group in market occupations.
(See the discussion in section 3.1 for additional details.) Taking a weighted average of
the imputed wage in the home sector and the wage in the census data, we estimate that
output (as defined by our model) grew by 1.47 percent per year between 1960 and 2008.
    How much of this growth is due to changing τ ’s, according to our model? We answer
this question by holding the A’s (productivity parameters by occupation), φ’s (schooling
parameters by occupation), and q’s (group shares of the working population) constant
over time and letting the τ ’s change.22
    The results of this calculation are shown in Table 2. When the frictions are inter-
preted as occurring in human capital accumulation (the τ h case), the change in occu-
pational frictions explain 20.4 percent of overall growth in output per worker over the
last half century. If we instead interpret the frictions as occurring in the labor market
(the τ w case), the changing τ w ’s account for 15.9 percent of the cumulative growth from

cannot pin down the φi levels, as absolute wage levels are also affected by the Ai productivity parameters.
Thus we use a final moment – average years of schooling in one occupation – to determine the φi levels. We
choose to match schooling in the lowest wage occupation, which is Farm Non-Managers in most years.
Calling this the “min” occupation, we set φmin in a given year to match the observed average schooling
                                                              smin
among Farm Non-Managers in the same year: φmin = 1−η     β 1−smin
                                                                    .
  21
     This might be lower than standard output growth measures because it is calculated solely from wages;
for example, it omits employee benefits.
  22
     More specifically, we follow the standard approach of chaining. That is, we compute growth between
1960 and 1970 allowing the τ ’s to change but holding the other parameters at their 1960 values. Then we
compute growth between 1960 and 1970 from changing τ ’s holding the other parameters at their 1970
values. We take the geometric average of these two estimates of growth from changing τ ’s. We do the same
for other decadal comparisons (1970 to 1980 and so on) and cumulate the growth to arrive at an estimate
for our entire sample from 1960–2008.
                                  THE ALLOCATION OF TALENT                                       29


         Table 2: Productivity Gains: Share of Growth due to Changing Frictions


                                                                    τ h case         τ w case

        Frictions in all occupations                                 20.4%            15.9%
                Counterfactual: wage gaps halved                     12.5%            13.7%
                Counterfactual: zero wage gaps                        2.9%            11.8%

        No frictions in “brawny” occupations                         18.9%            14.1%


   Note: Average annual wage growth between 1960 and 2008 was 1.47%. Entries in the table show
   the share of labor productivity growth attributable to changing frictions according to our model
   under various assumptions. In the last line, we assume that there are no frictions for white women
   in occupations where physical strength is important. Instead, we allow Ti,ww to change over time
   to match the occupational allocation for white women. For blacks in this case, we do allow for
   frictions, but also assume Ti,bw = Ti,ww .




1960 to 2008. The gains are smaller in the τ w case because some of the wage gaps are
accounted for directly by labor market discrimination in this case, with no direct impli-
cations for productivity. There are still indirect effects operating through human capital
accumulation and occupational choice, of course.
   A related calculation is to hold the τ ’s constant and calculate growth due to changes
in the A’s, φ’s, and q’s. Figure 6 does this. The left panel considers the τ h case. The
vast majority of growth is due to increases in Ai and φi over time, but an important part
is attributable to reduced frictions. Allowing the τ h ’s to change as they did historically
raises output by 15.2 percent in the τ h case. The right panel of Figure 6 presents the τ w
case. Here, reduced frictions raised overall output by 11.3% between 1960 and 2008.
   Could the productivity gains we estimate be inferred from a simple back-of-the-
envelope calculation involving the wage gaps alone? In particular, suppose one takes
white male wage growth as fixed, and calculates how much of overall wage growth
comes from the faster growth of wages for the other groups. The answer is that faster
wage growth for blacks and white women accounts for 12 percent of overall wage growth
from 1960 to 2008. This is compared to our estimate of the productivity gains from
changing τ ’s of 20 percent in the τ h case and 15 percent in the τ w case.
   Our counterfactuals differ from the back-of-the-envelope calculation in two funda-
mental ways. First, we are isolating the contribution of changing τ ’s on labor produc-
   30                                         HSIEH, HURST, JONES, AND KLENOW



                  Figure 6: Counterfactuals: Output Growth due to A, φ versus τ
                   h                                                                     w
     Total output, τ case                                                  Total output, τ case
     200                                                                   200

     190                                                       Final gap   190                                                     Final gap
                                                                is 15.2%                                                            is 11.3%
     180                                                                   180
                                   Baseline                                                              Baseline
     170                                                                   170

     160                                                                   160

     150                                                                   150
                                                Constant τ’s                                                        Constant τ’s
     140                                                                   140

     130                                                                   130

     120                                                                   120

     110                                                                   110

     100                                                                   100
      1960         1970     1980       1990         2000            2010    1960         1970     1980       1990       2000            2010
                                                                  Year                                                                Year


     Note: These graphs show the counterfactual path of output in the model if the τ ’s were kept
     constant over time (in a chained calculation). That is, how much of cumulative growth is due
     to changing A’s and φ’s versus changing τ ’s. The left panel is for the τ h case, and the right is
     for the τ w case.



tivity growth, whereas the back-of-the-envelope also reflects any impact of changing
A’s, φ’s, and q’s on the wage growth of women and blacks relative to white men. Sec-
ond, our counterfactuals take into account the impact of changing τ ’s on white men. In
our counterfactuals, we will show shortly, the wage gains to women and blacks come
partly at the expense of white males. As women and blacks move into high-skill occu-
pations, this crowds out white men by lowering the wage per unit of human capital in
those occupations so long as ρ < 1, i.e. occupations are not imperfectly substitutable.
   The middle rows of Table 2 illustrate how average wage gaps between groups relate
to the productivity gains that we estimate. We consider counterfactuals in which we
substantially reduce the average wage gaps fed into the model. Cutting the wage gaps
in half in all years reduces the share of growth explained from 20.4% to 12.5% in the
τ h case. Setting the average wage gaps in the data to zero leaves only 2.9% of growth
explained by changes in the human capital frictions. This is not surprising given the
theoretical results shown in Section 2. The wage gap is affected by frictions faced by a
group. As the wage gap goes to zero, so do the average frictions. In the τ w case, in con-
trast, the gains are relatively insensitive to the wage gaps, falling from 15.9% to 13.7% to
11.8% as wage gaps are halved and then eliminated. In the τ w case, misallocation of tal-
ent by race and gender can occur even if average wages are similar, as the misallocation
of talent is tied to the dispersion in the τ ’s, whereas the wage gaps are related to both the
                                   THE ALLOCATION OF TALENT                                         31


mean and variance of the τ ’s. In the τ h case, the distortions operate by affecting average
human capital investments that do show up in the wage gaps.23 As these contrasting
cases show, model productivity gains cannot be gleaned from the wage gaps alone.
       The final row in Table 2 considers the robustness of our productivity gains to re-
laxing the assumption that men and women draw from the same distribution of talent
in all occupations. In particular, we consider the possibility that some occupations
rely more on physical strength than others, and that this reliance might have changed
because of technological progress. To see the potential importance of this story, we
go to the extreme of assuming no frictions faced by white women in any of the oc-
cupations where physical strength is arguably important. These occupations include
construction, firefighters, police officers, and most of manufacturing.24 That is, we es-
timate values for Tig for white women that fully explain their observed allocation to
these occupations for 1960, 1970, . . ., 2008. Our hypothesis going into this check was
that most of the productivity gains were coming from the rising propensity of women
to become lawyers, doctors, scientists, professors, and managers, occupations where
physical strength is not important. The results in Table 2 support this hypothesis. The
amount of growth explained by changing frictions falls only slightly — for example,
from 20.4% to 18.9% in the τ h case — if we assume that all the movement of women
into manufacturing, construction, police, firefighting and other brawny occupations
was due to changes in relative comparative advantages in these occupations as op-
posed to changing τ ’s in these occupations.
       How much additional growth could be had from reducing the frictions all the way
to zero? The answer is in Table 3. Consider first the τ h case. Between 1960 and 2008,
changing frictions raised output by 15.2% with our baseline parameters. If the remain-
ing frictions in 2008 were removed entirely, output would be higher by an additional
14.3%. For the τ w case the gain from eliminating all frictions in 2008 would be 10.0%.
Thus there remain substantial gains from removing frictions.
       As we have stressed, productivity gains can come from reducing misallocation across


  23
     The τ h results are identical to the case where we assume human capital efficiency parameters h̄ig are
driving the labor market outcomes of groups. As a result, the wage gap is closely linked to the productivity
gains in this case.
  24
     These occupations are assigned based on Rendall (2010), who classifies occupations based on the
importance of physical strength. We define brawny occupations as those below the median in Rendall
(2010).
   32                         HSIEH, HURST, JONES, AND KLENOW



            Table 3: Potential Remaining Output Gains from Zero Barriers


                                                           τ h case        τ w case

        Frictions in all occupations
              Cumulative gain, 1960–2008                    15.2%           11.3%
              Remaining gain from zero barriers             14.3%           10.0%

        No frictions in “brawny” occupations
              Cumulative gain, 1960–2008                    14.0%           10.0%
              Remaining gain from zero barriers             11.7%            9.1%




occupations and from boosting average human capital investments. These, in turn,
are tied to the variance and mean of distortions across occupations for a given group.
To illustrate their relative importance, consider the following thought experiment: in a
given year, first (a) eliminate the variance of barriers across occupations for each group;
then (b) eliminate the mean barrier across occupations for each group. Table 4 does
this for 1960 and 2008. In the τ h case, over 80% of the gains from eliminating all bar-
riers arise from reducing misallocation in 1960. In 2008 more than 100% of the gains
come from reducing misallocation. In the τ w case, around 80% of the gains come from
reducing misallocation in both years. These results suggest that the declining variance
— and therefore misallocation — plays a central role in our productivity gains.



5.3. Robustness

How sensitive is the growth contribution of changing τ ’s to our parameter choices? Ta-
bles 5 and 6 explore robustness to different parameter values. For each set of parameter
values considered, we recalculate the τig , Ai , and φi values so that the model continues
to fit the occupation shares and wage gaps.
   The first row checks sensitivity to the elasticity of substitution (ρ) between occu-
pations in production. In the τ h case, the share of growth explained ranges from 19.7
percent when the occupations are almost Leontief (ρ = −90) to 21.0 percent when they
are almost perfect substitutes (ρ = 0.95). This compares to 20.4 percent with our base-
                                  THE ALLOCATION OF TALENT                                        33


          Table 4: Decomposing the Output Gains: Variance vs. Mean Barriers


                                                                        τ h case      τ w case


           1960            Eliminating Dispersion                        22.2%          14.9%
                           Eliminating Mean and Variance                 26.9%          18.6%


           2008            Eliminating Dispersion                        16.6%            7.8%
                           Eliminating Mean and Variance                 14.3%          10.0%


   Note: Entries in the table represent the percentage increase in labor productivity from either (a)
   eliminating the dispersion of distortions across occupations for each group; or (b) eliminating all
   distortions (setting their mean and variance to zero for each group).




line value of ρ = 2/3. Outcomes are more sensitive in the τ w case, with the share of
growth explained by changing τ w ’s going from 12.3 to 18.4 percent (vs. 15.9 percent
baseline). The gains are increasing in substitutability. Our intuition is that distortions
to the total amount of human capital in one occupation versus another are greater with
higher substitutability across occupations (higher ρ). We not only have too few women
doctors, for example, but too little total human capital of doctors when women face
barriers to the medical profession. This is particularly true when the allocation of tal-
ent is being directly distorted as in the τ w case.
   The second row indicates that the gains from changing τ ’s rise modestly as θ(1 − η)
rises above our baseline value (holding η fixed at 0.25). Recall that our baseline θ(1 −
η) of 3.44 was estimated from wage dispersion within occupation-groups controlling
for hours worked, potential experience, and education – and making adjustments for
AFQT scores and transitory wage movements. This baseline value attributes 75% of
wage dispersion within occupation-groups to comparative advantage. Our baseline θ
may overstate the degree of comparative advantage, as it imperfectly controls for abso-
lute advantage. We thus entertain higher values of θ that attribute 50%, 75% and 90% of
wage dispersion within occupation-groups to absolute advantage. These higher θ(1−η)
values of 4.16, 5.61, and 8.41 attribute the remainder – 50%, 25% and 10% of wage dis-
persion – to comparative advantage. As shown in the second row of the robustness
table, counterfactual gains rise from 20.4 percent to 21.3 percent of growth as θ rises in
   34                             HSIEH, HURST, JONES, AND KLENOW




        Table 5: Robustness Results: Percent of Growth Explained in the τ h case

                     Baseline
                      ρ = 2/3           ρ = −90            ρ = −1            ρ = 1/3           ρ = .95
Changing ρ             20.4%              19.7%             19.9%             20.2%            21.0%

                        3.44               4.16              5.61              8.41
Changing θ             20.4%              20.7%             21.0%             21.3%

                      η = 1/4           η = 0.01           η = .05            η = .1            η = .5
Changing η             20.4%              20.5%             20.5%             20.5%            20.3%


  Note: Entries in the table represent the share of labor productivity growth that is explained by the
  changing τ h ’s using the chaining approach. Each entry changes one of the parameter values rela-
  tive to our baseline case. In the “Changing θ” row, the parameter values reported are θ(1 − η).




        Table 6: Robustness Results: Percent of Growth Explained in the τ w case

                     Baseline
                      ρ = 2/3           ρ = −90            ρ = −1            ρ = 1/3           ρ = .95
Changing ρ             15.9%              12.3%             13.3%             14.7%            18.4%

                        3.44               4.16              5.61              8.41
Changing θ             15.9%              14.6%             12.9%             11.2%

                      η = 1/4             η=0              η = .05            η = .1            η = .5
Changing η             15.9%              13.9%             14.4%             14.8%            17.5%


  Note: Entries in the table represent the share of labor productivity growth that is explained by the
  changing τ w ’s using the chaining approach. Each entry changes one of the parameter values rela-
  tive to our baseline case. In the “Changing θ” row, the parameter values reported are θ(1 − η).
                                     THE ALLOCATION OF TALENT                                             35


                 Table 7: Gains When Changing Only the Dispersion of Ability


                                                         Changing θ
                                       3.44            4.16            5.61           8.41

                   τ h case          20.4%            18.6%           9.5%            8.4%

                   τ w case          15.9%            15.1%           8.0%            3.9%

          Note: Entries in the table represent the share of labor productivity growth that is explained
          by the changing τ ’s using the chaining approach. Each entry alters only the value of θ
          relative to our baseline case. The baseline paths of the τ ’s and A’s are not recalculated.
          The parameter values listed are for θ(1 − η). The baseline case features θ(1 − η) = 3.44




the τ h case. In the τ w case, the percent of growth explained falls from 15.9 percent to
11.2 percent across the θ range.
       The insensitivity of our results to θ may seem puzzling. But note that, as we en-
tertain different values of θ, we simultaneous change the baseline A’s and τ ’s to fit
observed wages and employment shares for each occupation and group in each year.
When the A’s and τ ’s are not distributed lognormally, changing their covariance can
push the gains up or down. In the τ h case, the net result is that the productivity gains
are actually increasing in θ. In the τ w case, productivity gains are decreasing in θ.
       Table 7 isolates the impact of changing θ holding fixed the baseline paths for all
variables. This means we no longer match the observed wages and occupations. But
it usefully illustrates that higher θ alone decisively shrinks the gains from changing τ ’s.
This is true for both the τ h and τ w cases. As people are more similar in ability (θ in-
creases), the gains are smaller from reducing occupational frictions.
       Returning to Tables 5 and 6, the third row considers different values of the elasticity
of human capital with respect to goods invested in human capital (η). In the τ h case, the
gains hardly change as η rises from 0.01 to 0.25.25 The τ h values adjust as we change
η to explain the observed wage gaps, and the productivity gains are tied to the wage
gaps in the τ h case. Gains are much more sensitive to η in the τ w case, rising from 13.9
percent to 17.5 percent as η goes from 0 to 0.5.

  25
     We must have η > 0 in the τ h case as the only source of wage and occupation differences across groups
is different human capital investments in this case.
       36                           HSIEH, HURST, JONES, AND KLENOW



       Although not shown in the robustness tables, the gains are not at all sensitive to β,
the weight placed on time vs. goods in utility. The gains do not change to one decimal
point as we move its value from 0.5 to 0.8 around the baseline value of β = 0.693. The
gains are also not sensitive to how we impute wages in the home sector.26
       We can also exclude the home sector altogether, and analyze the gains conditional
on working in the market. In this calculation, we allow the “population” share of women
to rise over time to explain their increasing representation in the workforce. The τ
changes explain an even higher fraction of growth in market wages: 24.9% in the τ h
case and 21.8% in the τ w case (vs. 20.4% and 15.9% when combining the home sector
with market occupations).
       Another robustness check we carry out is to look only at workers between 25 and 35
years old (inclusive). The reason for this counterfactual is that our model is static and
the data are inherently dynamic. By focusing on the young, we will include each cohort
only once in our analysis, when they first enter the labor market. Using this younger
sample, the changing τ ’s account for an even higher fraction of growth, 28.7% in the
τ h case and 23.6% in the τ w case.27 Related, the gains from dismantling barriers that
remain in 2008 are smaller when looking only at the young: 8.0% and 7.6% for the τ h
and τ w cases, vs. 14.3% and 10.3% when looking at all ages.
       Finally, we test the sensitivity of our findings to the number of occupations consid-
ered. The gains are surprisingly robust. When we look at a broader set of 20 occupations
(vs. 67 in our baseline), the gains are 20.1% vs. 20.4% baseline in the τ h case, and 14.4%
vs. 15.4% baseline in the τ w case. For 1980 onward we can construct a consistent set
of 331 more detailed occupations. Looking at the 1980–2008 subperiod, the gains are
similar with more finely divided occupations: 21.1% vs. 20.9% baseline in the τ h case,
and 16.8% vs. 15.2% in the τ w case.


5.4. Further Results

In this subsection, we describe a number of additional insights from the model.
  26
      Specifically, we raise or lower home sector wages in every year by one standard error from the regres-
sion of market wages on education across occupation-groups controlling for group dummies — between
15% and 23% depending on the year. We find the gains fluctuate modestly around the baseline values. For
example, in the τ h case the fraction of growth explained rises to 21.9% with low home sector wages and
falls to 18.6% with higher home sector wages, versus 20.4% in the baseline.
   27
      Wage growth was notably slower for the young at 1.04% per year, so there was less to explain.
                                    THE ALLOCATION OF TALENT                                           37


                                Table 8: Female Participation Rates


                                                              τ h case                 τ w case


         Women’s LF participation                         1960 = 0.329              2008 = 0.692

         Change, 1960 – 2008                                                0.364
                   Due to changing τ ’s                        0.235                     0.262
                   (Percent of total)                         (72.3%)                  (78.7%)


   Note: Results are for white women and black women combined. Participation is defined as working
   in market occupations. Italicized entries in the table are data; non-italicized entries are results from
   the model.




   In the Census data, the share of women working in the market rose from 32.9 per-
cent in 1960 to 69.2 percent in 2008. One explanation is that women’s market oppor-
tunities rose, say due to declining discrimination or better information. See Jones,
Manuelli, and McGrattan (2003), Albanesi and Olivetti (2009a), and Fogli and Veldkamp
(2011) for empirical analysis of these hypotheses. As illustrated in Figure 3, the τ ’s fell
in market occupations relative to the home sector for women. How much of the rising
female labor-force participation rate can be traced to changing τ ’s? Table 8 provides the
answer. Of the 36.4 percentage point increase, the changing τ ’s contributed 23.5 or 26.2
percentage points, or around 75 percent of the total increase. According to our model,
the remaining 25 percent can be attributed to changes in technology such as changes
in the A’s or φi .’s. The latter is in the spirit of the work by Greenwood, Seshadri and
Yorukoglu (2005) on “engines of liberation”. It is also consistent with studies attribut-
ing women’s rising work to changes in the wage structure, such as Jones, Manuelli, and
McGrattan (2003) and Fernandez and Wong (2011).
   As we report in Table 9, gaps in average years of schooling narrowed from 1960 to
2008 for all three groups vs. white males: by 0.4 years for white women, 1.8 years for
black men, and 1.55 years for black women. If the τ ’s for blacks and women fell faster
in high schooling occupations, then the changing τ ’s contributed to some of this edu-
cational convergence. The table indicates how much. For white women, the changing
   38                           HSIEH, HURST, JONES, AND KLENOW



              Table 9: Education Predictions, All Households (Age 25–55)


                        Actual        Actual      Actual          Change       Due to
                         1960          2008       Change          vs. WM        τ ’s
  White men             11.11         13.47         2.35            ...           ...
  White women           10.98         13.75         2.77           0.41          0.63
  Black men              8.56         12.73         4.17           1.81          0.65
  Black women            9.24         13.15         3.90           1.55          1.17



τ ’s account for the trend and then some (0.6 years, vs. 0.4 in the data). For black men,
falling frictions might have narrowed the schooling gap by 0.65 years, about one-third
of the convergence in the data. For black women, declining distortions might explain
three-quarters (1.17/1.55) of their catch-up in schooling.
   How much of the productivity gains reflect changes in the occupational frictions
facing women vs. those facing blacks? Tables 10 provides the answer. The columns
presents the productivity gain from setting the τ ’s to their levels at the end of each pe-
riod (1960–1980, 1980–2008, and 1960–2008). The first row does this for all groups, and
the next rows do this for white women, black men, and black women, respectively. Take
the τ h case. Three-quarters (15.3 out of 20.4) of the total gains from reduced occupa-
tional frictions over the last fifty years can be explained by the changes facing white
women. Falling frictions faced by blacks accounted for the remaining one-quarter of
the gains. The primary reason for this is that women are a much larger fraction of the
population compared to blacks.
   The share of gains associated with falling frictions for white women vs. blacks differs
across the time periods. Again, consider the τ h case. Blacks accounted for a larger
share of the gains in the 1960s and 1970s than in later decades. From 1960 to 1980,
reduced frictions for blacks account for over 40% of the overall gains. From 1980 to
2008, reduced frictions for blacks account for less than 15% of the overall gains. This
timing might link the gains for blacks to the Civil Rights movement of the 1960s.
   What was the consequence of shifting occupational frictions for the wage growth
of different groups? Table 11 tries to answer this question. The first column presents
the actual growth of real wages for the different groups from 1960 to 2008. Real wages
increased by 77 percent for white men, 126 percent for white women, 143 percent for
                             THE ALLOCATION OF TALENT                                39


            Table 10: Contribution of Each Group to Total Earnings Growth


                              1960–1980          1980–2008         1960–2008

        τ h case:
      All groups                19.7%             20.9%               20.4%
      White women               11.3%             18.2%               15.3%
      Black men                  3.3%              0.9%               1.9%
      Black women                5.1%              1.9%               3.2%

        τ w case:
      All groups                21.1%             19.2%               20.0%
      White women                8.7%             15.4%               12.6%
      Black men                  3.4%              0.8%               1.9%
      Black women                4.7%              1.4%               2.8%



                          Table 11: Group Changes in Wages


                                   Actual               Due to           Due to
                                  Growth                  τ h ’s            τ w ’s
    White men                  77.0 percent             -5.8%            -7.1%
    White women                126.3 percent            41.9%            43.0%
    Black men                  143.0 percent            44.6%            44.3%
    Black women                198.1 percent            58.8%            59.5%




black men, and 198 percent for black women. For brevity, consider the τ h case. In the
absence of the change in occupational frictions, the model says real wages for white
men would have been almost 6 percent higher. Put differently, real income of white
men declined due to the changing opportunities for blacks and women. At the aggre-
gate level, this loss was swamped by the wage gains for blacks and women. Over 40
percent of the wage growth for these groups was due to the change in occupational
frictions. The model explains the remainder of growth as resulting from changes in
technology (A’s) and skill requirements (φ’s).
   Tables 12 looks at the regional dimension of the decline in frictions confronting
   40                               HSIEH, HURST, JONES, AND KLENOW



                Table 12: Contributions to Northeast - South Convergence


                                              1960–1980          1980–2008                 1960–2008

          τ h case:
        Actual wage convergence                  20.7%                -16.5%                     10.0%
        Due to all τ ’s changing                  4.9%                1.5%                       6.9%
        Due to black τ ’s changing                3.6%                1.9%                       5.6%

          τ w case:
        Actual wage convergence                  20.7%                -16.5%                     10.0%
        Due to all τ ’s changing                  2.2%                0.4%                       2.8%
        Due to black τ ’s changing                2.3%                1.2%                       3.6%




blacks and women. Here, we assume that workers are immobile across regions. With
this assumption, a decline in occupational frictions in the South will increase average
wages in the South relative to the North. From 1960 to 2008, wages in the South in-
creased by 10 percent relative to wages in the Northeast. In the τ h case, about 7 per-
centage points of this convergence was due to reduced occupational frictions facing
blacks and women in the South — with the bulk of the effect due to falling τ ’s for blacks.
   From 1980 to 2008, we see a reversal of the North-South convergence, perhaps driven
by the reverse migration of blacks to the U.S. South. Reverse migration is what one
would expect to see if workers are responding to improved labor market outcomes in
that region. Persistent wage gaps might then reflect skill differences between regions.




5.5. Average Quality of Workers by Occupation

Using equations (9) and (10), the average quality of workers — including both innate
ability and human capital — for group g in occupation i is given by

                                                                       N
                                                                                            1
                                                                                    ! 1θ · 1−η
                       Hig                 1                 −1/β
                                                                       X
                                                                               θ
                             = γ η̄ ·        w )w · (1 − si )     ·          w̃sg                        (27)
                      qg pig          (1 − τig   i                     s=1
                                                     THE ALLOCATION OF TALENT                                                          41


                Figure 7: Relative Average Quality, White Women vs. White Men
                                         h                                                                     w
   Average quality, women / men          τ case                          Average quality, women / men          τ case
      0.8                                                                    2


                                                                            1.8
     0.75                                                                                        Doctors
                                                                            1.6

      0.7
                                                                            1.4


                                                                            1.2
     0.65                                                                                  Managers

                                                                             1
      0.6                                                                            Teachers
                                                                                                                                Home
                                                                            0.8


     0.55
       1960        1970           1980            1990   2000     2010       1960        1970           1980            1990   2000      2010
                                                                Year                                                                   Year


  Note: The panels show relative average quality (human capital and innate ability) in various occu-
  pations for white women versus white men, in the τ h and τ w cases. Computed using equation (28).




Average quality for a group relative to white men is therefore

                                                                 w
                                                            1 − τi,wm    wageg
                                             Hig /qg pig
                                                          =        w  ·        .                                                          (28)
                                          Hi,wm/qwm pi,wm    1 − τig    wagewm

Relative quality in an occupation is simply the wage gap adjusted by the τ w frictions.
   In the τ h case (where the τ w variables are set to zero), equation (28) implies that
average quality for a group relative to white men is the same across all occupations.
In particular, relative quality is precisely equal to the wage gap. When the labor mar-
ket friction are introduced, this changes. In this case, wages are not equal to marginal
products, so that average quality differs from wages. More specifically, wages are less
than marginal products, so average quality is higher when the frictions are larger.
   One way to think about these quality differences is to consider the following ques-
tion: if you were to see a doctor chosen at random in 1960 for a fixed fee, would you
rather see a male doctor or a female doctor? Figure 7 shows the ratio of average quality
for white women vs. white men for several occupations, as in equation (28). In the τ h
case, relative qualities are equated in all occupations. Because the wage gap reflects
quality, the average female doctor has less human capital than the average male doc-
tor. Over time, as the wage gaps have declined, the relative quality of women in each
occupation rose substantially between 1960 and 2008, from 0.56 to 0.77.
   The τ w case presents a very different view of the data, as shown in the right panel.
   42                         HSIEH, HURST, JONES, AND KLENOW



The relative quality of women is higher than their wages suggest because they are paid
less than their marginal products. In 1960, average quality was substantially higher for
women vs. men doctors and managers. Only the most talented women overcame fric-
tions to become doctors and managers in 1960, and some lesser talented white men
entered these professions instead. In this case, the difference in quality has faded sub-
stantially over time due to declining frictions, but remains present even in 2008.
   The real world presumably has elements of both the τ h and the τ w cases. To this
end, independent information on quality trends for occupation-groups could help us
separate and identify human capital and labor market frictions.




6. Conclusion

How does discrimination in the labor market and in the acquisition of human capital
affect occupational choice? And what are the consequences of the resulting allocation
of talent for aggregate productivity? We develop a framework to tackle these questions
empirically. This framework has three building blocks. First, we use a standard Roy
model of occupational choice, augmented to allow for labor market discrimination and
discrimination in the acquisition of human capital. Second, we impose the assumption
that the distribution of an individual’s ability over all possible occupations follows an
iid extreme value distribution. Third, we embed the Roy model in general equilibrium
to account for the effect of occupational choice on the price of skills in each occupation,
and to allow for the effect of technological change on occupational choice.
   We apply this framework to measure the changes in barriers to occupational choice
facing women and blacks in the U.S. from 1960 to 2008. We find large reductions in
these barriers, concentrated in high-skilled occupations. We then use our general equi-
librium setup to measure the aggregate effects of the reduction in occupational barri-
ers facing these groups. We estimate that falling barriers can explain 15 to 20 percent of
aggregate wage growth, 75 percent of the rise in women’s labor force participation, and
essentially all of the wage convergence between women and blacks and white men.
   It should be clear that this paper provides only a preliminary answer to these im-
portant questions. It would be useful to develop a framework that does not rely on the
                                    THE ALLOCATION OF TALENT                                         43


assumption that the distribution of talent is iid across all occupations.28 It would also
be useful to quantify the extent to which the barriers are due to labor market discrim-
ination versus discrimination in the acquisition of human capital. Independent data
on quality trends would be useful to distinguish between these two forces. Finally, we
have focused on the gains from reducing barriers facing women and blacks over the last
fifty years. But we suspect that barriers facing children from less affluent families and
regions have worsened in the last few decades. If so, this could explain both the adverse
trends in aggregate productivity and the fortunes of less-skilled Americans over the last
decades. We hope to tackle some of these questions in future work.29


References
Albanesi, Stefania and Claudia Olivetti, “Gender Roles and Medical Progress,” NBER Working
  Papers 14873, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc April 2009.

   and     , “Home Production, Market Production and the Gender Wage Gap: Incentives and
  Expectations,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2009, 12 (1), 80–107.

Bailey, Martha J., “More Power to the Poll: The Impact of Contraceptive Freedom on Women’s
  Life Cycle Labor Supply,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 2006, 121 (1), 289–320.

  , Brad Hershbein, and Amalia R. Milleri, “The Opt-In Revolution? Contraception and the
  Gender Gap in Wages,” NBER Working Papers 17922, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Inc March 2012.

Beaudry, Paul and Ethan Lewis, “Do Male-Female Wage Differentials Reflect Differences in the
  Return to Skill? Cross-City Evidence From 1980-2000,” Technical Report, UBC unpublished
  paper 2012.

Becker, Gary, The Economics of Discrimination, Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press,
  1957.

Bertrand, Marianne, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz, “Dynamics of the Gender Gap for
  Young Professionals in the Financial and Corporate Sectors,” American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics, July 2010, 2 (3), 228–55.
  28
      For example, Lagakos and Waugh (2011) allow skill to be correlated for working inside and outside of
agriculture. Mulligan and Rubinstein (2008) do the same for working in the home sector and in the market,
and argue for changing selection of high ability U.S. women into the market over time.
   29
      One could also investigate groups in other countries. Hnatkovska, Lahiri and Paul (2011) look at castes
in India and find narrowing differences in education, occupations, and wages in recent decades.
   44                          HSIEH, HURST, JONES, AND KLENOW



Biskupic, Joan, Sandra Day O’Connor: How the First Woman on the Supreme Court Became Its
  Most Influential Justice, New York, NY: HarperCollins, 2006.

Blau, Francine D., “Trends in the Well-Being of American Women, 1970-1995,” Journal of Eco-
  nomic Literature, March 1998, 36 (1), 112–165.

  , Peter Brummund, and Albert Yung-Hsu Liu, “Trends in Occupational Segregation by Gen-
  der 1970-2009: Adjusting for the Impact of Changes in the Occupational Coding System,”
  Working Paper 17993, National Bureau of Economic Research April 2012.

Card, David and Alan B. Krueger, “School Quality and Black-White Relative Earnings: A Direct
  Assessment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1992, 107 (1), 151–200.

Cavalcanti, Tiago and Jos Tavares, “The Output Cost of Gender Discrimination: A Model-
  Based Macroeconomic Estimate,” CEPR Discussion Papers 6477, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers
  September 2007.

Charles, Kerwin Kofi and Jonathan Guryan, “Prejudice and Wages: An Empirical Assessment of
  Becker’s The Economics of Discrimination,” Journal of Political Economy, October 2008, 116
  (5), 773–809.

Chay, Kenneth Y., Jonathan Guryan, and Bhashkar Mazumder, “Birth Cohort and the Black-
  White Achievement Gap: The Roles of Access and Health Soon After Birth,” NBER Working
  Papers 15078, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc June 2009.

Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, and Susanne M. Schennach, “Estimating the Technology of
  Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation,” Econometrica, 2010, 78 (3), 883–931.

Donohue, John J. and James Heckman, “Continuous versus Episodic Change: The Impact of
  Civil Rights Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks,” Journal of Economic Literature, De-
  cember 1991, 29 (4), 1603–43.

Dupuy, Arnaud, “An Economic Model of the Evolution of the Gender Performance Ratio in Indi-
  vidual Sports,” International Journal of Performance Analysis in Sport, 2012, 12 (1), 224–245.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel S. Kortum, “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica,
  2002, 70 (5), 1741–1779.

Ellison, Glenn and Ashley Swanson, “The Gender Gap in Secondary School Mathematics at
  High Achievement Levels: Evidence from the American Mathematics Competitions,” Jour-
  nal of Economic Perspectives, 2010, 24 (2), 109–128.
                               THE ALLOCATION OF TALENT                                45


Erosa, Andres, Tatyana Koreshkova, and Diego Restuccia, “How Important Is Human Capital?
  A Quantitative Theory Assessment of World Income Inequality,” Review of Economic Studies,
  October 2010, 77 (4), 1421–1449.

Fernandez, Raquel, “Cultural Change as Learning: The Evolution of Female Labor Force Partic-
  ipation over a Century,” American Economic Review, forthcoming 2012.

  , Alessandra Fogli, and Claudia Olivetti, “Preference Formation and the Rise of Women’s La-
  bor Force Participation: Evidence from WWII,” NBER Working Papers 10589, National Bureau
  of Economic Research, Inc June 2004.

  and Joyce Chen Wong, “The Disappearing Gender Gap: The Impact of Divorce, Wages, and
  Preferences on Education Choices and Women’s Work,” 2011. unpublished paper.

Fogli, Alessandra and Laura Veldkamp, “Nature or Nurture? Learning and the Geography of
  Female Labor Force Participation,” Econometrica, July 2011, 79 (4), 1103–1138.

Goldin, Claudia, Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of American Women, New
  York, NY: Oxford University Press, 1990.

   and Lawrence F. Katz, “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and Women’s Career and
  Marriage Decisions,” Journal of Political Economy, 2002, 110 (4), 730–770.

   and   , “The Most Egalitarian of All Professions: Pharmacy and the Evolution of a Family-
  Friendly Occupation,” NBER Working Paper 18410 September 2012.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Ananth Seshadri, and Mehmet Yorukoglu, “Engines of Liberation,” Review
  of Economic Studies, January 2005, 72 (1), 109–133.

Guvenen, Fatih and Burhanettin Kuruscu, “A Quantitative Analysis of the Evolution of the U.S.
  Wage Distribution, 1970-2000,” in Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogoff, and Michael Woodford,
  eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2009, pp. 227–276.

Hnatkovska, Viktoria, Amartya Lahiri, and Sourabh B. Paul, “Breaking the Caste Barrier: Inter-
  generational Mobility in India,” 2011. U.B.C. manuscript.

Jones, Larry E., Rodolfo E. Manuelli, , and Ellen R. McGrattan, “Why Are Married Women Work-
  ing So Much?,” Staff Report 317, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapois June 2003.

Karabel, Jerome, The Chosen: the Secret History of Admission and Exclusion at Harvard, Yale,
  and Princeton, New York, NY: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2005.

Lagakos, David and Michael E. Waugh, “Selection, Agriculture, and Cross-Country Productivity
  Differences,” 2011. Arizona State University and NYU manuscript.
   46                             HSIEH, HURST, JONES, AND KLENOW



Luttmer, Erzo G.J., “On the Mechanics of Firm Growth,” Working Papers 657, Federal Reserve
  Bank of Minneapolis 2008.

Manuelli, Rodolfo and Ananth Seshadri, “Human Capital and the Wealth of Nations,” March
  2005. University of Wisconsin working paper.

McFadden, Daniel, “Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior,” in P. Zarembka,
  ed., Frontiers of Econometrics, New York, NY: Academic Press, 1974, pp. 105–142.

Mulligan, Casey B. and Yona Rubinstein, “Selection, Investment, and Women’s Relative Wages
  Over Time,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2008, pp. 1061–1110.

Pitt, Mark M., Mark R. Rosenzweig, and Nazmul Hassan, “Human Capital Investment and the
  Gender Division of Labor in a Brawn-Based Economy,” American Economic Review, Decem-
  ber 2012, 102 (7), 3531–3560.

Rendall, Michelle, “Brain versus brawn: the realization of women’s comparative advantage,”
  IEW - Working Papers iewwp491, Institute for Empirical Research in Economics - University
  of Zurich September 2010.

Rodgers, William and William Spriggs, “What Does the AFQT Really Measure: Race, Wages,
  Schooling and the AFQT Score,” Review of Black Political Economy, Spring 1996, pp. 13–46.

Roy, A. D., “Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings,” Oxford Economic Papers, June
  1951, 3 (2), 135–146.

Smith, James P. and Finis R. Welch, “Black Economic Progress after Myrdal,” Journal of Economic
  Literature, June 1989, 27 (2), 519–64.
