NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SIMPLIFYING TAX INCENTIVES AND AID FOR COLLEGE:
PROGRESS AND PROSPECTS
Susan Dynarski
Judith Scott-Clayton
Mark Wiederspan
Working Paper 18707
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18707

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2013

This paper is forthcoming in Tax Policy and the Economy, vol. 27. We thank Monica Bhatt and Dyuti
Bhattacharya for excellent research assistance. Jeffrey Brown provided helpful comments. All errors
and opinions are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Susan Dynarski, Judith Scott-Clayton, and Mark Wiederspan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Simplifying Tax Incentives and Aid for College: Progress and Prospects
Susan Dynarski, Judith Scott-Clayton, and Mark Wiederspan
NBER Working Paper No. 18707
January 2013
JEL No. I22
ABSTRACT
The application for federal student aid is longer than the tax returns filled out by the majority of US
households. Research suggests that complexity in the aid process undermines its effectiveness in inducing
more students into college. In 2008, an article in this journal showed that most of the data items in
the aid application did not affect the distribution of aid, and that the much shorter set of variables available
in IRS data could be used to closely replicate the existing distribution of aid. This added momentum
to a period of discussion and activity around simplification in Congress and the US Department of
Education. In this article, we provide a ˝five-year retrospective of what's changed in the aid application
process, what hasn't, and the possibilities for future reform. While there has been some streamlining
in the process of applying for aid, it has fallen far short of its goals. Two dozen questions were removed
from the aid application and a dozen added, reducing the number of questions from 127 to 116. Funding
for college has also been complicated by the growth of a parallel system for aid: the tax system. A
massive expansion in federal tax incentives for college, in particular the American Opportunity Tax
Credit, has led to millions of households completing paperwork for both the IRS and the US Department
of Education in order to qualify for college funding.

Susan Dynarski
University of Michigan
Weill Hall
735 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-3091
and NBER
dynarski@umich.edu
Judith Scott-Clayton
Teachers College
Columbia University
525 W.120th Street, Box 174
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
scott-clayton@tc.columbia.edu

Mark Wiederspan
University of Michigan
School of Education
610 East University Avenue
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-1259
mwieders@umich.edu

1

Introduction

The application for federal aid for college, at 116 questions, is longer than the tax return completed
by most US households. A long-standing theoretical and experimental literature suggests that
seemingly minor differences in program design can have profound impacts upon decision-making
(Kahneman and Tversky, 2000). A burgeoning empirical literature has demonstrated that these
predictions hold in real-life situations such as saving for retirement (Madrian and Shea, 2001).
Empirical patterns in the behavioral impact of student aid have supported the hypothesis that
complexity in the aid system undermines its efficacy: simple aid programs have a robust impact
on college attendance, while traditional forms of student aid (which require a FAFSA) do not
(Dynarski and Scott-Clayton, 2006, 2008). A recent field experiment directly tested this hypothesis
by randomly assigning families to a radically simplified aid application process (Bettinger et al.,
2012). The results were striking: a simplified aid application produced substantial increases in
college attendance - comparable to that induced by offering an applicant many more thousands of
dollars in in grant aid.
Five years ago, we published in this journal an analysis of complexity in the aid system. Over
the next few years, complexity in the aid system drew the attention of the media, advocacy groups,
presidential candidates, the National Economic Council and the Council of Economic Advisers. A
flurry of legislative and agency activity around aid simplification followed. There also ensued a
significant expansion in the scope of tax benefits for college students, with annual expenditures for
the education tax credits reaching $18 billion. Eighteen million households now receive education
tax benefits of some type, while 13 million receive traditional student aid. As a result, college
students and their families now face two bureaucracies when trying to understand and apply for
aid for college: the Internal Revenue Service and the US Department of Education (ED).
In this paper, we describe the array of federal subsidies for college students that are delivered
through the tax system and the traditional aid programs. We review the evidence on the effectiveness of these programs in increasing the accumulation of human capital. And we provide a
quantitative analysis of the plausibility of using IRS data alone to calculate eligibility for the traditional aid programs, thereby eliminating the need for a separate application for traditional student

aid. This analysis updates that of Dynarski and Scott-Clayton (2008) with more recent data on aid
receipt. This paper expands upon the analysis of Dynarski and Wiederspan (2012) by including
part-time students, who comprise an increasing share of college enrollment, as well as examining
how aid simplification could affect programs other than the Pell Grant.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we provide a broad overview of the two systems
that subsidize college students in the US. We then turn to a more detailed description of the tax
expenditures for college, the evidence on their efficacy, and critiques of their administration. In
Section 4, we provide an analogous description of the traditional aid programs. We then turn to
a discussion of policy efforts to simplify and streamline these systems. In Section 7 we discuss
the feasibility of dividing labor between the two agencies that subsidize college students, with IRS
collecting the financial data and ED delivering aid itself. We provide a quantitative analysis of the
effect on the distribution of traditional aid of eliminating the aid application, using only IRS data
to assign aid.

2

Overview of Federal Funding for College Students

In Table 1, we list the major programs that subsidize college costs for college students, for fiscal year
2010 (U.S. Government Accountability Office, 2011; Ackerman et al., 2011; College Board, 2011).1
The federal loan programs and the grant programs are the two largest sources of aid for college,
subsidizing in recent years about 13 million students annually. Grants represented $49 billion in
2010, with the Pell accounting for $35 billion of this total and education grants for military service
representing $12 billion. In 2010, $104 billion was disbursed through the federal loan programs.
The cost of these loans is well below this figure, of course, since most will be repaid, unlike the
grants.
In addition to the traditional aid programs, the tax system now delivers subsidies to college
students and their families, to the tune of $29 billion annually. The tax system subsidizes the
families of future college students through the Coverdell and 529 programs, tax-advantaged savings plans authorized by the federal and state governments, respectively. The federal and state
1

Appendix Table A1 provides a brief description of the programs we discuss in this paper.

2

tax systems subsidize current college students and their families through tax credits (the federal
American Opportunity Tax Credit, Lifetime Learning Credit and Hope Credit, plus a few state
credits), a deduction for tuition costs, and a dependent exemption for students aged 19 to 23. This
latter provision also extends a family’s eligibility for the Earned Income Tax Credit. Finally, the
tax code subsidizes former college students with a deduction for interest paid on student loans.
In 2010, 18 million tax filers benefited from one of the education tax programs (U.S. Government
Accountability Office, 2012).

3

Tax Expenditures for College Students

Tax breaks for private spending on education have been a contentious topic for decades (Moynihan,
1978; Silliman, 2011). Private school associations and parents of children in private schools lobbied
for a tax deduction for private school tuition (see Samwick (2012) of this volume for an analysis of
one such proposal). Opponents have viewed this as a back door to government funding to religious
schools. Tuition deductions and credits were repeatedly proposed and repeatedly defeated. Several
of the major changes in postsecondary policy were conceived as political responses to pressure to
institute a private school tax break for middle-income constituents. Both the Guaranteed Student
Loan (introduced in 1965, as part of the Higher Education Act) and the Middle Income Student
Assistance Act (1978), which extended Title IV aid to middle and upper-income families, emerge
d during battles over a tuition tax credit (Hearn, 2001).
There are more than a dozen federal provisions that provide tax advantages for those saving or
paying for college, plus a number of scattered state programs. There still is no federal tax credit
or deduction for the tuition costs of elementary or secondary school students.

3.1

Tax Credits

In 1996 Bill Clinton, then a candidate for the presidency, proposed a tax credit for the first two
years of college costs. After Clinton’s election, this proposal took shape as the Hope and Lifetime
Learning Credits, introduced in 1997. The Hope and LLC allowed families of college students to
offset their educational costs with tax benefits of up to $1,500 a year. Tuition and required fees
3

counted toward allowable expenses for both credits, with any grant aid deducted from allowable
expenses. At its inception, the Hope Credit refunded 100% of the first $1,000 of eligible expenses
and 50% of up to $2000 in remaining expenses. The LLC refunded 20% of the first $5,000. The
Hope Credit was limited to the first two years of college, while the LLC applied to any level
of postsecondary education. When introduced, the Hope and LLC phased out between AGIs of
$80,000 and $100,000 ($40,000 and $50,000 for single filers). Both credits were non-refundable
(Kane, 1999).
The benefits of the Hope and LLC accrued largely to middle- and high-income families (greater
than $50,000) (Long, 2004). At very low AGIs (below $10,000), families did not qualify for the
credits because they had insufficient tax liability (and the credits were not refundable). Even for
those with higher AGIs, the value of the credits could be limited by the definition of allowable
expenses, which consisted only of tuition and fees. A typical, low-income student attending a
community college with average tuition and fees of $2,439 in 2010 (Institute of Education Sciences,
2011) and receiving the average Pell Grant of $3,416 (U.S. Department of Education, 2012a) would
have had no expenses eligible for Hope or LLC. For a middle-income student attending a more
expensive private college and not receiving any grant aid, allowable expenses would generate the
maximum tax credit.
The tax credits are received after a family files their taxes and documents their postsecondary
expenses for a given year. This means they may be delivered more than a year after a tuition bill
is paid (e.g., if tuition is paid in January of 2012 and the credit is claimed when the family files in
April 2013).
The credits remained largely unchanged for 10 years, with minor tweaks to their maximum
values and AGI phase-out ranges. By 2008, Hope refunded 100% of the first $1,200 of expenses
and 50% of the next $1,200, for a maximum value of $1,800. The LLC had a maximum value
of $2,000, refunding 20% of the first $10,000 of eligible expenses (Crandall-Hollick, 2012). The
phaseout ranges on both credits had increased to $96,000 and $116,000 ($48,000 to $58,000 for a
single filer), respectively. The number of households receiving the credits rose by more than half,
from about 4.5 million filers in 1998 to 7.5 million in 2008. The credits totaled $7.6 billion in the

4

2008 tax year.
Responding to critiques that the HOPE and LLC were of limited benefit to low-income families,
presidential candidate Barack Obama proposed a tax credit that would cover a broader range of
educational expenses than the Hope Credit, and would be partially refundable for families with zero
tax liability. This proposal took form in 2009 as the American Opportunity Tax Credit, a renamed
and modified version of the Hope credit. The American Opportunity Tax Credit (AOTC) allows
individuals to reduce their federal income taxes by up to $2,500 per eligible college student. AOTC
was created as part of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 and temporarily
replaced the HOPE Credit for 2009 and 2010. AOTC was extended for 2011 and 2012 by the
Tax Relief Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization and the Job Creation Act of 2010. Currently
AOTC is set to expire by the end of 2012. Should AOTC not be extended by Congress for 2013,
AOTC will be replaced by the Hope Credit.
The maximum benefit for the AOTC was set at $2,500, with $1,000 of that amount refundable.
All of the first $2,000 in qualifying expenses is eligible for the credit, and 25% of an additional
$2,000. Eligible expenses include course-related books and supplies. This allows students attending
low-tuition public institutions to access more of the credit. Students are allowed to claim the credit
for four years of undergraduate education (unlike Hope, which was limited to 2 years). Like the
Hope Credit, the AOTC is available for all eligible students in the household; by contrast, only
one Lifetime Learning Credit may be claimed per household (Department of the Treasury, Internal
Revenue Service, 2011).
With the introduction of the AOTC, spending on the tax credits rose sharply. In 2010, spending
on the AOTC was nearly $19 billion, comparable to annual spending on the Pell just a few years
earlier. With the simultaneous increases in Pell generosity (described below), annual spending on
that program in 2010 was $35 billion in 2010 (Crandall-Hollick, 2012; College Board, 2011).
The AGI cap on the AOTC is considerably higher than that on the Hope Credit: $180,000 for a
joint return. Before AOTC, 18% of the dollars devoted to the education tax credits and deductions
went to families with incomes over $100,000; the figure for 2010 was 26% (College Board, 2011).
And because the AOTC is partially refundable, expenditures for low-AGI families also increased:

5

pre-AOTC 5% of the credit and tuition deduction dollars went to filers with incomes under $25,000;
in 2011 the share was 17%. The AGI cap on the AOTC is higher than that on any of the other
credits or deductions. High-income households that were once only eligible for the tuition tax
deduction (see below) are now eligible for the more-generous AOTC. As a result, the share of
households claiming the deduction has dropped while the share claiming the credits has risen.

3.2

Tuition and Loan Interest Deductions

Since 2002, families not claiming one of the education tax credits have been able to deduct up
to $4,000 in tuition fees from income. This is an “above-the-line” deduction that filers can use
even if they do not itemize. Although the benefit officially expired at the end of 2011, it has been
retroactively reinstated in the past. The benefit was originally set to expire in 2005, but in 2006 it
was extended to cover 2006 and 2007; in 2008 it was extended to cover 2008 and 2009; and in 2010
it was extended to cover 2010 and 2011. For 2011, the income limit for this deduction was $80,000
for single filers or $160,000 for joint returns.
Up to $2,500 in interest on student loans is deductible from taxable income for households with
incomes up to $75,000 (single) or $150,000 (married). This deduction is for interest on any student
loans, not just federal loans. This deduction was estimated to cost $1.5 billion in tax revenue
in 2010. With rapid increases in the share of middle-income families carrying student loan debt
(Simon and Barry, 2012), we expect that the revenue implications of this deduction will also grow
rapidly.

3.3

Savings Incentives

The federal Coverdell Education Savings Account and state 529 savings plans are tax-advantaged
savings accounts for education. Earnings accrue untaxed in these accounts. Withdrawals are untaxed if they are used for postsecondary expenses. The Coverdell can also be used for elementary or
secondary expenses; it is the only federal tax benefit for private elementary or secondary schooling.
The Coverdell allows for annual, after-tax deposits of up to $2,000. The more generous contribution limits for the 529 vary by state: cumulative contribution limits for a beneficiary range from

6

$146,000 to $305,000. A typical state allows an annual contribution of $10,000 for married filers
(Finaid.org, 2012). The 529 accounts can be transferred to a relative.
These savings accounts were estimated to cost $1.4 billion in tax expenditures in 2010. The
benefits of these savings accounts rise sharply with income, since those with the highest marginal
tax rates benefit the most from sheltering capital income from taxation (Dynarski, 2000). These
additional deductions have little to no value for low-income families, who face relatively low marginal
tax rates.

3.4

Dependent Exemption

Children are generally considered independent for tax purposes after age 18. This is extended to
age 24 if the child is enrolled in school, allowing parents to claim a dependent exemption for the
student, thus reducing their taxable income. This provision also applies to the Earned Income Tax
Credit, a refundable credit for low-income families. These provisions save households up to several
thousand dollars a year for each child enrolled in college and were estimated to cost about $3 billion
in 2010 (U.S. Government Accountability Office, 2011).

3.5

Evidence on the Effectiveness of the Tax Expenditures

A simple model of human capital unambiguously predicts that subsidizing college costs raises the
privately-optimal level of schooling. While the theoretical predictions are clear, it is an empirical
question how much a given dollar of subsidy affects behavior.
Evidence regarding the effect of the tax benefits on educational outcomes is limited to just two
studies. An early study using a difference-in-difference approach (comparing financially-eligible
and ineligible families before and after the introduction of the Hope and Lifetime Learning Tax
Credits) found no evidence of impacts (Long, 2004). This null effect was attributed to the credits’
non-refundability (which limited its value for low-income families) and their delivery well after
tuition bills are due.
A recent study uses a similar difference-in-difference strategy, but includes the new American
Opportunity Tax Credit in its analysis and also takes advantage of more accurate data on income

7

eligibility (Turner, 2011). This study finds effects of roughly the same magnitude as has been
found for grant assistance (discussed below): the probability of college enrollment increases by 3
percentage points for every $1,000 of tax-based aid. It is possible that earlier analysis simply could
not discern an effect because some eligible families were incorrectly classified as ineligible in the
data, and vice versa, attenuating the estimated difference between groups. It is also possible that
the AOTC is more effective than its predecessors, since its refundability opens it to families whose
decision to attend college may plausibly be constrained by income. However, the credit is still
delivered well after tuition is paid, which limits its ability to solve liquidity constraints for these
families.

3.6

Challenges in Administering the Tax Credits

The Government Accountability Office has found that many families do not choose the tax advantage that would most benefit them. Families can choose among the AOTC, LLC, tuition tax
deduction, or disbursement from a 529 or Coverdell to cover current expenses. Different types of
expenditures (tuition, books, living expenses) qualify for some of these but not others. GAO found
that about 15% percent of filers made a suboptimal choice, suggesting substantial confusion among
filers and tax preparers (U.S. Government Accountability Office, 2012).
In 2011, the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration (TIGTA) released a report
highly critical of the administration of the AOTC (Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration, 2011). TIGTA inspected the income tax returns that claimed in AOTC in 2009, the first
year of the credit, and found ambiguities in two million returns qualifying for $3 billion in credits.
Most of these flagged returns lacked a Form 1098-T by the IRS that support students’ attendance
at an eligible college. The same colleges that qualify for federal financial aid qualify for the tax
credits, so this reflects a failure of coordination between ED (which has a constantly-updated list
of eligible institutions) and IRS (which failed to obtain it). The report pointedly referred IRS to a
publicly-available dataset of institutions in the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System.
The report also noted that institutions inconsistently fill out the 1098-T, the information return
that is used to report eligible postsecondary expenses to IRS. The intent of this form is to gather

8

information about a student’s costs net of any scholarship aid. The TIGTA concluded that some
colleges fail to net out scholarships. TIGTA also identified 350,000 cases in which a household
received a credit even though the information on the 1098-T indicated they did not fulfill at least
one of the eligibility criteria (at least half-time, undergraduate). The report emphasized that
reducing fraud and error in the education credits will require better gathering of information from
taxpayers and postsecondary institutions.
IRS defended its performance in its response in the TIGTA report, indicating that fraud was
not nearly as rampant as the report implied (Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration,
2011). In particular, IRS noted that while TIGTA report correctly noted that millions of AOTC
recipients had not had their postsecondary institutions confirmed, this was due not to fraudulent
filings but to weaknesses in the IRS’s databases of eligible institutions, which they pledged to
improve.
In response to the TIGTA report, legislation was introduced to the House to tighten administration of the AOTC. The proposed legislation would require that taxpayers list the employer
identification number of a student’s postsecondary institution. In theory, this should be present on
the 1098-T, but apparently some institutions listed incorrectly.
None of these administrative challenges are insurmountable. The TIGTA is holding IRS to a
degree of oversight that ED has maintained over colleges for decades. However, while ED has all
of the necessary lists and procedures and lines of communication in place, IRS is relatively new to
the student aid game. Until the agency gets its procedures into place, the opportunities for error
and fraud are widened. The TIGTA report warns, however, that improving these procedures may
create additional paperwork burdens for families and colleges.

4

Traditional Federal Aid for College

The footprint of the IRS in the funding of postsecondary students was quite small until 1998.
By contrast, the US Department of Education has been funding college students since 1965. The
federal programs established in the Higher Education Act of 1965 are known collectively as Title
IV aid. They include the precursors to Pell Grants, Stafford Loans, and Federal Work-Study. Title
9

IV aid also includes a variety of smaller programs. The discussion that follows will focus on the
largest sources of Title IV aid: the Pell Grant and federal loans.

4.1

The Pell Grant

HEA 1965 established the Educational Opportunity Grant Program, which allocated funds directly
to colleges that committed to identifying and recruiting students with “exceptional financial need”
(Gladieux and Hauptman, 1995, p. 15). In 1972, the program was split into the Supplemental
Educational Opportunity Grant (SEOG) program, which survives as a small program that delivers funds directly to colleges, and the Basic Educational Opportunity Grant (BEOG) program,
which delivers funds directly to students. The BEOG program, renamed the Pell Grant in 1980,
expanded eligibility to students attending part-time, as well as to those in vocational education
or community colleges. Over the twenty years following the 1972 legislation, the number of Pell
Grant recipients grew 20-fold (College Board, 2011, table 8), while college enrollment rose by just
44 percent (Institute of Education Sciences, 2010, table 197).
While there is no explicit income limit on Pell receipt, the vast majority of Pell recipients have
family incomes below $50,000, which is slightly above the median of U.S. household incomes (Bureau
of the Census, 2012, table H-6). In 2008, legislation was passed that substantially increased the
generosity of the program. The maximum grant was increased, and students were allowed to receive
a Pell both during the academic year and summer. These changes, combined with higher college
enrollments and weak economic conditions that pushed more families into Pell eligibility, drove Pell
expenditures to record levels. Pell volume increased by more than 90 percent just between 2008-09
and 2010-11, with the number of recipients rising from 6.2 million to 9.1 million and the average
grant among recipients increasing from $2,945 to $3,828 (College Board, 2011, figures 13A and
13B). Tuition prices have risen faster than inflation, however. So while the real value of the Pell
rose between 1995 and 2011, its purchasing power declined from 35% of public four-year tuition to
32% (College Board, 2011, figures 13A and 13C).

10

4.2

Federal Loans

The Stafford Loan, the largest student loan program, dates to 1965, when the Guaranteed Student
Loan was introduced. In the original program, the government paid the interest on these loans
during college, loans were limited to low-income students, and loan volume was only a third of
grant volume. Changes to the loan program in 1992 resulted in a sharp uptick in volume and rapid
growth over the following twenty years. A new loan was created, open to all students regardless of
need, called the unsubsidized Stafford Loan. While the government does not pay the interest on
unsubsidized Stafford loans while students are enrolled, both subsidized and unsubsidized Stafford
loans offer interest rates, forbearance protections, and flexible repayment options that make them
substantially more appealing than private student loans or credit card debt. Dependent undergraduates may borrow up to $31,000 in unsubsidized loans regardless of need. For low-income students,
up to $23,000 of that amount may be in subsidized loans (U.S. Department of Education, 2012b).
Parents are allowed to borrow up to the full cost of attendance through federal PLUS loans,
regardless of need. Unlike the Stafford loans, the PLUS loans require a credit check. Payment
on these loans starts immediately, and interest accrues during college. Over half of student loans
initiated each year are now through the PLUS and unsubsidized Stafford loan programs (College
Board, 2011, figure 3).

4.3

Aid Application Process

Establishing eligibility for federal aid is called “need determination.” The data elements that determine “need” are collected in the FAFSA, which is required for all federal grants and loans. This
form, which most students now complete on-line, is also required for many state and institutional
aid programs. The FAFSA requests information about students’ own income and savings, their
parents’ income and savings, their receipt of various other types of governmental assistance and
the amounts of other income and liabilities (such as education tax credits claimed, child support
paid or received, and other money received or paid on the student’s behalf).2 This information is
based upon the prior tax year (e.g., 2011 for students entering college in fall 2012), meaning that
2

See the 2012-13 FAFSA On The Web Worksheet, http://www.fafsa.ed.gov/fotw1213/pdf/fafsaws13c.pdf.

11

a high school student would not be able to file a FAFSA until at least January of their senior year,
or after taxes are filed.
From information on the FAFSA, the U.S. Department of Education computes the expected
family contribution (EFC), an estimate of how much the family can pay out of pocket for college.
Need is defined as the difference between the cost of attendance (e.g., tuition, fees, books, living
expenses) and this family contribution. The EFC is provided to both students and the schools to
which they have applied. Before 2008, the EFC was the only information students received upon
completing the FAFSA. Online applicants now also receive an estimate of their Pell eligibility. They
do not receive any estimate of their eligibility for the tax credits.
In Table 2, we compare the 2011 FAFSA to its 2006 incarnation, as well as to the 1040, 1040A
and 1040EZ for the 2010 tax year. The FAFSA (116 questions) is now slightly shorter than the
1040 (126 questions). In 2006, by contrast, the FAFSA was slightly longer. Dropped questions
include eight pertaining to earned income credits, additional child tax credits, welfare benefits,
and untaxed social security benefits, two relating to veteran benefits, four pertaining to untaxed
income and income adjustments, six calculation lines, one on planned enrollment intensity and two
about the colleges to which the FAFSA is being forwarded. Added questions address tax credits
and allowances (four questions), dependency status (six questions), the student’s high school name
and location, parents’ email address, dislocated-worker status, and means-tested benefits.

4.4

Research on the Effectiveness of the Aid Programs

Do the aid programs administered by ED affect educational attainment? There are many more
studies of the effectiveness of traditional student aid than on the effectiveness of the education
tax benefits. However, the quality of this empirical evidence varies considerably. Answering this
empirical question is a challenge, since eligibility for subsidies is certainly not random. Rather, aid
is offered to students on the basis of characteristics that have their own effect on the probability
of college attendance. For example, Pell Grants flow to low-income youth. If these students are
relatively unlikely to attend college, perhaps because of low levels of parental education or lowquality secondary schooling, then estimates of the effect of aid based on this source of variation in

12

aid will be downwardly biased. Conversely, since many colleges use merit scholarships to attract
high-achieving students, the bias on estimates of the effect of aid will, in some cases, be positive.
Since many studies in this literature pool all sources of aid into a single variable, it is frequently
impossible to sign the bias on a given estimate.
This omitted variables problem may be unsolvable using standard multiple regression methods.
One solution is a randomized, controlled trial, in which aid amounts are randomly assigned to a
pool of potential college students. ED is currently planning such an evaluation of the effect of
Pell Grant on students attending short-term, training programs. In the review that follows, we
focus on studies that have used experimental or quasi-experimental methods to evaluate the effect
of aid. For a detailed review, see Deming and Dynarski (2009) or Dynarski and Scott-Clayton
(forthcoming).

4.4.1

Grants

Studies that examine the Pell Grant, currently the largest source of federal grant aid, produce
mixed results: Hansen (1983) and Kane (1996) found no effect of the introduction of the Pell on
the college enrollment rate of low-income recent high school graduates. Seftor and Turner (2002)
use a differences-in-differences framework to examine the effect of Pell Grant eligibility rules, and
find that non-traditional students are about 4 percentage points more likely to attend college once
they are considered eligible. Bettinger (2004) uses a regression-discontinuity approach to look at
the effect of the Pell Grant on persistence using a sample of college students; his estimates are
extremely sensitive to specification.
This set of findings is consistent with a story in which experience with the aid process is important: older individuals may have learned about the Pell program over time, and continuing students
may learn about the program once they enroll in school. Those who have recently graduated from
high school but not yet enrolled may be the least informed and least equipped to figure out the
process.
Veterans educational benefits have historically been one of the largest sources of grant aid for
college in the US. Multiple studies of the post-World-War-II GI Bills (Angrist, 1993; Turner and

13

Bound, 2003; Bound and Turner, 2002) have found these benefits to have raised schooling levels
substantially.
Dynarski (2003) examined the elimination of the federal Social Security Student Benefit (SSSB)
program, using a difference-in-difference analysis. From 1965 to 1982, the Social Security Administration paid for millions of students to go to college. Under the SSSB program, the children
of deceased, disabled or retired Social Security beneficiaries received monthly payments while in
college. At the program’s peak, 12 percent of young full-time college students were receiving these
benefits. In 1981, Congress voted to eliminate the program. The elimination of the grant program
reduced college attendance of the affected group by more than a third.
Several quasi-experimental studies of large state merit aid programs, which provide scholarships
to students meeting minimum GPA and/or test score thresholds, have found significant positive
impacts on enrollment (Dynarski, 2000, 2004; Cornwell and Mustard, 2006; Dynarski, 2008). These
include regression-discontinuity studies of programs in DC, California and West Virgina (Kane,
2007; Abraham and Clark, 2006; Kane, 2003; Scott-Clayton, 2011).

4.4.2

Loans

There is very little rigorous research on the effect of student loans. Dynarski (2002) finds suggestive
evidence of positive effects of student loan expansions in the U.S. in the early 1990s on college
attendance, but the estimates are not highly robust to specification checks. A review by Heller
(2008) of the effects of loans on college access concluded that the findings from the non-experimental
literature can at best be described as mixed. In part, this may be because studies are inconsistent
in their choice of counterfactual: they may be comparing $1 of loans to $1 of grants, $1 of workstudy, or to no aid at all. Based on the non-experimental evidence, Heller concludes that college
enrollments are not as sensitive to loans as to grants. This is unsurprising given that loans are not
worth as much to students, but since they also cost less, it is unclear whether loans may still be
cost-effective compared to grants.

14

4.4.3

The Application Process

A recent experimental study by Bettinger et al. (2012) provides evidence that the complexity of the
aid process undermines the effectiveness of aid. In this experiment, low-income families who visited
a tax-preparation center were randomly assigned to one of three groups: 1) a full treatment group
who received both personalized information about eligibility for financial aid as well as personal
assistance with completing and submitting the FAFSA; 2) an information-only group that received
personalized information about financial aid eligibility but no application assistance; and 3) a
control group that received a brochure with general information about college costs, financial aid,
and the value of going to college.
The full treatment, which took less than 10 minutes and cost less than $100 per participant,
increased immediate college entry rates by 8 percentage points (24 percent) for high school seniors
and 1.5 percentage points (16 percent) among independent participants with no prior college experience. After three years, participants in the full treatment group had accumulated significantly
more time in college than the control group. Impacts on Pell Grant receipt were even larger.

5

Recent Policy Responses to Complexity in Aid

This evidence discussed suggests that the details of aid design and delivery may be important moderators of program impacts. The programs that have clearly demonstrated positive impacts tend
to have simple, easy-to-understand eligibility rules and application procedures, but the evidence
regarding federal Pell Grants (the nation’s largest, but comparatively opaque grant program) is
surprisingly weak. The FAFSA experiment clearly demonstrated that a substantial streamlining of
the aid process would substantially boost college enrollment.
In this journal in 2007, building upon Dynarski and Scott-Clayton (2006, 2007), we showed
that the FAFSA rivals the IRS tax forms in length, containing more questions than the 1040EZ,
1040A or even the 1040. We also demonstrated that there is very little tradeoff between simplicity
and targeting in the federal aid programs, since the majority of questions on the FAFSA have little
marginal impact on federal aid eligibility. A small handful of the questions - in particular, income

15

and family size - account for over 90 percent of the variation in Pell grant eligibility. Most of the
questions could therefore be removed from the FAFSA while maintaining the existing distribution
of aid.
Several organizations under the direction of the federal government have also acknowledged
this complexity and called on the need to reform the application process. In 2005, the Advisory
Committee on Student Financial Assistance released a report examining the financial aid system
and concluded
“Millions of students and adult learners who aspire to college are overwhelmed by
the complexity of student aid. Uncertainty and confusion robs them of its significant
benefits. Rather than promote access, student aid often creates a series of barriers a gauntlet that the poorest students must run to get to college. Replacing complexity
with a steady stream of encouragement that makes access to college simple and certain
is a top priority of Congress and the higher education community.” (p. i)
The suggestion in the Committee’s report of making the application process less complex was
reiterated in the 2006 report of the Commission on the Future of Higher Education, which had
been charged by then-Secretary of Education Margaret Spellings to identify challenges facing the
higher education system in the United States. The Commission called for “consolidating programs,
streamlining process, and replacing the FAFSA with a much shorter and simpler application”
(Commission on the Future of Higher Education, 2006). In 2008, a working group of academics
and aid officials released a report sounding similar themes under the auspices of the College Board
(Rethinking Student Aid Study Group, 2008).
In the midst of this policy discussion, Congress approved several simplifications to the aid
process in the College Cost Reduction and Access Act of 2007. These provisions did not take effect
until the 2009-10 academic year. CCRAA eliminated portions of the FAFSA, including Worksheet
A, which had asked about untaxed income. But CCRAA also imposed new requirements for
determining if a student was an independent, thereby adding questions to the FAFSA. CCRAA
also expanded the number of students who automatically qualified for a family contribution of zero
(an “auto-zero EFC”). Before CCRAA, households with annual income below $20,000 were eligible
for the auto-zero; CCRAA raised that threshold to $30,000 (U.S. Department of Education, 2008b).
Upon Barack Obama’s election, the National Economic Council and the Council of Economic
16

Advisers began working on efforts to streamline the aid process. In September 2009 they released
a report devoted to the topic (Council of Economic Advisors, 2009) that drew extensively upon
Dynarski and Scott-Clayton (2006, 2007) and the report of the Rethinking Student Aid Study Group
(2008). During the summer of 2009, Congressional committees developed ambitious legislation
to streamline the aid form. Most of these provisions were eventually discarded in last-minute
negotiations that were dominated by legislation to overhaul student loans and health care.
Since this burst of Congressional activity in 2007 and 2008, the most significant changes to the
aid system have been made by administrative authority. ED has worked to simplify the online
FAFSA, eliminating repetitive questions (e.g., applicants had previously been asked their age and
birth date in three different places) and introducing “skip logic” that allows students and parents
to answer fewer questions based on their responses to screening questions (U.S. Department of
Education, 2010).
In spring 2010, some online applicants were for the first time allowed to automatically transfer
their IRS data into the FAFSA application. This process saves applicants from having to collect tax
documents and enter items manually. This may prevent data-entry errors that cause applications to
be flagged for revision and resubmission.3 This represented a major administrative breakthrough,
since IRS had steadfastly refused to allow any such transfer of data to ED, citing both privacy
concerns and a longstanding opposition to using tax data for any purpose other than tax collection.
Both of these issues were resolved to IRS’s satisfaction by having applicants personally log into
IRS servers while filling in the FAFSA, with data items then copied over to the aid form via the
applicant’s web browser.
This effort to streamline the online application was paired with an ongoing campaign to move
applicants away from the paper FAFSA. ED stopped accepting bulk orders for the paper FAFSA
that had been placed annually by colleges, high schools, college coaching programs, libraries, and
community agencies. This meant that students were no longer able to go to their high school
guidance counselor to get a copy of the FAFSA, but had to instead order one from ED. Paper
3

ED has for a number of years sent FAFSAs to IRS to have them checked for errors in income and tax data. Upon
discovering an inconsistency, IRS flags the application, which ED then returns to the applicant for revision. IRS does
not specify (to ED or the applicant) which answer is in error.

17

applications dropped sharply in the wake of this change in policy, from 778,000 in 2006-07 filling
year to 500,000 in the following year (U.S. Department of Education, 2007b). In 2009-10, only
40,000 paper FAFSA applications were submitted (U.S. Department of Education, 2011a).
In another important development, completing the FAFSA online (but not on paper) now
produces an immediate estimate of federal aid eligibility, just as completing a 1040 produces an
estimate of tax liability. Previously, applicants received no notification of aid eligibility until they
received a letter from the aid offices of the colleges to which they had been admitted.

6

How Does the Aid System Look Today?

We have just described quite a bit of activity. What has been the net effect of this activity on the
applicant experience? Is the aid application process less of a hurdle than it was in 2007?

6.1

Length of the FAFSA

The FAFSA still makes the typical tax return look svelte. While two dozen questions have been
removed from the FAFSA in the past five years, another dozen have been added. As a result, the
FAFSA now has 116 questions, compared to 127 questions five years ago. In Table 2, we compare
the 2011-12 FAFSA to its 2006-07 incarnation, as well as to the 1040, 1040A and 1040EZ for
the 2010 tax year. The FAFSA is now slightly shorter than the 1040, at 116 and 126 questions,
respectively. In 2006, by contrast, the FAFSA was slightly longer. Since more than half of families
with incomes in the Pell range (that is, below $50,000) fill out the 1040A or 1040EZ,4 the shorter
tax forms may be a more appropriate benchmark. The FAFSA compares poorly with these shorter
IRS forms: the 1040EZ has 38 questions and the 1040A has 84, compared to the FAFSA’s 116.
Nine data items on the 1040EZ (44 on the 1040A) are used to compute tax liability, as compared
to the 66 FAFSA questions used to compute aid eligibility. As was true in 2006, it is a puzzle why
the aid system requires so much more data than the tax system to determine ability to pay.
4

Authors’ calculations using published tables in Parisi (2011).

18

6.2

Estimated Time to Complete the FAFSA

As can be seen in Table 2, ED has increased its estimate of time needed to complete the paper
FAFSA, from one hour to three hours:
“The time required to complete the paper or PDF version of the FAFSA is estimated
to be three hours; the time required to complete the web version of the FAFSA, on
FAFSA on the Web, is estimated to be one hour and fifteen minutes; the time required to
complete the pre-filled web version of the FAFSA, on FAFSA on the Web, is estimated to
be fifty-five minutes. These estimates include the time necessary to review instructions,
search data resources, gather the data needed, and complete and review the information
collection, and make copies of output documents for future reference.”5
The agency was roundly criticized for the implausibility of its earlier estimates, and these new
estimates still seem low. By way of comparison, the IRS estimates that it takes seven hours to
complete the 1040EZ, which is a third the length of the FAFSA. The IRS estimates it takes 23
hours to complete the 1040, which is only slightly longer than the FAFSA.
Outside researchers who have fielded taxpayer surveys have concluded that even these IRS
estimates are low (Blumenthal and Slemrod, 1992). No independent researchers have conducted a
similar survey or observation of the time required to complete the FAFSA, whether on paper or
online. The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, which mandates these time estimates, allows each
agency to choose its own method for calculating the time costs of filling out federal forms. The
online FAFSA consists of 19 screens, 116 questions and many pages of accompanying instructions.
ED has provided no justification or description of the time-use methodology behind its assertion
that it takes 75 minutes to complete this process, including gathering the requisite documentation.6

6.3

FAFSA-IRS Link Benefits Few Applicants

The ability of an applicant to link data from his 1040 to his FAFSA has great potential to simplify
the application process. Much of the financial data needed to compute aid eligibility is present in
the IRS data, as are many of the demographic items that the FAFSA requests. As discussed in
5

2012-13 FAFSA instructions, downloaded on January 2, 2012 from http://studentaid.ed.gov.
The Office of Management and Budget recently issued a clarification of the implementation Paperwork Reduction
Act, directing agencies to conduct usability tests when creating forms; it is unclear whether this will apply to existing
forms such as the FAFSA or only new ones.
6

19

Dynarski and Scott-Clayton (2006, 2007), it is feasible to eliminate the FAFSA completely, using
a check-off on the 1040 to indicate that a person is applying for aid.
As implemented, however, the IRS link falls well short of this potential. Applicants are allowed
to import their IRS data only if they have already filed their tax return for the previous tax
year. IRS says it needs an additional two to eight weeks to make returns available to online aid
applicants. As a result, it is virtually impossible for anyone filing under the traditional academic
and tax schedules to use the FAFSA-IRS link. A family who files a 1040 as soon as W-2s are due
in household mailboxes (start of February) would be eligible to use the FAFSA-IRS link sometime
between mid-February and April, while a family who files on tax day would not be able to do so
until May or June. These dates are after the FAFSA deadlines imposed by most colleges, as well as
the FAFSA deadlines for virtually every state aid program. Even by mid-April, the date by which
our early-bird tax filer could plausibly use the FAFSA-IRS link, the filing deadline has passed for
fifteen state aid programs, including those in California (March 2) and Illinois (“as soon as possible
after January 1”).
Students who want to qualify for state aid need to file even earlier than these posted deadlines,
since some programs give out funds on a first-come, first-served basis, with eligible candidates
left empty-handed if funds run dry before they file. In an analysis of Kentucky’s College Access
Program Grant, we found that roughly 40 percent of eligible applicants received no grant because
funds ran out before the filing deadline. A student who wants to maximize her chances of receiving
aid would therefore file early, forgo the IRS match and manually enter her tax information. And
this, indeed, is what has occurred. ED estimates that just 24 percent of applicants use the IRS link
(U.S. Department of Education, 2011b).

7

Prospects for Simplification

With the growth in the education tax credits in recent years, we now have two federal agencies
administering and delivering aid for college students. ED has done this for decades, and has a fairly
smooth process in place for communicating with colleges and delivering funds to students through
those colleges. Treasury, by contrast, is fairly new to this game and there have been growing pains.
20

The current structure of overlapping responsibilities represents an inefficient use of resources.
Asking ED to develop expertise in gathering and verifying families’ income data is similarly inefficient, since IRS already does this work in order to administer the federal tax system The competencies of the two agencies are complementary, and an efficiently designed system of postsecondary
subsidies could be built upon the strengths of the two agencies.
In particular, IRS could continue to gather the household data that determines individual
eligibility for the tax credits and aid, ceding to ED the work of delivering aid and communicating
with colleges. This division of labor would build on the relative strengths of the two agencies while
reducing the paperwork burden imposed on households and colleges. Paperwork would be most
reduced if ED used only IRS data in its calculation of aid eligibility. This represents a substantial
shortening of the number of data items that would be used in calculating aid eligibility.

7.1

Feasibility of Streamlining the Aid System

We have described the evolution of complexity in the aid system and recent efforts to reduce it.
What are the possibilities going forward? Dynarski and Scott-Clayton (2006) showed, based on
2003-04 data, that the aid system could be massively simplified without compromising targeting in
the Pell program. Does this finding still hold? In this section we update the analysis of Dynarski
and Scott-Clayton (2006) using 2007-08 data on student aid and aid applications.7
We show that the vast majority of questions still have little impact on aid eligibility and could
be eliminated with very little effect on the distribution of aid. We also examine the effect of using
older tax data in the calculation of aid. If ED were willing to use the previous year’s tax return to
calculate aid eligibility, then all applicants could take advantage of the IRS-FAFSA link, thereby
considerably streamlining the application process.
We focus on Pell Grants, since they are the most expensive component of federal need-based aid.
Note that the tax benefits are already distributed based only on IRS data items, so this exercise
is unnecessary for the AOTC. The question at hand is whether we could use IRS data to define
eligibility for aid, just as we do for the credits, thereby getting ED out of the business of gathering
7

We use data from the 2007-08 National Postsecondary Student Aid Survey (NPSAS:08).

21

income data from households.

7.2

Example: Removing Assets from the Aid Calculation

An example will demonstrate our approach. The FAFSA gathers information on applicants’ assets.
These enter into the calculation of a family’s Expected Family Contribution (EFC). Housing equity
and funds in tax-advantaged retirement accounts are not considered in the calculation of the EFC
and are therefore not collected by the FAFSA. Since IRS does not collect information about asset
holdings, this information would be lost were aid eligibility to be calculated using only IRS data.
What would be the impact on the distribution of aid if assets were ignored? A subset of (marginal)
families will have their aid eligibility changed if assets are ignored. Other (intra-marginal) families
will see no change, because their other financial characteristics either place them firmly beyond the
margin of aid eligibility or at the aid maximum.
Figure 1 shows our estimated distribution of the Pell Grant, by income, during the 2007-08
academic year. We calculate these Pell Grants using the federal financial aid formula and all of
the relevant information in the FAFSA.8 In this graph, each income category contains 5% of the
sample. The average Pell Grant drops sharply with income, and is essentially zero above incomes
of about $60,000.
What happens if we drop assets from the calculation of Pell eligibility? To answer this question,
we set all assets to zero, and recalculate aid eligibility. Nobody’s Pell eligibility will go down in
this scenario, since no one is needier when assets are ignored. The share of FAFSA applicants
eligible for a Pell (52%) does not change, while the average Pell Grant rises from $1,320 to $1,344
(Table 3). Total Pell spending for this population rises from $12.0 to $12.1 billion. For 95% of aid
applicants, there is zero change in the Pell amount for which they are eligible. That is, for only 5%
of aid aid applicants is there any relationship between asset holdings and Pell eligibility. For 97%
of aid applicants, Pell eligibility changes by less than $100.
The resulting changes to the distribution of Pell are shown in Figure 1, to which we have already
8
When we compare these calculated aid amounts to their true values (which are contained in NPSAS), we come
extremely close to the true values: regressing the actual against the predicted values yields an R2 of 0.96 for the EFC
and 0.998 for the Pell. See Data Appendix.

22

referred. The dark shading is the change in the Pell Grant induced by ignoring assets. The change
is not easy to see in this graph, because it is so small.
The EFC is the aid program’s summary statistic for ability to pay. It is used for calculating not
only the Pell Grant, but also subsidized student loans, state aid, and non-government aid offered
by colleges. While dropping assets affects the Pell eligibility of only 6% of applicants, it affects the
EFC of 30% (Table 3). For 12% of applicants, in fact, the EFC drops by more than $500. How
can this be consistent with the small impact on Pell just discussed? Baseline EFC ranges from
zero to $100,000 in our sample. Dropping assets alters the EFC substantially for applicants almost
exclusively in the upper ranges, as shown in Figure 2A, which plots the new against old EFCs,
along with the 45-degree line. We also plot the 25th and 75th percentiles of the cells. Each cell
contains 1% of the sample.
Note that all of the observations are below the 45-degree line: dropping assets can only reduce
the estimated family contribution. Also note the tight clustering near the origin, with the vast
majority of EFCs below $30,000 (Figure 2B focuses on this subsample). There are a few large
changes depicted in Figure 2A. For example, for the top 1% of EFCs (the rightmost point) the
average EFC drops by more than $10,000, while in the next lowest cell it drops by $5,000. The
average EFCs in these cells at baseline are $70,000 and $50,000, respectively. Dropping assets
brings the average EFC for these cells down to $60,000 and $45,000, respectively. These values
are above the cost of full-time attendance at the vast majority of colleges. No federal or state aid
is awarded to families with EFCs in this range, so variation in this range is irrelevant for these
programs.9
One concern is that families with substantial assets but low incomes don’t currently apply for
aid, since they know they will be disqualified on the basis of their assets. These families would
not appear in our data, which consists only of aid applicants. To check this, we examine asset and
income data in the 2007 Survey of Consumer Finances, to see if there is a substantial population of
9
Conceivably, a family with two children simultaneously enrolled at an expensive four-year college could qualify
for grants from a wealthy institution such as Harvard or Yale even with an EFC of $45,000. These schools may
therefore choose to gather more information than would be provided by the FAFSA - and in fact, already do. Both
schools already require that parents complete the College Board PROFILE, which collects items not requested in the
FAFSA (e.g., home equity, retirement funds).

23

families with low incomes but large asset holdings. Among families with children in the Pell income
range (less than $40,000), 96% have less than $150,000 in non-retirement, non-housing assets.

7.3

Implications of Relying Upon IRS Data to Define Aid Eligibility

We concentrated on assets in the section above because it has been the focus of the most intense
scrutiny in discussions of aid simplification. We will not repeat this full exercise for every data
element in the FAFSA, because there are 66 financial items that go into the formula. Rather, we
will show the effect of eliminating from the aid calculation all of the non-IRS data items. This
includes data items whose elimination would tend to make families look needier (e.g., assets) as
well as those whose elimination would tend to make families look better off (e.g., medical expenses).
We show the net effect of eliminating all of these data items on the EFC and Pell.
We next examine how aid changes when only IRS data is used to determine eligibility. This
opens the door to an application-free Pell, since eligibility could be calculated using IRS data alone.
With this approach, we determine Pell amounts using the adjusted gross income of the parents and
students, taxes paid, state of residence, family size, parents’ and independent students’ marital
status, and the type of income tax form filed. We also make use of the number of family members
in college and receipt of a means-tested benefit.

7.3.1

Shifts in the Distribution of Pell As A Result of Simplification

The correlation between the baseline Pell and the Pell based on the limited set of variable is 0.95
(Table 3). The extensive data we drop in this simulation explain only nine percent of the variation
in aid (Column (3), Table 3). With the few variables we include, we explain 90.9 percent of the
variation in the Pell Grant. For 74 percent of FAFSA applicants the Pell does not change by even
a dollar. Our simulated Pell is within $100 of the baseline Pell (which we estimated using all of the
items in the aid formula) for 80 percent of students, and within $500 of baseline for 91 percent of
students. Of the remaining 9%, two-thirds (6%) gain more than $500 while a third (3%) lose more
than $500 relative to the current regime. The share of students eligible for Pell Grants rises from
52% to 53%. The average Pell increases from $1,320 to $1,379, or about 4.4%. Pell spending rises

24

from $12 billion to $12.52 billion.
Note that this approach uses the existing formula but simply zeroes out all of the elements that
are not present in the tax data. An alternative approach would be to rewrite the formula, assigning
weights to the various IRS data items that replicate the current distribution of aid.
The changes in the distribution of the Pell resulting from this massive simplification of the
aid form are depicted in Figure 3, where we plot average Pell against adjusted gross income.
Independent and dependent students are pooled in these data. Each income interval represents 5
percent of the sample. The light bars depict the average Pell for each income group, using the
complete aid formula. The dark bars represent the change in the average Pell for each income
group that results from using only IRS data to estimate aid eligibility. As is clear from the figure,
the changes are extremely small. The increases are largely among families with incomes between
$24,000 and $38,000. The average Pell for this population rises by $59 from a baseline of $1,320, or
4.5%. We estimate that overall Pell spending would rise by about $500 million for this population.

7.3.2

How Large Are These Implied Shifts in the Distribution of Pell?

These projected shifts in the distribution of aid induced by simplification are dwarfed by recent
policy changes that have increased the generosity of the Pell. The Pell maximum was raised from
$4,310 in 2007 to $5,510 in 2011. Further, many more students were automatically assigned an
EFC of zero based on their low incomes; the maximum income for a auto-zero EFC was raised from
$15,000 in 2003 to $31,000 in 2012. When a student is assigned an auto-EFC, all of the financial
information in the FAFSA is essentially thrown out.
The impact of the recent increases in Pell generosity on the distribution of Pell are depicted
in Figure 4 and Table 5. For these calculations, we take aid applicants in the 2007-08 NPSAS
and run their characteristics through the aid formulas for academic years 2007-08 and 2011-12.
This analysis effectively holds constant student characteristics (income, schooling costs, etc.) while
allowing the aid formula to vary. The average Pell for this population rises from $1,320 in 2007 to
$2,127 in 2011 (Table 5). The share of applicants eligible for the Pell rises from 48% to 63%. Pell
expenditures for this population rise by more than half, from $12 billion to $19.3 billion. These

25

increases largely accrued to families in the middle of the Pell range - the same applicants who would
see much more modest increases from simplification (Figure 4).

7.3.3

What About Programs Other than Pell?

We have shown that determining aid eligibility using IRS data alone has little impact on the Pell.
But what about other aid programs, which may be a function of a greater range of values of the
EFC than is the Pell? To address this question, we repeat the analysis just discussed, with the EFC
as the variable of interest (Table 3). Eliminating all of the non-IRS questions induces an increase
in the average EFC of about 3%, from $8,078 to $8,344.
While 91% of applicants remain within $500 of their baseline Pell with a simplified formula,
only 72% of the simplified EFCs are within this range of their baseline. For 19% of applicants, the
EFC rises by more than $500 while for 9% of applicants the EFC drops by more than $500. EFC
has a much broader range, going as high as $100,000 in our sample. Figure 5 depicts the changes
in the distribution of the EFC induced by simplification. The bars indicate the 25th and 75th
percentiles of the simplified EFC for each of 100 cells, which each represent 1% of the sample. The
cells generally lie along the 45-degree line, indicating average changes of zero within these cells.
The wide bars indicate that these zero averages are generated by large positive and negative shifts
in EFC.
Note, however, that these large shifts occur solely at very high EFCs, which apply to relatively
few families. A student with an EFC above $5,000 will not receive a Pell. But what about other
forms of aid? Several state aid programs have effective EFC ceilings below that of the Pell (e.g.,
Texas and Ohio). Simplifying the formula would have little impact on the size of the population
eligible for those programs. The cutoffs for other state programs are higher: Illinois, for example,
has an EFC cutoff of $9,000 for its grant program, while students with an EFC up to $12,000
qualify for Minnesota’s program. If anything, in this range we see that EFCs under a simplified
formula tend to be slightly higher in this range. This analysis suggest that more students would
not be swept into eligibility for the state aid programs by simplification.

26

7.3.4

Use Older IRS Data to Calculate Aid Eligibility

All applicants, rather than just 24 percent, could benefit from the FAFSA-IRS link if the requirement were lifted that the applicant had already filed their 1040 for the previous tax year. One
option is that the FAFSA-IRS link could provide data from the previous year’s 1040. That is, a
student applying in early 2012 for aid for 2012-13 could use IRS data from tax year 2010 (rather
than 2011) to complete her FAFSA. These data could either be used to determine her final aid
eligibility, or as a placeholder until the 1040 is filed for 2011. The latter is effectively what happens
now: most applicants will complete their 2012-13 FAFSA before filing their 2011 taxes, providing
estimates of their 2011 tax data in their FAFSA application. They are then required to update
their FAFSA once they file for the 2011 tax year.
As it stands, however, families manually enter these estimates. ED could instead import from
IRS the 2010 tax data as an estimate of the 2011 data. Applicants who are confident that their
2011 tax data will differ substantially from the 2010 values can choose to manually enter their
information. As they do now, families would then receive an estimate of their aid eligibility based on
the 2010 data. ED and IRS could automatically update these values when the 2011 tax form is filed,
just as the individual applicant now does. While these may sound like minor administrative tweaks,
these minor tweaks open the possibility of a nearly-automatic aid application. As Kahneman
and Tversky (2000) and Thaler and Sunstein (2008) argue, small differences in administrative
requirements can produce enormous differences in outcomes.
This approach still leaves some uncertainty in final aid eligibility (though no more than currently
exists), since aid may be changed once the 2011 tax form is filed. An alternative that would allow
for both simplicity and certainty in the aid process would be to determine final aid eligibility based
on the previous year’s 1040. As we now show, this has little impact on the targeting of aid while
increasing its simplicity and certainty.
For this analysis, we need to observe income in two consecutive years for a set of students.
About half of the students in NPSAS who apply for aid for the 2007-08 academic year do so the
following year (2008-09). These students are likely a select subset of the population, but look
comparable to the full sample (see Appendix Table). We estimate 2008-09 aid amounts using the

27

methodology described earlier, first using all of the elements in the aid formula and then just the
subset of items available in the IRS data. We then replace the IRS data items that were reported
on the 2008-09 FAFSA with those reported on the 2007-08 FAFSA. This simulates the effect of
allowing 2008-09 applicants to use data from the 1040 they filed in 2007 (for the 2006 tax year),
rather than using the 1040 they will file in 2008 (for the 2007 tax year).
Table 4 shows the results. For this sample of repeat applicants (as was true for the full sample),
restricting the aid formula to IRS data has little effect on aid eligibility (Column 3), with 72 percent
of applicants seeing zero change in their Pell eligibility and 88 percent seeing a change of less than
$500. When we replace this IRS data with data from one year earlier, the results change slightly
(Column 4), with 64 percent of applicants seeing zero change in their Pell eligibility and 75 percent
seeing a change of less than $500. The average Pell for this group rises by $96, from a baseline
value of $1,615 (Column 1), or 4.8 percent.

8

Conclusion

There are now a dozen tax expenditures for education, representing $29 billion in forgone revenue
annually. Traditional aid for college students, in the form of grants and loans, represents an
additional $150 billion. With the rapid growth of the tax credits, an increasing number of students
now complete paperwork for both the IRS and the US Department of Education in order to obtain
college funding.
We now have compelling evidence that complexity in the aid system undermines its effectiveness.
Yet in the past five years we have seen only halting progress in simplifying the aid system, with one
question added to the FAFSA for every two removed. And there is more paperwork on the horizon
for families and colleges, with the Treasury Inspector General putting pressure on the IRS to obtain
more documentation from applicants and colleges regarding their eligibility for the tax credits. If
carried through, these steps will largely duplicate the work that ED already does in administering
the traditional aid programs and multiply paperwork burdens on households and colleges.
ED and IRS bring complementary strengths to the administration of aid for college. ED has
long experience in delivering aid to students and communicating with colleges. IRS has a well28

developed capacity for gathering and verifying income data from households. Conversely, IRS
has little experience with verifying student enrollment and delivering aid when it is needed. And
while ED has long experience in gathering income data from applicants, it does so by imposing
substantial paperwork burdens upon households and colleges. Just one example: colleges are
statutorily required to “verify” a minimum of 30% of their aid applications each year, an auditing
process that requires applicants to submit extra supporting documentation, including copies of tax
returns. Some colleges audit 100% of their aid applications. Were tax data alone used to calculate
aid eligibility, the data underlying all applications would automatically be verified, since it would
come from the IRS rather than the applicant.
At a minimum, a simpler aid program would increase the efficiency of aid dollars by reducing
the administrative and paperwork costs for schools and families. At best, simplification would
clarify incentives for students and induce into college some who now believe it is unaffordable.

9

Data Appendix

9.1

Data and Sample

We use individual-level data from the restricted-use version of the 2007-08 National Postsecondary
Student Aid Survey (NPSAS:08). NPSAS:08 is representative of students filing for aid for the
2007-08 school year. About half the sample also files a FAFSA for the 2008-09 school year, and we
examine only this sample in some of our analyses.
The NPSAS:08 includes FAFSA and financial aid data for 75,710 (11,199,083 survey-weighted)
undergraduate federal aid applicants. We drop students who enroll in more than one college during
an academic year, because their complete cost of attendance is not available. This reduces the
sample from 75,710 to 64,500 (10,223,034 survey-weighted). We drop an additional 1,480 (289,809
survey-weighted) students who were missing either EFC or data elements needed to calculate EFC.

29

9.2

Calculating EFC and Pell Eligibility

We calculate students’ EFC and Pell eligibility using the FAFSA items contained in NPSAS and the
2007-08 or 2008-09 aid formulas, as documented in the Federal Student Aid Handbook by the U.S.
Department of Education (2007a, 2008a). We compare these calculated amounts to their actual
values, which are also provided in NPSAS. Since enrollment information that goes into calculating
the Pell for part-time students is not consistently provided in NPSAS, and also because NPSAS
perturbs a small percentage of cases in order to maintain confidentiality, we do expect our calculated
aid amounts to perfectly match the actual amounts. However, we come quite close. For only 5%
of the sample (3,780 observations) are we off by more than $4,000 in our Pell calculations. Most
of these cases are students whom we calculate to be Pell eligible but do not receive any Pell grant,
or whom we calculate are not eligible for any Pell but do receive a Pell. Since these students’ Pells
are not replicable using even all of the information in NPSAS, we drop them from the analysis.
This leaves us an analytic sample of 59,240 (9,083,492 survey-weighted) undergraduate aid
applicants for 2007-08. For this sample, our calculated aid amounts are extremely close to their
actual values. Regressing the actual against the calculated 2007-08 values yields an R2 of 0.958 for
the EFC and 0.998 for the Pell. We use the calculated values in all of the simulations in which we
drop items from the aid formula.
About half of this analytic sample filed a FAFSA for both the 2007-08 and 2008-09 academic
years. For analysis in which we examine the reliability of older income data for estimating aid, we
dropped 2,870 (28,5670 survey-weighted) students who changed their Title-IV defined dependency
status between filing years. This yields a sample of 27,540 (4,757,248 survey-weighted) students for
these analyses.
Weighted sample statistics are in Appendix Table A2. In the first column is the full analytic
sample, while the second column is limited to those students who apply for aid two years in a
row. A little over half of the sample is dependent under Title IV rules, 19% are independents with
no dependents and 25% are independents with dependents. Over 60% of the students are female.
Two-thirds attend college full-time for at least part of the year, while the balance are never enrolled
more than half time. A third attend public, four-year colleges, 30% attend community colleges, 19%

30

attend private, non-profit schools, while 17% attend for-profit schools. 52% of applicants receive a
Pell Grant.

9.3

Part-Time Students’ EFC and Pell Eligibility

NPSAS does not provide all of the information required to calculate Pell eligibility for students
enrolled part-time. Students who attend full-time for the entire year are eligible for the full Pell,
while all other students are eligible for a percentage of that full Pell.This percentage depends on
which of four categories of enrollment intensity the student falls into each term: full-time, threequarter time, half-time and less than half-time. Unfortunately, this information is not provided on
a term-by-term basis in NPSAS. We estimate enrollment intensity by dividing a student’s actual
Pell by the Pell we calculate them to be eligible for were they enrolled full-time for the full year.
The resulting distribution of estimated enrollment intensities looks sensible, with students clustered
around permutations of the four categories of enrollment intensity (e.g., 75%, 87.5%). We use these
estimated enrollment intensities in our simulations.

31

References
Abraham, Katharine G. and Melissa A. Clark, “Financial Aid and Students’ College Decisions: Evidence from the District of Columbia Tuition Assistance Grant Program,” The Journal
of Human Resources, July 2006, 41 (3), 578–610.
Ackerman, Deena, Julie-Anne Cronin, Nick Turner, and Andrew Bershadker, “Coordinating the American Opportunity Tax Credit and The Federal Pell Grant,” November 2011.
Unpublished.
Advisory Committee on Student Financial Assistance, The Student Aid Gauntlet: Making Access to College Simple and Certain, Washington, DC: Advisory Committee on Student
Financial Assistance, January 2005.
Angrist, Joshua D., “The Effect of Veterans’ Benefits on Education and Earnings,” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, 1993, 46 (4), 637–652.
Bettinger, Eric P., “How Financial Aid Affects Persistence,” in Caroline Hoxby, ed., College
Choices: The Economics of Where to Go, When to Go, and How to Pay for It, University of
Chicago Press, 2004.
, Bridget Terry Long, Philip Oreopoulos, and Lisa Sanbonmatsu, “The Role of Application Assistance and Information in College Decisions: Results from the H&R Block FAFSA
Experiment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127 (3), 1205–1242.
Blumenthal, Marshal and Joel Slemrod, “The Compliance Cost of the U.S Individual Income
Tax System: A Second Look After Tax Reform,” National Tax Journal, 1992, 2, 185–202.
Bound, John and Sarah Turner, “Going to War and Going to College: Did World War II
and the G.I. Bill Increase Educational Attainment for Returning Veterans?,” Journal of Labor
Economics, October 2002, 20 (4), 784–815.
Bureau of the Census, “Regions All Races by Median and Mean Income 1975-2010,” www.
census.gov/hhes/www/income/data/historical/household/2010/H06AR_2010.xls 2012.
32

College Board, Trends in Student Aid: 2011, Washington, DC: College Board, 2011.
Commission on the Future of Higher Education, A Test of Leadership: Charting the Future
of U.S. Higher Education, Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, 2006.
Cornwell, Christopher M. and David Mustard, “The Enrollment Effects of Merit-Based
Financial Aid; Evidence from Georgia’s HOPE Program,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2006, 24
(4), 761–86.
Council of Economic Advisors, Simplifying Student Aid: The Case for an Easier, Faster, and
More Accurate FAFSA, Washington, DC: Council of Economic Advisers, 2009.
Crandall-Hollick, Margot L., “The American Opportunity Tax Credit: Overview, Analysis, and
Policy Options,” CRS Report for Congress R42561, Congressional Research Service, Washington,
DC June 2012.
Deming, David and Susan Dynarski, “Into College, Out of Poverty? Policies to Increase the
Postsecondary Attainment of the Poor,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
Series, September 2009, No. 15387.
Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue Service, “Publication 970: Tax Benefits for
Education,” Technical Report 2011.
Dynarski, Susan, “Hope for Whom? Financial Aid for the Middle Class and Its Impact on
College Attendance,” National Tax Journal, September 2000, 53 (3), 629–661.
, “Loans, Liquidity, and Schooling Decisions,” Manuscript, Harvard University Kennedy School
of Government, Boston, MA 2002.
, “Does Aid Matter? Measuring the Effect of Student Aid on College Attendance and Completion,” American Economic Review, 2003, 93 (1), 279–288.
, “Who Benefits from the Education Saving Incentives? Income, Educational Expectations, and
the Value of the 529 and Coverdell,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Inc May 2004.
33

, “Building the Stock of College-Educated Labor,” Journal of Human Resources, 2008, 43 (3),
576–610.
and Judith Scott-Clayton, “The Cost of Complexity in Federal Student Aid: Lessons from
Optimal Tax Theory and Behavioral Economics,” National Tax Journal, 2006, 59 (2), 319–356.
and

, “Pell Grants on a Postcard: A Proposal for Simple and Predictable Federal Student

Aid,” Discussion Paper 2007-01, The Hamilton Project, Washington, DC February 2007.
and

, “Complexity and Targeting in Federal Student Aid: A Quantitative Analysis,” Tax

Policy and the Economy, 2008, 22, 109–150.
and

, “Financial Aid: Research Lessons for a Changing Policy Landscape,” The Future of

Children, forthcoming.
and Mark Wiederspan, “Student Aid Simplification: Looking Back and Looking Ahead,”
National Tax Journal, 2012, 65 (1), 211–234.
Finaid.org, “FinAid:

Saving for College:

Section 529 Plans,” www.finaid.org/savings/

529plans.phtml#Contributions 2012.
Gladieux, Lawrence and Arthur M. Hauptman, The College Aid Quandary: Access, Quality,
and the Federal Role, Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution, 1995.
Hansen, W. Lee, “Impact of Student Financial Aid on Access,” Proceedings of the Academy of
Political Science, 1983, 35 (2), 84–96.
Hearn, James C., “The Paradox of Growth in Federal Aid for College Students, 1965-1990,”
in Michael B. Paulsen and John C. Smart, eds., The Finance of Higher Education: Theory,
Research, Policy and Practice, New York, NY: Agathon Press, 2001, pp. 267–320.
Heller, Donald E., “The Impact of Student Loans on College Access,” in Sandy Baum, Michael S.
McPherson, and Patricia Steele, eds., The Effectiveness of Student Aid Policies: What the Research Tells Us, New York, NY: College Board, 2008, pp. 39–67.

34

Institute of Education Sciences, Digest of Education Statistics: 2009, Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Education, 2010.
, Digest of Education Statistics: 2011, Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, 2011.
Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky, Choices, Values and Frames, Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Kane, Thomas J., “Lessons From the Largest School Voucher Program Ever: Two Decades of
Experience with Pell Grants,” in Bruce Fuller, Richard Elmore, and Gary Orfield, eds., Who
Chooses? Who Loses? Culture, Institutions and the Unequal Effects of School CHoice, New
York, NY: Teachers College Press, 1996.
, “Student Aid after Tax Reform: Risks and Opportunities,” in Jacqueline E. King, ed., Financing
a College Education: How It Works, How It’s Changing, Phoenix, AZ: The American Council
on Education and Oryx Press, 1999, pp. 137–150.
, “A Quasi-Experimental Estimate of the Impact of Financial Aid on College-Going,” Technical
Report, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc May 2003.
, “Evaluating the Impact of the D.C. Tuition Assistance Grant Program,” The Journal of Human
Resources, July 2007, 42 (3), 555–582.
Long, Bridget T., “The Impact of Federal Tax Credits for Higher Education Expenses,” in
Caroline Hoxby, ed., College Choices: The Economics of Where to Go, When to Go, and How
to Pay for It, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2004.
Madrian, Brigitte C. and Dennis F. Shea, “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
Participation and Savings Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2001, 116 (4),
1149–1187.
Moynihan, Daniel Patrick, “Why Private Schools Merit Public Aid: The Constitutional Case
for Tuition Tax Credits,” 1978. Address to the National Association of Independent Schools
Annual Conference in New York.
35

Parisi, Michael, “Individual Income Tax Returns, Preliminary Data, 2009,” Statistics of Income
Bulletin, Winter 2011.
Rethinking Student Aid Study Group, Fulfilling the Commitment: Recommendations for
Reforming Federal Student Aid, Washington, DC: College Board, 2008.
Scott-Clayton, Judith, “On Money and Motivation,” Journal of Human Resources, 2011, 46 (3),
614–646.
Seftor, Neil S. and Sarah E. Turner, “Back to School: Federal Student Aid Policy and Adult
College Enrollment,” The Journal of Human Resources, April 2002, 37 (2), 336–352. ArticleType:
research-article / Full publication date: Spring, 2002 / Copyright 2002 The Board of Regents of
the University of Wisconsin System.
Silliman, Benjamin Rue, “College Tuition Tax Credits: An Examination of the Impact of the
American Opportunity, HOPE, and Lifetime Learning Tax Credits Since 1998,” in Jake Zhu
and Wali I. Mondal, eds., Proceedings of American Soceity of Business and Behavioral Sciences,
Vol. 18 2011, pp. 279–288.
Simon, Ruth and Rob Barry, “College Debt Hits Well-Off — Upper-Middle-Income Households
See Biggest Jumps in Student Loan Burden,” Aug 09 2012.
Thaler, Richard and Cass. Sunstein, Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and
Happiness, Yale University Press, 2008.
Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration, “Billions of Dollars in Education Credits Appear to Be Erroneous,” Technical Report, Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration, Washington, DC September 2011.
Turner, Nicholas, “The Effect of Tax-Based Federal Student Aid On College Enrollment,” National Tax Journal, 2011, 64 (3), 839–862.

36

Turner, Sarah and John Bound, “Closing the Gap or Widening the Divide: The Effects of the
G.I. Bill and World War II on the Educational Outcomes of Black Americans,” The Journal of
Economic History, March 2003, 63 (01).
U.S. Department of Education, 2007-2008 Federal Student Aid Handbook, Washington, DC:
U.S. Department of Education, 2007.
, Summary of Changes for the Application Processing System: 2008-2009, Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Education, 2007.
, 2008-2009 Federal Student Aid Handbook, Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education,
2008.
, Summary of Changes for the Application Processing System: 2009-2010, Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Education, 2008.
, Summary of Changes for the Application Processing System: 2011-2012, Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Education, 2010.
, 2009-2010 Federal Pell Grant Program End-of-Year Report, Washington, DC: U.S. Department
of Education, 2011.
, “Federal Student Aid Applicant: Facts and Figures,” Technical Report, Washington, DC 2011.
, 2010-2011 Federal Pell Grant Program End-of-Year Report, Washington, DC: U.S. Department
of Education, 2012.
,

“Subsidized

and

Unsubsidized

Loans,”

http://studentaid.ed.gov/types/loans/

subsidized-unsubsidized#how-much-can-i-borrow 2012.
U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Fiscal Year 2012, Analytical Perspectives, Budget of
the U.S. Government,” Technical Report, U.S. Government Accountability Office, Washington,
DC 2011.

37

, “Higher Education: Improved Tax Information Could Help Families Pay for College,” Report
to the Committee on Finance, U.S. Senate GAO-12-560, U.S. Government Accountability Office,
Washington, DC May 2012.

38

Table 1
Federal Support for Postsecondary Students by Source, 2010
Amount
($billions)
$49.06
$34.76
$12.15
$0.76
$0.55
$0.40
$0.38
$0.06

Grants
Pell
Veterans/Military
Supplemental Educational Opportunity
Academic Competitiveness
Other
SMART
LEAP
Loans
Unsubsidized Stafford
Subsidized Stafford
PLUS
Perkins
Other

$103.99
$46.09
$39.69
$17.11
$0.97
$0.13

Work-Study

$1.17

Tax Credits/Deductions/Exclusions
American Opportunity Tax Credit
Lifetime Learning Tax Credit
Dependent exemption for students aged 19-23
Exclusion of scholarship and fellowship income
Deductibility of student-loan interest
Exclusion of asset earnings in 529 plans
Deduction for higher education expenses
Exclusion of employer-provided grants
Exclusion of interest on savings bonds
Total Federal Support

$28.65
$15.11
$3.49
$2.96
$2.76
$1.48
$1.39
$0.76
$0.68
$0.02
$182.88

Notes: Table adapted from Ackerman, et al. (2011). Education Tax Credit/Deductions/Exclusion data
from Table 17-2, U.S. Office of Management and Budget (2011). Financial aid data from Table 1,
College Board (2011). All values in 2010 constant dollars. Financial aid data for 2010-11 are preliminary
estimates.

39

Table 2
IRS versus FAFSA Question Counts
1040
2010

1040A
2010

1040EZ
2010

FAFSA
2006–2007

FAFSA
2011–2012

2

2

1

5

6

126

84

38

127

116
18

Non-financial items
Identifying information
Demographic/family information
Enrollment status/school
Signature and preparer
Other

6
8
0
12
1

6
8
0
12
1

6
2
0
12
1

22
18
7
8
10

24
29
4
8
7

Financial items
Earned income
Other income
Assets
Deductions/credits/allowances
Calculations from tables
Withholdings, refund preferences

1
19
0
42
21
16

1
12
0
23
12
9

1
2
0
3
6
5

5
33
6
12
6
0

5
19
6
14
0
0

Number of items required for computation
of tax/refund or aid amount

76

44

9

72

66

Number of words in signing statement

49

64

59

232

232

Number of pages (excluding instructions)
Number of questions
Answered through IRS data transfer

Official estimate of hours to prepare
Paper
23
9
7
1
3
Web
1
Notes: Counts for the FAFSA are for dependent students with two parents and include questions on required student and
parent worksheets. Total number of questions includes sub-questions and non-numbered questions. Items such as name and
address are counted in the same way on IRS and FAFSA forms.

40

Table 3
Effect of Aid Formula Simplification on Pell Grants and Expected Family Contribution

(1)

2007-08
Dropping
Assets
(2)

1.00
1.00

0.992
0.983

0.953
0.909

1.00
1.00
1.00

0.95
0.97
0.99
0.01
0.00

0.74
0.80
0.91
0.06
0.03

Average Pell grant (includes zeroes) ($)
Total Pell grants ($billion)

1,320
11.99

1,344
12.21

1,379
12.52

Share receiving Pell Grants

0.52

0.52

0.53

Panel B: Expected Family Contribution
Correlation between new and old EFC
R2

1.00
1.00

0.98
0.96

0.95
0.90

1.00
1.00
1.00

0.70
0.80
0.88
0.00
0.12

0.28
0.33
0.50
0.34
0.17

8,078

7,472

8,344

2007-08
Full FAFSA
Panel A: Pell Grant
Correlation between new and old Pell
R2
Percent of applicants whose Pell
…does not change
…is within $100 of baseline
…is within $500 of baseline
…increases by $500 or more
…decreases by $500 or more

Percent of applicants whose EFC
…does not change
…is within $100 of baseline
…is within $500 of baseline
…increases by $500 or more
…decreases by $500 or more
Average Expected Family Contribution ($)

2007-08
IRS Data Only
(3)

Notes: The sample consists of 59,240 undergraduate aid applicants enrolled at one institution during the 2007-2008
academic year. See Data Appendix for details. The analysis uses NPSAS weights (WTA000).
Source: NPSAS:08

41

Table 4
Using Older Income Data to Determine EFC and Pell Grant Eligibility
Estimates of 2008-09 Formula Using IRS Data from 2007 versus 2006
Full FAFSA
2007
Tax Data
(1)

Full FAFSA
2006
Tax Data
(2)

No FAFSA
2007
Tax Data
(3)

No FAFSA
2006
Tax Data
(4)

1.00
1.00

0.862
0.743

0.953
0.908

0.844
0.713

1.00
1.00
1.00

0.66
0.69
0.78
0.13
0.09

0.72
0.77
0.88
0.06
0.05

0.64
0.67
0.75
0.15
0.10

Average Pell grant (includes zeroes) ($)
Total Pell grants ($billion)

1,615
7.68

1,673
7.96

1,648
7.84

1,711
8.14

Share receiving Pell Grants

0.52

0.53

0.52

0.54

Panel B: Expected Family Contribution
Correlation between new and old EFC
R2

1.00
1.00

0.91
0.83

0.95
0.90

0.85
0.73

1.00
1.00
1.00

0.24
0.28
0.41
0.24
0.35

0.26
0.31
0.47
0.37
0.16

0.23
0.26
0.36
0.32
0.31

8,289

7,824

8,716

8,157

Panel A: Pell Grant
Correlation between new and old Pell
R2
Percent of applicants whose Pell
…does not change
…is within $100 of baseline
…is within $500 of baseline
…increases by $500 or more
…decreases by $500 or more

Percent of applicants whose EFC
…does not change
…is within $100 of baseline
…is within $500 of baseline
…increases by $500 or more
…decreases by $500 or more
Average Expected Family Contribution ($)

Notes: The sample consists of 27,540 aid applicants who filed a FAFSA in both 2007-2008 and 2008-09. See Data
Appendix for details. The simulation in Column 2 uses the same elements as Column 1 but uses 2006 instead of
2007 tax information (AGI, earned income, taxes paid, type of income tax form used). The simulations in Columns
3 and 4 drop the FAFSA and use only IRS data for the listed tax years. All 2006 tax values are inflated to 2007
values using the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U). The analysis uses NPSAS weights
(WTA000).
Source: NPSAS:08

42

Table 5
How Aid Formula Changes Have Affected Targeting of Pell Grant
Predicted Values for 2007-2008 Undergraduate Aid Applicants
2007-08
Baseline

2011-12

(1)

(2)

1.000

0.923

1.000

0.852

…is within $100 of baseline

1.00

0.39

…is within $500 of baseline

1.00

0.44

…increases by $500 or more

0.00

0.56

…decreases by $500 or more

0.00

0.00

Share with automatic zero EFC

0.19

0.26

Average Pell grant (includes zeroes) ($)

1,320

2,127

Total Pell grants ($billion)

11.99

19.32

Share Pell grant recipients

0.52

0.63

Correlation with baseline Pell grant
R

2

Share of applicants whose Pell grant

Pell maximum ($)
4,310
5,550
Notes: The sample consists of 59,240 undergraduate aid applicants enrolled at one institution for
the full or part year during the 2007-2008 academic year. Students' characteristics are run through
the aid formula for listed years to predict aid values. See Data Appendix for details. The analysis
uses NPSAS weights (WTA000).
Source: NPSAS:08

43

Figure 1
Effect of Dropping Asset Related Questions from FAFSA: 2007-08 Aid Year
4,500
4,000
3,500

Pell Grant ($)

3,000
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0
-500

Expected Family Contribution ($), 2007-08 Formula
2007-08 Average

Notes: See notes to Table 3.

44

Simulated Change

99,338

31,882

22,454

17,150

13,683

11,096

8,923

7,233

5,866

4,724

3,549

2,511

875

1,635

<156

<156

<156

<156

<156

<156

-1,000

Figure 2A
Plotting New EFC Against Old EFC: 2007-08 Aid Year
Dropping Assets
85K
80K
75K
70K
65K

Simulated EFC

60K
55K
50K
45K
40K
35K
30K
25K
20K
15K
10K
5K

Baseline EFC (2007-08)

Notes: See notes to Table 3.

45

85K

80K

75K

70K

65K

60K

55K

50K

45K

40K

35K

30K

25K

20K

15K

10K

5K

0

0

Figure 2B
Plotting New EFC Against Old EFC: 2007-08 Aid Year
Dropping Assets
Baseline EFC < $30,000

34K
32K
30K
28K
26K

Simulated EFC

24K
22K
20K
18K
16K
14K
12K
10K
8K
6K
4K
2K

Baseline EFC (2007-08)

Notes: See notes to Table 3.

46

34K

32K

30K

28K

26K

24K

22K

20K

18K

16K

14K

12K

10K

8K

6K

4K

2K

0

0

Figure 3
Effect of Using Only IRS Data to Define Pell Grant Eligibility: 2007-2008 Aid Year
4,500
4,000
3,500

Pell Grant ($)

3,000
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0
-500

Household Heads' Income ($)
2007-08 Average

Notes: See notes to Table 3.

47

Simulated Change

731,712

132,833

104,851

90,347

78,479

68,758

59,521

51,343

44,366

37,643

32,469

28,127

24,086

20,596

17,171

13,691

10,333

6,734

0-2,646

0-2,646

-1,000

Figure 4
Increases in Generosity of the Pell Grant Program from 2007-08 to 2011-12, by Income
4,500
4,000

Pell Grant ($)

3,500
3,000
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000

Household Heads' Income ($)
2007-08 Average

Notes: See notes to Table 5.

48

2011-12 Average

731,712

132,833

104,851

90,347

78,479

68,758

59,521

51,343

44,366

37,643

32,469

28,127

24,086

20,596

17,171

13,691

10,333

6,734

0-2,646

0

0-2,646

500

Figure 5
Plotting New EFC Against Old EFC: 2007-08 Aid Year
IRS Data Only
85K
80K
75K
70K
65K

Simulated EFC

60K
55K
50K
45K
40K
35K
30K
25K
20K
15K
10K
5K

Baseline EFC (2007-08)

Notes: See notes to Table 3.

49

85K

80K

75K

70K

65K

60K

55K

50K

45K

40K

35K

30K

25K

20K

15K

10K

5K

0

0

Appendix Table A1
Description of Federal Programs for Postsecondary Students
Federal Student Aid Programs
Pell Grant
The largest funded need-based aid program in the United States.
Currently, students can receive a grant amount up to $5,500. The size
of the Pell award depends primarily upon family income and
enrollment intensity.
Unsubsidized &
Subsidized and unsubsidized loans, also known as Stafford Loans, are
Subsidized Stafford
administered by the federal government through the Federal Direct
Loans
Loan Program (FDLP). Unsubsidized loans are available to all students
regardless of need. With subsidized loans, eligibility is based on need
and the federal government pays the interest on these loans while the
student is in college. The maximum amount a dependent student can
borrow for an undergraduate degree under the Stafford Loan programs
is currently $31,000.
Federal Tax Credits and Deductions
Hope Credit
Provided a maximum credit of $1,800 for qualifying expenses relating
to tuition and fees, only for students in their first two years of college,
and only for families with tax liability. The American Opportunity Tax
Credit replaced the Hope credit in 2009.
Lifetime Learning
Eligible tax filers are able to receive a maximum credit of $2,000 for
Credit (LLC)
tuition and fees expenses.
American Opportunity AOTC replaced the Hope the credit in 2009 and allows for a credit up
Tax Credit (AOTC)
to $2,500 for expenses relating to tuition and fees and course materials.
The credit rate is 100 percent for the first $2,000 of expenses and 25
percent on the next $2,000. Up to $1,000 of the credit is refundable for
families with limited or no tax liability.
Tuition & Loan
These deductions offer filers a maximum deduction of $4,000 for
Interest Deductions
expenses relating to tuition and fees. This deduction expired in 2011,
but it has been retroactively reinstated after a temporary expiration
several times previously.
Saving Incentives
Interest accumulates tax-free when families save for college using
Federal Coverdell accounts and state 529 savings plans. Withdrawals
from these accounts are not taxed unless the amount withdrawn is
greater than the student’s education expenses.
Dependent Exemption A parent or guardian has the ability to claim an exemption for a
dependent who is between the ages 19 and 23 and is a full-time student.
The filer is allowed an exemption of $3,650 per dependent.
Source: U.S. Government Accountability Office (2012)

50

Appendix Table A2
Descriptive Statistics of Sample Used in Analysis
Full Sample
2007-08

Applied in Both Years
2007-08
2008-09

Demographics (Average)
Age
24.63
24.28
25.28
Gender (Share of applicants)
Male
0.38
0.37
0.37
Female
0.62
0.63
0.63
Race/Ethnicity (Share of applicants)
White
0.58
0.59
0.59
African-American
0.17
0.17
0.17
Hispanic
0.16
0.15
0.15
Other Race
0.04
0.04
0.04
Institutional Type (Share of applicants)
Public-4yr
0.34
0.38
0.38
Private, Non-Profit
0.19
0.21
0.21
Public-2yr
0.30
0.28
0.28
Private, For-Profit
0.17
0.12
0.12
Enrollment Status (Share of applicants)
Full-Time, Full/Part Year
0.67
0.71
0.71
Part-Time, Full/Part Year
0.33
0.29
0.29
Financial Aid Awards & COA (Average) ($)
Actual Pell Award (includes zeroes)
1,323
1,468
N/A
Share Receiving Pell Grant
0.52
0.53
N/A
Actual Subsidized Loan (includes zeroes)
1,823
2,018
N/A
Share Receiving Subsidized Loan
0.59
0.57
N/A
Actual Unsubsidized Loan (includes zeroes)
1,297
1,355
N/A
Share Receiving Unsubsidized Loan
0.42
0.40
N/A
Cost of Attendance
17,242
18,468
N/A
FAFSA Elements (Average) ($)
Automatic Zero EFC (Share of applicants)
0.19
0.18
0.17
SNT (Share of applicants)
0.48
0.46
0.45
Actual EFC
8,262
7,827
8,412
Parents' Income1
66,854
66,921
68,671
Parents' Taxes Paid1
6,045
5,783
6,196
Parents' Worksheet A1
1,526
1,408
1,257
Parents' Worksheet B1
3,732
3,861
3,793
Parents' Worksheet C1
551
647
581
Parents' Cash, Savings, Checking1
7,173
7,340
7,113
Parents' Investment Net Worth1
21,597
20,782
20,548
Parents' Business/Farm Net Worth1
3,766
3,424
4,110
Student's (& Spouse's) Income
13,040
12,147
13,048
Student's Taxes Paid
557
486
535
Student's Worksheet A
717
710
644
Student's Worksheet B
577
571
517
Student's Worksheet C
261
263
298
Student's Cash, Savings, Checking
805
755
747
Student's Investment Net Worth
995
846
837
Student's Business/Farm Net Worth
55
53
65
Dependency Status (Share of applicants)
Dependents
0.56
0.57
0.57
Independents w/o dependents
0.19
0.18
0.17
Independents w/ dependents
0.25
0.25
0.26
N
59,240
27,540
27,540
Notes: Column 1 represents the sample of the 59,240 aid applicants who filed a FAFSA in 2007-08. Column
2 represents the sample of the 25,540 aid applicants who filed a FAFSA in 2007-08 and 2008-09. The
analysis uses NPSAS weights (WTA000).
Source: NPSAS:08
1
Parents’ income, tax, and assets information is specific to the 32,890 applicants who are dependent.

51

