NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNCERTAINTY AND TRADE AGREEMENTS
Nuno Limão
Giovanni Maggi
Working Paper 18703
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18703
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2013

We thank Kyle Bagwell, Mostafa Beshkar, Paola Conconi, Swati Dhingra, Avinash Dixit, Robert Staiger
for helpful comments as well as participants in the 2012 AEA meetings, the 2012 Venice CAGE/CEP
Workshop, the 2012 Princeton IES Summer Workshop, the Australasian Econometric Society and
seminars at Stanford, Wisconsin, Oxford, LSE, Warwick, Notingham and USP. Limao thanks the Yale
University's Leitner Program for support during part of this project. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Nuno Limão and Giovanni Maggi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Uncertainty and Trade Agreements
Nuno Limão and Giovanni Maggi
NBER Working Paper No. 18703
January 2013
JEL No. F1,F13,F5,F6,O19
ABSTRACT
In this paper we explore the potential gains that a trade agreement (TA) can provide by regulating tradepolicy uncertainty, in addition to the more standard gains from reducing the mean levels of trade barriers.
We show that in a standard trade model with income-risk neutrality there tends to be an uncertaintyincreasing motive for a TA. With income-risk aversion, on the other hand, the uncertainty-managing
motive for a TA is determined by interesting trade-offs. For a given degree of risk aversion, an uncertaintyreducing motive for a TA is more likely to be present when the economy is more open, the export
supply elasticity is lower and the economy is more specialized. Governments have stronger incentives
to sign a TA when the trading environment is more uncertain. As exogenous trade costs decline, the
gains from decreasing trade-policy uncertainty tend to become more important relative to the gains
from reducing average trade barriers. We also derive simple "sufficient statistics" to determine the
direction of the uncertainty motive for a TA and the associated welfare gains, and we apply them to
the trading relationship between US and Cuba before 1934. Finally, we examine how the uncertainty
motive for a TA is affected by the presence of ex-ante investments, and examine conditions under
which an uncertainty-reducing TA will increase investment in the export sector.
Nuno Limão
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
limao@econ.umd.edu
Giovanni Maggi
Department of Economics
Yale University
37 Hillhouse Avenue Rm 27
New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER
giovanni.maggi@yale.edu

1. Introduction
Policy practitioners often argue that a central benefit of trade agreements is to reduce trade
policy uncertainty. Indeed, the WTO and many other trade agreements explicitly state that
one of their goals is to increase the predictability of the trade policy environment.1 The 2008
great recession illustrates the concerns of policy makers and international institutions about the
eﬀects of large shocks on the trade policy environment. During that crisis there was widespread
fear of disastrous trade wars, such as those in the 1930’s that preceded (and spurred) the
creation of the GATT, but while applied protection increased, the worst fears were not realized
(cf. Bown, 2011). It is at least conceivable that one of the reasons why trade wars did not
occur is that countries were constrained by trade agreements that limit policy variation even
under large shocks.
In spite of the importance that policy makers and international institutions attribute to the
notion of an uncertainty-reducing role of trade agreements, we know little about its theoretical
underpinnings. A large body of theory has explored the possible roles of trade agreements as
means to correct international policy externalities (e.g. Grossman and Helpman [1995], Bagwell
and Staiger [1999] and Ossa [2011]) and to allow governments to commit vis-a-vis domestic
actors (e.g. Maggi and Rodriguez-Clare [1998] and Limão and Tovar-Rodriguez [2011]). But
this research focuses on the role of trade agreements in managing the level of trade barriers,
not their uncertainty.
The main objective of our paper is to explore the conditions under which there is an
uncertainty-reducing motive for a trade agreement, and examine the potential gains that a
trade agreement can provide by regulating trade-policy uncertainty, above and beyond the
more standard gains from reducing the levels of trade barriers.
We focus on a scenario where there are no frictions in contracting between governments, so
that the agreement is a complete contingent contract. Since we are focusing on the motives and
potential gains from a trade agreement, rather than its design, focusing on a setting without
transaction costs seems like a natural first step. To isolate the uncertainty-managing motive
for a trade agreement we perform the following thought experiment: we focus on the optimal
1

For example, the WTO’s web site states that “Just as important as freer trade — perhaps more important
— are other principles of the WTO system. For example: non-discrimination, and making sure the conditions
for trade are stable, predictable and transparent.” Several preferential trade agreements such as some of those
entered into by the United States, the European Union and by developing countries often claim that they aim
to ‘reduce distortions to trade’ and ‘ensure a predictable environment for business planning and investment’.

1

“mean preserving agreement,” that is the optimal agreement among those that keep the average
trade barrier at the same level as in the noncooperative equilibrium. If this agreement leads
to a policy distribution that is diﬀerent from the noncooperative one, we say that there is an
“uncertainty-managing motive” (or simply an “uncertainty motive”) for a trade agreement, and
if it reduces policy uncertainty relative to the noncooperative equilibrium we say that there is
an “uncertainty-reducing motive” for the trade agreement.2
The first step of our analysis is to examine a simple framework in which government objectives are specified in reduced form as functions of a trade policy and an underlying shock.
Starting from a reduced-form framework with relatively little structure is useful for several
reasons. First, the framework delivers general formulas for the direction of the uncertainty
motive and the gains from regulating policy uncertainty, which admit intuitive interpretations
and make the logic of our results very transparent. Second, these formulas can be readily applied to a specific model structure to examine the fundamental determinants of the uncertainty
motive and the associated gains. And third, the framework can in principle be interpreted as
applying also to other types of international agreements, such as environmental or investment
agreements.
Initially we focus on a setting where only one country (Home) chooses a trade barrier,
which exerts a negative externality on a policy-passive country (Foreign); but later we extend
the model to allow for two policy-active countries. The noncooperative level of the trade barrier
is increasing in the underlying shock. We identify two key eﬀects that determine whether there
is an uncertainty motive for a trade agreement, and if so, in what direction it goes. The first
one is what we label the policy-risk preference eﬀect,3 determined by the concavity/convexity of
Foreign’s payoﬀ with respect to Home’s policy: when the Foreign country is policy-risk averse,
this eﬀect works in favor of an uncertainty-reducing motive. Intuition might suggest that this
eﬀect is all that matters for determining whether there is “too much” or “too little” risk in the
noncooperative policy. And indeed this is the case when the shock aﬀects the Foreign country
only through Home’s policy (a “political economy” shock). However, when the shock aﬀects the
2

We also consider an alternative thought experiment, which focuses on the tariﬀ schedule that a government
would unilaterally choose if it were constrained to deliver the same mean as the optimal agreement. If such
“mean-preserving unilateral” choice exhibits more uncertainty than the optimal trade agreement, we say that
there is an uncertainty-reducing motive. In section 2 we discuss the similarities and diﬀerences between the
results under the two thought experiments, and the reasons why we focus the analysis on the mean-preservingagreement thought experiment.
3
In this paper we use the words “risk” and “uncertainty” interchangeably.

2

Foreign country also in a direct manner (an “economic” shock), there is an additional eﬀect that
we label the externality-shifting eﬀect. If a higher level of the shock strengthens the marginal
international policy externality holding the policy level constant, this eﬀect works in favor of
the uncertainty-reducing motive for a trade agreement. In this case, therefore, the uncertainty
motive can go in the opposite direction of the Foreign country’s policy-risk preference.
Our next step is to apply the general conditions and formulas derived in the reducedform framework to a more structured trade model. More specifically, we focus on a standard
competitive general-equilibrium trade model with two sectors, where the Home country is large
and the Foreign country is small and maximizes welfare. We allow individuals to be income-risk
averse. In the basic model we consider shocks of the political-economy type, but then extend
the model to allow for more general shocks.
It is natural to start by focusing on the benchmark case of income-risk neutral individuals. In
this case we find that there tends to be an uncertainty-increasing motive for a trade agreement.
The reason for this result is that, given the political-economy nature of the shock, all that
matters for the uncertainty motive is the Foreign country’s policy-risk preference (as mentioned
above), and in the presence of income-risk neutrality the Foreign country tends to be policy-risk
loving. This is due to the convexity of the indirect utility function and of the revenue function
in prices, reflecting the ability of firms and consumers to make decisions after observing prices.
Interestingly, then, the standard trade model with income-risk neutrality seems at odds with
the often-heard informal argument that trade agreements can provide gains by reducing tradepolicy uncertainty.
When we consider the case in which individuals are income-risk averse, we find that the
uncertainty-managing motive for a trade agreement is determined by an interesting trade-oﬀ
between risk aversion and flexibility: on the one hand the degree of risk aversion, in interaction
with the degree of openness, pushes toward an uncertainty-reducing motive; on the other hand
the degree of flexibility of the economy, which in turn is determined by the export supply
elasticity and the degree of specialization, pushes toward an uncertainty-increasing motive. We
note that, empirically, lower-income countries tend to have lower export supply elasticities and
a lower degree of diversification, thus at a broad level our model suggests that the uncertaintyreducing motive for a trade agreement should be more important for lower-income countries
than for higher-income countries.
The uncertainty motive for a trade agreement is aﬀected in interesting ways by changes in
3

exogenous trade costs (e.g. transport costs). We show that, if risk aversion is suﬃciently strong,
as the trade cost declines from its prohibitive level initially there is an uncertainty-increasing
motive for a trade agreement, but this turns into an uncertainty-decreasing motive as the
trade cost becomes suﬃciently low. Thus the model broadly suggests that uncertainty-reducing
motives for trade agreements are likely to emerge as the world becomes more integrated, and
are more likely to be present for countries within a region.
Next we examine the potential gains that a trade agreement can provide by regulating
trade-policy uncertainty, and compare them with the more standard gains from regulating the
trade-policy mean. We isolate the latter by focusing on “uncertainty preserving” agreements,4
while the former are captured by the gains from a mean-preserving agreement. We consider
local approximations of the gains from such agreements starting from the noncooperative policy
schedule.
The most notable results concern how these gains depend on the underlying degree of
uncertainty and on the exogenous trade cost. We find that an increase in the variance of
the shock leads to larger gains from regulating policy uncertainty, while it does not aﬀect
the gains from regulating the policy mean, thus it implies larger overall gains from a trade
agreement. This in turn suggests that governments should have a higher propensity to sign a
trade agreement when the trading environment is more uncertain.
We show that trade costs have a non-monotonic impact on the gains from regulating policy
uncertainty relative to the gains from regulating the policy mean. Interestingly, if trade costs are
low enough that there is an uncertainty-reducing motive, further reductions in trade costs will
tend to increase the relative gains from reducing policy uncertainty. Our model thus suggests
that, over time, the gains from reducing trade-policy uncertainty are likely to become more
important relative to the gains from reducing the mean levels of trade barriers; and at the
cross-sectional level, such relative gains should be larger for countries within a region.
Next we extend the model to allow for more general economic shocks. As mentioned above,
economic shocks may amplify or reduce the impact of Home’s protection on Foreign, thereby
introducing a policy-externality-shifting eﬀect, in addition to the policy-risk-preference eﬀect.
The externality-shifting eﬀect operates through two possible channels: first, to the extent that
the shock aﬀects domestic economic conditions in the Home country, it will aﬀect the Foreign
4

Specifically, an uncertainty-preserving agreement is an agreement that shifts the tariﬀ schedule in a way
that changes the mean but preserves all the higher central moments (variance, skewness, kurtosis, etc.).

4

country through the terms-of-trade; and second, to the extent that the shock aﬀects domestic
economic conditions in the Foreign country, it will have a further impact on this country.
We discuss conditions under which the externality-shifting eﬀect strengthens the uncertaintyreducing motive for a trade agreement.
Our model provides a simple “suﬃcient-statistic” approach to determine the direction of
the uncertainty motive for a trade agreement and to evaluate the relative gains from regulating
policy uncertainty. We start from the observation that the international externality exerted by
Home’s tariﬀ is given by an adjusted measure of Foreign’s openness, where the adjustment factor
involves real per capita income and the degree of income risk aversion, and show that there is
an uncertainty-reducing motive if and only if, at the noncooperative equilibrium, the adjusted
openness co-varies with the tariﬀ as a result of the shocks. A measure of covariance between
the adjusted openness and the tariﬀ can then be used, in conjunction with the tariﬀ mean, to
provide an approximate measure of the relative gains from regulating policy uncertainty.
We illustrate with a simple example how the “suﬃcient statistic” approach outlined above
can be applied to a specific bilateral trading relationship, namely the one between the US and
Cuba in the period before their 1934 agreement. We find a positive correlation between US
tariﬀs and Cuban adjusted openness when calculated at reasonable levels of risk aversion, which
suggests that indeed there was an uncertainty-reducing motive for a trade agreement between
these two countries, and we find that the relative gains from reducing trade-policy uncertainty
were significant. Our model is extremely stylized and so this exercise should be interpreted
with caution. But we think it suggests that the model can be taken to the data in a meaningful
way, and it points to a potential direction for future research: developing richer versions of the
model and taking them to richer datasets.
In our basic model, factors can be allocated only after uncertainty is resolved. In section 6 we
extend the model to allow for ex-ante investments. We show that the condition determining the
direction of the uncertainty motive for a trade agreement in the presence of ex-ante investments
is analogous to the one derived in the static model, provided the market allocation of capital is
eﬃcient given Home’s trade policy. Even though the trade agreement can change the allocation
of capital, this change has no first-order welfare eﬀect in the Foreign country, due to the initial
eﬃciency of the allocation. We interpret this result as suggesting that there is no separate
uncertainty motive associated with ex-ante investment. Next, we examine the direction in which
a trade agreement aﬀects investment and trade via changes in policy uncertainty. Focusing on
5

the case of political-economy shocks, we show that if income-risk aversion is suﬃciently strong
and the support of the shock suﬃciently small, there is an uncertainty-reducing motive for a
trade agreement, and the reduction in policy uncertainty leads to more investment in the export
sector. Under the same conditions we also find that the expected volume of trade increases,
provided the export supply elasticity does not increase too rapidly with the price.
Overall, our analysis of ex-ante investments suggests an important caveat to the statements
made by the WTO and other trade agreements that an important goal is to reduce policy
uncertainty in order to increase investment in export markets: even though a reduction in
policy uncertainty does (under some conditions) have this eﬀect, this in itself is not suﬃcient
to ensure a first-order increase in welfare.
Finally, we extend the analysis to allow for two (symmetric) policy-active countries. The
general condition that determines the direction of the uncertainty motive for a trade agreement
in this case still includes the policy-risk-preference and externality-shifting eﬀects, but now
there is an additional eﬀect, which works in favor of an uncertainty-reducing motive if tariﬀs
are strategic substitutes, and against it if they are strategic complements.
Next we briefly discuss the related literature. The increasing interest in the links between
uncertainty and trade agreements has generated a few papers, but their focus is very diﬀerent
from ours. Typically they focus on how uncertainty, in conjunction with contracting imperfections, aﬀects the optimal design of trade agreements. For example, Horn, Maggi and Staiger
(2010), Amador and Bagwell (forthcoming) and Beshkar and Bond (2012) show that the presence of uncertainty and contracting imperfections can explain the use of rigid tariﬀ bindings.5
In contrast to these papers, we focus on the uncertainty-managing motive for a trade agreement
and the gains that a trade agreement can provide by regulating policy uncertainty.
Also, there is a small but growing empirical literature on trade agreements and uncertainty.
Cadot et al. (2011) show evidence that regional trade agreements reduce trade-policy volatility
in agriculture.6 Rose (2004) and Mansfield and Reinhardt (2008) empirically examine the eﬀect
of trade agreements on the volatility of trade flows. Finally, the impact of uncertainty-reducing
trade agreements on trade flows and firms’ investment into foreign markets is modeled and
tested by Handley and Limão (2012) and Handley (2011). But whereas they take trade policy
5

These contracting imperfections take the form of contracting costs in Horn, Maggi and Staiger; of private
information in Amador and Bagwell; and of costly state verification in Beshkar and Bond.
6
They also find that the WTO’s agricultural agreement reduced agricultural trade-policy volatility, in spite
of the weak disciplines involved, but the eﬀect is only weakly identified.

6

(before and after a trade agreement) as exogenous, we make it endogenous.
We structure the paper in the following way. In section 2 we lay out a basic framework
with only one policy-active country and reduced-form government objectives. In section 3 we
consider a standard trade model with political economy shocks, and examine the uncertainty
motive for a trade agreement and the associated gains. In section 4 we extend the basic model
to allow for more general economic shocks. In section 5 we develop our “suﬃcient statistic”
approach and apply it to the US-Cuba example. In section 6 we extend the analysis to allow
for ex-ante investments. In section 7 we consider a setting with two symmetric policy-active
countries. In section 8 we conclude. The Appendix contains the proofs of our results.

2. Basic framework
To make our points transparent, we start by focusing on a two-country setting where only one
country is policy-active, hence there is a one-way international policy externality (in section 7
we will allow for two policy-active countries). In this section we model government objectives
in reduced form, as functions of a trade policy and an underlying shock; in the next section
we will “open up” the black box of government objectives in the context of a standard trade
model.
There are two countries, Home and Foreign. The Home government chooses a trade barrier
, while the Foreign government is passive. We let ( ) denote the Home government’s
objective function, where  is interpreted as an exogenous shock to this government’s policy
preferences; this could represent for example a politically-adjusted welfare function, with  a
political-economy parameter (e.g. the extra weight attached to a special-interest group) or an
economic parameter. We let  () denote the c.d.f. of . We assume that  is concave in  and
satisfies the single crossing property   0 The Foreign government’s objective is ∗ ( ).
We assume that an increase in the trade barrier hurts Foreign: ∗  0. The governments’ joint
payoﬀ is denoted by  ( ) = ( ) + ∗ ( ). We assume  is concave in  and satisfies
the single crossing property 
  0. The role of the single-crossing properties will be apparent
shortly.
As we will discuss in the next section, this reduced-form framework can be interpreted as
capturing a two-sector, perfectly-competitive world in which a large country trades with a small
welfare-maximizing country, and in which a trade agreement (TA) is motivated by a terms-of-

7

trade externality.7 But we note that this framework could also be applied to settings where
TAs are motivated by externalities unrelated to terms-of-trade as emphasized by "new trade"
models of trade agreements (e.g. Ossa, 2011, Mrazova, 2011, Bagwell and Staiger, 2012).
We start by describing the non-cooperative policy choice. We assume the Home government
observes  before choosing its trade policy, hence the noncooperative policy is given by:
 () = arg max ( )


The single crossing property   0 implies that  () is increasing. The distribution of the
shock,  () and the shape of the  (·) schedule induce a distribution for the noncooperative
policy  .
We now describe our assumptions regarding the TA. The agreement is signed ex ante,
before  is realized, so the timing is the following: (0) the TA is signed; (1)  is realized and
observed by both countries; (2)  is implemented and payoﬀs are realized. We assume that
 is verifiable and there are no costs of contracting, so the agreement can be contingent on
. As we mentioned in the Introduction, given that our main focus is on the potential gains
from regulating policy uncertainty relative to the noncooperative equilibrium, abstracting from
contracting imperfections is arguably the natural first step.8
We assume that the TA maximizes the governments’ expected joint payoﬀ  ,9 so the
(unconstrained) optimal TA is given by
 () = arg max  ( )

The single crossing property 
  0 implies that  () is increasing.

What motivates governments to sign a TA in this setting is the presence of an international
policy externality, which causes the noncooperative policy choice to be ineﬃcient. When we
7

In the literature on trade agreements there is a small tradition of models with a small country and a large
country, a prominent example being McLaren (1997).
8
While our assumption of frictionless contracting serves to focus more sharply on the questions we are
addressing, we note that the GATT-WTO does include a number of contingent clauses, for example the "escape
clauses" in GATT Articles XIX and XXVIII. For a model that endogenizes the degree to which a trade agreement
is contingent, based on the presence of contracting costs, see Horn, Maggi and Staiger (2010).
9
This implicitly assumes that international transfers are available and that transfers enter governments’
payoﬀs linearly, so that Home’s payoﬀ is given by  +  and Foreign’s payoﬀ by ∗ −  , where  is a transfer
from Foreign to Home. The transfer can be interpreted for example as a non-trade policy concession that serves
as a form of compensation between governments. Focusing on a transferrable-utility setting seems like a natural
choice given that we are abstracting from any form of international transaction costs. We also note that the
need for government-to-government transfers would be reduced or even eliminated in a more symmetric setting
where both countries are policy-active. In section 7 we consider a fully symmetric setting, and in such a setting
governments select the optimal symmetric agreement, which maximizes the sum of their expected payoﬀs.

8

introduce an explicit trade structure in the next section, this externality will operate via termsof-trade, but for now this can be interpreted as a more general international policy externality.
The international policy externality is transmitted through the whole distribution of . For
example, if Home’s policy schedule () is changed in such a way that the mean of  remains
unchanged but the degree of uncertainty in  changes, this will have an impact on Foreign’s
expected welfare ∗ . In order to isolate the “uncertainty motive” for a TA from the “mean
motive”, we consider the following thought experiment: if we constrain the TA to keep the
average  at the noncooperative level, is there any role left for a TA? This is the idea behind
our notion of “mean preserving agreement” (MPA). If the optimal MPA changes the riskiness
of  relative to the noncooperative policy  (), we say that there is an uncertainty-managing
motive for a TA. And in this case, if the optimal MPA decreases (increases) the riskiness of 
relative to  (), we say that there is an uncertainty-reducing (-increasing) motive for a TA.
Formally, the optimal MPA is defined as
  () = arg max  (() ) s.t. () =  ()
()

(2.1)

where the operator  denotes an expectation over .
Before we study the optimal MPA, we can build intuition by considering a local argument
for the simplest possible case. Consider the case where  aﬀects Foreign only through the policy
, so that its payoﬀ is simply ∗ (). This can be interpreted as a scenario in which  represents
a domestic political-economy shock in the Home country.
Start from the noncooperative policy  () and ask: how can we change the policy schedule
locally to achieve an increase in  =  + ∗ , while preserving the mean of the policy?
Since  () maximizes , a small change from  () will have a second-order eﬀect on 
and a first-order eﬀect on ∗ . Clearly, then, to achieve an increase in  we must increase
∗ . Suppose ∗ is convex in : then if we change the policy schedule (slightly) in such a way
that the new policy is a mean-preserving spread of  (), this will increase ∗ (by the wellknown Rotschild-Stiglitz, 1970, equivalence result) and thus  will also increase. Likewise,
if ∗ is concave in , we can achieve an increase in  by making a (slight) mean-preserving
compression of  (). Therefore this argument suggests that the key condition determining
whether the optimal MPA increases or decreases policy uncertainty is the concavity/convexity
of Foreign’s objective with respect to .
Of course, the argument above suggests only a suﬃcient condition for local improvement over
9

the noncooperative outcome; in particular, one can improve over the noncooperative outcome
in many other ways, including by changing the policy schedule in ways that are neither a
mean-preserving compression nor spread of  (). But as we show below, this intuition does
carry over to the globally optimal MPA in the case of political-economy shocks (when the
single-crossing properties are satisfied).
Importantly, however, the Rotschild-Stiglitz type argument no longer applies if the shock
 aﬀects the Foreign payoﬀ ∗ directly as well as through the policy . In this case, it is not
enough to know whether Foreign’s objective is concave or convex in  to determine how the
optimal MPA will change policy uncertainty, as we now show.
To derive the FOCs for the optimal MPA problem in (2.1) we set up the Lagrangian:
¡
¢
 =  ( ) +   () − ()

(2.2)

Since the multiplier  is constant with respect to , we can rewrite the Lagrangian as follows
=

Z

¡
¢
[ ( ) +   () − () ] ()

(2.3)

and since we can maximize this pointwise we obtain the following FOCs

 (() ) =  for all 
 () = ()
Note that the FOC requires the marginal contribution of  to joint surplus, 
 , to be equalized
across states (realizations of ), and in particular 
 should be equal to the multiplier ,
which is easily shown to be negative. Also note that the FOC for the unconstrained optimal
agreement is given by 
 ( ) = 0, so both for the unconstrained optimum and for the optimal
MPA, 
 is equalized across states, but in the former case it is equalized at zero, while in the
latter case it is equalized at some negative constant.
Using the FOC we can prove:

∗ ( () ) 
 

∗ ( () )  0 for
 

Lemma 1. (i) If

0 for all , then   () intersects  () once and from

above. (ii) If

all , then   () intersects  () once and from below.

(iii) If


∗ ( () )
 

= 0 for all , then   () =  () for all .

Figure 1 illustrates Lemma 1 graphically for the case


∗ ( () )
 

 0. The basic intuition

for the result can be conveyed by focusing on the case in which  can take only two values, say
10

 and  . Let us start from  () and ask: how can we improve the ex-ante joint payoﬀ?
Given the mean-preservation constraint, there are only two ways to modify the schedule  ():
decreasing  for  =  and increasing  for  =  (that is, flattening the schedule), or
vice-versa (that is, steepening the schedule). Intuitively it is preferable to reduce  in the state
where it is more important to do so, that is where the international externality is stronger
(more negative). If


∗ ( () )
 

 0, then the international externality is stronger in the

high- state, so it is preferable to flatten the policy schedule relative to  (). Similarly, if

∗ ( () )
 

 0 the objective can be improved by making the opposite change, that is,

steepening the schedule relative to  (). The proof of Lemma 1 (in Appendix) extends this
basic logic to the case of continuous . Notice that Lemma 1 does not rely on the single crossing
properties we assumed for  and  , while the next result does.
Lemma 1 leads directly to our first proposition. In the proposition, we say that there is an
uncertainty-reducing (-increasing) motive for a TA if   () is a mean preserving compression
(spread) of  ().

∗ ( () ) 
 

If 
∗ ( () ) 

∗ ( () ) =
If 

Proposition 1. (i) If

0 for all , then there is an uncertainty-reducing

motive for a TA. (ii)

0 for all , then there is an uncertainty-increasing

motive for a TA. (iii)

0 for all  then   () =  (), hence there is no

uncertainty-managing motive for a TA.
Proposition 1 states that the direction of the uncertainty-managing motive for a TA, if
any, is determined by how the shock  aﬀects the marginal international externality ∗ at
the noncooperative equilibrium, taking into account its direct eﬀect and its indirect eﬀect
through the policy. In particular, if ∗ ( () ) is decreasing (increasing) in  then there is



∗
an uncertainty-reducing (-increasing) motive for a TA. Writing ∗ ( () ) = ∗
 ·  + 

(where we use a superscript  to indicate that a function is evaluated at  ()), the uncertainty

motive for a TA can be traced to two key determinants: (a) Foreign’s policy-risk preference
(captured by ∗ and weighted by


),


and (b) the direct impact of the shock  on the

marginal international externality holding  constant (as captured by ∗ ), which we refer to
as the externality-shifting eﬀect.
Proposition 1 makes clear that the source of the uncertainty matters. In particular, we
can distinguish between two types of shock: (1) a “political economy” shock, which aﬀects the
Foreign country only through the policy  (in which case ∗ = ∗ ()); and (2) an “economic”
11

shock, which aﬀects the Foreign country not only indirectly through the policy  but also directly
(in which case ∗ = ∗ ( )).
In the case of “political economy” shocks, Proposition 1 says that the uncertainty motive
for a TA is determined solely by Foreign’s preference for policy risk, as captured by the sign of
∗ . This confirms our initial intuition based on Rotschild and Stiglitz’s (1970) result: when
Foreign’s objective is concave in , a MPS in  reduces ∗ , so there is a negative “policyrisk externality,” hence the noncooperative policy is “too risky” (with the reverse logic holding
if Foreign’s objective is convex in ).10 In the case of “economic” shocks, on the other hand,
Proposition 1 states that Foreign’s policy-risk preference (the sign of ∗
 ) is no longer suﬃcient
to determine whether there is “too much” or “too little” risk in the noncooperative policy,
because the externality-shifting eﬀect (∗ ) comes into play. In this case, the direction of the
uncertainty motive for a TA is determined by whether the international policy externality ∗
is increasing or decreasing in  at the noncooperative equilibrium.
Before concluding this section, we mention an alternative thought experiment that one
could consider to isolate the uncertainty motive for a TA. Suppose the Home government can
choose a contingent policy () subject to the constraint that this policy have the same mean
as the optimal agreement policy  (). If such “mean-preserving unilateral” policy is more
risky than  (), then we say that the noncooperative policy is “too risky”, and so there is
an uncertainty-reducing motive for a TA. One can show that, under this alternative thought
experiment, the direction of the uncertainty motive is again determined by the sign of


∗ ,
 

but this time evaluated at  () rather than at  ().11 As a consequence, if  is a “political
economy” shock, the two thought experiments yield the same answer (there is an uncertaintyreducing motive for a TA if and only if ∗  0). If  is an “economic” shock, on the other
hand, both thought experiments indicate that the uncertainty motive depends on Foreign’s
policy-risk preference (∗ ) and on the externality-shifting eﬀect (∗ ), but the relative weight
0

of these two terms diﬀers (in one case ∗ is weighted by  (), in the other case it is weighted
0

by  ()). In what follows we base our analysis on the MPA thought experiment. The main
10

We highlight however that, even in this case where the result is intuitive, it is far from self-evident: a priori
the optimal MPA could have entailed any mean-preserving change in  relative to  (), and since the MPS
risk criterion is a partial ordering, it was not a priori obvious that the distribution of    () could be ranked
in a MPS sense relative to that of  (). We also note here that if ∗  0 ( 0) then the optimal MPA policy
is a “simple” mean preserving spread (compression) of the noncooperative policy, meaning that the respective
cdf’s cross only once (as shown in the proof of Proposition 1).
11
The proof of this statement is available upon request.

12

reason is that, as we will show later, focusing on the MPA allows us to characterize the gains
from regulating trade-policy uncertainty and trade-policy mean in terms of quantities that can
in principle be observed or estimated, while the alternative thought experiment does not share
this property.12
2.1. Gains from regulating policy uncertainty and policy mean
In this section we examine the magnitude of the gains that a TA can oﬀer by regulating policy
uncertainty, beyond the standard gains associated with regulating the policy mean. Here we
will derive general formulas for these gains, and in section 3 we will apply the formulas to a
more structured trade model.
It is natural to define the gain from regulating policy uncertainty as the increase in  associated with a move from  () to   (), that is    ≡  (  ()  )− ( ()  ).

To make progress in examining the determinants of this gain, we employ a local approxima-

tion approach: we consider a small mean-preserving change in the policy schedule starting from
 () and evaluate the eﬀect of this change on  . In particular, consider moving from  ()
to  () − ( () − ̄ ), where  is a small constant and ̄ is the mean of  (). Clearly,

if   0 (  0) this represents a small mean-preserving compression (spread) of  (). The

resulting change in  can be approximated as follows:
¯
 ( () − ( () − ̄ ) ) ¯¯
= −[∗ (  ( ))( − ̄ )]
(2.4)
¯

=0
¯
¶
¸
∙µ
∗ (  ( )) ¯¯
∗ 





≈ −  (̄  (̄ ))+
¯   ( − ̄ ) ( − ̄ )

 =̄
¯
∗ (  ( )) ¯¯
2
=−
¯   ·  

 =̄
In the first line of (2.4) we use the fact that  = 0 at the noncooperative policy, and

employ a change of variables from  to  , letting ( ) denote the inverse of  () (with
the expectation now taken with respect to  ). In the second line we use a first-order Taylor
approximation of ∗ (  ( )) around ̄ .
12

To be more specific, with our MPA thought experiment we approximate the gains from regulating tradepolicy uncertainty starting from the noncooperative tariﬀ, which is in principle observable. Under the alternative
thought experiment the starting point for the approximation would be the “mean-preserving unilateral” tariﬀ
choice (defined above), which is unobservable.

13

The expression in the last line of (2.4) is intuitive. It states that the value of the MPA
is the product of two components. The first one is analogous to the derivative

∗ ( ())
,


except for the change of variable from  to  . Recall from Proposition 1 that the sign of this
derivative determines the direction of the uncertainty-managing motive: if the international
externality ∗ is stronger when the noncooperative policy is higher, there is value to reducing
policy uncertainty. The second component is the variance of  , which intuitively magnifies the
value of managing policy uncertainty.
Since the sign of  can be chosen to ensure a positive gain, we can write the approximate
value of the MPA as
̃  

¯
¯ ∗ 
¯  (  ( )) ¯
¯
≡ ¯¯
¯



=̄

·  2

(2.5)

Notice that ̃   can be interpreted as the change in joint expected welfare associated with
a 1% change in the standard deviation of  , since the standard deviation of  − ( − ̄ )
is equal to (1 − ) times the standard deviation of  .

Next we focus on the more standard gains from regulating the mean level of the policy.
A natural approach is to define an “uncertainty-preserving agreement” (UPA) in the following
way. Consider a parallel downward shift of the  () schedule,  ()−̄ , where  is a positive
constant. This shift reduces the mean of the policy by a factor  but preserves all its central
higher moments (variance, skewness, kurtosis), so it is natural to interpret such a shift as one
that changes the policy mean while preserving policy uncertainty.
Following similar steps as above, we can derive the approximate value of the UPA:

 ( () − ̄  )
|=0 = −∗ (  ( )) · ̄
(2.6)

¯
¶
µ
∗ (  ( )) ¯¯



≈ − ∗ (̄  (̄ )) +
¯   · ( − ̄ ) · ̄

 =̄
∗ 


= − (̄  (̄ )) · ̄
Intuitively, the gain from reducing the mean policy level is approximately equal to the
marginal international externality from the policy (∗ (·)) evaluated at certainty and scaled up
by the mean policy level.
Next, for future reference we write down the relative gains from regulating policy uncertainty
versus policy mean, where the latter is approximated by ̃   ≡ −∗ (̄  (̄ )) · ̄ :
14

¯
¯
 2
̃   ¯¯  ln ∗ (  ( )) ¯¯
=¯
¯   · ̄

̃   
 =̄

(2.7)

Finally, one can use the expressions above to approximate the value of a small joint improvement in policy mean and policy uncertainty starting from the noncooperative equilibrium.
Clearly, this value is given by a weighted average of expressions (2.4) and (2.6) above, with the
weights determined by the relative change in  and . It seems reasonable to take such value
as an approximation of the overall value of a TA. Below we will apply this observation in the
context of our economic structure.

3. Uncertainty and mean motives in a standard trade model
We now open up the black box of government objectives in order to examine how the uncertainty
and mean motives for a TA depend on economic fundamentals. Our basic model focuses on the
case in which shocks are of the "political economy" type. We will later extend the analysis to
the case of more general "economic" shocks.
We consider a standard two-country, two-good trade model with competitive markets. We
assume Home is the natural exporter of the numeraire good, indexed by 0, while Foreign (the
small country) is the natural exporter of the other good, which has no index.
Let  (resp. ∗ ) denote the price of the nonnumeraire good in Home (resp. Foreign). We
will often use the logarithms of prices, letting  ≡ ln  and  ∗ ≡ ln ∗ . The Home country can

choose an ad-valorem tariﬀ on imports of the non-numeraire good. Let  ≡ ln  , where  is

the ad-valorem tariﬀ factor. We also allow for an exogenous iceberg trade cost and denote the
logarithm of this cost factor by . The reason we allow for trade costs is not only that such
costs are important empirically, but because they will play an important role in determining
the gains from regulating policy uncertainty, as will become clear below. By the usual arbitrage
condition, if the tariﬀ is not prohibitive then we must have ∗ =  −  − . Since Foreign has

no policy of its own, we can refer to  ∗ as Foreign’s “terms-of-trade” (TOT). Since Foreign
is small,  is determined entirely in the Home country, so we can leave the market clearing
condition that determines  in the background.
The reason we use the logarithms of the relative price, the tariﬀ rate and the trade cost
is the following. In general equilibrium settings with uncertainty about relative prices, the
conventional notion of risk based on arithmetic mean-preserving spread of relative prices leads
15

to predictions that are sensitive to the choice of numeraire, as pointed out for example by
Flemming et al. (1977). These scholars have argued that a more robust approach is to define
an increase in relative-price risk as a geometric mean preserving spread (GMPS) of the relative
price, which is an arithmetic mean preserving spread of the log of the relative price (in our
notation,  ∗ ). For analogous reasons we employ the log of the tariﬀ and of the trade cost.
We next impose some standard assumptions on preferences and technology. To make the
key points we only need to specify the economic structure in the Foreign country. On the
technology side, we assume constant returns to scale with a strictly concave PPF, so that
supply functions are strictly increasing. This allows us to describe the supply side through a
GDP (or revenue) function. Letting ∗ be the domestic relative price and (0∗   ∗ ) the outputs,
we define ∗ (∗ ) ≡ max0∗ ∗ {0∗ +∗  ∗ } s.t. (0∗   ∗ ) ∈ ∗ , where ∗ is the set of feasible outputs.
On the preference side, we assume that all citizens have identical and homothetic prefer³ ∗ ´
ences. This implies that indirect utility takes the form  ∗(∗ ) , where  ∗ is income in terms
of numeraire and ∗ (∗ ) a price index. It is natural to refer to

∗
 (∗ )
∗

as the representative

individual’s "real income". For the purposes of comparative statics it is convenient to parametrize the degree of risk aversion, so we assume that  (·) exhibits constant relative risk aversion
(CRRA), indexed by the parameter .
All citizens have identical factor endowments, and the population measure is normalized
to one. There are no international risk-sharing markets, so that the Foreign country cannot
diversify away its income risk.13 The Foreign government maximizes social welfare, so we can
write14
1
 =

∗

µ

∗ (∗ )
∗ (∗ )

13

¶

If Foreign citizens could diversify away their income risk, the model would be equivalent to one where they
are income-risk neutral. In this case, as we show below, there would typically be a policy-uncertainty-increasing
motive for a TA.
14
We note that the assumption of risk-averse citizens is not in contradiction with the assumption — discussed
in footnote 9 — that the government’s utility is transferrable. Recall that the Foreign government’s payoﬀ is
assumed to be ∗ −  , where ∗ is the utility of the representative citizen and  the transfer made to the
Home government (e.g. in the form of a non-trade policy concession). We view the assumption of transferrable
government utility as a convenient modeling device that allows us to focus on the TA that maximizes the
governments’ joint payoﬀ. A more restrictive assumption that is implicit in our setting, on the other hand, is
that the TA cannot specify contingent transfers that can in turn be used to provide insurance to citizens: if
this were the case, a TA could be used as an international risk-sharing mechanism, thus making risk aversion
irrelevant. Contingent transfers between governments can be allowed in our model only if they take a nonmonetary form so that they cannot be used to provide insurance to citizens.

16

As far as the Home country is concerned, we can keep its economic structure in the background, except for the non-cooperative tariﬀ schedule  (). Recall that we are focusing on
the case of political economy shocks, so  aﬀects Foreign only through .
Finally, we assume that the trade pattern cannot switch as a result of the shock, that is,
Foreign exports the nonnumeraire good for all values of  in its support.
As made clear by the analysis of section 2, the key to gauge the uncertainty motive for a
TA is to consider how the marginal international externality exerted by the Home tariﬀ, ∗ ,
responds to the shock . In our model, Home’s tariﬀ exerts only a TOT externality on Foreign
welfare, which is given by

where  ∗ =

∗
∗

∗ = − ∗ · Ω∗

(3.1)

∗ ∗
∗
∗

is Foreign’s degree of openness (export

is Foreign’s real income and Ω∗ ≡

share of GDP). Intuitively, the degree of openness Ω captures the impact of an increase in 
on Foreign’s real income through TOT, and the factor  ∗ is related to the marginal utility of
income: with   0, the externality is stronger when real income ( ∗ ) is lower (for a given level
of openness), because the marginal utility of income is higher. In what follows we will refer to
 ∗ Ω∗ as the “adjusted” degree of openness.15
We start by focusing on the benchmark case of income-risk neutrality.
Since we are adopting the GMPS notion of risk (as we discussed above), it is natural to define
risk neutrality as indiﬀerence with respect to a GMPS of real income, which corresponds to the
case:  (·) = ln(·), or  → 0 in the CRRA specification. Thus in this case the government’s
³ ∗ ∗ ´
( )
∗
∗
objective is ∗ = ln ∗ (
∗ ) , and the international externality is simply  = −Ω .

The key step to apply Proposition 1, given that  is a political economy shock, is to examine

the Foreign country’s attitude toward policy risk, as captured by ∗ . This is given by the impact
of  on openness, which is easily shown to be
∗ |→0 = Ω∗ (∗ + ∗ ) 
∗ ∗

where ∗ is the export supply elasticity and ∗ ≡ 1 − ∗ is the import-competing sector share

of GDP, which can be interpreted as the degree of income diversification.

15
As stated earlier, in this model the underlying motive for a TA is the presence of a TOT externality. To
be more precise, the reason why the noncooperative equilibrium is ineﬃcient is not the presence of a TOT
externality per se, but the fact that the Home country has monopoly power over TOT. To confirm this point,
consider an alternative version of this model where the Home country is replaced by a continuum of symmetric
small countries (all aﬀected by a common  shock): in such a setting it can be verified that the noncooperative
equilibrium would be eﬃcient for all .

17

We will assume throughout that ∗ is nonnegative.16 Given this assumption, it follows
that ∗ |→0  0: thus, in the case of income-risk neutrality, the Foreign country benefits

from an increase in policy risk. The intuition for this result is that, since production and

consumption can be optimized after observing prices, both the producers’ revenue function and
the consumers’ indirect utility functions (given income) are convex in prices.17 The insight that
a small country may gain from TOT risk in itself is not new to our model, and was pointed out
for example by Eaton (1979);18 what is new is that in light of Proposition 1, the convexity of
∗ with respect to  implies that the optimal MPA increases trade-policy uncertainty.
To summarize, if individuals are income-risk neutral, there is an uncertainty-managing motive for a TA, but this calls for an increase — rather than a decrease — in trade-policy uncertainty.
Evidently, then, if one wants to make economic sense of the WTO-type informal arguments
discussed in the introduction, which state that one of the goals of TAs is to reduce trade policy
uncertainty, one must depart from the benchmark case of income-risk neutrality in this standard
model and focus on the case of income-risk aversion, which is what we do next.
Let us now re-examine the Foreign country’s preference for trade-policy risk allowing for
income-risk aversion (  0).19 Recalling that the international externality from the tariﬀ is
given by ∗ = − ∗ · Ω∗ and diﬀerentiating this expression with respect to , we obtain
∗ =  ∗ Ω∗ (Ω∗ + ∗ + ∗ ) 

(3.2)

This expression (derived in Appendix within the proof of Proposition 2), together with the
result of Proposition 1, leads to:
16

There is considerable empirical evidence that this is the case in reality for most sectors and most countries
(see for example Tokarick, 2010).
17
It is important to note that this feature extends well beyond the simple perfectly-competitive setting we are
considering here. In particular, one might wonder whether the presence of imperfect competition or irreversible
investments might make exporting firms’ profit functions concave in prices, but even in these circumstances
profit functions are typically convex in prices. The intuitive reason is that profit functions are convex whenever
firms can make any ex-post adjustment in their production decisions after observing prices, and this feature is
extremely general.
18
See also Anderson and Riley (1976), who examine how the degree of specialization of a small economy
aﬀects its gains from TOT fluctuations, and Young and Anderson (1982), who compare the eﬀects of quotas
and tariﬀs for a small economy facing TOT fluctuations in the presence of risk aversion.
19
Note that, even with income risk aversion, in the Foreign country there is still no motive for trade protection,
so our assumption that this country practices free trade continues to be without loss of generality given the
representative-citizen assumption. As Eaton and Grossman (1985) made clear, in a small country an insurance
motive for trade protection can arise only if citizens have heterogenous incomes, at least ex-post. In our setting,
Foreign citizens are always homogenous, even ex-post. This will be true also in the next section, where we
consider a dynamic setting with ex-ante investments.

18

Proposition 2. There is an uncertainty-reducing (-increasing) motive for a TA if Ω∗ + ∗ +
∗  0 ( 0) at the noncooperative equilibrium.
There are several aspects of Proposition 2 that are worth highlighting. First, if incomerisk aversion is suﬃciently strong relative to the other parameters of the model (namely if
∗

∗

), then there is an uncertainty-reducing motive for a TA. While the role of risk
  − Ω+
∗
aversion is quite intuitive, the impact of the other variables — which we focus on next — is more
subtle.
Proposition 2 states that, for a given degree of risk-aversion   0, the uncertainty motive
for a TA is more likely to be in the direction of reducing policy uncertainty when: (a) the
economy is more open (Ω∗ is higher); (b) the export supply elasticity ∗ is lower; and (c) the
economy is more specialized (∗ is lower).20
Focus first on the degree of openness Ω∗ . This variable aﬀects the uncertainty motive
through its interaction with the income-risk preference parameter , so the role of openness is
in essence to magnify the impact of the citizens’ income-risk preference.
Next consider the role of the export supply elasticity ∗ . Intuitively, a country that can
easily adjust production and consumption as a result of the shocks (that is, a country with a
higher ∗ ) is more likely to have a welfare function that is convex in the foreign tariﬀ, and hence
is less likely to benefit from a decrease in tariﬀ uncertainty. This in turn suggests an interesting
implication. At the empirical level, lower-income countries tend to have lower export supply
elasticities, and this in turn implies that the uncertainty-reducing motive for a TA should be
more important for lower-income countries than for higher-income countries.21
20

Here we can make the statements in the text a bit more precise. First, when we say that the uncertainty
motive is “more likely” to be in the direction of reducing policy uncertainty when a variable  is higher, we
mean that as  increases the sign of ∗
 can switch from negative to positive but not vice-versa. Second, in
the text we talk about changes in Ω∗ , ∗ and ∗ as if these variables were exogenous, but of course they are
not. To make our statements more precise, let ξ denote the vector of all technology and preference parameters
(excluding ). We can think of the key endogenous variables Ω∗ , ∗ and ∗ as functions of ξ. Note that  does
not aﬀect these variables. Next note that Ω∗ ∈ [0 1] and ∗ ∈ [0 1], while ∗ ≥ 0 by assumption. In the text,
when we refer to a change in an endogenous variable, we mean that the parameter vector ξ is being changed in
such a way that the variable of interest changes while the others do not. If we include in ξ the whole technology
and preference structure, by varying ξ we can span the whole feasible range of Ω∗ , ∗ and ∗ , so this "all else
equal" thought experiment can be performed.
21
See for example Tokarick (2010), who estimates that the median export supply elasticity is 0.52 for low
income countries, 0.77 for low/medium income countries, 0.83 for medium/high income countries, 0.92 for high
income non-OECD countries, and 1.14 for high income OECD countries. These estimates are based on a
standard trade model for a small economy with one export, one import and one non-traded good, with no own
consumption of the export good.

19

Focus next on the degree of diversification, ∗ . Proposition 2 indicates that, other things
equal, the uncertainty motive for a TA is more likely to be in the direction of reducing policy
uncertainty if the Foreign country is less diversified. A related remark is the following: assuming that preferences are Cobb-Douglas and the supply function  ∗ (∗ ) is diﬀerentiable, if the
economy is suﬃciently specialized (∗ is suﬃciently close to zero) then there is an uncertaintyreducing motive for any   0.22 Interestingly, these twin observations go in the same direction
as the one we made above about ∗ : to the extent that lower-income countries are more likely
to be specialized, our model predicts that the uncertainty-reducing motive for a TA should tend
to be more important for lower-income countries.
One way to summarize the discussion above is that the direction of the uncertainty motive
for a TA is determined by an overall tradeoﬀ between risk aversion, which operates through
the term Ω∗ and pushes toward an uncertainty-reducing motive, and the degree of flexibility
of the economy, which is captured by (∗ + ∗ ) and pushes toward an uncertainty-increasing
motive.
Finally, it is interesting to consider the impact of the exogenous trade cost , which we
have thus far left in the background. We consider the following thought experiment. Let  
be the level of  at which there is no trade (Ω∗ = 0), and consider the eﬀect of decreasing 
from   to zero. Suppose risk aversion is strong enough that in the absence of trade costs
( = 0) there is an uncertainty-reducing motive. Clearly, as  drops below   , initially
the uncertainty motive for a TA goes in the direction of increasing policy uncertainty (because
Ω∗ is negligible and hence dominated by ∗ + ∗ ), but as  drops further, the direction of
the uncertainty motive will at some point reverse and call for a reduction in policy uncertainty.
Thus we can state:
³ ∗ ∗´
Remark 1. Assume risk aversion is suﬃciently strong, in the sense that   − Ω+
∗

. If

=0

the trade cost  is close enough to its prohibitive level, there is an uncertainty-increasing motive
∗ +∗

22

To see this, recall that there is an uncertainty-reducing motive if   − Ω∗ . In the limit as the country
∗ ∗
∗
∗
becomes fully specialized, ∗ → 1, hence ∗ → 0. Next note that ∗ =  ∗ ∗ −  ∗ ∗ , where ∗ is the elasticity of
∗
 ∗ (∗ ) and ∗ is the elasticity of ∗ (∗ ). Cobb-Douglas preferences imply ∗ = 
∗ , where  is the consumption
share of the non-numeraire good, hence ∗ =

 ln ∗
 ln ∗

− 1; but

 ln ∗
 ln ∗

=

∗  ∗
∗

→ 1, hence ∗ → 0. Given the
0

assumption that  ∗ (∗ ) is smooth, in the limit as the economy becomes fully specialized clearly  ∗ (∗ ) must
approach zero (because of the resource constraint), hence ∗ → 0, which implies ∗ → 0. And since Ω∗  0,
∗ +∗

then Ω∗ → 0. So we can conclude that for any fixed   0 the condition   −
economy is suﬃciently specialized.

20

∗
∗
 +
Ω∗

is satisfied if the

for a TA (Ω∗ + ∗ + ∗  0), while if  is close enough to zero there is an uncertainty-reducing
motive for a TA (Ω∗ + ∗ + ∗  0).
Remark 1 suggests two broad implications of the model, one concerning the evolution of the
uncertainty motive for TAs over time and one of a cross-sectional nature. First, if one believes
that exogenous trade costs have been declining over time, the model broadly suggests that
uncertainty-reducing motives for TAs should emerge and become more important as the world
becomes more integrated. And second, since trade costs tend to increase with geographical
distance, the model suggests that uncertainty-reducing motives for TAs are more likely to be
present (other things equal) for countries within a region. We will come back to these themes in
the next section, where we consider the potential gains from regulating trade-policy uncertainty.
3.1. Gains from regulating policy uncertainty in a standard trade model
In this section we examine the gains that a TA can oﬀer by regulating trade-policy uncertainty
and compare them with the more standard gains from regulating the trade-policy mean. To
this end, we apply the general formulas developed in section 2.1.
Given that the political economy shock  aﬀects Foreign welfare only through Home’s tariﬀ
, we have

∗ ( ( ))


= ∗ ( ). Plugging the expressions for ∗ and ∗ developed above in

the general formulas of section 2.1, we obtain:
Proposition 3. (i) The approximate value of an MPA starting from the noncooperative equilibrium is

¢
¡
̃   = |Ω∗ + ∗ + ∗ | ·  ∗ Ω∗ ·  2

(3.3)

(ii) The approximate value of a UPA starting from the noncooperative equilibrium is
̃    =  ∗ Ω∗ · ̄

(3.4)

(iii) The relative value of an MPA versus a UPA is:
̃

 

̃

 

∗

= |Ω +

∗

 2
+ |· 
̄
∗

(3.5)

where all expressions are evaluated at the noncooperative equilibrium.
Proposition 3 provides an approximation of the potential gains that a TA can oﬀer by
managing trade policy uncertainty, in absolute terms (part (i)), and relative to the gains from
managing the trade policy mean (part (iii)).
21

It is worth highlighting the role of two key determinants of these gains: the variance of the
noncooperative tariﬀ,  2 , which can be interpreted as capturing the degree of uncertainty in
the trade policy environment, and the exogenous trade cost .
Focus first on the role of  2 . Other things equal, when  2 is higher the gains from
regulating tariﬀ uncertainty, as captured by ̃   , are higher. On the other hand,  2 has
no impact on the gains from reducing the tariﬀ mean, as captured by ̃    . Thus, if one
approximates the overall value of a TA as a weighted average of ̃   and ̃   (as we
discussed at the end of section 2.1), then a higher  2 leads to larger overall gains from a TA.23
Thus, at a broad level, our model suggests that governments should have stronger incentives to
sign trade agreements when the trading environment is more uncertain.
Next we focus on the impact of the trade cost , and in particular on how it aﬀects the
relative gains from regulating policy uncertainty (̃   ̃   ). We continue to assume  
³ ∗ ∗´
, as in the previous section. As we observed above, there exists a critical , say ̂,
− Ω+
∗
=0

for which Ω∗ + ∗ + ∗ = 0. To simplify, we assume that ̂ is unique. Under this assumption,
the relative gain ̃   ̃    is non-monotonic in , with a minimum value of zero at  = ̂

To see this, note that when  is close to   , the relative gain is strictly positive (with the
gains from the MPA coming from an increase in uncertainty); when  is equal to ̂ the ratio
̃   ̃   reaches zero; and if  is lower than ̂ this ratio is strictly positive again, but this
time the gains from the MPA come from a decrease in uncertainty. Thus we can state:
³ ∗ ∗´
Remark 2. Assume that   − Ω+
∗

regulating policy uncertainty (̃   ̃

and that ̂ is unique. Then the relative gains from

=0
 

) are non-monotonic in , with a minimum value of

zero at  = ̂.
This result suggests that, when trade costs are low enough that there is an uncertaintyreducing motive for a TA (  ̂), further reductions in trade costs will tend to increase the
relative gains from reducing trade-policy uncertainty. Thus, at a broad level, our model suggests
that, as the world becomes more integrated, the gains from decreasing trade-policy uncertainty
23

Another way to make the same point is to consider the full gains from the optimal TA and approximate
the payoﬀ functions with quadratic functions. The value of the optimal TA is given by [ ( () ) −
 ( () )]. Consider a mean preserving spread of , which captures an increase in underlying uncertainty.
This will increase the value of the TA if and only if  ( () )− ( () ) is µ
convex in . Assuming that
¶ all
³ 0 ´2
³ 0 ´2



 0


 0
third derivatives of  and  are zero, this is the case if  
 0.
+ 2  −  
+ 2 
´
³ 0
0
0 2
0
0

Using  = − and simplifying, this condition becomes  − 
 0, which is always satisfied if  6=  .


22

should tend to become more important relative to the gains from reducing the mean levels of
trade barriers.
3.2. Impact of policy uncertainty on trade volume
The next question we address is, what is the impact of the optimal MPA on the expected volume
of trade? To fix ideas, suppose that the optimal MPA leads to a mean preserving compression
∗
∗
in . Note that trade
Z volume can be written as  ( ), so the change in expected log trade
due to the MPA is
ln ∗ ( ∗ )  (  ( ∗ ) −  ( ∗ )), where  ( ∗ ) (resp.   ( ∗ )) is

the distribution of  ∗ induced by  () (resp.   ()). Noting that a mean preserving

compression in  leads to a mean preserving compression in  ∗ , by standard Rotschild-Stiglitz
logic it is immediate to conclude that expected log trade increases if and only if Foreign’s export
supply elasticity ∗ is decreasing in  ∗ . Also note that the same conclusion applies to the (log)
trade value  ∗ + ln ∗ ( ∗ ), since an MPA keeps  () and thus  ( ∗ ) unchanged.
In general the export supply function can have increasing or decreasing elasticity, so this
is ultimately an empirical question. It is interesting to relate this analysis with a central
result of the TOT theory of trade agreements, highlighted by Bagwell and Staiger (1999) and
other papers by the same authors, namely that a mutually beneficial TA always expands trade
relative to the noncooperative equilibrium. Thus the mean motive for a TA has an unambiguous
expanding impact on trade. In contrast, the uncertainty motive for a TA may impact trade
volume in either direction.24
There is a special but interesting case where the model yields a more definite prediction
about the impact of a decrease in trade policy uncertainty on expected trade. This is the
same case we considered above when highlighting that an uncertainty-reducing motive is more
likely to be present for lower-income countries. We showed above that, if preferences are CobbDouglas and Foreign is suﬃciently specialized, then the optimal MPA reduces policy uncertainty
for any   0. In this case, the export supply elasticity ∗ must be decreasing in  ∗ around the
point of full specialization, since it is zero if the country is fully specialized (and we assumed
∗ ≥ 0). As a consequence, a decrease in policy uncertainty increases expected trade. This
24

One can also ask how the optimal MPA aﬀects trade volatility. It is easy to show that in the “neutral” case
of constant export supply elasticity, an MPA that reduces policy uncertainty also reduces trade volatility. Thus
there is a tendency for the optimal MPA to impact policy uncertainty and trade (volume and value) uncertainty
in the same direction. But if the export supply elasticity is not constant, the impact of a change in policy
uncertainty on trade volatility is ambiguous.

23

suggests that countries heavily specialized in commodities are not only more likely to benefit
from a reduction in policy uncertainty, as we argued above, but also more likely to experience
an increase in expected trade as policy uncertainty decreases.

4. More general economic shocks
Thus far we have focused on shocks of the political-economy kind, which aﬀect Foreign welfare
only through Home’s tariﬀ . We now extend the analysis to the case of more general economic shocks, allowing  to aﬀect Foreign welfare not just through the policy but also directly;
conventional demand or supply shocks in Home and/or in Foreign in general will have this
feature. This extension is important for two reasons. First, empirically there is evidence that
trade policy responds to a variety of economic shocks such as aggregate downturns (see Bown
and Crowley, forthcoming). Second, economic shocks may magnify or dampen the impact of
Home’s trade protection on Foreign, that is, they may have a policy-externality-shifting eﬀect,
in addition to the policy-risk-preference eﬀect.
To apply the condition derived in the reduced-form analysis of section 2, start by recalling
that Foreign’s terms-of-trade are given (in logarithmic form) by  ∗ ( ) = () −  − . This
notation emphasizes that the shock may aﬀect Foreign’s TOT, holding the policy  constant,

through Home’s domestic price; this will be the case if the domestic shock aﬀects economic
conditions at Home. In addition to aﬀecting Foreign welfare through the TOT channel just
highlighted, the shock may also aﬀect Foreign welfare directly (that is, holding the TOT constant); this will be the case for example if  represents a global demand or supply shock.
We extend our notation to reflect the more general nature of the shock. To this end, we write
Foreign welfare as a function of TOT and the shock as ∗ ( ∗ (·) ). Recalling that the Foreign
government maximizes national welfare, we can then write ∗ ( ) = ∗ (() −  −  ).
Recall from section 2 that there is an uncertainty-reducing motive for a TA if ∗
 ·

∗
∗
  0, and recall our interpretation of the term  ·







+

as capturing the eﬀect of policy-risk

preference, while we interpreted the term ∗
 as capturing a policy-externality-shifting eﬀect.
In what follows it is convenient to interpret  as the log of the underlying shock, so that


0

≡  () can be interpreted as the elasticity of the tariﬀ factor with respect to the shock.

Using ∗
=  ∗ Ω∗ , plugging in the expression (3.2) for ∗

 and simplifying, we find that

24

there is an uncertainty-reducing motive for a TA if
¡ ∗ ∗ ¢

ln
 Ω
(Ω∗ + ∗ + ∗ ) ( −  ) −
 0

 ln( ∗ Ω∗ )
denotes

 ∗ constant,  ≡  0 ()

where

(4.1)

the elasticity of adjusted openness with respect to the shock holding
is the elasticity of Home’s domestic price with respect to the shock,

and (4.1) is evaluated at the noncooperative tariﬀ.
To interpret (4.1), start by recalling that the sign of Foreign’s preference for trade policy risk
is given by the sign of (Ω∗ + ∗ + ∗ ). Thus the term (Ω∗ + ∗ + ∗ )  in (4.1) is related to

the policy-risk preference eﬀect. This term is analogous to the case of political-economy shocks
considered in the previous section.
The new feature with more general shocks is the presence of a policy-externality-shifting
eﬀect. Recall our discussion above of the two possible channels through which  can aﬀect
Foreign welfare holding  constant. Similarly,  can aﬀect the marginal international externality
through two possible channels: the term (Ω∗ + ∗ + ∗ )  in (4.1) captures the impact of 
 ln( ∗ Ω∗ )
captures
on the policy externality through Home’s domestic price , and the term

the direct impact of  on the policy externality holding the TOT,  ∗ , constant.
Note that, if the shock  is importer specific, in the sense that it originates in the Home country and aﬀects Foreign welfare only through the TOT, only the first of the two channels high ln( ∗ Ω∗ )
lighted above is operative, so
= 0 so condition (4.1) is (Ω∗ + ∗ + ∗ ) ( −  )  0.


To highlight the implications of this type of shock, suppose that Foreign is averse to TOT risk
(or equivalently to trade-policy risk), that is Ω∗ + ∗ + ∗  0. Note that the total impact of
 on TOT is given by

∗


=  −  , so there are two diﬀerent sources of TOT risk: a “policy”

risk (captured by   0) and an “economic” risk (captured by  ). Without economic risk
(e.g. in the case of a pure political-economy shock), a mean preserving compression in  clearly
reduces TOT risk. And the same is true whenever policy risk is not oﬀset by economic risk,
so that

 ∗


 0. But if the economic risk oﬀsets the policy risk ( is positive and dominates

 ), then TOT risk is reduced by increasing policy risk, so in this case the optimal MPA will
increase policy risk.
In the case of importer-specific shocks we can show a further result: under a regularity
condition, the optimal MPA reduces terms-of-trade risk if Foreign is averse to TOT risk (or
equivalently to trade-policy risk), that is if Ω∗ + ∗ + ∗  0. Thus, the impact of the optimal
MPA on TOT risk is determined solely by the Foreign country’s preference for TOT/policy
25

risk, and follows the same intuitive pattern as in the case of political economy shocks.25
Next focus on the case in which the shock  is global, in the sense that it aﬀects domestic
conditions in both countries (or equivalently, suppose that the two countries experience perfectly correlated domestic shocks). In this case both channels of the policy-externality-shifting
 ln( ∗ Ω∗ )
eﬀect that we described above will be operative. The second eﬀect (through
) can

be interpreted as follows: if shocks that increase the noncooperative tariﬀ also increase the
adjusted degree of openness for a fixed tariﬀ, this strengthens the uncertainty-reducing motive.
It is worth emphasizing that, unlike in the case of political-economy shocks considered in
the previous section, here the direction of the uncertainty motive for a TA may go in a diﬀerent
direction than Foreign’s preference for policy risk. So, for example, it is possible that even if
individuals are risk-neutral ( → 0) and hence the Foreign country is policy-risk loving, there
may be an uncertainty-reducing motive for a TA.

The sign of the externality-shifting eﬀect in general depends on the exact nature of the shock
and of the economic structure, but we highlight an interesting case in which the externalityshifting eﬀect indeed pushes towards an uncertainty-reducing motive. Suppose that  is a global
productivity shock that strengthens comparative advantage, so that Foreign’s openness Ω∗ is
higher (for given TOT) when  is higher. Further suppose that Home’s noncooperative tariﬀ 
increases with trade volume; this is compatible with our model if TOT manipulation motives
are important for Home’s choice of tariﬀ. In this case  is increasing in , as assumed in our
 ( ∗ Ω∗ )
model. Then, if the eﬀect of the shock via  ∗ is not too strong, the sign of
will be

positive, thus contributing towards an uncertainty-reducing motive.

5. A suﬃcient statistic for the uncertainty motive
If one is willing to assume that the model is true, one can in principle use the model to check
the direction of the uncertainty motive for a TA between two countries and evaluate the relative
gains from regulating policy uncertainty. In this section we illustrate with a simple example
how this could be done with actual data.
As we observed above, there is an uncertainty-reducing motive for a TA if the (negative)
international externality from the tariﬀ at the noncooperative equilibrium is stronger when  is
25

The regularity assumption we need is the following: if we define Home’s choice variable as  ∗ rather than
 (which is clearly equivalent), we need Home’s noncooperative choice of  ∗ to be monotonic in , which is
2
ensured if  ∗ does not change sign over the relevant range of ( ∗  ).

26

higher, that is if


(− ∗ Ω∗ )


 0. Since  () is increasing, this condition can be equivalently

written as

( ∗ Ω∗ )
 0


In principle, one can use information on openness, real income per capita ( ∗ ) and estimates
of  to construct a measure of the adjusted degree of openness. Our model then implies that
if the adjusted measure of openness co-varies with the noncooperative tariﬀ then there is an
uncertainty-reducing motive for a TA. Note that this condition is valid not only in the case of
political-economy shocks considered in section 3, but also in the case of more general economic
shocks considered in section 4.
This suﬃcient-statistic approach can also be used to approximate the relative gains from
regulating policy uncertainty. Applying the general formula 2.7 to our trade model, we can
write
¯
¯
̃   ¯¯  ln( ∗ Ω∗ ) ¯¯  2
=¯
¯ · ̄

̃  

This suggests quantifying ̃   ̃   by taking a measure of correlation between ln( ∗ Ω∗ )
and  , and multiplying it by  2 ̄ . For example, if we run a simple OLS regression of
ln( ∗ Ω∗ ) on  , we can write
¯
¢¯
¡
¯ ln( ∗ Ω∗ )   ¯
̃   ¯¯  ¯¯  2
·  =
= 
̄
̄
̃  

(5.1)

where   is the estimated OLS coeﬃcient.

Next we illustrate how this approach can be applied in a simple empirical example, namely
the trade relationship between US and Cuba in the period before 1934. Our model is static in
nature, but it seems natural to use the time variation in noncooperative tariﬀs and adjusted
openness to measure their covariation. We focus on the annual US average tariﬀ prior to
1934, the year of the Reciprocal trade agreement act (RTAA), which essentially ended the
protectionist era that started in 1921 and culminated in the Smoot-Hawley tariﬀs to start a
period of more cooperative trade policies (Irwin, 1998). More specifically, we use  = ln(1 +  ),
where  is the US import-weighted average tariﬀ starting in 1867 calculated by Irwin (2007).
We start by plotting  from 1867 to 1960 in Figure 2 and noting that there is considerable
variation prior to 1934.26
26

Part of this variation is simply a downward trend, but there is also considerable variation around the trend.

27

The first agreement that the US signed under the RTAA was with Cuba in 1934. This,
together with the fact that Cuba was a small open country (its export share of GDP in this
period was on average 0.32) that mostly exported to the US, makes these countries a good fit
to illustrate how our covariation test can be performed. We use data available for Cuba on
openness and income per capita in the period 1903-1933 to calculate a measure of adjusted
openness at alternative levels of risk aversion.27
The first point we note is that if there were income-risk neutrality ( = 0) then the covariance
test would reduce to examining the sign of the elasticity of Cuban openness with respect to
the US tariﬀ. We find this elasticity to be negative, which is plausible since higher US tariﬀs
tend to reduce the Cuban share of exports in GDP.28 Table 1 contains the adjusted covariance
¢
¡
measure,  ln( ∗ Ω∗ )   ̄ , at diﬀerent levels of . Note from the first row of the table
that with  = 0 the relative gain from an MPA would be modest.

If, as is more reasonable, citizens are risk averse then we also need to take into account the
covariance between Cuban real income per capita and the US tariﬀ. We find this relationship
to be negative, as we would expect, since the US tariﬀ tends to depress Cuba’s terms-of-trade.
We also calculate the critical risk aversion value at which the adjusted openness and the tariﬀ
are not correlated and find that it is ̂ = −11.29 So our test indicates there is an uncertainty-

reducing motive for a TA if ̂  −11. We do not have estimates of risk aversion for Cuba,

however we note that Kimbal et al. (2008) estimate CRRA coeﬃcients for US households (by
This trend is probably due to the fact that the revenue motives for imposing tariﬀs (which were arguably
important before the civil war) declined over time for various reasons, including the introduction of the income
tax in 1916. Another part of the variation is caused by price changes since the US had many specific tariﬀs.
However, statutory rates also oscillated considerably prior to 1934 depending on whether Congress was controlled
by Republicans (protectionist) or Democrats. The RTAA lowered the ability of Congress to engage in such policy
reversals.
27
The start date is dictated by income data availability from the Montevideo-Oxford Latin American Economic
History Database, available at http://oxlad.qeh.ox.ac.uk/results.php. We note that 1903 also coincided with
an initial US-Cuba trade agreement whereby the US granted a 20% preferential reduction to Cuban sugar and
tobacco. However, as Cuba scholars such as Dye and Sicotte (1999) point out, there was no legal commitment
to those lower tariﬀs so the “regime was not risk-free — exporters in both countries faced the possibility that
tariﬀ modifications could reduce or even eliminate the benefits conveyed by the treaty" (p. 22). This was in
fact what happened starting in 1921 when the US increased tariﬀs on several goods including Cuban sugar. In
fact, some argue that the subsequent US tariﬀ increases in the Smoot Hawley act caused the sharp decline of
Cuban Sugar exports in 1930-33 and contributed to the Revolt of 1933.
28
We find a negative relationship between
ln Ω∗ and
for a linear time-trend.
´  whether or not we control
³
¡
¢
¡
¢
29
∗̂ ∗  
= 0 to obtain ̂ = − ln(Ω∗    ln( ∗   .
This is obtained by solving  ln( Ω )  
¡
¢
We ¡then use ¢ ln(Ω∗   ̄ = −0046 from the first row of Table 1 and our estimate of
 ln( ∗   ̄ = −0042. Note that any value in the first row of Table 1 can be obtained as
− (0042) − 0046.

28

using their preferences over diﬀerent gambles), finding that about 90% of the distribution lies
below −15.
We obtain a similar critical value (̂ = −1) if instead of the aggregate US tariﬀ we use the

US tariﬀ on Cuban sugar. The latter may be a better proxy of the US trade barriers that

aﬀected Cuba directly, since Cuban exports of sugar to the US accounted for 25-30% of Cuban
national income (Dye, 2005, p. 193). The last row of Table 1 shows that even at moderate
levels of risk aversion the relative value of an uncertainty-reducing agreement is not negligible,
and it is close to 13 when  = −5 (the median value in the study by Kimbal et al).
In sum, this section illustrates how the model can be used to determine the direction of the
uncertainty motive for a TA between two countries and to quantify the relative gains from regulating trade-policy uncertainty. The positive correlation between US tariﬀs and Cuban adjusted
openness at reasonable levels of risk aversion suggests that there was indeed an uncertaintyreducing motive for a TA between these two countries before 1934, and we find the relative
gains from reducing policy uncertainty to be significant. It is important to emphasize, however,
that this exercise is not a test of the model, but rather it assumes that the model is true and so
it must be taken with a grain of caution, since the model is very stylized. The message we want
to convey is that it is feasible to take our model to the data in a meaningful way, and it might
be desirable to develop richer and more realistic versions of our model in order to quantify the
uncertainty-related gains from TAs.

6. Ex-ante investments
Our basic model assumes that allocation decisions occur ex post, after the shock is realized. But
in reality there are a variety of production factors that cannot be flexibly shifted in response
to policy and economic shocks. In this section we extend our analysis to allow for allocation
decisions that must be made ex-ante, before the shock is realized, or “ex-ante investments”. As
we noted in the introduction, the often-heard informal arguments about the motives for TAs
claim that they should increase investment and trade by reducing uncertainty. Allowing for
ex-ante investments in our model seems compelling if one wants to formally examine this issue.
Recall that the standard model allows for an arbitrary number of factors that are mobile
ex-post. We now assume that one of these, “capital,” is mobile ex-ante but fixed ex-post.30 We
30

We could allow for a higher number of factors that are mobile ex ante but fixed ex post, but the notation
would get more cumbersome. And of course, the model also allows for factors that are fully fixed (immobile

29

normalize the endowment of capital to one and let ∗ denote the fraction of capital allocated
to the export sector. To simplify the analysis we assume that all factors in the Home country
are perfectly flexible so they can be allocated after the shock  is realized. This allows us to
keep the economic structure for Home in the background, as we did in the static model.
We assume the following timing: (0) The tariﬀ schedule is selected (cooperatively or noncooperatively); (1) capital is allocated; (2)  is realized; (3) the trade policy is implemented and
markets clear.
Both in the cooperative and noncooperative scenarios, we allow the tariﬀ schedule to be
contingent on . Note that we keep the timing constant across the cooperative and noncooperative scenarios. The reason for this choice is to abstract from domestic-commitment motives
for a TA. And of course, if we want a TA to be able to aﬀect investment decisions by managing
policy uncertainty, we need policy choices to be made before investment decisions, and this
explains our choice of timing.31
The first step of the analysis is to extend Proposition 1 from the previous static setting to
the present dynamic environment. We write Foreign welfare as ∗ (   ∗ ), and we continue
to write Home’s objective as ( ), which reflects the assumption that Foreign is a small
country.32
In keeping with our assumption that there is no role for trade policy intervention in Foreign,
we assume that capital is perfectly divisible, so that the citizens of the small country are not
only identical ex-ante, but also ex-post, and thus there is no redistribution motive for a tariﬀ.
This in turn implies that, given Home’s (cooperative or noncooperative) tariﬀ schedule (),
capital in Foreign is eﬃciently allocated, and hence ∗ maximizes ∗ (()  ∗ ).33 To simplify
the arguments below, we assume that ∗ is strictly concave in  ∗ .
both ex ante and ex post).
31
While the assumption is made to provide a clean thought experiment, we note that in some cases countries
are able to unilaterally choose contingent protection programs in ways that represent long-term commitments.
For example the U.S. and the E.U. have contingent protection laws that apply in the absence of trade agreements.
32
If Home’s objective  is some weighted social welfare function, then for a given Home tariﬀ  the level of ∗
can aﬀect  only through the Home country’s terms of trade , but since Foreign is small  is not aﬀected by
∗ . On the other hand, ∗ can in general aﬀect the noncooperative tariﬀ  , for example because it can aﬀect
the Foreign country’s export supply elasticity. In our notation we suppress the dependence of  on ∗ , as this
should not cause any confusion.
33
If capital is divisible, all citizens have identical incomes ex-post, and as a consequence there is no idiosyncratic
risk, which implies that the competitive allocation is eﬃcient, conditional on Home’s trade policy. Note that
there is aggregate risk in this economy, but it cannot be diversified away (since there are no international
insurance markets in our model).

30

As in the previous static setting, we characterize the optimal MPA, that is the tariﬀ schedule
that maximizes expected joint welfare subject to the constraint  () =  ().
We now argue that Proposition 1 extends to this setting, in the sense that we only need
to determine the sign of


∗ (
 

()   ∗ ) to know if there is an uncertainty-reducing role for

a TA. The following local argument provides some intuition for the result. Starting at  (),
a small mean-preserving compression has no first order eﬀect on  since this objective is
maximized by  (). Therefore, the new schedule will only increase  if it increases ∗ .
Since, as noted above,  ∗ maximizes ∗ (()  ∗ ), this policy change has no first-order eﬀect
on ∗ via ∗ . So any impact of the policy change on ∗ must be due to the “static” eﬀect,
i.e. to


∗
 

6= 0.

We now consider the full MPA program. Recalling that, for a given (), the level of ∗
maximizes ∗ (()   ∗ ) and has no eﬀect on , then ∗ maximizes  (() ; ∗ ). Thus
we can write the MPA program as if the governments were choosing ∗ directly:
max∗  (()  ∗ )

()

(6.1)

s.t. () =  ()
Assuming an interior optimum, we obtain the following FOCs:
∗

 (   ) =  for all 

(6.2)

() =  ()
∗

∗ (()   ) = 0

(6.3)

We can now apply an argument similar to the static model, using the first two of the FOC
above. The only diﬀerence is that the derivative


∗
 

is evaluated at the optimal level of  ∗ ,

but as long as the sign of this derivative does not change with ∗ , Proposition 1 extends to this
setting. In Appendix we prove the following:
Proposition 4. If


∗ ( ()  ∗ )
 

 0 ( 0) for all (∗  ), then there is an uncertainty-

reducing (-increasing) motive for a TA.
Proposition 4 highlights that the uncertainty motive for the TA is driven by the static eﬀect,
i.e. the impact of the shock on the policy externality conditional on the capital level. In a broad
sense, we can interpret this result as indicating that the presence of ex-ante investments does
not generate a separate uncertainty motive for a TA.
31

This conclusion, as we highlighted, relies on the competitive allocation of capital being
socially eﬃcient given Home’s trade policy, which is ensured in our setting by the assumption
of perfectly divisible capital. While this assumption is somewhat restrictive, we note that the
same result would obtain in a setting where capital is not divisible, provided that an eﬃcient
domestic insurance market is present, or alternatively that the government can use an entry
subsidy/tax to control the allocation of capital.34
Of course one could consider reasonable alternative scenarios where capital allocation is not
eﬃcient, and in such scenarios there could be an “investment motive” for an MPA, or in other
words, there could be scope for a TA to “correct” the capital allocation through changes in
policy uncertainty, but we note that this would be a second-best argument for a TA, as the
first-best way to address such ineﬃciency would be the use of more targeted policies.
Given that the condition for an uncertainty-reducing motive for a TA is similar as in the
static model, the results of the previous sections all extend to the present setting, with the only
diﬀerence that the relevant expressions are evaluated at a given capital allocation. Moreover,
the expressions for the approximate values of an MPA and a UPA are also unchanged, since
there is no first order eﬀect on Foreign welfare due to capital re-allocation. But even if there
is no separate “investment motive” for an MPA, such an agreement in general does aﬀect
equilibrium investment levels relative to the noncooperative equilibrium, as we show next.
6.1. Impact of policy uncertainty on investment and trade
We start by asking how the optimal MPA aﬀects ex-ante investments. We focus on the case
in which


∗
 

 0, so that the optimal MPA reduces policy risk. To simplify the exposition

we assume that the trade pattern does not switch as  ∗ changes, that is, Foreign exports the
nonnumeraire good for all ∗ ≥ 0. Also, for simplicity we focus here on the case of political
economy shocks, as in the basic model of section 3.
Recall that eﬃcient capital allocation implies

∗
∗

= 0. By standard results (Rotschild and

∗

Stiglitz, 1971), the equilibrium  increases as a result of a mean-preserving compression in 
if


∗
∗ 

( ∗ )  0 for all  in its support. Thus the eﬀect depends on the impact of  ∗ on

34

If capital is indivisible, so that each citizen must choose ex-ante whether to allocate her capital to the export
sector or the import-competing sector, then ex-post agents fare diﬀerently in diﬀerent states of the world. In
this situation, the competitive equilibrium is eﬃcient (given Home’s trade policy) only if a domestic insurance
market is present, or if the government can use policies to correct the allocation of capital, such as an entry
subsidy/tax.

32

Foreign’s policy-risk preference. In general this eﬀect can go in either direction, but we now
highlight a set of suﬃcient conditions under which it is negative.35
Note that the result of Proposition 3 extends directly to this dynamic setting, in the sense
that the expression for ∗ is just the same as in (3.2), provided its various components are
re-interpreted as conditional on the capital allocation ∗ . Subject to this re-interpretation, we
have

¤
 £
 ∗
 ( ∗ ) = ∗  ∗ Ω∗ (Ω∗ + ∗ + ∗ )
∗



(6.4)

In Appendix we prove that, if  is suﬃciently negative and the support of  suﬃciently
small, then


∗
∗ 

( ∗ )  0 for all  in its support, which leads to the following:

Proposition 5. Suppose  is a political economy shock. If there is suﬃcient income risk
aversion and the support of  is suﬃciently small, then the optimal MPA increases investment
in the export sector.
Broadly interpreted, this proposition suggests that under the condition that generates an
uncertainty-reducing motive for a TA, namely a strong degree of income-risk aversion, the
agreement leads to higher investment in the export sector, provided the underlying uncertainty
in the environment is small enough. We also note that the same result would hold if we replaced
the condition that  is suﬃciently negative with the alternative condition that the export supply
elasticity ∗ is suﬃciently close to constant, as we show in Appendix.
Finally we examine the impact of the optimal MPA on expected trade volume in the presence
of ex-ante investments.
Recall first that, in the absence of ex-ante investment, if the MPA reduces policy uncertainty,
expected trade increases if and only if the export supply elasticity ∗ ( ∗ ) is decreasing in  ∗ .
In the presence of ex-ante investment, we can write trade volume as ∗ ( ∗  ∗ ), thus the MPA
35

The general ambiguity of the impact of mean-preserving changes in prices on investment decisions is well
known. In the literature this ambiguity is resolved in diﬀerent ways, e.g. assuming decreasing absolute risk
aversion, positing a specific shock distribution, restricting the economic environment or, as we do, considering
cases with small uncertainty. But we emphasize that our result is novel: we are not aware of any existing result
that expresses a similar set of suﬃcient conditions for a similar economic environment. We also note that we
could prove the result under the alternative assumption that the probability mass is suﬃciently concentrated,
rather than the support being suﬃciently small, but in this case the notation and the analysis would be more
cumbersome.

33

increases expected log trade if and only if the following is positive
Z
Z
¡ ∗ ∗  ¢ 
¡
¢
∗
∗
  ( ) − ln ∗  ∗   ∗  ( ∗ )
ln    
¡ ∗ ∗  ¢
Z
Z
∗
¡
¢
¡
¢
 


∗

∗

∗
ln ∗ ∗ ∗ 
=
ln ∗  ∗  ∗  
 ( ) −  ( ) +
 ( )
 (   )

where  ∗  and ∗ are respectively the equilibrium capital levels at the optimal MPA and

∗
at the noncooperative equilibrium, and  and 
 are the respective distributions of  .

The first term in the expression above is analogous to the one in the static model, so it depends
¡
¢
¡
¢
on whether ∗  ∗   ∗ ≡  ln ∗  ∗   ∗  ∗ is increasing or decreasing in  ∗ . The second

term captures the expected growth in exports due to the change in investment. If  ∗ increases,

this eﬀect will be positive if the support of the shock is suﬃciently small and the economy is
not completely specialized.36
Summarizing the discussion above, if risk aversion is suﬃciently strong and uncertainty is
suﬃciently small, the optimal MPA reduces uncertainty in trade policy and increases investment
in the export sector. Moreover, under these conditions, expected trade increases provided the
export supply elasticity does not increase too rapidly with the price.
We conclude this section with a final point regarding the statement made by the WTO that
one of its key goals is to reduce policy uncertainty for the purposes of increasing investment
in export markets. Our analysis suggests that, even though under some conditions a reduction
in policy uncertainty does lead to more investment in the export sector, this by itself does not
imply a first-order welfare increase: if capital markets are eﬃcient, the only first-order welfare
change from a reduction in policy uncertainty is of a "static" nature, that is, it comes from the
correction of the international policy-risk externality, conditional on the allocation of capital.

7. Two policy-active countries
In this section we extend our analysis by considering a setting with two policy-active countries.
We focus on the reduced-form framework of section 2 and abstract from ex-ante investments
∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

(  )
)




To see this, note that  
= (−
= 
∗
∗
∗ − ∗ · ∗ , where ∗ is the ex-post diﬀerential in the
rate of return to capital across sectors. This diﬀerential is zero in expectation under risk neutrality, while it can
diﬀer from zero with risk aversion, but if the shock has small support
it is close to zero∗ at the optimal ex-ante
∗

allocation. Thus if the support of  is suﬃciently small then 
∗  0, provided that ∗  0, which is the case
if the economy is not completely specialized.
One may also ask how an MPA aﬀects the volatility of trade flows. When ∗ is not constant, this impact
is ambiguous, but it is direct to show that in the “neutral” case where ¡∗ is constant,
an MPA that
¢
¡ decreases
¢
trade policy uncertainty decreases uncertainty in trade volume, i.e. ln ∗  ∗ is a MPS of ln ∗ ∗  .
36

34

for simplicity.
We represent the reduced-form payoﬀ functions as ( ∗  ) and ∗ (∗   ∗ ), where  is
Home’s policy and ∗ is Foreign’s policy. For tractability, we assume that countries are mirrorimage symmetric, and we continue to assume a single dimension of uncertainty, that is ∗ = ;
the interpretation is that there is a global shock that aﬀects symmetrically the two countries,
or equivalently, two domestic shocks that are perfectly correlated.
Given symmetry, we denote the common payoﬀ given a symmetric tariﬀ  as ̃( ) ≡

(  ). We make the following assumptions:

(i) Single crossing properties: ̃  0,   0 (and by symmetry, ∗∗   0);
(ii) Concavity: ̃ concave in ,  concave in  (and by symmetry, ∗ concave in ∗ );
(iii) Stability of reaction functions: | |  ∗ (and analogously for Foreign).
Given that countries are symmetric, the noncooperative equilibrium tariﬀs are symmetric,
and implicitly defined by the following FOC:
 (    ) = 0
This condition yields the noncooperative tariﬀ schedule  (). Given our assumptions,  ()
is increasing, as can be verified by implicitly diﬀerentiating the FOC:



0
=


−( + 
∗ )
where the numerator is positive by the single crossing property and the denominator is positive
by the stability assumption.
Given the symmetry of the problem, it is natural to focus on the optimal symmetric MPA,
which is given by:37
  () = arg max  ̃(() ) s.t. () =  ()
()

(7.1)

We can write the Lagrangian for this problem as
=
37

Z

¡
¢
[̃( ) +   () − () ] ()

(7.2)

Given the concavity of the payoﬀ functions, we conjecture that the global maximum is indeed symmetric,
so that there is no loss of generality in focusing on a symmetric MPA.

35

Maximizing this Lagrangian pointwise yields the FOCs
̃ (() ) =  for all 
() =  ()
We can then prove the following:
∗
Proposition 6. If (∗
 + ∗ ) ·




+ ∗
  0 ( 0) for all  then there is an uncertainty-

∗
reducing (-increasing) motive for a TA. If (∗
 + ∗ ) ·




+ ∗
 = 0 for all  then there is

no uncertainty motive for a TA.

We can now contrast the result of Proposition 6 with the corresponding result for the smalllarge country setting. The general condition for an uncertainty-reducing motive,


∗
 

 0, is

similar as in the small-large country setting, but in the large-large country setting this expression
includes an additional term, namely ∗
∗ . We label this the “strategic interaction” eﬀect, which
is positive if tariﬀs are strategic complements and negative if they are strategic substitutes. Thus
an interesting new insight that emerges is that the strategic-interaction eﬀect works in favor
of the uncertainty-reducing motive if tariﬀs are strategic substitutes, and vice-versa if tariﬀs
are strategic complements. Whether tariﬀs are strategic substitutes or complements depends
on the specifics of the trade structure (see for example Syropoulos, 2002), so the direction of
this eﬀect is ultimately an empirical question.
Note also that, while the other terms are similar as in the small-large country setting, they
will reflect additional eﬀects when one applies the general formula to a specific trade structure.
∗
In particular, the policy-risk-preference eﬀect ∗
 and the externality-shifting eﬀect  will

include tariﬀ-revenue and pass-through elasticity eﬀects that were absent in the small-large
country setting.
Finally, it can be shown that the expressions derived in section 2.1 for the gains from
regulating policy uncertainty and policy mean extend directly to the present large-large country
setting.

8. Conclusion
In this paper we examine the often-heard argument that a trade agreement can provide gains
to its member countries by decreasing uncertainty in trade policies, in addition to the more
36

standard gains from reducing the levels of trade barriers. Our basic trade model is one where
trade agreements are motivated by terms-of-trade externalities, noncooperative trade policies
are uncertain because of shocks to the political-economic environment, and individuals may
be income risk-averse. We find that the uncertainty-managing motive for a trade agreement is
determined by interesting trade-oﬀs. Among the most notable results, we find that for a given
degree of risk aversion an uncertainty-reducing motive for a trade agreement is more likely to be
present when the economy is more open, the export supply elasticity is lower and the economy
is more specialized. The model suggests that, as the world becomes more integrated, the gains
from decreasing trade-policy uncertainty should tend to become more important relative to the
gains from reducing the levels of trade barriers. Furthermore, governments have more to gain
by joining a trade agreement when the trading environment is more uncertain. We develop a
simple “suﬃcient statistic” approach to determine the direction of the uncertainty motive for a
trade agreement and quantify the associated gains, and illustrate how it can be taken to the data
by focusing on the bilateral trading relationship between the US and Cuba before their trade
agreement in 1934. Finally, we examine how the uncertainty motive for a TA is aﬀected by the
presence of ex-ante investments, and examine conditions under which an uncertainty-reducing
TA will increase investment in the export sector and raise expected trade volume.
There are several potentially interesting avenues for future research. Here we mention three
of them. First, in this paper we have abstracted from contracting frictions. As mentioned
in the introduction, we believe this is a natural first step given that our main focus is the
potential gains from regulating policy uncertainty, but it would be interesting to examine how
results would change in the presence of contracting frictions. Second, it would be desirable
to examine the possible uncertainty-managing role of trade agreements in settings where the
underlying reason for the agreement is not the classic TOT externality: in particular, one might
consider settings in which agreements are motivated by the governments’ need for domestic
commitment, or by the presence of non-TOT international externalities. Finally, a challenging
but potentially fruitful direction of research would be to develop a richer version of our model
with the objective of taking it to a comprehensive dataset: this would probably require, among
other things, allowing for multiple countries, multiple goods and imperfectly correlated shocks
across countries.

37

9. References
Amador, M. and Bagwell, K. (forthcoming).“The Theory of Optimal Delegation with an Application to Tariﬀ Caps”. Econometrica.
Anderson, J. and Riley, J. (1976). “International Trade with Fluctuating Prices”. International
Economic Review, 17(1):76—97.
Bagwell, K. and Staiger, R. W. (2012). “Profit Shifting and Trade Agreements in Imperfectly
Competitive Markets”. International Economic Review, 53(4):1067—1104.
Bagwell, K. and Staiger, R. W. (1999). “An Economic Theory of GATT”. American Economic
Review, 89(1):215—248.
Beshkar, M. and Bond, E. (2012) "Cap and Escape in Trade Agreements," mimeo.
Bown, C., editor (2011). “The Great Recession and Import Protection: The Role of Temporary
Trade Barriers”. Number 978-1-907142-38-3. Centre for Economic Policy Research.
Bown, C. and M. Crowley (Forthcoming). “Import Protection, Business Cycles, and Exchange
Rates: Evidence from the Great Recession.” Journal of International Economics.
Cadot, O., Olarreaga, M. and Tschopp, J. (2009). “Do Trade Agreements Reduce the Volatility
of Agricultural Distortions?”, mimeo.
Dixit, A. (1989). “Trade and Insurance with Imperfectly Observed Outcomes.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 1(104):195—203.
Dye, A. (2005). “Cuba and the Origins of the US Sugar Quota.” Revista de Indias, LXV(233):
193-218.
Dye, A. and Sicotte, R. (1999). “US-Cuban Trade Cooperation and its Unraveling.” Business and
Economic History, 28(2): 19-31.
Eaton, J. (1979). “The Allocation of Resources in an Open Economy with Uncertain Terms of
Trade”. International Economic Review, 20(2):391—403.
Eaton, J. and Grossman, G. M. (1985). “Tariﬀs as Insurance: Optimal Commercial Policy when
Domestic Markets are Incomplete”. Canadian Journal of Economics, 18(2):258—72.
Flemming, J. S., Turnovsky, S. J., and Kemp, M. C. (1977). “On the Choice of Numeraire and
Certainty Price in General Equilibrium Models of Price Uncertainty”. Review of Economic
Studies, 44(3):573—83.
Grossman, G. M. and Helpman, E. (1995). “Trade Wars and Trade Talks”. Journal of Political
Economy, 103(4):675—708.
Handley, K. (2011). “Exporting under Trade Policy Uncertainty: Theory and Evidence”. WTO
ERSD-2011-20.
Handley, K. and Limão, N. (2012). “Trade and Investment under Policy Uncertainty: Theory and
Firm Evidence”. NBER WP 17790.
Horn, H., Maggi, G. and Staiger, R. W. (2010). Trade Agreements as Endogenously Incomplete

Contracts. American Economic Review, 100(1):394—419.
Irwin, D. (2007). Trade Restrictiveness and Deadweight Losses from U.S. Tariﬀs, 1859-1961.
NBER WP 13450.
Irwin, D. (1998). From Smoot-Hawley to Reciprocal Trade Agreements: Changing the Course of
U.S. Trade Policy in the 1930s. The Defining Moment: The Great Depression and the American
Economy in the Twentieth Century, Bordo, M. et al (eds), University of Chicago Press, 325—352.
Kimbal, M., Sahm, C., and Shapiro, M. (2008). “Imputing Risk Tolerance from Survey Responses”. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 103:1028 U1038.
Limão, N. and Tovar, P. (2011). “Policy Choice: Theory and Evidence from Commitment via
International Trade Agreements”. Journal of International Economics, 85(2):186—205.
Maggi, G. and Rodriguez-Clare, A. (1998). “The value of Trade Agreements in the Presence of
Political Pressures”. Journal of Political Economy, 106(3):574—601.
Mansfield, E. D. and Reinhardt, E. (2008). “International Institutions and the volatility of International Trade”. International Organization, 62(04):621—652.
Mclaren, J. (1997). “Size, Sunk Costs, and Judge Bowker’s Objection to Free Trade”. American
Economic Review, 87(3):400—420.
Mrazova, M. (2011). “Trade Agreements when Profits Matter”. Mimeo.
Newbery, D. and Stiglitz, J., editors (1981). The Theory of Commodity Price Stabilization: A
Study in the Economics of Risk. Oxford University Press.
Ossa, R. (2011). “A New Trade Theory of GATT/WTO Negotiations”. Journal of Political
Economy, 119(1):122—152.
Rose, A. K. (2004). “Do WTO Members Have More Liberal Trade Policy?” Journal of International Economics, 63(2):209—235.
Rothschild, M. and Stiglitz, J. E. (1970). “Increasing Risk I: A Definition.” Journal of Economic
Theory, 2(3):225—243.
Rothschild, M. and Stiglitz, J. E. (1971). “Increasing Risk II: Its Economic Consequences”.
Journal of Economic Theory, 3(1):66—84.
Staiger, R. W. and Tabellini, G. (1987). “Discretionary Trade Policy and Excessive Protection”.
American Economic Review, 77(5):823—37.
Syropoulos, C. (2002). “Optimum Tariﬀs and Retaliation Revisited: How Country Size Matters”.
The Review of Economic Studies, 69(3):707—727.
Tokarick, S. (2010). “A Method for Calculating Export Supply and Import Demand Elasticities”.
IMF WP 10/180.
Young, L. and Anderson, J. (1982). “Risk Aversion and Optimal Trade Restrictions”. The Review
of Economic Studies, 49(2):291—305.

39

10. Appendix
Proof of Lemma 1:
We start by proving part (ii). The schedules   () and  () are clearly continuous.
The mean constraint and the continuity of   () and  () ensure the existence of at
least one intersection. Consider one such intersection ̂, so that   (̂) =  (̂). By the


∗ 
FOC, 
 ( (̂) ̂) = . Since  ( (̂) ̂) = 0 this implies  ( (̂) ̂) = . Now if


∗ ( () ) = 0 then ∗ ( () ) =  for all , which in turn implies 
 ( () ) = 
 
for all . Therefore the schedule  () satisfies the FOC, hence   () =  () for all .

We next prove part (i), focusing on the case 
∗ ( () )  0. Again,   () and  ()
must intersect at least once. We now argue that   () can only intersect  () from above.
This, together with continuity, will also ensure the uniqueness of the intersection.

We argue by contradiction. Suppose   () intersects  () at some point ̂ from below.
Consider two values of  on the opposite sides of this intersection, 1  ̂  2 such that
  (1 )   (1 ) and   (2 )   (2 ).
Recalling that  ( () ) = 0 and


∗ ( () )
 

 0 for all , then


∗ 
∗ 
 

 ( (2 ) 2 ) =  ( (2 ) 2 )   ( (1 ) 1 ) =  ( (1 ) 1 )

These inequalities and the concavity of  in  imply
 

 
  

(2 ) 2 )  
(1 ) 1 )
 (
 ( (2 ) 2 )   ( (1 ) 1 )   (

This contradicts the FOC, which requires 
 to be equalized across states. QED
Proof of Proposition 1:
 
First observe that   0 implies  () is increasing, and 
() is increasing
  0 implies 
(this can be proved by implicitly diﬀerentiating the FOC for the MPA problem and recalling
that  is independent of ).

Part (i). Focus on the case 
∗ ( () )  0. By Lemma 1, in this case   () intersects
 () once and from above. We show that the random variable  () is a second order stochastic
shift of the random variable   (), which together with the fact that these two random
variables have the same mean implies that the former is a MPS of the latter. Let  () denote
the inverse of  () and   () the inverse of   (); these inverse functions exist because
 () and   () are both increasing. Also, let ̂ be the value of  for which the two curves
intersect.

The cdf of  is given by  () =  ( () ≤ ) =  ( ≤  ()) and the cdf of   is given
by   () =  (  () ≤ ) =  ( ≤   ()). Lemma 1 implies that   ()   ()
for all   ̂ and   ()   () for all   ̂, which in turn implies that   ()   () for
all   ̂ and   ()   () for all   ̂. This implies that  () is a second order stochastic
shift of   (), as claimed.

Part (ii) was already proved in Lemma 1. QED
Proof of Proposition 2:
Start by noting that ∗ =

 2 ∗
.
(ln ∗ )2

It is straightforward to derive:

#
" µ
¶2
¡ ∗ ¢
 2 ∗
 2 ln  ∗
 ln  ∗
= 
+


 ln ∗
 (ln ∗ )2
 (ln ∗ )2

where ln ∗ = ln ∗ − ln ∗ . Next note that
respect to ln ∗ and simplifying, we obtain:

 ln ∗
 ln ∗

=

∗ ∗
.
∗

Diﬀerentiating this elasticity with
2

0

∗  ∗
∗  ∗
∗  ∗
 2 ln ∗
= ∗ · (1 − ∗ ) +



∗
 (ln ∗ )2
∗

∗0

Next note that employing Roy’s identity we obtain  ∗ = ∗ , hence
that
¡ ∗ ∗¢
 ∗
 2 ln ∗
· ∗ 
2 =
∗
∗

 (ln  )

 ln ∗
 ln ∗

=

∗ ∗
.
∗

It follows

Adding things up and simplifying, we find ∗ =  ∗ Ω∗ (Ω∗ + ∗ + ∗ ). QED
Proof of Proposition 4:
We start by proving part (b). The schedules   () and  () are clearly continuous. The
mean constraint and the continuity of   () and  () ensure the existence of at least
one intersection. Consider one such intersection ̂, so that   (̂) =  (̂). By the FOC,

∗ 
) = . Since  ( (̂) ̂) = 0 this implies ∗ ( (̂) ̂ ∗  ) = . Now

 ( (̂) ̂ 

if 
∗ ( ()  ∗  ) = 0 then ∗ ( ()   ∗  ) =  for all , which in turn implies
 
 ( ()  ∗  ) =  for all . Therefore the schedule  () satisfies the FOC, hence
  () =  () for all  and ∗  =  ∗ .
We next prove part (a). Again,   () and  () must intersect at least once. We now argue

∗ ( ()  ∗  )  0 for all  then   () can only intersect  () from above.
that if 
This, together with continuity, will also ensure the uniqueness of the intersection.
We argue by contradiction. Suppose   () intersects  () at some point ̂ from below.
Consider two values of  on the opposite sides of this intersection, 1  ̂  2 such that
  (1 )   (1 ) and   (2 )   (2 ).
Recalling that  ( () ) = 0 for all  ∗ and assuming
then


∗ ( ()  ∗  )
 

 0 for all 


∗ 

) = ∗ ( (2 ) 2  ∗  )
 ( (2 ) 2  

∗ 
)
 ∗ ( (1 ) 1  ∗  ) = 
 ( (1 ) 1  

41

These inequalities and the concavity of  in  imply
 

∗ 
(2 ) 2  ∗  )  
)

 (
 ( (2 ) 2  

∗ 
 
)  
(1 ) 1  ∗  )
 
 ( (1 ) 1  
 (

The claim follows. QED.
Proof of Proposition 5
As a first step, we argue that an increase in ∗ leads to a decrease in the degree of diversification
∗ ∗
∗ . We can write ∗ = 1− ∗∗+∗ = 1− 10∗ . An increase in ∗ (holding  ∗ = ln ∗ constant)
1+ ∗ ∗

0

∗

leads to an increase in  and a decrease in 0∗ , hence ∗ falls.
Next focus on Ω∗ . We have Ω∗ =

∗ ∗
∗

=

∗  ∗ −∗ ∗
∗

=

1

∗
1+ ∗0∗

−

∗ ∗
.
∗

As ∗ increases, the first

term in the above expression increases, as we argued above. Next note that ∗ aﬀects the
∗ ∗
∗
consumption share ∗ only through ∗ . In principle 
∗ has an ambiguous sign, but note that

∗
= 0 under certainty. If ∗ is uncertain but has a
under certainty  ∗ maximizes ∗ , hence 
∗
¡ ∗ ∗ ¢
∗

will also be small in
will
be
small
in
absolute
value,
and
hence
small support, 
∗
∗


∗
absolute value. This ensures that if the support is small enough, Ω∗ is increasing in ∗ .
Next note that a change in ∗ in general has an ambiguous eﬀect on the export supply elasticity
∗ , so in general the eﬀect of ∗ on Ω∗ (Ω∗ + ∗ + ∗ ) is ambiguous, however if risk aversion
is suﬃciently strong, i.e. if  is suﬃciently negative, then clearly the eﬀect is negative. If ∗ is
approximately constant we do not require  to be suﬃciently negative.

Finally, consider the sign of the whole expression (6.4). Letting Ω∗ (Ω∗ + ∗ + ∗ ) ≡ (∗  ∗ ),
we can rewrite (6.4) as
¤  ∗
 £ ∗ ∗ ∗

∗
∗

(


)(


)
=
·  +  ∗ · ∗ =
∗
∗



∗

¶
µ ∗
∗ ∗
·  ·  ∗
 ∗ +



(10.1)

Note that the term ∗∗ is the relative change in real income due to a capital re-allocation.
This is zero under certainty, and under uncertainty it necessarily changes sign over the range
of ∗ , since if it was always positive or negative there would be an incentive to re-allocate
capital. We now argue that if  is suﬃciently negative and the support of ∗ is small enough,
the expression above is negative. Fix  at some level ̂ such that   0 and ∗    0
under certainty (where  is some positive constant). The arguments above ensure that such ̂
must exist. Next recall that ∗ satisfies ∗∗ = 0 under certainty. Then, as the support of ∗
∗∗
shrinks
to
zero,
̂
goes
to zero for all ∗ in the support, while ∗ approaches   0, therefore
∗
£
¤

 ∗ (∗  ∗ )(∗   ∗ )  0. QED
∗
Proof of Proposition 6:




∗ 
∗
∗ 

Focus on the case (∗
 + ∗ )  +   0, or equivalently   ( ()  () )  0. The
 

() intersects  () once and from
key is to prove the analog of Lemma 1, namely that 

42

above.
We argue by contradiction. Suppose   () intersects  () at some point ̂ from below.
Consider two values of  on the opposite sides of this intersection, 1  ̂  2 such that
  (1 )   (1 ) and   (2 )   (2 ).
Recalling that  ( ()  () ) = 0 and


∗ ( ()  () )
 

 0 for all , then

̃ ( (2 ) 2 ) = ∗ ( (2 )  (2 ) 2 )  ∗ ( (1 )  (1 ) 1 ) = ̃ ( (1 ) 1 )
These inequalities and the concavity of ̃ in  imply
̃ (  (2 ) 2 )  ̃ ( (2 ) 2 )  ̃ ( (1 ) 1 )  ̃ (  (1 ) 1 )
This contradicts the FOC, which requires that ̃ (  () ) be equalized across states.
Having proved the analog of Lemma 1, the claim of the proposition follows immediately: just
observe that the assumed single crossing properties imply  () and   () are increasing,
and apply a similar argument to that in the proof of Proposition 1. QED

43

Figure 1
Noncooperative Policy vs. Mean Preserving Agreement

t

tN

tMPA

↓
↑

λ

λ*

0

.1

lnt
.2

.3

.4

Figure 2
US ln average tariff factor 1867-1960. Source Irwin 2007. Red line: 1934.

1860

1880

1900

1920
Year

1940

1960

Table 1
Covariance test for uncertainty reducing motive and relative magnitude1

log Cuban adjusted openness
(θlnv*+lnΩ*)

θ
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6
-7
-8
-9
-10

US average tariff (t)

US sugar tariff (t)

-0.046
-0.004
0.04
0.08
0.12
0.16
0.20
0.25
0.29
0.33
0.37

-0.079
0.000
0.08
0.16
0.24
0.32
0.40
0.48
0.56
0.64
0.72

1) Cov(y*,t)/E(t) for 1903-33 where y* is log(Cuban adjusted openness) and t is either ln(1+tariff) averaged
over all products for US or only its tariff on Cuban sugar. See text for data sources.

