                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          U.S HIGH SCHOOL GRADUATION RATES:
                              PATTERNS AND EXPLANATIONS

                                         Richard J. Murnane

                                        Working Paper 18701
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18701


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2013




This paper has been accepted for publication in the Journal of Economic Literature. I am a member
of the Board of Directors of MDRC. (Research conducted by MDRC is described in this paper.) I
received support from the Russell Sage and Spencer Foundations for some of the research on which
this paper is based. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Richard J. Murnane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
U.S High School Graduation Rates: Patterns and Explanations
Richard J. Murnane
NBER Working Paper No. 18701
January 2013
JEL No. C81,I21,I24,J15,J16,J24,J31

                                              ABSTRACT

I survey the evidence on patterns in U.S. high school graduation rates over the period 1970-2010 and
report the results of new research conducted to fill in holes in the evidence. I begin by pointing out
the strengths and limitations of existing data sources. I then describe six striking patterns in graduation
rates. They include stagnation over the last three decades of the twentieth century, significant race-,
income-, and gender-based gaps, and significant increases in graduation rates over the first decade
of the twenty-first century, especially among blacks and Hispanics. I then describe the models economists
use to explain the decisions of individuals to invest in schooling, and examine the extent to which
the parameters of the models explain recent patterns in graduation rates. I find that increases in the
nonmonetary costs of completing high school and the increasing availability of the GED credential
help to explain stagnation in the face of substantial gaps between the wages of high school graduates
and school dropouts. I point out that there are several hypotheses, but to date, very little evidence
to explain the increases in high school graduation rates over the first decade of the twenty-first century.
 I conclude by reviewing the evidence on effective strategies to increase high school graduation rates,
and explaining why the causal evidence is quite modest.


Richard J. Murnane
Graduate School of Education
Harvard University
6 Appian Way - Gutman 469
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
richard_murnane@harvard.edu
                        U.S High School Graduation Rates: Patterns and Explanations *



                                                1.       Introduction

        “We have one of the highest high school dropout rates of any industrialized nation. . . . And

dropping out of high school is no longer an option. It’s not just quitting on yourself, it’s quitting on

your country—and this country needs and values the talents of every American.”

          ------President Barack Obama, State of the Union Speech to the U.S. Congress, Feb. 24, 2009



        During the first seventy years of the twentieth century, the high school graduation rate of

teenagers in the United States rose from 6 percent to 80 percent.1 A result of this remarkable trend

was that by the late 1960s, the U.S. high school graduation rate ranked first among countries in the

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD, 2007).2 The increase in the

proportion of the labor force that had graduated from high school was an important force that fueled

economic growth and rising incomes during the twentieth century.


* Harvard University Graduate School of Education. I think the many people made contributions to this paper. Josh
Beauregard, Katie Buckley, Stephen Hoffman, Matthew Kraft, David Liebowitz, John Papay, Rachel Rubin, and Melanie
Wasserman provided excellent research assistance. David Autor, Robert Balfanz, Carrie Conaway, Janet Currie, David
Deming, Greg Duncan, Joanna Fox, Eric Hanushek, James Heckman, Andrew Ho, Kevin Lang, Frank Levy, Lawrence
Mishel, Richard Nelson, Phil Oreopoulos, John Papay, Margaret Patterson, Janet Quint, Joydeep Roy, David Stern, Lazar
Treschan, Rebecca Unterman, Michael Wald, Rob Warren, and four referees provided helpful comments on earlier drafts
of this paper. Claudia Goldin, Sarah Turner, The Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education, and
the GED Testing Service provided data. Paul LaFontaine answered many questions about the methods he and James
Heckman used in estimating the high school graduation rates reported in their 2010 paper. The Russell Sage and Spencer
Foundations provided support for some of the research on which this paper is based.
1
  Goldin and Katz (2008) report a U.S. high school graduation rate in 1970 of 77 percent. Heckman and Fontaine (2010)
estimate a figure of 81 percent (see Table A.7 in the Supplemental Appendix to their 2010 paper.) The difference
between these estimates stems in part from differences in the populations on which the estimates are based and in part
from differences in methodology. The estimate for 1970 that Goldin and Katz report comes from dividing the number of
people who graduated from high school in 1970 (as reported by schools) by the population of 17-year-olds in that year,
including recent immigrants (see U.S. Department of Education (1993)). The Heckman and LaFontaine estimate comes
from dividing the number of 20–23-year-olds (excluding recent immigrants) in 1970 who report that they had graduated
from high school by the total number of 20–23-year-olds in that year, excluding recent immigrants.
2
  As of 2005, the high school graduation rate among 55–64-year-olds was higher in the United States than in any other
OECD country.

                                                        2
        Between 1970 and 2000, the high school graduation in the United States stagnated. In

contrast, the secondary school graduation rate in many other OECD countries increased markedly

during this period. A consequence is that in 2000, the high school graduation rate in the United States

ranked thirteenth among nineteen OECD countries (OECD, 2012).

        Until quite recently, it appeared that the stagnation of the U.S. high school graduation rate had

continued into the twenty-first century. However, evidence from two independent sources shows that

the graduation rate increased substantially between 2000 and 2010. This increase prevented the

United States from losing further ground relative to other OECD countries in preparing a skilled

workforce. But graduation rates in other OECD countries also increased during that decade. As a

result, the U.S. high school graduation rate in 2010 was still below the OECD average.3

         Given the importance of educational attainment and skills of workers to labor market

earnings for individuals and economic growth for countries (Goldin and Katz, 2008; Hanushek and

Woessman, 2008), it is important to understand the reasons for the three-decade stagnation and for

the recent increase in the U.S. high school graduation rate. As I explain in detail below, during the

last three decades of the twentieth century, increased requirements for a high school diploma

counteracted substantial economic returns to the credential. More difficult to explain are the recent

increase, and the striking gender gap, in the graduation rate.

        The paper addresses the following four questions:

             1. What were the patterns in U.S. high school graduation rates during the last 40 years?


3
  The OECD (2012) estimates that the U.S. high school graduation rate increased from 70 percent in 1970 to 77
percent in 2010. The OECD bases its estimates on the Common Core of Data, which is described in Section 2. In
2010, the average upper secondary school graduation rate among OECD countries was 84 percent. In that year, the
U.S. high school graduation rate ranked twentieth out of twenty-four OECD countries (OECD, 2012, Table A2.3,
p.55). However, this comparison may be somewhat deceptive in that, as reported in Table A2.2 of the OECD
publication (2012), the high school graduation rate of the population under age 25 in the United States (77 percent)
was equal to the OECD average high school graduation rate for people under age 25. The explanation is that while a
significant number of people complete secondary education after age 24 in some OECD countries, this is not the
case in the United States.

                                                         3
             2. What are the explanations for these patterns?

             3. What are promising strategies for increasing the high school graduation rate?

             4. Why haven’t policy evaluations been more useful in guiding efforts to increase the

                 high school graduation rate?

        The paper is organized in six sections. Section 2 clarifies methodological issues concerning

the measurement of high school graduation rates. Section 3 describes patterns and trends in the high

school graduation rates of different groups in the United States. Section 4 describes economic models

of teenagers’ decisions about whether to remain in high school. Section 5 examines the evidence

bearing on explanations for the patterns in high school graduation rates. Section 6 summarizes

evidence on the effectiveness of policy interventions aimed at increasing high school completion

rates. Section 7 reviews the answers to the four questions addressed in the paper and suggests

questions for future research. Unless otherwise noted, when discussing data or results, I am

discussing U.S. high school graduation rates only.

                                          2.       Methodological Issues

        This section outlines the three types of data sources—household surveys, the Common Core

of Data, and longitudinal data sets—used to estimate high school graduation rates in the United States

and the strengths and limitations of each. Estimates of high school graduation rates are sensitive to

the choice of data source, in part because of differences in coverage. They are also sensitive to

methodological choices about how to use the data from any given source. The section also shows why

estimates of the high school graduation rate are extremely sensitive to how the researchers categorize

recent immigrants and recipients of the General Educational Development (GED) credential.4 These

measurement issues are critical to the design of future research.


4
  This section was informed by the thoughtful discussion of different methods of estimating high school graduation
rates contained in Mishel and Roy (2006) and Heckman and LaFontaine (2010).

                                                        4
2.1     Household Surveys

       Researchers have estimated high school graduation rates using household surveys including

the Current Population Survey (CPS), the decennial Census of the Population, and the American

Community Survey (ACS). They do so by calculating a “status completion rate,” defined as “the

percentage of individuals in a given age range who are not in high school and who have earned a high

school diploma or equivalency credential, irrespective of when or where the credential was earned”

(Chapman et al., 2011, p. 2). An important strength of this estimation method is its transparency and

insensitivity to the number of years that it took individuals to graduate from high school.

       One limitation of the CPS as a data source for estimating the status completion rate is that one

individual answers questions pertaining to all members of the household. There is some concern that

some respondents may exaggerate the educational attainments of household members (Warren and

Halpern-Manners, 2007). A second limitation is that the CPS sampling frame includes only the

noninstitutionalized civilian population. Consequently, it excludes people living in group quarters,

such as incarcerated individuals and those serving in the military. The Census of Population does

include these groups and provides a basis for estimating the degree to which CPS-based estimates are

biased by the exclusion of the prison and military populations. The detailed information in the Public

Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) from the decennial census also provides a basis for estimating the

extent to which CPS-based estimates of the graduation rate are biased by including immigrants who

did not attend U.S. high schools.

       Of course, a limitation of census data is that the census is conducted only every ten years. In

response to this problem, the U.S. Census Bureau created the American Community Survey (ACS),

which samples approximately 3 million housing units each year. The ACS does include the military




                                                 5
and incarcerated individuals in its sampling frame and provides data suitable for estimating the status

completion rate for the nation.

2.2     The Common Core of Data

        Each year the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES), a branch of the U.S.

Department of Education, conducts a census of local educational agencies and schools. The resulting

database, called the Common Core of Data (CCD), contains information for each public high school

in the country on the number of students enrolled in each grade and the number of students who

graduated in the previous year. In principle, the CCD has two related strengths as a data source.

First, given that the information comes from the administrative records of individual schools, it

should be quite accurate. Second, it should be possible to estimate graduation rates for individual

schools, districts, and states from the CCD. In practice, however, the comparability of the information

across states and across local jurisdictions is compromised by different definitions and accounting

practices (Roy and Mishel, 2008). For example, some states issue high school completion credentials

indistinguishable from conventional high school diplomas to students in special programs, some of

which prepare students to take the GED examinations.5

        Inaccuracies in the counts of graduates in the CCD are not the only problem. Another problem

stems from the varied paths teenagers take through high school. If no students changed schools

during their high school years, if no students were retained in grade, and if no teenagers migrated to

the United States, then estimating the four-year high school graduation for a high school, for a state,

or for the nation from the CCD would be straightforward: simply divide the number of students who

graduated at the end of school year t by the number of students who first enrolled at the beginning of

school year, t-3. Of course, many students do switch public schools, some move between public and


5
 See Heckman, Humphries, LaFontaine, and Rodriguez (2012). In Table F-1 on page 33 of the online appendix,
Heckman and his colleagues list ten states that follow this practice.

                                                      6
    private schools, some take longer than four years to graduate, and some immigrants enter U.S. high

    schools as tenth, eleventh, or twelfth graders.

            A consequence of these varied paths through high school is that the number of ninth grade

    students in a state’s public schools in a particular year may not be an accurate estimate of the number

    of students who could graduate from the state’s public high schools three years later. A related

    problem is that the number of students enrolled in the ninth grade in a particular year may not be a

    good estimate of the number of students who first enrolled in ninth grade in that year because a

    substantial numbers of students are retained in that grade, as I later illustrate. A result is that dividing

    the number of students who graduate at the end of year t by the number of students enrolled in Grade

    9 in year t-3 underestimates the four-year graduation rate. Moreover, since the percentage of ninth

    grade students retained in grade has risen in recent decades, the bias from estimating four-year

    graduation rates using this conventional methodology has increased, especially for blacks and

    Hispanics, groups with especially high retention rates in ninth grade (Roy and Mishel, 2008).

            Analysts have developed a variety of strategies to account for these issues. For example, in

    2006, NCES reported estimates from the CCD of the percentage of high school students who

    graduated on time using a method known as the “Averaged Freshman Graduation Rate” (AFGR). It

    calculates the AFGR in year t for individual states and for the nation by dividing the number of

    graduates with regular diplomas in year t by the average number of students enrolled in Grades 8, 9,

    and 10, three, four and five years earlier.6 Roy and Mishel (2008) conclude that, although some of



6
  For a detailed explanation of the method used to calculate the AFGR, see Seastrom et al. (2006). After adopting the
AFGR method, NCES applied it to information from the CCD for earlier years. For example, the Digest of Education
Statistics 2009 reports estimates of the AFGR for the nation for every school year from 1969/1970 to 2008/2009. See
http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d09/tables/dt09_103.asp. However, in a personal communication, Robert Stillwell
of NCES pointed out that the estimates for years prior to 2002/2003 may not be comparable with estimates beginning
in that year because of changes in the enrollment information provided in the CCD. See Swanson (2003) and Warren
and Halpern-Manners (2009) for informative discussions of alternative methods for estimating high school graduation
rates from the CCD.

                                                          7
    the methods are less biased than others, none produces accurate estimates.7 For that reason, I rely

    primarily on data sources other than the CCD in reporting patterns in high school graduation rates for

    the nation. However, because until very recently, the CCD was the only data source for estimating

    high school graduation rates for states and individual schools, I report some patterns in CCD-based

    estimates that are supported by other data.

           Although analysts argue about the merits of alternative estimators of state and national

    graduation rates based on the CCD, there is no disagreement that estimates of high school graduation

    rates for schools or districts based on the CCD are too sensitive to student mobility patterns to be

    used in accountability systems.

    2.3 Longitudinal Data Sets

           A third data source for estimating high school graduation rates for the nation as a whole is the

    set of longitudinal studies sponsored by NCES and the U.S. Department of Labor. These data sets

    track the academic progress over time of nationally representative samples of students. An important

    strength of these data sets is their ability to follow students who change schools and those who take

    more than four years to complete high school. The data sets also provide a method of estimating high

    school graduation rates for students enrolled in private schools.

           One limitation of using information from the longitudinal surveys is nonrandom sample

    attrition; individuals who drop out of school are also particularly likely not to respond to follow-up

    surveys. If these cases are simply dropped from the analysis, the results will likely overestimate high

    school graduation rates. Another limitation that also risks overestimating graduation rates is that most

    longitudinal surveys sponsored by NCES (including High School and Beyond and the Education

    Longitudinal Study of 2002) first sample adolescents when they are in Grade 10. Using data from the


7
  A recent report by a National Research Council committee (Hauser and Koenig, 2011) recommends that NCES stop
reporting high school graduation rates calculated by applying the AFGR method to data from the CCD.

                                                       8
National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988 (NELS88), which followed a large sample of

students who were eighth graders in 1988 to a final survey in 2000, Altonji and Mansfield (2011)

report that one-third of the survey participants who dropped out of high school did so before the first

follow-up survey in Grade 10. Consequently, these youth would not have been included in

longitudinal studies that begin with tenth-grade students.8

        The relatively young age at which NELS88 participants were first surveyed makes this data

set valuable for estimating high school graduation rates. However, as Heckman and LaFontaine point

out in the online appendix to their 2010 paper, the NELS88 data set also has limitations. Students

who were listed by school administrators as learning disabled or physically disabled did not

participate in the survey. Those students, who were disproportionately minority males, had higher

school dropout rates than students included in the NELS88 sample. Another limitation is that the

survey excluded institutionalized individuals, including those who were incarcerated, from the final

survey in 2000. Given that the overwhelming majority of the incarcerated are high school dropouts,

excluding them leads to an overestimate of graduation rates of minority males. However, Mishel and

Roy (2006) argue convincingly that, even for these groups, NELS88-based estimates of high school

graduation rates are more accurate than those based on the CCD.

        Administrative databases that track the academic progress of all students attending public

schools in a state provide an increasingly important source of information on high school outcomes

for students enrolled in public schools. One indication of their importance is that U.S. Department of

Education regulations (2008) specify that all states use longitudinal data on individual students to




8
  See Barton (2009) and Hauser and Koenig (2009) for informative summaries of problems with alternative
strategies for estimating high school graduation rates.

                                                       9
calculate and report four-year cohort graduation rates, disaggregated by subgroups, at the school,

district, and state level, beginning with the 2010-11 school year.9

         In many respects, the longitudinal databases developed by state departments of education are

an advance over the CCD. However, the same three atypical student paths through high school that

make it impossible to develop accurate estimates of high school graduation rates from the CCD

(student mobility, grade retention, and immigration) also make it difficult to achieve this objective

using state-specific longitudinal databases. In an attempt to make comparisons of high school

graduation rates meaningful, the U.S. Department of Education published a twenty-nine-page set of

rules in 2008 that it expects states to follow in calculating high school graduation rates from

administrative records.10 One rule is that a student who leaves the state’s public schools prior to

graduation can be dropped from the relevant cohort (the denominator in the high school graduation

calculation) only if the school or district obtains “confirmation in writing” that the student enrolled in

a private high school, a high school outside the state, emigrated, or died.11 A second requirement is

that states must report four-year graduation rates. A third is that students entering a public school,

even as late as twelfth grade, must be counted in the appropriate cohort in calculating the four-year

graduation rate. While the intent of the rules is to specify a common set of practices all states follow

in calculating high school graduation rates, there is considerable room for interpretation. For

example, does a note from a guidance counselor stating that a student told her he was enrolling in a

high school in a neighboring state count as “confirmation in writing”?

         To illustrate the importance of the rules and their interpretation, I display in columns 1–7 of

Table 1 the set of mutually exclusive possible graduation statuses six years after initially starting


9
   The incentive for states to comply with the federal reporting requirement is that, under the No Child Left Behind
legislation, states that do not do so could lose federal funding of compensatory education (Title 1) programs.
10
    U. S. Department of Education (2008).
11
   Ibid., p. 9.

                                                         10
Grade 9 for 77,190 students who entered ninth grade in a Massachusetts public school for the first

time at the beginning of the 2005/2006 school year.12 (Table 1 excludes students who joined this

cohort after the fall of 2005.) Column 1 lists the percentage of students in each demographic group

known to have graduated from a Massachusetts public high school within four years of initial entry to

Grade 9. Column 2 lists the percentage known to have taken five years to graduate. Column 3 lists the

percentage known to have taken six years to graduate. Column 4 lists the percentage known not to

have graduated. It includes known dropouts, including those who subsequently earned the GED

credential, the small number of students who completed twelfth grade but did not receive a diploma,

the small number who were still enrolled in high school six years after entering Grade 9, and the few

students who died.13 Column 5 lists the percentage of students who were recorded in the state

database as having transferred out of the state public school system. Column 6 lists the percentage of

students who disappeared from the system but did so without an exit code indicating what had

happened to them. Column 7 lists the four-year high school graduation rate of each group, calculated

using the rules specified by the U.S. Department of Education (2008).14

          The first thing to notice is that almost 10 percent of black and Hispanic youth who graduate

from Massachusetts public schools take more than four years to do so. The comparable figure for


12
   The information displayed in Table 1 is based on my analyses of a restricted database provided by the Massachusetts
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education. This is the same data base that the Department uses to generate the
information on MA high school graduation rates required under No Child Left Behind. I think John Papay for his
considerable assistance in conducting the analyses.
13
   Fewer than 1 percent of students in Massachusetts public schools completed Grade 12 but were not awarded a
diploma. According to U.S. Department of Education rules, these students must be counted as nongraduates in
estimating high school graduation rates. Fewer than 0.5 percent of students in the cohort were still enrolled in a
Massachusetts public high school six years after entering Grade 9.
14
   Owing to rounding error, some of the graduation rates reported in column 9 differ slightly from the estimates calculated
by dividing the figure in column 1 by (100- the figure in column 7). The U.S. Department of Education rules specify that
states should include late entrants to a cohort in calculating the four-year high school graduation rate. Following these
rules, the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education calculates the on-time graduation rate for
the 2009 cohort to be 81.5 percent. The reason that the estimate of the high school graduation rate that is reported in Table
2 (84.4 percent) is higher than the DESE figure is that the population on which the figures in Table 2 are based excludes
late entrants to the 2009 cohort.


                                                          11
white youths is 2 percent. Consequently, racial/ethnic gaps in six-year graduation rates are 15 percent

to 25 percent smaller than racial/ethnic gaps in four-year graduation rates.

       A second interesting aspect of Table 1 is that the percentages of black and Hispanic students

who are listed as transferring out of the Massachusetts public high schools (14.5 and 16.3 percent,

respectively) are almost twice as high as the percentage of white students listed as exiting the system

(7.9 percent). Individual schools, which are the source of data on student transfers, have strong

incentives to list students who leave without a diploma as transfers rather than as simply having

disappeared. The reason is that transfers are removed from the cohort in calculating the school’s high

school graduation rate. Consequently, estimates of high school graduation rates in a state, especially

graduation rates of black and Hispanic students, are very sensitive to the interpretation of the

“confirmation in writing” rule. For an indication of the importance of transfers, compare the estimates

of graduation rates for African-American youth in column 1 and column 7 of Table 1. The estimate in

column 7 (72.6 percent) assumes that all of the black students counted as transfers (14.5 percent of

the total number of black students) belong in that category. The estimate in column 1 (62.1 percent)

assumes that all of these students stopped going to high school after leaving the Massachusetts public

school system.

                                          [Table 1 about here]

       Another issue in using the state’s longitudinal database is how to count students who transfer

into a public school after starting high school in another jurisdiction. Among the public school

students scheduled to graduate in 2009, there were 7,517 late entrants (8.9 percent of the cohort).

Under U.S. Department of Education rules, such students must be included in estimates unless they

subsequently transfer out of the state’s public school system. Two aspects of the distribution of

outcomes for these late arrivals stand out. The first is the small percentage (46.3) who graduate from



                                                 12
Massachusetts public schools within four years of entry into Grade 9. The second is the remarkably

high percentage (29.5) listed as transferring out of the state public school system. The net effect of the

large percentage counted as transfers is that the estimated four-year graduation rate for late entrants

(65.7 percent), while still low, is 20 percentage points higher than it would be if the transfers had

been treated as dropouts. In summary, high school graduation rates are likely to be especially low in

states experiencing significant in-migration of students. Just how much in-migration lowers estimates

of high school graduation rates will depend a great deal on the classification of the large percentage

of in-migrants who leave a state’s public high schools prior to graduation.

       How researchers count students who are retained in grade, who transfer out of public schools,

and who enter Massachusetts high school late has a substantial impact on graduation rate estimates

for individual high schools. To illustrate this, Table 2 provides information on educational outcomes

for students in the 2009 graduating cohort of one large urban high school (enrollment greater than

2,000) and one quite large suburban high school (enrollment greater than 1,500) in Massachusetts.

The urban high school is located in a community with large numbers of low-income immigrants.

More than one-half of the students in the urban high school are non-white, and the majority of

students are eligible for free- or reduced-price lunch. In 2011, the number of ninth graders in the

school was 60 percent larger than the number of twelfth graders, reflecting both retention of students

in Grade 9 and a high dropout rate.

       The suburban school also has a substantial number of non-white students, more than one-

quarter of the total enrollment. However, owing to high housing prices, the percentage of students

from low-income families is modest. In 2011, fewer than 10 percent were eligible for free or reduced

price lunch. In contrast to the urban high school, the number of twelfth graders in the suburban school

was greater than the number of ninth graders.



                                                 13
         The first row of outcomes for each school in Table 2 pertains to students who entered the high

school on time as ninth graders in September 2005. The second row pertains to late entrants to the

cohort. The column entries have the same definitions as in Table 1. Given the difference in the

demographics of the student bodies, it is not surprising that the percentage of on-time graduates

among students who entered the urban school at the beginning of Grade 9 (51.3 percent) is much

lower than the percentage of four-year graduates among on-time entrants to the suburban school (84.6

percent). The same is true for late-entrants: a 32.8 percent on-time graduation rate for late entrants to

the urban school compared with a 72.7 percent rate in the suburban school. Nor perhaps is it

surprising that the percentage of the cohort in the urban school serving immigrant communities that

consists of late entrants (almost 25 percent) is approximately twice as high as the comparable

percentage of late entrants to the cohort in the suburban school.

         Most relevant to this paper is the contrast between the two schools in the ratio of transfers to

students with unknown outcomes. For example, 44.5 percent of late entrants to the urban school are

classified as having transferred. In contrast, only 1.7 percent of late entrants to the cohort in the urban

school are classified as having unknown outcomes, meaning that the student left the school prior to

graduation but the school does not know what the student did after leaving. Thus, the ratio of the

number of students classified as “transfers” to the number classified as “unknown” in the urban

school is 26 to 1. The corresponding ratio of transfers to unknown outcomes for late entrants to the

suburban school is less than 2 to 1.

         The most compelling explanation for the difference in these ratios is that the urban school

applied a much looser interpretation of the “confirmation in writing” criterion for placing students in

the transfer category than did the suburban school.15 Because the percentage of students in the 2009


15
  To examine the validity of this explanation, we looked to see whether the students reported as having transferred
to another public high school in Massachusetts appeared on the rolls of another school. The urban school reported

                                                         14
graduating cohort of the urban high school who left prior to earning a diploma is so high (45.9

percent of on-time entrants and 60.5 percent of late entrants), the strictness with which the school

applied the “confirmation in writing” rule in specifying transfers has an enormous impact on the

estimated graduation rate for the cohort.16

         In summary, the Achilles heel in developing accurate estimates of high school graduation

rates from state longitudinal databases is the classification of students who disappear from one public

high school and do not enroll in another public high school in the same state. States must rely on

reports from high schools to classify these students. In the absence of expensive monitoring, schools

have strong incentives to classify students who leave prior to graduation as “transfers.” To the extent

that this does not accurately represent the students’ status, this practice results in biased estimates of

high school graduation rates.17 Consequently, differences among schools, and indeed among states, in

estimated graduation rates may reflect different interpretations of the “confirmation in writing” rule

rather than differences in the success of high schools in educating students.

                                                   [Table 2 about here]

2.4 Recent Immigrants

         One other factor that influences the estimates of high school graduation rates, especially of

Hispanics, is whether recent immigrants are included in the relevant population. Among twenty- to

twenty-four-year-olds in the United States in 2010, 8.4 percent were recent immigrants (defined as

that a total of 90 students (19 percent of the total number of “transfers”) moved to another Massachusetts high
school. Only 58 of the 90 (64 percent) appeared on the rolls of another Massachusetts public high school. The
suburban high school reported that a total of 10 students (22 percent of the total number of “transfers”) moved to
another Massachusetts public high school. All ten appeared on the rolls of another high school. This pattern
supports the explanation that the urban school employed a much more looser interpretation of the “confirmation in
writing” rule than the suburban school did.
16
   The percentage of nongraduates in the cohort is calculated by subtracting from 100 the sum of the percentages of
the cohort graduating in four, five, and six years since first entering Grade 9.
17
   One way that states, including Massachusetts, are reducing the bias when high schools report students who disappear as
transferring to another public school in the state is to verify that the student does appear on the rolls of another high school
in the state. However, short of monitoring the quality of the documentation that schools use in declaring a leaving student
as a transfer to a school outside of the state, states must accept the classifications provided by individual high schools.


                                                           15
those who came to the United States after age 11). Of these, 55.8 percent were Hispanic.18 The high

school completion rate among twenty- to twenty-four -year-old Hispanics who were recent

immigrants is 48.5 percent, considerably lower than the 77.8 percent of twenty- to twenty-four-year-

old Hispanics who were not recent immigrants. In contrast, the graduation rate of recent white

immigrants of the same age is 90.0 percent, a figure higher than that for whites who are not recent

immigrants (86.3 percent).19 A consequence of this pattern is that estimates of the Hispanic-white

gap in high school graduation rates are much higher if recent immigrants are included. A corollary of

this pattern is that high school graduation rates tend to be particularly low in schools and school

districts that serve large numbers of recent Hispanic immigrants.

2.5 The GED

           A controversial question is whether to treat recipients of the GED as high school graduates.

The GED was introduced in 1942 as a means of providing a secondary school credential to veterans

who joined the military before graduating from high school. In 1947, New York was the first state to

allow school dropouts who were not veterans to earn the GED credential. In 1974, California became

the last state to offer the GED option (Heckman, Humphries, and Mader 2011).

        Whether to count GED recipients as high school graduates is controversial for three reasons.

First, average labor market outcomes for GED recipients are much closer to those of dropouts without

this credential than to those of conventional high school graduates (Cameron and Heckman, 1993;

Murnane, Willett, and Tyler, 2000). Second, the number of GED recipients increased rapidly during

the 1990s. In 2011, 433,990 Americans passed the GED examinations, a figure equal to 12 percent of



18
  My tabulations from the 2010 ACS.
19
  My tabulations from the 2010 ACS with the estimated number of GED recipients subtracted from the number of high
school graduates reported in the ACS. The high school graduation rate among recent black immigrants who were age
twenty to twenty-four in 2010 is 82.2 percent. As shown in Table 3, the high school graduation rate of black twenty- to
twenty-four-year olds in 2010 who were not recent immigrants is 78.2 percent.

                                                        16
all high school credentials issued that year.20 Third, black and Hispanic youth are particularly likely

to earn the GED credential instead of a conventional high school diploma. Among those aged twenty-

five to twenty-eight in 2008, 17.4 percent of blacks and 12.8 percent of Hispanics who had earned a

secondary school credential did so by obtaining a GED. This compares with 10.6 percent of non-

Hispanic whites.21 For all of these racial/ethnic groups, the GED is more common among those born

in the early 1980s than among those born a decade earlier.22 Consequently, estimates of trends in the

high school graduation rates of black and Hispanic youth are particularly sensitive to treatment of the

GED credential.

        The NCES counts GED recipients as high school completers in its estimates of the status

completion rate. However, it does not include GED recipients as high school graduates in its

estimates of the average freshman graduation rate for public school students.23 This is one reason that

estimates of the status completion rate (89.8 percent for those aged eighteen to twenty-four in 2009)

are considerably higher than estimates of the AFGR (75.5 percent for the 2008/2009 school year)

(Chapman et al., 2011). Another reason is that the 11 percent of U.S. teenagers who attend private

schools and the 3 percent who are home schooled are included in the population of young Americans

for which the status completion rate is estimated, but not in the population of students attending



20
   The figure on the number of Americans passing the GED examinations in 2011 comes from GED Testing Service
(2012), Table 14. The 12 percent figure is calculated by dividing the number of GED recipients by the sum of the
number of Americans passing the GED examinations and the number of high school diplomas awarded in 2011. The
number of high school diplomas awarded (3,282,200) is from Snyder and Dillow (2012), Table 111. Since 2004, this
percentage has held quite steady at 12 percent. However, as explained later in this paper, the age distribution of
individuals passing the GED examinations has changed markedly in recent years. In 2003, 36 percent of those who
passed the GED exams were 16-18 years of age. In 2011, the comparable percentage is 27 percent.
21
   My calculations using data from the NLSY97.
22
   For example, among blacks who were in Grade 8 in 1988, and consequently had been born in 1973 or 1974, 15.1
percent of those who had earned a secondary school credential by the age of twenty-six did so by obtaining the GED
credential.22 For Hispanic youth, the figure is 11.6 percent. The comparable figure for non-Hispanic white youth is
8.4 percent. These estimates are from Ingels et al. (2002), and are based on data from the National Education
Longitudinal Study of 1988.
23
   A few states, including New Jersey, count individuals who obtain a GED through in-school programs as high
school graduates, even though they have not satisfied conventional credit hour requirements.

                                                        17
public schools for which the AFGR is estimated. Both of these groups have very high graduation

rates.24

           Given that average labor market outcomes for GED recipients are closer to those of high

school dropouts lacking this credential than to conventional high school graduates, I adopt the NCES

convention of defining the high school graduation rate as the percentage of individuals in a particular

group that earned a conventional high school diploma. I also distinguish GED recipients from

“uncredentialed” high school dropouts.

                              3.       Patterns in High School Graduation Rates

           In this section, I describe six striking patterns in high school graduation rates between 1970

and 2010. I use information from two types of sources. The first consists of published reports of

graduation rates. The second consists of estimates I made using data from the decennial Censuses of

Population, the ACS, the GED Testing Service, the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY)

1979 and 1997, and a data set providing longitudinal information on school outcomes for public

school students in Massachusetts.

           Two prior studies provide valuable guidance in constructing estimates of high school

graduation rates from the census, the ACS, and GED Testing Service data. The first is a 2006 study

by Mishel and Roy that compares the strengths and limitations of estimates of graduation rates based

on different data sources. These authors also describe a method for combining data from the GED

Testing Service on the number of individuals who pass the GED battery of examinations each year

with data on educational attainments from the U.S. Census to estimate an “adjusted status completion



24
   Using data from the 2002 Education Longitudinal Study, Bozick and Lauff (2007) report that the graduation rate
for students attending Catholic high schools in 2004 was 98.1 percent. The corresponding figure for students who
attended other private high schools was 96.2 percent. These estimates are probably upwardly biased because they
only include students who had not left high school prior to the timing of the baseline survey in Grade 10. To my
knowledge, there is no clear definition of high school graduation for students who are home-schooled. But
presumably, most home school students would report on household surveys that they had “graduated.”

                                                       18
rate” in which GED recipients are not included in the number of high school graduates. The second is

Heckman and LaFontaine’s 2010 paper showing that many apparent inconsistencies in the evidence

on U.S. high school graduation stem from differences across studies in the populations from which

survey samples are drawn and from differences in the definition of a high school graduate. These

authors refined the Mishel and Roy method and report adjusted status completion rates for cohorts of

Americans born from the late 1940s through the late 1970s.25

         I report Heckman and LaFontaine’s estimates of high school graduation rates for cohorts born

in the periods 1947–1950, 1951–1955, and 1956–1960. For cohorts born after these years, I estimate

graduation rates using data from the 1990 and 2000 censuses, the 2010 ACS, and micro-data supplied

by the GED Testing Service.26 In doing so, I follow the method described by Heckman and

LaFontaine (2010), including excluding recent immigrants as they did.27 For ease of exposition, I

sometimes refer to the high school graduation rate for a particular birth cohort in terms of the year

when its graduation rate was measured. For example, I refer to the graduation rate for the cohort born

between 1986 and 1990 as the graduation rate of twenty- to twenty-four-year-olds in 2010.



3.1 Stagnation of the National High School Graduation Rate Between 1970 and 2000


25
   Heckman and LaFontaine provide a lengthy online appendix to their 2010 paper that provides a detailed
explanation of their method for estimating high school graduation rates.
26
   Heckman and LaFontaine (2010) report estimates of high school graduation rates for cohorts born between 1961
and 1980. They used the tables from the annual GED Statistical Reports to estimate the number of GED recipients
within groups defined by age, race/ethnicity, and gender. However, since the Statistical Reports only report counts
by gender, by race/ethnicity, and by age group, and not, for example, separate counts for black females of a
particular age, Heckman and LaFontaine had to make a number of assumptions to generate their estimates. The
individual-specific data on GED recipients provided by the GED Testing Service allowed me to sharpen their
estimates as well as to provide estimates for cohorts born between 1981 and 1985 and between 1986 and 1990.
27
   Heckman and LaFontaine (2010) defined recent immigrants among twenty- to twenty-four-year-olds as
individuals who had immigrated within the last ten years. This meant that twenty-four-year olds in Census 2000
would have been counted as recent immigrants if they had immigrated after age fourteen while twenty-year-olds
would have been counted as recent immigrants if they had immigrated after age ten. Given that the key question is
whether recent immigrants attended U.S. schools, I defined recent immigrants among twenty- to twenty-four-year-
olds in the 1990 and 2000 Censuses(Stillwell, Sable, and Plotts 2011) and the 2010 ACS as individuals who had
immigrated when they were older than age eleven.

                                                         19
        After increasing rapidly for most of the twentieth century, the high school graduation rate,

excluding recent immigrants, peaked at about 80 percent in 1970 (Goldin and Katz, 2008). During the

next thirty years, the graduation rate stagnated or fell slightly. As shown in Table 3, the estimated

status completion rate for twenty- to twenty-four-year-olds, excluding recent immigrants, was 77.6

percent in 2000. Compositional effects account for at least 75 percent of the difference between the

estimate for 1970 and 2000.28 As illustrated in Figure 1, high school graduation rates are lower for

black and Hispanic youth than for white youth. Excluding recent immigrants, the percentage of

twenty- to twenty-four-year-olds who are black or Hispanic almost doubled between 1970 (13.9

percent) and 2000 (26.9 percent).29

                                                [Figure 1 about here]

                                                 [Table 3 about here]

3.2 Increase in the High School Graduation Rate between 2000 and 2010

        The U.S. high school graduation rate as estimated from adjusted census and ACS data

increased by 6 percentage points between 2000 and 2010.30 As illustrated in Figure 1, the rate of

increase over the decade was quite steady. The increase in the graduation rate is also evident in

estimates based on the CCD. For example, the averaged freshman graduation rate for public school

students, as reported by NCES, increased from 71.1 percent for the 1998–1999 school year to 75.5

percent for the 2008–2009 school year. The OECD estimate of the secondary school completion rate


28
   The 75 percent figure for compositional effects comes from holding constant the racial/ethnic composition of
twenty- to twenty-four-year-olds at its 1970 distribution. If the racial/ethnic composition of twenty- to twenty-four-
year-olds (excluding recent immigrants) is held constant at its distribution in 2000, then the predicted high school
graduation for 1970 is 77.2 percent, slightly lower than the estimate in 2000 (77.7 percent).
29
   I calculated these percentages from tables in the online supplement to Heckman and LaFontaine (2010). The figures
including recent immigrants are 14.6 percent in 1970 and 30.0 percent in 2000.
30
   The ACS only includes individuals in group quarters starting in 2006. For that reason, I estimated graduation rates
for twenty- to twenty-four-year-olds in 2001 through 2005 from estimates I calculated of graduation rates of twenty-
five- to twenty-nine-year olds in the ACS samples for 2006 through 2010. I used these same surveys to estimate
high school graduation rates for 2006 through 2010. In every case, the estimates are of “adjusted completion rates,”
meaning that GED recipients are not counted as high school graduates.

                                                        20
 for the United States, which is also based on the CCD, is 70 percent for 2000 and 77 percent for 2010

 (OECD, 2012).31

 3.3 Racial/Ethnic and Socioeconomic Gaps in High School Graduates Rates

         Analyses using all of the major data sets show that the high school graduation rates of black

 and Hispanic youth are substantially lower than those of white youth. For example, on the basis of

 adjusted census and ACS data (Table 3), the estimated high school graduation rates of white, black,

 and Hispanic youth born between 1986 and 1990 (86.3, 78.2, and 77.8 percent, respectively) result in

 a black-white gap of 8.1 percentage points and a Hispanic-white gap of 8.5 percentage points.

         Table 3 also shows that racial/ethnic gaps in high school graduation rates are smaller between

 groups born in the late 1980s than those born a decade earlier—even though the high school

 graduation rate of white youth born in the late 1980s is higher than a decade earlier. The reason is that

 the high school graduation rates of black and Hispanic youth born in the late 1980s are more than 10

 percentage points higher those of comparable youth born a decade earlier.

         One puzzle is that estimates of black-white and Hispanic-white gaps in graduation rates in the

 CCD do not show the recent declines that appear in adjusted census and ACS estimates. For example,

 the black-white and Hispanic-white gaps in high school graduation rates in 2008–2009, estimated by

 applying the AFGR method to the CCD, are 18.5 and 16.1 percentage points, respectively (Stillwell,

 Sable, and Plotts, 2011).32 One factor contributing to the difference in CCD-based estimates is that

 the CCD estimates four-year graduation rates. Because much larger proportions of black and

 Hispanic youth take more than four years to graduate from high school, racial/ethnic gaps in four-year


 31
    The OECD computes the secondary school graduation rate for the United States by calculating the sum of age-
 specific graduation rates (i.e., number of graduates of a specific age, as measured in the CCD, dividing by the
 population at this age).
32
   The reported four-year graduate rates for white, black, and Hispanic youth in 2008-2009 are 82.0,
63.5 and 65.9 percent, respectively.


                                                        21
graduation rates are larger than gaps in six-year graduation rates. A second factor is that the increase

in Grade 9 retention rates has been particularly great for black and Hispanic youth and, as explained

above, this results in a downward-bias in CCD-based estimates of graduation rates for these groups.

A third factor is that the population of students in the CCD includes recent immigrants who attended

public high schools. This is not the case in Table 3 results. This exclusion has a marked impact on

estimates of the size of the Hispanic-white gap given that Hispanics constitute the majority of recent

immigrants and they have a very low high school graduation rate. Evidence from nationally

representative data sets support the claim that estimates of racial/ethnic gaps in graduation rates based

on the CCD are upwardly biased. For example, the estimates from the NLSY97 of the black-white

gap and Hispanic-white gap in graduation rates among twenty-five to twenty-eight-year olds are 11.4

and 8.9 percentage points, respectively.33 These estimates are much closer to those derived from

adjusted ACS data than from those based on the CCD.

           Although they receive less attention than race-based gaps, youth from low socioeconomic

status (SES) families, as measured by the incomes and educational attainments of parents, have

considerably lower graduation rates than those from higher SES families. For example, among

eighth-grade students in 1988, the graduation rate is 31 percent lower for children in the lowest SES

quartile than children in the top quartile (Ingels et al., 2002). This pattern is troubling given the role

education plays in upward mobility.

3.4 A Gender Gap Favoring Females

           The high school graduation rate is higher for females than for males in each of the major

racial/ethnic groups, but particularly for black youth (12.2 percentage points among twenty- to

twenty-four-year-olds in 2010, as measured from adjusted ACS data). As Goldin and Katz (2008)



33
     My calculations from the NLSY97.

                                                   22
point out, the gender gap in high school graduation rates is not a new pattern. Throughout most of the

twentieth century, more females than males graduated high school.34

         During the first decade of the twenty-first century, gender gaps in graduation rates fell,

especially among Hispanics, even though graduation rates for females in all of the major racial/ethnic

group increased. The reason is that the graduation rates of males, especially Hispanics, experienced

greater increases (see Table 3). Yet even with these increases, significant gender gaps prevail,

especially among black and Hispanic youth.

         As Martha Bailey and Susan Dynarski (2011) point out, gender gaps in educational

attainments are more difficult to explain using conventional economic models than gaps based on

SES or race because males and females grow up in the same families and attend the same schools.

Nor are gender gaps unique to the United States. Among twenty-six OECD countries, the gap

favoring females was at least 4 percentage points in twenty-two of the countries in 2010, with an

average gap of 6 percentage among the reporting countries (OECD, 2012).

3.5 Concentration of the Dropout Problem in A Small Subset of High Schools

         High school dropouts tend to be concentrated in certain schools. In 2008, one-half of all high

school dropouts attended one of the 1,746 high schools with high dropout rates (in which the number

of students enrolled in twelfth grade in a particular year was less than 60 percent of the number

enrolled as ninth graders three years earlier). These schools overwhelmingly enroll black and

Hispanic students from low-income families. The majority are located in cities, but almost one-third

are in rural areas and towns, primarily in the South.35


34
   In 1920, the gap was 7 percentage points; in 1950, it was 5 points. During the next twenty years the gap narrowed,
and by 1970, the graduation rates of twenty- to twenty-four-year-old males and females were approximately equal.
However, between 1970 and 2000, the gender gap would widen again.
35
   These schools constituted 14 percent of the nation’s 12,074 public high schools enrolling at least three hundred
students. I thank Robert Balfanz for providing the number of high schools with enrollment of at least three hundred
students in 2008 and also information on the location of the high schools with very high dropout rates. Balfanz and his
colleagues base their estimates on information from the CCD. At this point, it is not possible to determine to what extent

                                                         23
3.6 Variation among States

         National trends in high school graduation rates conceal significant variation among states. For

example, the average freshman graduation rate in 2008–2009 ranged from a low of 56.3 percent in

Nevada to a high of 90.7 percent in Wisconsin. In the six years between the 2002-2003 and 2008-

2009 school years, the average freshman graduation rate rose by at least 3 percentage points in

seventeen states, and fell by at least 3 points in three states. Robert Balfanz and his colleagues (2012)

conclude that the increase in twelve states between 1999 and 2009 accounted for most of the increase

in the national high school graduation rate over this period.

         Part of the variation among states in graduation rates and trends reflects variation in the

racial/ethnic composition of high school students. For example, the low graduation rate for black

youth in Mississippi in 2008-2009 (58.6 percent) had a marked impact on the overall state graduation

rate because nearly one-half of all public school students are black. In contrast, the quite low

graduation rate for black youth in Wisconsin (65.3 percent) had relatively little impact on the state’s

overall graduation rate because fewer than 10 percent of the state’s students are black. However,

much of the variation among states in high school graduation rates reflects variation in the graduation

rates of students of particular race/ethnicities. For example, the 2008-2009 high school graduation

rate for black youth was 56.4 percent in Indiana and 71.8 percent in Maryland.36



                        4.       Models of the Decision to Stay in School and Graduate




the patterns reported by Balfanz and his colleagues (2010) are sensitive to the limitations of the CCD reported in Section
2.
36
   All of the estimates of high school graduation rates reported in section 3.6 are from Stillwell, Sable, and Plotts (2011).
The estimated graduation rate for black students in Arizona in 2008-2009 (78.7 percent) was even higher than the
comparable rate in Maryland. However, the extraordinarily high year-to-year variation in the estimated overall graduation
rates for Arizona raises questions about the accuracy of the estimates in that state.


                                                          24
       Researchers from several social science disciplines have studied teenagers’ decisions about

whether to persist in high school to graduation. Sociologists tend to emphasize the roles of peer

groups and school cultures (e.g., Coleman and Hoffer, 1987). Many psychologists have examined

teenagers’ decisions from a developmental perspective, recently enriched by evidence from

neuroscience on brain development and the attraction of risk-taking during the early teenage years

(e.g., Steinberg, 2010). Ethnographers from both of these disciplines point out that for many youth,

dropping out is a process rather than an explicit decision. The process starts with irregular attendance,

followed by failed courses, and eventually to the realization that the obstacles to graduation are

overwhelming (Alexander, Entwistle, and Horsey, 1997; Lyche, 2010; Rumberger, 2011). In contrast

to these perspectives, economists typically focus on factors that affect the benefits and costs teenagers

face in deciding about whether to remain in school .

4.1 A High-School Focused Rational Investment Framework

       Most economic models posit that high school students are rational agents whose decisions

about whether to stay in school for another year depend on weighing the expected benefits and costs.

Critical variables in these models include:

   The predicted payoff over a lifetime (in terms of consumption or utility, which depends on

    income and nonpecuniary factors such as health) from completing another year of schooling,

   The opportunity cost of continuing in school for another year,

   The rate of time preference (in the absence of perfect capital markets),

   The nonmonitory cost of completing another year of schooling.

   The availability and value of alternative high school completion credentials.

       This basic analytical framework dates back to the work of Becker (1964) and Mincer (1958).

In recent decades, economists have extended it in important ways. Lang and Ruud (1986) posit that


                                                25
the student’s decision about whether to stay in school for another year depends on his or her

assessment of whether doing so will result in an additional year of completed schooling. One reason it

may not is that in many school systems failure to obtain passing grades in core subjects such as

English and mathematics results in grade retention. As I discuss in section 5, this extension is

important in reconciling the evidence on school dropout rates with evidence from compulsory

schooling studies.

        Another important extension is to model educational investments as a series of decisions that

depend on an individual’s cognitive and socioemotional skills. In a number of papers, Heckman and

colleagues do this by formulating and estimating models of sequential decisions made at each age and

grade (see Cameron and Heckman, 1998, 2001; Cunha and Heckman, 2007, 2008; Cunha, Heckman,

and Schennach, 2010; Heckman, Lochner, and Todd, 2006, 2008; and Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua,

2006).37 In these models, skills are determined by the interaction of genetic and environmental

influences and are affected by investments made at different stages of childhood. The researchers

show that investments in the early years of childhood are particularly important to the development of

skills as a result of the biology of brain development.38 Children in whom early investments are not

made reach high school lacking the skills to make regular progress toward graduation. For these

children, the probability that an additional year in school will result in an increase in educational

attainment is low, explaining why such a high percentage of students who enter high school with

weak skills drop out before graduation.

        One insight from the models developed by Heckman et al. is that to understand why a great

many students, particularly black and Hispanic students from low-income families, do not graduate

from high school, it is important to understand the factors, particularly low income and liquidity

37
   Eckstein and Wolpin (1999) also develop and estimate a sequential choice model. While the dynamic selection models
are consistent with the rational investment framework, they do not impose it.
38
   For an accessible explanation of the brain development evidence, see Nelson and Sheridan (2011).

                                                       26
constraints, that limit the investments parents can make during the first years of their children’s lives.

A second insight is that social interventions made during children’s early years that supplement the

investments parents make in their children will be more efficient than interventions made when

children are older.

        Yet another extension consists of the insight that the rational investment framework for

understanding the schooling decisions of teenagers is consistent with a market signaling model as

well as with the more conventional human capital model. For example, Betts (1998) shows that, in

the context of his market signaling model, individuals who would have dropped out of school before

graduation benefit from a policy intervention that raises the standard for high school graduation.39

Building on this work, Bedard (2001) shows that in a human capital model, expansion of access to

postsecondary education does not decrease the incentive for marginal high school students to drop out

of school. In contrast, in her market signaling model, it increases the incentive to drop out because

expansion of postsecondary education dilutes the average quality of the pool of high school graduates

who do not go to college. In turn, this reduces the earnings differential between high school graduates

and dropouts. She presents evidence supporting the relevance of the signaling model for explaining

the decisions of some teenagers to drop out of high school.

4.2 A Challenge to the Rational Investment Framework

        In the rational investment framework described above, the rate of time preference plays an

important role under the realistic assumption that teenagers face credit constraints. Conventional

economic models of investment decisions assume that the rate of time preference is constant in the

steady state. However, age-sensitive rates of time preference, especially a high rate for many

39
  As Lang (2007) explains, the critical question in understanding the consequences of an increase in high school
graduation standards concerns the responses of students who, in the absence of an increase in effort, would have
graduated under the low standards regime, but not under the high standards regime. Betts and Costrell (2001)
describe a model that contains elements of both market signaling and human capital formation. They explain that the
policy challenge is to design policies that create incentives for marginal students to increase their effort levels.

                                                        27
teenagers, could explain the apparently irrational decision to drop out of high school and later to

regret having done so. A very high rate of time preference for adolescents, especially in the presence

of peers, is consistent with recent evidence from neuroscience on the behavior of teenagers

(Steinberg, 2010). However, as Frederick, Loewenstein, and O’Donoghue point out in a paper

published in this journal in 2002, the concept of age-sensitive rates of time preference really means

that the emphasis in the conventional economics framework on long run costs and benefits does not

work well as the basis for explaining the schooling decisions of many teenagers.40 An implication is

that understanding the schooling decisions of teenagers may require especially close attention to the

social environment in which they make decisions.

4.3   A Model of Schooling Decisions with Peer Group Influences

        Drawing on insights from sociology and psychology, Akerlof and Kranton (2000, 2002)

present a model of schooling decisions in which peer group norms play an important role in

determining the nonmonetary cost of skill acquisition and school completion. In the Akerlof and

Kranton model, teenagers derive utility from their identity at the time, that is, by how they are

perceived by their social group. This, in turn, depends on the ideals of the social group and on the

extent to which an individual’s attributes and behaviors fit the ideals of the group. For individuals

whose social group is the “nerds,” their peers value time and effort devoted to acquiring academic

skills. For members of this group, the disutility of acquiring the academic skills needed to progress

toward graduation is low. For members of the “jocks” social group, athletic prowess is the valued

attribute, and the disutility from devoting time and effort to academic skill acquisition is higher.

Finally, “burnouts” value opposition to their particular school. For members of this group, the

disutility from devoting time and effort to acquiring academic skills is extremely high. Consequently,


40
  In the traditional economics framework, the investment decisions of individuals are influenced by the decisions of
others only indirectly through impacts on prices.

                                                        28
this is the group with the lowest probability that an additional year spent in school results in an

increase in the number of years of completed schooling.41

        In Akerlof and Kranton’s model, schools play an active role in determining the percentage of

students who are “burnouts,” and consequently are highly unlikely to devote considerable effort to

acquiring academic skills. They do this by conveying values, either explicitly or implicitly, that

students embrace, tolerate, or actively oppose. Schools with quite homogeneous student populations

find it relatively easy to convey a set of values that most students accept, and thus the percentage of

burnouts is low. However, with a diverse student population, any single set of values will be opposed

by a significant number of students, and this burn-out group is particularly likely to either drop out of

school or devote very little effort to fulfilling graduation requirements. As the authors explain, a

common response to this problem is to create “shopping mall” high schools, in which there is no

driving set of core values. An advantage of the shopping mall school is that almost all students can

find a way to identify with some piece of it.42 A disadvantage is that the lack of a driving mission

means that for all students except for those in the “nerd” group, there is little pressure to excel

academically. For most students, a lack of academic pressure was not a major obstacle to graduation

when requirements for obtaining the credential were low. However, it has posed more of an obstacle

in recent decades as states have responded to the weak skills of many high school graduates by

increasing course completion requirements and by introducing exit examinations in core subjects that

students must pass.

        The Akerlof and Kranton model has implications for the effectiveness of particular uses of

resources devoted to improving schooling. One is that using resources to develop a clear sense of


41
   Austen-Smith and Fryer (2005) also present a model in which peer groups influence the school-related decisions
of adolescents. In their model, many students face a two-audience signaling quandary: the behaviors that promote
academic success are the same behaviors that bring about peer-group rejection.
42
   For a rich description of the “shopping mall high school,” see Powell, Farrar, and Cohen (1985).

                                                        29
mission that students endorse will improve academic achievement and the graduation rate. A second

is that traditional uses of resources that do not address the challenge of building a community will not

make a difference. As I discuss in section 6, some of the recent evidence on the effectiveness of

alternative strategies to improve high schools is consistent with the predictions of the Akerlof and

Kranton model.

       Another perspective that emphasizes the importance of the decision-making environment is

the behavioral economics view of poverty. The relevance here is that teenagers from low-income

families are vastly overrepresented among school dropouts. Bertrand, Mullainathan, and Shafir

(2004) and Banerjee and Duflo (2011) argue that the poor are no more or less rational than more

affluent individuals. However, the constraints imposed by poverty make mistakes like irregular

school attendance more costly for low-income teenagers than for those whose parents have the

resources and knowledge to limit the consequences of poor decisions. This perspective leads the

authors to focus on situational factors that may encourage good decisions. Rapid responses by school

staff to student absences are one example. A second is the creation of small theme-based high

schools. The logic is a high school in which all students are expected to do the same work will foster

social groups in which paying attention to schoolwork is the accepted norm. In section 6 I describe

evidence supporting the value of this perspective.

                                       5. Explaining the Patterns

       There is a vast literature describing the backgrounds of students who tend to drop out of high

school. Correlated characteristics include low family income, low educational level of parents, living

in a single-parent household, minority group status, and gender. There are also many papers

describing behaviors and attributes of students that predict a relatively high probability of dropping

out of high school. They include poor attendance and low test scores in middle school, and having



                                                30
repeated a grade (see the many references in Rumberger, 2011). A smaller, but still substantial,

literature describes high schools with relatively high dropout rates (e.g., Balfanz et al., 2010).

Correlated predictors include high rates of teacher turnover and high rates of student suspensions. The

descriptive studies do not provide causal evidence to explain the stylized facts described in section 3.

The number of studies with designs that support causal inferences is vastly smaller. It is these causal

studies that I focus on here.

5.1 The Predicted Payoff Over a Lifetime from Completing Another Year of Schooling

         As illustrated in the left panel of Figure 2, the average real wages of male school dropouts and

male high school graduates have followed similar paths since 1979, declining by more than 15

percent between 1979 and 1993, and recovering about half of the loss over the subsequent sixteen

years.43 During the same three decades, the average real wage of four-year male college graduates

increased by 14 percent. The ratio of the average real wage of dropouts relative to that of terminal

high school graduates was at its peak for males in 1980 (.80) and ranged between .75 and .79 in

subsequent years. Thus, the average economic payoff to a high school diploma has risen for males in

recent decades, even without taking into account the rising option value of college enrollment that




43
  The figures in the panels of Figure 2 are based on my tabulations using the CPS Outgoing Rotation Groups 1979–2009.
The sample includes workers aged sixteen to sixty-four who were in engaged in full-time, full-year work, defined as at
least thirty-five hours per week for at least forty weeks in the year. The data are first aggregated into sex-age-education-
race/ethnicity cells (two sexes, four age groups, five education groups, and three race/ethnicity groups) using CPS sample
weights. In the classification of race/ethnicity, note that Hispanic origin takes precedence over the racial classification
where there is a conflict. The composition-adjusted mean hourly wage for each group represented in the figures is the
weighted average of the relevant cells, using a fixed set of weights equivalent to the group’s average employment share
between 1979 and 2009. In these tabulations, it was necessary to treat GED recipients as high school graduates. Because
GED recipients earn less, on average, than demographically similar conventional high school graduates, the patterns
described in the text and illustrated in the panels of Figure 2 are underestimates of the average wage differentials between
school dropouts and conventional high school graduates. In analyzing the impact of immigration on wage inequality
using Census and ACS data, Card (2009) was also compelled to treat GED recipients as high school graduates. An
interesting question is whether his conclusion that workers with less than a high school education are perfect labor market
substitutes for terminal high school graduates would be different if he had been able to distinguish GED recipients from
conventional high school graduates.

                                                         31
was available to most high school graduates but typically not to school dropouts.44 As many authors

have documented, the increase in education-related wage differentials, particularly during the 1980s,

stems to a large extent from changes in the economy that increased the demand for particular skills

during a period in which the supply of workers possessing the relevant skills grew relatively slowly

(See, e.g., Goldin and Katz, 2008; Autor, Levy, and Murnane, 2003; and Autor, Katz, and Kearney,

2008).45

        Although the real wage trends for females are slightly different, the trend in the average

payoff to high school graduation is similar, if more pronounced. As shown in the right panel of Figure

2, the average real wage of female terminal high school graduates was remarkably constant between

1979 and 1997 and then increased by approximately 10 percent over the subsequent twelve years.

The average real wage for female dropouts declined by 10 percent between 1979 and 1995, and then

recovered over the next fourteen years. The net result is that the ratio of the average real wage of

female dropouts to that of terminal high school graduates fell by 6 percentage points (from .83 to .76)

over the thirty-year period from 1979 to 2009.

        Moreover, the pattern of a declining average real wage of dropouts relative to that of terminal

high school graduates is also evident for black males and females and for Hispanic females (see

Figure 3).46 In a formal analysis that takes into account costs as well as education-related earnings

differences, Heckman, Lochner, and Todd (2006, 2008) show that the internal rate of return to high

school graduation rose between 1960 and 2000 for both white and black youth.47

                                           [Figures 2 and 3 about here]

44
   As documented in Patterson et al. (2010), about 40 percent of school dropouts who earned the GED credential in 2003
had enrolled in postsecondary education or training institutions by 2009. The vast majority had enrolled in programs
lasting no longer than two years. By 2009, fewer than 12 percent of those GED-holders who had enrolled in a
postsecondary education or training program had completed it.
45
   For a somewhat different perspective on the explanation for the wage trends, see Lemieux (2008).
46
   The one exception is Hispanic males for whom the relative wage of dropouts increased during the prior fifteen years
after dropping for the previous fifteen before that.
47
   These estimates assume a constant discount rate and no psychic costs of school attendance.

                                                       32
        A consequence of these wage trends is that, all else being equal, the high school graduation

rate should have increased during the prior three decades. So why didn’t it? One possible

explanation is that wage trends based on data from the CPS do not provide the relevant expected real

wages for adolescents on the margin of dropping out of school. In particular, many teenagers who

drop out may correctly perceive that, as a result of their low cognitive skill levels or unproductive

behavioral characteristics, they are unlikely to earn much more as a high school graduate than they

would as a dropout. The decline in the employment-to-population (EPOP) ratios for high school

dropouts aged sixteen to thirty-nine in Figure 4 is consistent with this explanation. Notice that

between 1980 and 2007, the EPOP ratio declined by 10 percentage points for male dropouts and by 3

percentage points for female dropouts.48 A result of this trend is that the average real wage of

employed high school dropouts relative to that of employed terminal high school graduates may be an

increasingly biased indicator of the economic payoff to a high school diploma for teenagers with

weak skills.49

                                               [Figure 4 about here]

        Eckstein and Wolpin (1999) present evidence from a structural model fitted with

observational data that supports this position. They show that, among white males who were in ninth

grade in the early 1980s, those who failed to graduate from high school had lower academic skills and

lower motivation (at least for school work) than those who did graduate. An explanation for the


48
   Figure 4 is based on CPS Outgoing Rotation Groups 1979-2009. The population sample includes all persons aged
sixteen to thirty-nine, excluding those in the military. The employment sample includes all persons aged sixteen to
thirty-nine who reported having worked last year, excluding those in the military. Each year depicted in the figure
represents a three-year moving average. In describing changes in the EPOP ratio, I used 2007 as the end-point rather
than 2008 to minimize the impact of the severe recession that began at the end of 2007.
49
   As Neal (2004) and Mulligan and Rubinstein (2008) have documented, trends in the labor force participation rates for
females with particular educational attainments are somewhat different from those of men. They also differ by race and
have changed over time. However, as with males, a consequence of trends in EPOP ratios for females is that changes over
time in education-related differences in the average real wages of those who work in the formal labor market may not
provide unbiased estimates of the economic payoff to high school graduation for women with weak academic skills.


                                                       33
stagnation of the high school graduation rate consistent with the Eckstein and Wolpin evidence is that

by the early 1970s, the four out of five students who entered high school with the skills and

behavioral traits necessary to benefit from a high school diploma were receiving one. The one in five

teenagers with very weak academic skills and/or behavioral tendencies not attractive to employers

would not benefit much from a high school diploma, at least given the current “shopping mall”

structure of most American public high schools.

        Evidence that could challenge the Eckstein and Wolpin explanation comes from studies

showing that compulsory school laws requiring adolescents to stay in school longer than they desired

resulted in substantial increases in their lifetime earnings. For example, Angrist and Krueger (1991),

Acemoglu and Angrist (2001), and Oreopoulos (2007) find that that the labor-market payoff to

adolescents compelled to remain in school for an additional year and who consequently complete an

additional year of schooling is approximately 10 percent. Of particular relevance, Oreopoulos (2009)

takes advantage of relatively recent changes in compulsory school laws in states to estimate the

causal impact of additional schooling on subsequent labor market outcomes. He finds that completing

an additional year of schooling lowers the probability of subsequent unemployment by 2.2 percentage

points and increases weekly earnings by 10.8 percent for white youth. Thus, the evidence indicates

that completing additional schooling not only paid off historically for adolescents on the margin of

dropping out of school, but also for those in recent decades as well.50

        One way to reconcile the Eckstein and Wolpin view is to recognize that the results of the

compulsory schooling studies are estimates of local average treatment effects that pertain to

individuals who completed more years of schooling as a result of the laws. The estimates do not

provide information on the benefits of remaining in school for students who do not increase their


50
  The compulsory schooling studies based on data from the middle decades of the twentieth century do not differentiate
by racial/ethnic group.

                                                       34
years of completed schooling even though the law compels them to remain in school for an additional

year. This is the case for students who fail to pass the core courses required to progress to the next

grade level. Oreopoulos (2009) documents that this pattern is particularly prevalent for black youth.

Although laws compelling sixteen-year-olds to remain in school for an additional year increased by

0.16 years the average number of years of schooling that white teenagers complete, they had no

impact on the number of years of schooling black teenagers completed.

         I illustrate these patterns with data from Massachusetts. As indicated in Table 4, 21 percent of

black students and 24 percent of Hispanic students who first entered ninth grade in a Massachusetts

public high school in the 2005-2006 school year repeated the grade. This compares with 6 percent of

white students.51 The percentage of repeaters in each racial/ethnic group is higher for males than for

females, with the differences by gender particularly large for black and Hispanic students.

         Table 4 illustrates that for substantial fractions of black, Hispanic, or low-income urban

students, enrolling in high school for an additional year does not result in an additional year of

completed schooling. The results of the compulsory schooling studies do not pertain to these

students.52 As indicated in column 2 of Table 2, only 35 percent of ninth grade repeaters in

Massachusetts graduate from a public high school in the state within six years of entering high

school.53 Thus, for students compelled to repeat Grade 9, the decision to drop out of high school may

reflect a realization that further attendance is unlikely to result in a high school diploma.


51
   The definition of “repeated grade 9” is that the student was registered in grade 9 in the fall term after the student was
initially in grade 9. Some of these students were able to move to grade 10 status by the spring term.
52
   One way to understand this point is to view the increase in the minimum school-leaving age as an exogenous
event designed to increase the number of years of schooling students complete. Students who do not increase their
number of years of completed schooling when subject to the law are noncompliers with the exogenous treatment.
Consequently, the local average treatment effect estimate of the impact of an additional year of completed schooling
on subsequent labor market earnings does not pertain to them.
53
   Twenty-seven percent of the students who repeated Grade 9 in a Massachusetts public high school were listed in
the state database as “transferring” out of the state public school system. Some of these students may have graduated
from high school in another state or country. However, as explained in section 2, schools have an incentive to report
students who leave their school without a diploma as “transfers.”

                                                           35
                                                  [Table 4 about here]

           In summary, one important reason the high school graduation rate did not increase during the

final three decades of the twentieth century despite a high internal rate of return to a high school

diploma is that a substantial proportion of students reach high school without the skills needed to

complete graduation requirements. As I explain below, increases in graduation requirements

contribute to the nonmonetary cost of earning a high school diploma, particularly for teenagers

entering high school with weak skills. I also return below to the puzzling question of why, after thirty

years of relative stagnation, the high school graduation rate increased during the first decade of the

twenty-first century.

           To examine the extent to which black-white and Hispanic-white gaps in graduation rates can

be accounted for by attributes of individuals measured prior to high school entry, I fit a set of linear

probability models predicting high school graduation. The baseline model includes race/ethnicity and

gender indicators and their interactions as covariates. I then sequentially add indicators of family

socioeconomic status, Grade 8 attendance, and scores on the Grade 8 state mathematics test as

covariates. As illustrated in Figure 5, the results show that racial/ethnic gaps in graduation rates can

to a large extent be accounted for by skills, behaviors, and family attributes measured when youth

were in eighth grade. For example, consider the 14.6 percentage point gap between the six-year high

school graduation rates of black males and white males who first entered ninth grade in a

Massachusetts public school in September 2005.54 Controlling for low family-income status as

indicated by eligibility for a free or reduced price lunch reduces the magnitude of the gap to 10.4

percentage points. Adding a control for Grade 8 attendance reduces the gap to 8.6 points. Finally,

adding a control for the Grade 8 mathematics score reduces the gap to 4.3 percentage points. Thus,

the three control variables account for 71 percent of the gap in graduation rates between black and
54
     The sample is restricted to students who took the Massachusetts grade 8 mathematics examination.

                                                          36
white males. Among females, the three control variables play an even larger role, accounting for all

of the black-white gap in six-year graduation rates. The same three control variables account for 56

percent of the 20.6 percentage point gap between Hispanic and white males, and 71 percent of the

16.2 percentage point gap between Hispanic and white females. The pattern illustrated in Figure 5 is

consistent with the argument made by O’Neill (1990), Neal and Johnson (1996) and Heckman (2011)

that differences in childhood investments play a major role in accounting for racial/ethnic gaps in

educational attainments and labor market outcomes.

                                              [Figure 5 about here]

       There is little question that racial discrimination plays a much smaller role today in explaining

differences in labor market outcomes between white and non-white workers than it did fifty years

ago. However, Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004) present recent evidence of labor market

discrimination against black job applicants. By reducing incentives for black youth to acquire skills

and educational credentials, labor market discrimination may contribute to the black-white gap in

high school graduation rates. However, its role is modest compared with that of differences in skills

evident as early as the beginning of kindergarten.

       Recent papers provide a different, but related explanation for the large gender gap in high

school graduation rates among blacks and Hispanics. Changes in judicial policies, particularly those

related to treatment of drug offenses, have led to a large increase in the incarceration rate of minority

males (Alexander, 2012). To my knowledge, there is no causal evidence on how this disturbing trend

affected the high school graduation rate of minority males and their children. However, Mechoulan

(2011) and Charles and Luoh (2010) present evidence that one of the responses of black and Hispanic

females to the judicial policies that reduced the number of marriageable men has been to increase

their educational attainments.



                                                 37
         Evans, Garthwaite, and Moore (2012) provide evidence to explain why the high school

graduation rate of black males, after increasing for several decades, fell between 1986 and 1996.55

They show that the arrival of crack increased the murder rate, the incarceration rate, and the

opportunity for employment outside the formal sector for black males. All of these factors contributed

to a decline in the rate of return to schooling for black males. While crack did not disappear from

American cities by the end of the century, it ceased to have a large impact on the graduation rates of

black males because stabilization of markets reduced homicide rates markedly.56

5.2 The Opportunity Cost of Continuing in School For Another Year

         The boom in the demand for Appalachian coal in the 1970s and a subsequent large decline

during the 1980s provided substantial variation in the wages available to teenagers in that region.

Black, McKinnish, and Sanders (2005) use this natural experiment to examine the impact of

opportunity cost on high school graduation rates. They find that a 10 percent decrease in the earnings

of low-skilled workers increased the high school enrollment rate by 5 percent to 7 percent.

Extrapolating from these results, economic models would predict, all things equal, that the decline in

the median real hourly wage of high school dropouts between 1979 and 2000 (Figure 2) would have

increased the high school graduation rate. However, as shown in Table 3, this did not occur.

Moreover, as shown in Figure 4, EPOP rates for male high school dropouts declined over this period,

indicating that increased work effort in the formal labor market cannot explain why high school

graduation rates stagnated between 1979 and 2000.

         Nor can trends in labor market opportunities for high school dropouts explain the increase in

the high school graduation rate between 2000 and 2010. As illustrated in Figure 2, the real wage of


55
   The decline in the high school graduation rate that provides the focus of the analysis by Evans, Garthwaite, and
Moore (2012) can be seen in Table 3. Notice in that table that the high school graduate rate of the cohort of black
males born between 1976 and 1980 is lower than that of cohorts born just earlier or just later.
56
   Fryer et al. (in press) present evidence supporting the findings of Evans, Garthwaite, and Moore (2012).

                                                         38
both male and female dropouts increased during the first part of the decade. But instead of falling, the

high school graduation rate increased and continued to increase during the latter part of the decade.

The fact that the increase in the graduation rate for males and females began well before 2007 also

indicates that the deep recession that began at the end of that year cannot explain why the high school

graduation rates of twenty- to twenty-four-year-old males and females were considerably higher in

2010 than the rates for their counterparts born a decade earlier.

5.3 The Rate of Time Preference

           In the absence of access to credit markets, individuals with high rates of time preference will

find educational investments less attractive than those with lower rates of time preference who face

the same streams of expected costs and benefits. Thus, in theory, differences in the distribution of

time preferences among successive cohorts of teenagers could help explain trends in high school

graduation rates. However, to my knowledge, there is no time-series evidence on changes in the

distribution of time preference among teenagers. Consequently, evidence on time preferences could

only explain differences in high school graduation rates among groups of teenagers with different

characteristics.

           There is a little evidence from experiments on differences in rates of time preferences among

groups of teenagers with different characteristics. For example, Castillo et al. (2011) asked a large

group of eighth graders a series of questions about whether they would prefer $49 one month from

now or a larger amount seven months from now. The responses indicate that black teenagers have

higher rates of time preference than white teenagers, and that boys have higher rates than girls.57

These authors also show that students with high estimated rates of time discount were more likely to

be sent to the school office for a disciplinary infraction over the next year than students with lower


57
     Bettinger and Slonim (2007) also report that boys have higher rates of time preference, on average, than girls.


                                                            39
rates of time discount. This is relevant because disciplinary infractions are negative predictors of the

probability of high school graduation. Thus, the evidence presented by Castillo and his colleagues is

consistent with the argument that differences in time preferences explain at least part of the difference

between the high school graduation rates of black and white teenagers and those of male and females.

       Lang and Ruud (1986) attempt to evaluate how important differences in time preference are in

explaining the black-white gap in high school graduation rates relative to differences in perceived

costs and benefits. Like Castillo and his colleagues, Lang and Ruud find higher rates of time

preference for black teenagers, but these higher rates do not explain educational attainment

differences. Instead, the attainment difference stems primarily from the longer time it takes for black

students to complete high school.

       Although theoretically interesting, the distinction between differences in rates of time

preferences and nonmonetary costs of acquiring a high school diploma may not be substantively

important in explaining the black-white educational attainment gap. The reason is that, as Becker and

Mulligan (1997) demonstrate, rates of time preferences are endogenous. Seen from this perspective,

the high rates of time preference of black children, who tend to grow up in lower-income families

than white children, are likely to stem from lower investments in their skill development during the

early childhood years (Heckman 2008, 2011).

       Recent research also sheds light on the role parental investments play in explaining gender

gaps in socioemotional skills, rates of time preference, and high school graduation rates. Bertrand and

Pan (2013) document that boys have lower levels of socioemotional skills than girls as fifth graders.

Most notably, their teachers are more likely to report that boys exhibit “externalizing problems,”

reflected in fighting, getting angry, or disturbing classroom activities. Boys are also much more likely

than girls to be suspended from school as eighth graders. While Bertrand and Pan’s data do not allow



                                                 40
them to examine whether children who exhibit externalizing problems have a lower probability of

graduating from high school, other studies document that this is the case (Castillo et al., 2011).

        Bertrand and Pan (2013) show that gender differences in externalizing problems are much

greater among children raised in single-parent families than those in two-parent families. They

document that boys in one-parent families (almost all of which are female-headed) receive less and

lower-quality parental supports than girls raised in single-parent families. They also find that boys’

noncognitive development (including the incidence of externalizing problems) is much more sensitive

to the level and quality of parental inputs than girls’. Bertrand and Pan (2013) also shed some light on

the reasons gender gaps in high school graduation rates are larger among black youth, and to a lesser

extent among Hispanics, than among whites. In 2009, only 37 percent of blacks under age eighteen

lived in families with both of their parents. The comparable figures for Hispanic and white children

are 67 and 75 percent, respectively (Kreider and Ellis, 2011). Of course, this pattern raises the

difficult and important question of why only a minority of black children in the U.S. grow up in

families with both of their parents.

5.4 The Nonmonetary Cost of Completing Another Year of Schooling

        Measures of cognitive skills and behavior measured as early as age five predict the probability

that children will graduate from high school.58 This pattern indicates that differences in children’s

early experiences may account for patterns in high school graduation rates by influencing the

nonmonetary costs students face in completing high school graduation requirements. Several studies

show that in utero shocks affect children’s intellectual development with consequences for

educational attainments. For example, Almond, Edlund, and Palme (2009) show that in utero

exposure to radiation from the Chernobyl disaster affected the cognitive skills of Swedish children

 58
   See Appendix Table 3.A9 in the online appendix to Duncan and Magnuson (2011). For other evidence on the
 same topic, see McLeod and Kaiser (2004).


                                                     41
and the probability that they graduated from high school, with the effects concentrated on children

whose parents had relatively low levels of educational attainments. Almond and Currie (2011)

summarize other evidence on the effects of in utero shocks on children’s development, pointing out

that the effects are greatest for children from relatively low-income families, perhaps because they

lack the resources to make compensatory investments in children whose skill development lags.

         Several studies show that the cognitive and non-cognitive skills of black and Hispanic

children measured at the beginning of kindergarten are lower, on average, than those of white

children. The skill gaps stem to a considerable extent from differences in parental investments during

early childhood (Cunha and Heckman, 2008; Cunha, Heckman and Schennach, 2010; Cunha et al.,

2006; Fryer and Levitt, 2004). The evidence on whether black-white gaps in reading and math skills

change during the elementary school years and the role of school quality in explaining trends is age-

and grade-dependent. Fryer and Levitt (2006) report that black-white skill gaps widen between

kindergarten and Grade 3. However, differences in school quality cannot account for the growth.

Hanushek and Rivkin (2009) and Clotfelter, Ladd, and Vigdor (2009) report that black-white gaps

widen between Grades 3 and 8 among children who start school with relatively high achievement.

Hanushek and Rivkin (2009) report that differences in teacher quality and peer group composition

account for a large part of the increase.59

         Studies examining the effects of court-ordered desegregation also indicate the importance of

school quality. Using different data sets, Guryan (2004) and Johnson (2011) show that court-ordered

school segregation plans implemented during the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s that sent students of color

to better public schools increased their high school graduation rates. Lutz (2011) shows that the

termination of court-mandated desegregation orders in school districts outside of the South resulted in


59
 Bond and Lang (in press) show that trends in black-white skills gaps can be quite sensitive to the metric used in
measuring children’s skills.

                                                         42
a marked increase in the school dropout rate of black youth. Deming et al. (2011) show that for

students living in neighborhoods served by low-quality public schools in Charlotte-Mecklenburg,

North Carolina (the majority of whom were black or Hispanic), the opportunity to attend a better

middle school or high school increased the probability of high school graduation by 9 percentage

points.60 These studies provide convincing evidence that low school quality and the consequent high

cost of obtaining the knowledge and skills needed to complete core courses and pass exit

examinations are important factors contributing to the relatively low high school graduation rate of

black and Hispanic students. Indeed, this same evidence helps to explain the concentration of

dropouts among students attending a minority of the nation’s high schools.

        A more difficult question to answer is whether increases in the cost of obtaining a high school

diploma explain the stagnation of the high school graduation rate during a period in which the labor

market payoff to high school graduation increased. The evidence seems to support this proposition. In

essence, the line of reasoning has two parts: first, requirements for earning a high school diploma

have increased, and second, the increase in requirements had a negative impact on the graduation rate

of vulnerable groups. We consider the two parts in turn.

        In response to concerns that the weak skills of the U.S. labor force contributed to the slow rate

of economic growth in the decades after 1973, states took a number of actions to improve the skills of

students graduating from public high schools. Among the first of such actions was the introduction by

nineteen states of minimum competency tests for graduation. These early steps were followed by

increased course requirements and more challenging exit examinations, all of which increased the

cost of obtaining a high school diploma for students with weak academic preparation.




60
  Deming (2011) shows that the opportunity to attend a better high school in Charlotte-Mecklenburg also reduced
the number of crimes that high-risk youth committed over the next seven years.

                                                       43
       The watershed document on the quality of the nation’s public school system was A Nation at

Risk, published in 1983. The report concluded that, “the educational foundations of our society are

presently being eroded by a rising tide of mediocrity that threats our very future as a Nation and a

people” (p. 5). The authors recommended that a condition for receipt of a high school diploma should

be that students complete four years of English, and three years of mathematics, science, and social

studies, and many states complied. By the early 1990s, attempts to improve public education had

morphed into the standards-based educational reform agenda, often called test-based accountability.

Although details vary greatly from state to state, standards-based educational reforms typically

include content standards that specify what students should know and be able to do, performance

standards that specify the levels of performance students should satisfy, assessments that measure the

extent to which students meet performance standards, and incentives for students and educators to

meet the standards. One consequence of test-based accountability is that in the 2011-2012 school

year, 70 percent of all public high school students had to pass at least one exit examination to obtain a

high school diploma (McIntosh, 2012).

       The second part of the line of reasoning is that increases in high school graduation

requirements reduced the high school graduation rates of vulnerable groups. This has proved difficult

to demonstrate convincingly for four reasons. First, the exit examinations that states introduced vary

enormously in difficulty. Consequently, it is likely that the impact of their introduction varies.

Second, states vary substantially in the extent to which they bolstered resources to improve

instruction and support for students who either failed a core course or an exit examination or whose

low prior achievement put them at risk of failure. Third, in some states, including Massachusetts,

local districts specify the courses that must be passed; many have raised the requirements.

Consequently, state requirements do not accurately reflect graduation requirements in individual



                                                 44
school districts. Fourth, the accuracy of available information on high school graduation rates varies

among states and among data sources for reasons described in Section 2. Given this variation among

states, it is not surprising that the evidence on impacts is not completely consistent, even among

studies with plausible identification strategies.

       Although not without exceptions, the evidence indicates generally that increased graduation

requirements have reduced high school graduation rates among low-achieving students (including

those with learning disabilities), students of color, and urban low-income students. For example,

Jacob (2001) and Bishop et al. (2001) find that increased requirements reduced high school

graduation rates of low-achieving students by 6 to 7 percent. Dee and Jacob (2007) also report

negative, albeit considerably smaller, impacts of minimum competency tests on the high school

graduation rates of particular disadvantaged groups.

       The pattern is somewhat stronger, although again with some exceptions, on the impacts of

more difficult standards-based exit examinations that states have adopted during the last two decades.

Reardon and Kurlaender (2009) and Reardon et al. (2010) use data on three cohorts of students from

four large California school districts to examine these impacts and find that the introduction of exit

examinations reduced high school graduation rates by approximately 4 percentage points, with effects

concentrated among low-achieving students, minority students, and English language learners.

Warren, Jenkins, and Kulick (2006) and Dee and Jacob (2007) report that exit exam requirements

reduced high school graduation rates by about 2 percentage points, with larger effects in states with

more difficult examinations, and with effects concentrated among black students and among students

in districts with large percentages of students of color.

       The quality of the evidence is especially weak on the impact that increases in course

completion requirements have on high school graduation rates. One reason is that in at least some



                                                    45
states, school districts have subverted the intention of the policy by introducing relatively

undemanding courses. Nonetheless, Lillard and DeCicca (2001) estimate that a one standard

deviation increase in course graduation requirements increased the population of school dropouts in

1990 by 3 to 7 percent.61

          Given the focus of this paper, I describe the evidence bearing on how increases in graduation

requirements have affected high school graduation rates. However, it is important to keep in mind

that states increased high graduation requirements and introduced other aspects of standards-based

educational reforms in order to improve the quality of education students receive and to make a high

school diploma a stronger signal of skill mastery. An assessment of the benefits and costs of these

controversial educational reforms goes beyond the scope of this paper, and in any case would need to

be state-specific. Nonetheless, it is important to remember that advocates of standards-based

educational reforms can point to accomplishments. For example, comparisons of the transcripts of

1990 and 2009 high school graduates carried out under the auspices of the National Assessment of

Educational Progress found that larger percentages of 2009 graduates from all major racial/ethnic

groups completed a more rigorous curriculum than did comparable 1990 graduates, and, on average,

2009 graduates completed about 420 more hours of course work than did 1990 graduates (Nord et al.,

2011). Moreover, many advocates of better education for disadvantaged children embrace standards-

based reforms, arguing that they are critical to setting high expectations for the achievement of all

children. They point to schools serving high concentrations of disadvantaged students that have

responded productively to the pressure of test-based accountability.62 Thus, it is in the context of a



61
   The authors use a difference-in-differences methodology to obtain their estimates. They recognize that a threat to the
validity of their results is that states that increased course requirements also took other steps such as the introduction of
exit examinations that may have reduced high school graduation rates.
62
   See Balfanz et al. (2010), and Ferguson et al. (2010) for evidence on high poverty schools that have improved their
performance under test-based accountability systems.

                                                           46
reform approach that has altered U.S. public education in many respects that I summarize the

evidence on its impact on high school graduation rates.



        In summary, my interpretation of the evidence is that increases in high school graduation

requirements during the last quarter of the twentieth century increased the nonmonetary cost of

earning a diploma for students entering high school with weak skills. By so doing, they counteracted

the increased financial payoff to a diploma and contributed to the stagnation in graduation rates over

the last decades of the twentieth century. Of course, this raises the question of why high school

graduation rates increased during the first decade of the twenty-first century, a period in which high

school graduation requirements were not reduced, and in some states were increased.63 To my

knowledge, there is no compelling explanation for this increase during the 2000s or for the especially

large increases in the graduation rates of black and Hispanic students. However, evidence from the

NAEP provides a clue. Figure 6 displays trends by racial/ethnic group between 1978 and 2008 in the

twenty-fifth percentile on mathematics and reading scores for thirteen-year-olds from the long-term

NAEP. I focus on the twenty-fifth percentile scores because students at the low end of the score

distributions are at greatest risk of not graduating from high school. (The trends in the tenth percentile

are very similar.)

         The twenty-fifth percentile mathematics score for black thirteen-year-olds was virtually

unchanged between 1986 and 1999. In contrast, between 1999 and 2008, it increased by 11 points,

approximately 0.35 standard deviations. The pattern for Hispanics is similar, with the twenty-fifth

percentile mathematics score remaining almost unchanged between 1986 and 1996, and then

increasing by 12 points (.38 standard deviations) between 1996 and 2008. The twenty-fifth percentile

63
  For example, beginning with the graduation class of 2011, high school students in New York must pass state
Regents examinations in five subjects to obtain a high school diploma. Earlier cohorts were required to pass fewer
examinations and if they did not do so, could receive a “local diploma.”

                                                        47
mathematics score for thirteen-year-old white students increased by 0.29 standard deviations over the

same period. The trends in eighth grade reading scores are somewhat different, but equally striking.

Between 1988 and 1994, the twenty-fifth percentile reading score of black eighth graders and

Hispanic eighth graders fell by 0.25 and 0.13 standard deviations, respectively. Between 1996 and

2008, the corresponding scores increased by 0.36 and 0.11 standard deviations.

       Thus, the evidence from the NAEP indicates an improvement over the last ten to fifteen years

in the reading and mathematics skills among entering freshman at the bottom of the skills

distribution. This may have translated into lower nonmonetary costs of completing high school

graduation requirements. Moreover, the impact may have been particularly great for black and

Hispanic students, given that larger shares enter ninth grade with weak mathematics skills than do

white students (Ho, 2008).

                                             [Figure 6 about here]



       It is not clear why the mathematics skills of thirteen-year-olds at the bottom of the skills

distribution have risen. It could be the result of improved schooling in Grades K–8. However, it could

also stem from improvements in the out-of-school circumstances of American children most at risk of

academic failure. For example, between 1980 and 2000, the fraction of American four-year-olds

enrolled in classroom-based preschool programs increased from one-half to two-thirds (Barnett and

Yarosz, 2007). This trend could have resulted in more children acquiring the cognitive and

socioemotional skills needed for success in high school.

       There are other trends in the circumstances of children at risk of academic failure that could

have contributed to the increase in the high school graduation rate. For example, the birth rate among

fifteen- to seventeen-year-old girls declined by 44 percent between 1990 and 2008, and by 60 percent



                                                48
among black teens (Ventura et al., 2012). Because children born to teenage mothers are prone to

develop externalizing problems that inhibit academic success, this trend could have contributed to

both the increases in the mathematics skills of thirteen-year-olds and to an increase in the high school

graduation rate. Moreover, the decline in the teenage birth rate could have reduced the number of

girls who left school to care for children and thus resulted in higher graduation rates. Yet another

salutary trend is a 47 percent decline between 1994 and 2009 in the arrest rate of teenagers for

violence-related offenses (OJJDP Statistical Briefing Book, 2011). One of several reasons this could

have contributed to an increase in the high school graduation rate is that involvement with the

criminal justice system typically results in a marked increase in absences from school (Kirk and

Sampson, 2011).

        In summary, there are many hypotheses for why the high school graduation rate of twenty- to

twenty-four-year-olds in 2010 is higher than it was in 2000, and why the increase in the graduation

rate was particularly large for blacks and Hispanics. However, to date, there is no compelling

evidence to explain this encouraging recent trend.

5.5 The Availability and Value of Alternative High School Completion Credentials

        Economic models posit that students’ responses to increases in the cost of acquiring a high

school diploma will depend on the attractiveness and cost of alternatives. The most common

alternative to a diploma is the GED. Between 1970 and 1995, the percentage of new high school

completion credentials awarded through GED certification increased from 2 percent to 17 percent.64

In 2002, after the GED Testing Service introduced a more difficult set of GED tests, the percentage

dropped to 10 percent. Since 2004, it has held steady at about 12 percent. Factors contributing to the


64
  In 2001, the percentage was 18.5 percent. However, this figure is an anomaly reflecting the especially large
number of individuals in the U.S. (648,022) who took and passed the GED examinations in the last year before the
GED Testing Service introduced more difficult GED exams. In the year 2000, 486,977 individuals in the U.S.
passed the GED exams.

                                                       49
increasing role of the GED during the last three decades of the twentieth century include reductions in

the minimum age for taking the exams, investments by states in GED preparation programs, the

creation and expansion of programs to prepare incarcerated individuals to take the GED

examinations, and increased requirements for receipt of a conventional high school diploma.

       The critical question is whether the availability of the GED leads some teenagers to drop out

of school who, in the absence of the GED, would have graduated from high school. Heckman et al.

(2012) use evidence from three natural experiments to answer this question. The first was a 1997

mandate by the GED Testing Service that all states adopt minimum passing scores on the five GED

tests; the new scores were higher than those in place in thirty-one states. Using a difference-in-

differences estimation strategy, the authors find that increases in GED minimum score requirements

reduced the dropout rate among black and Hispanic twelfth graders in affected states by 4.4 and 7

percentage points, respectively. The comparable figure for white twelfth graders was 1.4 percentage

points. The second natural experiment was the introduction of the “GED Option Program” into high

schools in Oregon in 2001. This program targets students at risk of dropping out of high school and

helps them to obtain GED certification while enrolled in high school. Heckman and colleagues show

that the introduction of the program reduced high school graduation rates by 4 percent. The third

natural experiment was the 1973 decision of the California legislature to make the GED available to

civilians in 1974. Again using a difference-in differences estimation strategy, Heckman and his

coauthors find that the GED option lowered the high school graduation rate by 3.6 percentage points

for males and by 2.6 percentage points for females.

       The reason the magnitude of the displacement effect matters is that, on average, the GED is

not a wise choice for students who could obtain a conventional high school diploma; GED recipients

do not fare as well in the labor market and in postsecondary education as conventional high school



                                                 50
graduates (Cameron and Heckman, 1993; Heckman and LaFontaine, 2006; Murnane, Willett, and

Tyler, 2000). Heckman, Humphries, and Mader (2011) point out that the poor subsequent track

record of GED recipients lies in poorer socioemotional skills such as motivation and persistence,

skills that high school graduates demonstrate by completing course requirements. In this regard,

Heckman and Rubinstein (2001) refer to the GED as a “mixed signal,” indicating to potential

employers that the recipient has mastered basic cognitive skills but is unlikely to have the

socioemotional skills that result in the regular attendance and punctuality that employers value.

       Although there is no question that, on average, GED recipients do not fare as well in the labor

market and in postsecondary education as conventional high school graduates, a different question is

whether the credential provides value to school dropouts who conclude that they cannot return to high

school and obtain a conventional diploma. The question matters because if there are benefits to

dropouts from obtaining the GED credential, they need to be weighed against displacement effects in

evaluating public policies regarding the GED. Heckman and LaFontaine (2006) report that, when

estimated in models that control for cognitive skills and that assume homogeneous effects of

educational credentials, GED recipients do not earn more than uncredentialed dropouts. Applying a

regression discontinuity identification strategy that accounts for the multiple times candidates may

take the GED tests, Jepsen, Mueser, and Troske (2010) reach the same conclusion.

       In contrast, Tyler, Murnane, and Willett (2000) find that the GED increases the earnings of

young low-skilled white dropouts by 10 percent to 19 percent. Their study uses Social Security

earnings records merged with information on GED test scores and an identification strategy that takes

advantage of differences in minimum GED passing scores across states. Their estimates pertain to

low-skilled dropouts, defined as those with cognitive skills just sufficient to obtain the GED




                                                51
credential in low standard states but not in high standard states.65 Using data from High School and

Beyond survey, Murnane, Willett, and Tyler (2000) replicate the Cameron and Heckman (1993)

finding of no effect of the GED on the earnings of recipients, when estimated in a model that controls

for cognitive skills and assumes a homogenous effect of the GED. They also replicate the finding of a

positive effect on the earnings of dropouts with low cognitive skills, when estimated in a model that

allows for heterogeneous effects by initial skill level.

         My explanation of the economic benefits of the GED credential to individuals who drop out of

school at age sixteen with weak cognitive skills and poor attitudes is informed by discussions with

teachers of GED test preparation programs. The instructors report that many such individuals enter

their programs after several years of bad labor market experiences. The participants feel they have

matured and would make better workers than they were at age sixteen, but they find it difficult to

convince employers to give them a chance. They hope that the GED credential will provide a

favorable signal. Tyler, Murnane, and Willett (2000) report that the credential does this for dropouts

with weak skills, enabling them to increase their annual earnings from an average of $9,628 to

$11,101 five years after receipt of the GED. The $11,101 earnings figure is nevertheless still well

below the poverty level for a family of three in 1995. This is consistent with the Heckman and

Rubinstein view of the GED as a “mixed signal,” one that replaced the unequivocally poor signal that

the dropouts previously carried.

         Teenagers with stronger cognitive skills leave high school for myriad reasons—for example,

they dislike school, they experience problems at home, or they are expecting a child. The modal


65
   The results reported by Jepsen, Mueser, and Troske (2010) conflict with those reported by Tyler, Murnane, and
Willett (2000). Both groups examine the impact of the GED on the subsequent earnings of individuals whose scores
on the GED examinations are just on the margin for passing. Since one of the natural experiments that Tyler and his
colleagues study takes into account the fact that some individuals retake the GED examinations, it seems unlikely
that the difference in results stems from differences in the treatment of the retaking option. One possible explanation
is that labor market conditions in Missouri, the site of the study by Jepsen and his colleagues, differ from those in
the states included in the analyses reported by Tyler et al.

                                                          52
reason they take the GED tests is to gain access to funding for postsecondary education or training.

Indeed, 43 percent of GED recipients enter college or training programs within six years of obtaining

the credential. However, only half of these return for the second semester, and very few complete a

degree program (Patterson et al., 2010). This explains why the GED credential provides little or no

economic benefit to these recipients.

        In summary, the existing evidence indicates that the availability of the GED credential does

lead some teenagers to drop out of school who otherwise would have persisted to graduation. As a

result, its increasing availability to teenagers between 1970 and 2000 contributed to the stagnation of

the high school graduation rate during a period when the economic payoff to graduation grew and the

requirements for earning a high school diploma also increased. It is possible that the introduction of

more difficult GED examinations in 2002, which resulted in a temporary decline in the number of 16-

18 year-olds obtaining the credential, contributed to the increase in the high school graduation rate

over the decade 2000-2010. However, I know of no causal evidence that this is the case.66

                        6. Increasing High School Graduation Rates: The Causal Evidence

        In this section I describe policy interventions that, based on impact evaluations with plausible

identification strategies, either increase the high school graduation rate or reduce the dropout rate of

students with particular characteristics. To keep the scope of this section manageable, I do not

consider interventions for which evaluations showed impacts on student test scores, but not on

graduation or dropout rates. This excludes most interventions targeted at younger children. I organize

the description by the age of children for whom the interventions are relevant.

6.1 Early Childhood Interventions


66
   The trends over the last decade in the number of 16-18 year-olds who passed the GED examinations are puzzling.
Between 2003 and 2008, the number increased steadily from 137,619 to 160, 143. Since 2008, the number has declined
steadily, falling to 116,309 in 2011.


                                                      53
        As Nelson and Sheridan (2011) explain, essential properties of most of the brain’s architecture

are established very early in life by genes, experiences, and their interactions. For this reason, policy

interventions aimed at enriching the early experiences of economically disadvantaged children may

be particularly effective in helping them to develop the cognitive and socioemotional skills necessary

to succeed in school and in later life. Evidence from small model preschool education programs,

including Perry Preschool and the Abecederian programs, indicate positive impacts on high school

graduation rates for females.67 However, the question remains whether preschool education programs

implemented at large scale would also have long-term benefits for economically disadvantaged

children, including an increase in the probability of high school graduation.

        Evidence from the Child-Parent Center Education (CPC) program is encouraging. Since 1967,

this program has provided intensive education and family-support services to children aged three to

nine from low-income, primarily black families in Chicago. An evaluation of the CPC program finds

that the on-time high school graduation rate for children who participated in the CPC program during

their preschool and primary school years (44.3 percent) is 7.7 percentage points higher than that of a

matched control group of children who did not participate in the CPC program. The difference is

larger, at 17.3 percentage points, for children who participated in the CPC program during both their

preschool and primary school years (Reynolds et al., 2011). The CPC program serves many more

children than the small model programs described above. For that reason, the evidence on long-term

outcomes, including high school graduation rates, is encouraging. However, the program served

children in only one city, Chicago.



67
   The impact evaluations of the Perry Preschool and the Abecedarian program did not find statistically significant,
positive impacts on educational attainments for boys. There were other long-term benefits for boys, however, especially in
crime reduction. See Heckman, Moon, Pinto, Savelyev, and Yavitz (2010) for a summary of benefits from the Perry
Preschool program.


                                                        54
         The largest publically funded program in the United States designed to improve the health and

education of very young disadvantaged children is Head Start. Introduced in 1965 as part of the Great

Society initiative, and currently serving approximately 900,000 disadvantaged children, Head Start

offers a variety of services, including preschool education and health and nutrition services. Using a

creative regression-discontinuity-based identification strategy and data from the U.S. census and from

the National Education Longitudinal Study (NELS88), Ludwig and Miller (2007) find that the offer

of Head Start to children living in the nation’s three hundred poorest counties during the first years of

the program increased the probability of high school graduation by approximately 3 percentage

points. Using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics pertaining to children born in the 1960s

and an estimation strategy that compares outcomes among siblings, Garces, Thomas, and Currie

(2002) find that participation in Head Start increases the probability of high school graduation by 20

percentage points for white children, but has no impact for black children. A possible explanation for

the differential effects by race is that black children were unable to sustain the benefits from Head

Start because they attended very low quality elementary and high schools.68

         Using data from the Children of the National Longitudinal Survey pertaining to children born

during the 1980s and the same identification strategy based on comparing outcomes for siblings,

Deming (2009) finds that participation in Head Start increases the probability of high school

graduation by 11 percentage points for males and by 13 percentage points for children of mothers

with low cognitive skills.69 A recent study by Havnes and Mogstad (2011) that focused on a very

different population finds results similar to Deming’s. These authors report that participating in

subsidized child care in formal settings in Norway during the preschool years reduces the probability

68
   Differences in the quality of the schools attended by children of different races would also explain Cascio’s (2009)
finding that the impact of the introduction of public kindergarten in states (primarily in the South) increased the high
school graduation rate of white children, but not that of black children.
69
   These estimates come from models in which GED recipients are not counted as high school graduates (see Deming
2009, pp. 126-27).

                                                          55
of dropping out of high school by 7 percentage points for children whose mothers had not graduated

from high school.

        In summary, a significant number of studies provide evidence that public investment in

improving education, health, and nutrition during the preschool years is a promising strategy for

increasing the probability that economically disadvantaged children graduate from high school.70

However, important questions remain about the intensity and quality of programs needed to improve

long-term outcomes for disadvantaged children. For example, a recent random assignment evaluation

of Head Start finds that cognitive and socioemotional outcomes at the end of first grade are not

consistently stronger for children who have participated in Head Start than for those who have not

(U.S Department of Health and Human Services, 2010). Two plausible explanations for the differing

results of this and earlier studies are, first, that the quality of alternatives to Head Start may have

improved so that the difference between the early childhood experiences of Head Start participants

and nonparticipants today is less than it was several decades ago. Second, it is possible that the

average quality and intensity of Head Start programs are much lower than those of the CPC program

in Chicago or some other public pre-school programs that have shown promising results.71

6.2 Elementary Schools

        In the mid-1980s, the Tennessee state legislature appropriated funding for a randomized

experiment to evaluate the causal impact of class size reduction on the reading and mathematics

achievement of children in the primary grades. More than 11,000 students and 1,300 teachers in 79

public schools participated in the Student/Teacher Achievement Ratio (STAR) experiment. In each

participating school, children entering kindergarten in the fall of 1985 were assigned randomly to a

70
   For a recent review of evidence on the impacts of early childhood interventions on long-term outcomes including the
probability of high school graduation, see Almond and Currie (2011). For a review of the quite discouraging evidence on
interventions designed to improve parenting practices, see Furstenberg (2011).
71
   See Gormley, Phillips, and Gayer (2008) and Weiland and Yoshikawa (in press) for promising recent evaluations
of a public pre-school program.

                                                        56
small class with thirteen to seventeen children or to a regular size class with twenty-two to twenty-

five students.72 Teachers in each school were also randomly assigned to classrooms. The research

design called for students to remain in their originally designated class type through third grade.

         Researchers have conducted follow-up studies examining the impact of the intervention on

participants’ subsequent educational attainments and, most recently, on adult labor market outcomes.

Particularly striking are the results of the analysis by Chetty and his colleagues (2011), who examine

the impact of kindergarten class size and class quality (measured by classmates' end-of-year test

scores) on long-term outcomes measured from administrative data. The authors report that children

assigned to a small kindergarten class and those assigned to a high-quality class are more likely to

attend college than those assigned to a larger or lower-quality class, and they have better adult

outcomes in general.

         Although Chetty et al. (2011) did not examine impacts of class size on high school graduation

rates, it seems likely that one of the ways that the program led to improved adult outcomes is by

increasing graduation rates. Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, one of the authors of the Chetty et al.

(2011) study, provided me with estimates of the intervention on high school graduation rates. She

finds that assignment to a small class for the first year in school increases the probability of high

school graduation by 9 percentage points (from a base of a 0.59) for black male children, and by 7

points (from a base of 0.60) for male children from low-income families (a heavily overlapping

group).73 These results are particularly striking given the racial and gender gaps in high school

graduation rates.


72
   In fact, there were three treatments in the STAR experiment: a small class, a regular-sized class with one teacher, and a
regular-sized class with one teacher and a full-time aide. However, given that there are no differences in average
outcomes between students assigned to the second and third treatments, almost all analysts have combined students in
these two treatment arms.
73
   The p value associated with this point estimate is 0.091. The corresponding point estimate of the impact of assignment
to a small class on the high school graduation rate of male children from low-income families is an increase of 7
percentage points (p=0.043). The corresponding estimates for female black children and for females from low-income

                                                          57
         In considering the substantive lessons from Chetty et al. (2011), it is important to keep two

patterns in mind. First, many of the high-quality kindergarten classes in the STAR experiment

contained the normal number of students (approximately twenty-four). Second, the magnitude of the

effect of class quality on adult outcomes is approximately the same size among children enrolled in

regular size kindergarten classes as among those enrolled in small classes. For this reason, I believe

that the critical lesson from the STAR experiment is that providing children, particularly males from

minority groups or low-income families, with a strong start in school is a powerful lever for

increasing their high school graduation rate and life chances. A second lesson implicit in the findings

of Chetty et al. (2011), although not emphasized, is that different combinations of inputs (for

example, class size, peer group composition, and teacher quality) will produce the same set of student

outcomes. Figuring out the most efficient way to provide all children, especially those from high-risk

groups, with a strong start in school is a critical policy challenge.74

         In another study that also involves linking school records with administrative data on adult

outcomes, Chetty, Friedman and Rockoff (2011) examine the impact of teacher quality, as measured

by their “value-added” in enhancing the reading and math scores of children in Grades 4-8, on

students’ long-term outcomes. They find that students assigned to high value-added teachers in any of

these grades are more likely to attend college and to have higher subsequent earnings than children

assigned to lower value-added teachers. The authors lack the data to examine impacts of teacher

value-added on student high school graduation rates. However, given that relatively few high school

dropouts enroll in college, it seems likely that the college-going results stem at least in part from

positive effects of good elementary school teaching on the probability of high school graduation.


families are not statistically different from zero. Finn, Gerber, and Boyd-Zaharias (2005) also report positive impacts of
the STAR small class treatment on high school graduation rates.
74
   Jepsen and Rivkin (2009) present evidence from California indicating that going to scale with across-the-board
class size reductions is unlikely to be the most efficient way to improve the quality of kindergarten and primary
school education provided to disadvantaged children.

                                                          58
Thus, these results indicate that providing students with effective elementary and middle school

teachers may be an important strategy for increasing high school graduation rates.75

6.3 Middle Schools

         Two studies explore whether the grade configuration of schools serving children in the years

before entry into high school affects the probability of high school graduation. Three grade

configurations are dominant: K-8 schools, junior high schools serving students in Grades 7 and 8 and

sometimes 9, and middle schools serving students in Grades 6-8. Using information from the CCD,

Bedard and Do (2005) find that moving from a system in which students change schools at the end of

Grade 6 to a system in which they change schools at the end of Grade 5 reduces the on-time high

school graduation rate by 1 percent to 3 percent. They argue that this reflects a detrimental effect on

students who are less able academically.76

         Schwerdt and West (in press) use administrative data from the Florida public schools to

examine the consequences for students of alternative grade configurations. They find that students

who attend an elementary school ending in Grade 5, and consequently change schools in Grade 6 and

again after Grade 8, have a 1.4 percentage point (14.5 percent) higher dropout rate between Grades 9

and 10 than students who attend a K-8 elementary school.77 The authors hypothesize that moving

from a school in which a particular cohort of students is the oldest to a school in which the cohort is

the youngest is a difficult experience, particularly for low-achieving students, and doing so increases

75
  The authors are very careful to point out that their study provides no guidance about efficient strategies to provide
more of the nation’s children with effective teachers.
 76
    Bedard and Do mention, but do not test, several possible mechanisms to explain why an additional year in
 elementary school is beneficial to low-achieving students. One mechanism they do not mention, but subsequent
 research supports, is that elementary school teachers teach reading skills while middle or junior high school
 teachers typically do not. Many children enter fifth grade without the reading skills to make sense of social studies
 and science texts. Thus, spending an additional year in a classroom in which teachers devote attention to reading
 instruction may help low-achieving students to acquire skills critical to their subsequent academic success. For a
 discussion of this potential mechanism, see Goldman (2012).
 77
    Schwerdt and West (in press) also report that students who change schools at the end of Grade 6 and again at the end
 of Grade 8 have a slightly higher dropout rate than students who attend K-8 schools. But the difference is not statistically
 significant.

                                                          59
the probability that they will leave school prior to high school graduation. A complementary

interpretation is that changing schools, per se, has a negative impact on children’s academic progress.

Consequently, it makes sense to minimize the number of times students have this experience.

6.4 High Schools

       Deming and colleagues (2011) examine the impact of high school quality on the probability of

high school graduation for teenagers in Charlotte-Mecklenburg, North Carolina. Their identification

strategy takes advantage of lotteries that enable winners to enroll in a public high school they choose

that is different from the one serving their local neighborhood. The majority of students who

participated in the lotteries were black and were eligible for free- or reduced-price lunch. Deming and

his colleagues find that enrolling in the public high school of their choice increases the probability of

high school graduation by 5.5 percentage points. For students living in neighborhoods served by low-

quality high schools, enrolling in their preferred high school creates a 14 percentage point increase in

the probability of graduation. One reason for these better outcomes is that students who enroll in their

preferred high school are much more likely to be “on track” in completing college-preparatory

science and mathematics classes needed for graduation. The authors also report that the impact of

high school quality on the probability of graduation is much larger for female than male students.

       The Talent Development High School Model is a whole school reform approach that focuses

on changing the experiences of students entering high school. Targeted at high schools serving high

percentages of low-achieving minority students, Talent Development places all ninth graders in

learning communities of 100 to 125 students taught by the same four or five teachers. The schedule

allows ninth graders to take double doses of mathematics and English aimed at providing the skills

needed to do high school level work. Students also take a “Freshman Seminar” designed to help them

develop study skills and to cope with personal adjustment issues. In this reform model, students then



                                                 60
move to career academies, which provide both learning communities and curriculum based on career

themes.

         An impact evaluation conducted by the research firm MDRC using an interrupted time series

approach finds that Talent Development increases the rate of on-time graduation by 8 percentage

points in the two earliest implementing schools, which were the only schools in which students were

tracked long enough to observe high school graduation rates (Kemple, Herlihy, and Smith, 2005).

However, the MDRC researchers caution that the early-adopting schools received strong support

from the program developers and also benefited from stable leadership, and that their results may not

be representative of those of other Talent Development schools in the district (although, like the

early-starting schools, the later-starting schools implementing this reform produced positive effects

on promotion rates and credits earned).78

         A high school reform initiative carried out over the last decade in New York City also shows

that high school quality makes a difference in the probability that economically disadvantaged urban

students graduate. Starting in 2002, New York City closed more than twenty large low-performing

high schools and opened more than two-hundred small schools in their place. The city stressed

innovative approaches to educating low-income urban students. The district invited stakeholders,

including groups of teachers, school reform organizations, and entrepreneurs from other sectors to

join forces in submitting proposals for new schools. Plans for involvement of community partners in

students’ education were a required part of each proposal. Winners of the design competition received

start-up funds and support for leadership development and the recruitment of strong teachers. In




78
  Evaluations showing positive impacts on outcomes in schools in which founders provided strong support are often not
replicated when the intervention is tried in other sites. For example, this pattern is present in the MDRC evaluations of
“Project Grad” and “First Things First,” two whole school reform interventions targeted at low-performing high schools.
See Snipes et al. (2006), and Quint et al. (2005).

                                                         61
addition, each school was paired with at least one intermediary organization skilled in launching new

schools.

        The New York City initiative demonstrates that new approaches to secondary education for

low-income students are possible to implement at considerable scale, even in a large urban district

widely viewed as excessively bureaucratic and resistant to change. Even more important, the results

of an impact evaluation in which the identification strategy was based on the results of lotteries that

determined access to the 105 oversubscribed small schools with no academic admission requirements,

are encouraging. The evaluation showed that enrolling in one of the 105 oversubscribed small schools

of choice increased the four-year high school graduation rate of students, the majority of whom

entered ninth grade reading well below grade level, from 59 to 68 percent.79

        The evidence on high school reforms that are effective in increasing graduation rates for

economically disadvantaged students is much too thin to provide anything like a set of blueprints for

improving secondary school education. However, it does suggest several lessons for reform efforts.

The first is the importance of providing a great deal of support and guidance to incoming ninth

graders, many of whom are anxious about their ability to function in a new school in which they are

the youngest students. Both the Schwerdt and West (in press) and the Talent Development evaluation

support this suggestion. Second, given the diverse needs and interests of teenagers, it makes sense to

create low-cost opportunities, such as the New York City small school design competition, for groups

of educators and partners to develop and implement new models for educating academically

struggling students. Third, there is promise in developing small schools that provide a focused



79
   For a description of the methodology and results of the MDRC evaluation, see Bloom, Thompson, and Unterman
(2010) and Bloom and Unterman (2012). The latter report documents that the percentage of the treatment group that
graduated from high school within five years was 7 percentage points higher than the five-year graduation rate of the
control group. This is important because evaluations of other high school interventions have shown that treatment impacts
on high school graduation rates dissipated over time as the control group caught up with the treatment group. See, for
example, Rodríguez-Planas (2012).

                                                        62
program of instruction that all students follow. This may help to develop the positive achievement

culture that Akerlof and Kranton (2000, 2002) see as critical to effective schooling. Fourth, creating

learning opportunities outside of school, such as internships in professional workplaces, may enable

students from low-income families to acquire critical cognitive and socioemotional skills and to

recognize the benefits of academic success. Evidence supporting this lesson comes from both the

evaluation of the New York City small-schools-of-choice initiative and evidence from the MDRC

evaluation of career academies.80

        A final lesson from the evidence on effective high school reforms is that increasing the

graduation rate of teenagers who enter ninth grade with weak cognitive and socioemotional skills is

extraordinarily difficult work. The evidence from the successful high school initiatives demonstrates

this lesson. While these initiatives increased graduation rates markedly, they all left a great many

students without a high school diploma. For example, more than 50 percent of the students in the

Talent Development high schools in Philadelphia failed to graduate on time. Among lottery winners

in the Charlotte-Mecklenburg schools, one quarter failed to graduate. Among students who enrolled

in a New York City small school of choice, one-quarter failed to graduate in five years. These

sobering figures underscore the importance of interventions aimed at providing young children from

low-income families with a strong start so that they enter ninth grade with the foundational skills

needed to succeed in high school.

6.5 Why Is the Evidence So Sparse?




80
  Ongoing research on the New York City small schools of choice should shed light on the extent to which learning
opportunities outside of school provided by community partners contributed to the effectiveness of these schools.
Page (2012) documents that providing greater exposure to the world of work contributed to the success of career
academies in enhancing long-run labor market earnings for participating students. I did not describe the career
academies study in this paper because students who won a lottery to enroll in a career academy did not have a higher
graduation rate than lottery losers. (Both treatment and control groups had quite high graduation rates.) Kemple
(2008) describes the results of the impact evaluation of career academies.

                                                        63
        Given the importance of education in contributing to economic growth and to

intergenerational economic mobility, increasing the high school graduation rate in the United States is

an important social objective. Yet the evidence on how to accomplish this is remarkably thin. In my

view, several factors contribute to the paucity of the evidence. First, although there are numerous

initiatives to improve the performance of schools, only a few are implemented in a manner that

supports a defensible impact evaluation. Even rarer are evaluations that follow students long enough

to assess impacts on high school graduation rates.

        Second, most impact evaluations are poorly designed. Evidence of this comes from the What

Works clearinghouse (WWC), which was created by the Institute of Education Sciences in 2002 to

evaluate evidence on the effectiveness of education programs, practices, and policies and to make its

conclusions publicly available on its website. As of October 2010, the WWC had reviewed 231

studies of dropout prevention interventions. Of these, only twenty-seven met the WWC evidence

standards, with or without reservations.81 Among evaluations of dropout prevention programs that

did meet WWC evidentiary standards, most were underpowered, and consequently could not detect

modest effects of interventions on graduation rates.

        Third, most interventions that lend themselves to strong impact evaluations are modest and

modular in nature, such as introducing an additional remedial course to improve the literacy skills of

struggling ninth graders. Such interventions are relatively easy to implement because only a few

teachers need to be trained and then assigned to teach groups of struggling students for an hour a day.

They are also relatively easy to evaluate with a random assignment design, especially when there is

excess demand for the new treatment. The problem with such modest interventions is that they do not




81
 See Institute of Education Sciences (2011) for a description of the WWC evidence standards. A staff member at the
WWC help desk provided the number of studies who met the evidence standards (October 19, 2010).

                                                       64
change the daily experiences of struggling students in any fundamental way and consequently have

little or no effect on graduation rates.

        In contrast, ambitious interventions that seek to transform the daily experiences of all teachers

and students in a high school are very difficult to implement. Although the successful school-wide

reform efforts may share common principles, like the importance of strong leadership and the

importance of changing the school culture, the details of the intervention are typically worked out

over time and tend to be somewhat idiosyncratic and difficult to replicate. The story of Brockton

High School, the largest public high school in Massachusetts, serving more than four-thousand

students, two-thirds of whom come from low-income families, illustrates this point.

        As described by Sam Dillon in the September 27, 2010, issue of the New York Times, one in

three students who attended Brockton High in the late 1990s failed to graduate. Moreover, the

graduation rate would fall if student performance did not improve because a large percentage of

Brockton High tenth graders were failing the state’s English language arts and mathematics

examinations. Beginning with those who entered Grade 9 in September 2000, Massachusetts students

needed to pass these examinations to obtain a high school diploma. (For more details, see Ferguson et

al. (2010).)

        Determined to turn the school around, a small group of teachers began meeting on Saturday

mornings to devise a plan of action. At the center of the resulting reform effort was a literacy

initiative, that engaged students in writing in every class, including gym, and all teachers would grade

student writing using a school-wide rubric. Other elements included a redesign of the teacher

evaluation system and close monitoring of student progress. Undaunted by resistance from some

teachers, the core group of reformers built support for their improvement plan over several years and

drove out the minority of teachers who did not want to participate. The reform effort led to significant



                                                 65
improvement in student performance on the state exit examinations and to increases in the graduation

rate.

        The Brockton High story is inspiring. It proves that it is possible to improve the performance

of high schools serving large percentages of low-income, low-achieving students. However, it does

not provide a blueprint for doing so. Moreover, evaluating the impact of school-wide reform efforts

like these is difficult both because it typically takes several years to define and implement the

interventions, and because it is challenging to develop compelling estimates of the counterfactual

outcomes.

        In summary, clearly defined modular interventions that are relatively easy to implement and

evaluate tend to have little or no effect on high school graduation rates because they do not alter

students’ fundamental experience of school. Whole school reform efforts show more promise.

However, they are difficult to implement and sustain, and progress is not based on implementing a

clear set of instructions. Consequently, it is difficult to define what the intervention is, and

consequently what the lessons for policy are. Typically the lessons from such school-wide reforms

are described in terms of the importance of strong leadership, improving instruction, increasing

support for students, and changing the school culture. While few educators or policymakers would

disagree with these principles, they do not lend themselves to clear guidance about what educators

should do.

        A different, although complementary approach to increasing high school graduation rates is to

alter the conditions and incentives under which educators and students operate. Examples of relevant

policies include standards-based educational reforms, charter school legislation, and the design

competition for new small high schools that New York City introduced. Such policies seem

promising to most economists because of their attention to incentives. However, evaluating their



                                                  66
impacts on high school graduation rates is difficult because the standards-based educational systems

and charter school regulations vary significantly across states, and consequently the impacts on

students and educators are likely to differ. Also, there is evidence of varied effects of particular

standards-based reform systems, with schools that have significant teaching capacity improving their

performance and other schools resorting to “drill and kill” instruction that may increase scores on

high stakes tests but does not prepare students well for life after graduation (Elmore, 2004; Supovitz,

2009).

         Fortunately, a number of advances have made it increasingly possible to conduct credible

causal evaluations of policy changes that affect whole schools, or school districts, or in some cases,

even states. These include policy interventions that assign children to treatments on the basis of

lotteries or other well-defined criteria (such as test scores), increasing openness to evaluations in

which whole schools are randomly assigned to interventions, and improvements in administrative

data collection that reduce the cost of long-term follow-ups. Nonetheless, there is still much to be

learned about the design and implementation of policies that will result in increased graduation rates

for students, especially those from economically disadvantaged backgrounds.

                                              7. Summing Up

         As stated at the beginning of this paper, the high school graduation rate in the United States

stagnated during the last three decades of the twentieth century. The explanation does not lie in a lack

of economic incentives to complete high school. To the contrary, as a result of changes in the

structure of the economy, the economic incentives increased during the 1980s and 1990s.

         At least part of the explanation for the stagnation in high school graduation rates lies in

increases in the noneconomic costs of obtaining a high school diploma that most affect students with

weak academic preparation. The catalyst for increasing high school graduation requirements was a



                                                  67
concern about the quality of the labor force, which first arose in the mid-1970s and which has

intensified. The concern led states to increase requirements for earning a high school diploma.

       An assumption implicit in state education policies is that the quality of schooling will improve

sufficiently enough to enable high school graduation rates to rise even as graduation requirements are

stiffened. Indeed, many states increased public expenditures on public education to facilitate this

improvement. However, it has proven much more difficult to improve school quality than to legislate

increases in graduation requirements. One reason is that a large percentage of the economically

disadvantaged students most affected by the increased graduation requirements enter school with

weak cognitive and socioemotional skills, which tend to trail them throughout their school careers. A

second is that economically disadvantaged students tend to be concentrated in a subset of the nation’s

schools where peer group influences hinder a positive learning environment. A third is the difficulty

in attracting skilled teachers to work in schools serving high percentages of economically

disadvantaged students. A fourth is that conventional comprehensive high schools do not engage the

interest and effort of many teenagers, especially those who enter with weak skills. A fifth is the use of

the GED option by a significant number of students, particularly black and Hispanic students, in some

cases with encouragement from high school staff.

       Increasing the high school graduation rate will require a set of complementary investments

and structural changes in the education system. Investments aimed at improving the school readiness

of economically disadvantaged children are critical, as are policies to increase the quality of teaching

in schools serving high concentrations of poor children so they do not enter ninth grade without the

skills and behaviors to succeed in high school. Finally, as Lyche (2010) concludes in a review of

factors affecting high school graduation rates in OECD countries, it seems important to create a

variety of high school options for students, including ones that provide significant experiences in



                                                68
workplace settings and clear connections between the skills students are asked to master and access to

jobs that make use of these skills.

        Analysts differ in their assessments of the promise of particular structural changes and

policies to improve educational options for economically disadvantaged students – a group with an

especially low graduation rate. Some advocate an increased role for charter schools. Others

recommend the use of vouchers to stimulate a larger role for the private sector. Others see promise in

standards-based educational reforms aimed at improving the accountability of traditional public

schools. Yet others recommend development of more secondary education programs that have a

career and technical education orientation. In my view, the evidence at this point is not clear-cut, and,

in any case, the alternatives are not mutually exclusive.

        A critical question to explore in future research is why the high school graduation rate

increased substantially during the first decade of the twenty-first century, with the increase

particularly large for black and Hispanic students. Understanding the answer to this question may be

critical to the design of policies to sustain and accelerate the increase. In addition to this central

question, my review of the evidence suggests several other questions that are important to address in

future research.

        1.      Why did the high school graduation rate increase more in some states than in others

between 2000 and 2010?

        2.      Why is there a substantial gender gap favoring females in high school graduation rates,

with the gap particularly large among black and Hispanic youth?

        3.      How will the adoption of Common Core State Standards in mathematics and English

language arts, which are significantly more academically demanding than the current standards in

most states, affect high school graduation rates?



                                                  69
       4.     How will the introduction of more difficult GED examinations that are aligned with

Common Core State Standards affect high school graduation rates?

       Learning the answers to these questions will likely shed considerable light on the extent to

which the myriad educational reforms are improving the education of the nation’s youth and

contributing to the human capital needed to fuel future economic growth.




                                               70
Table 1

Outcomes for Massachusetts public school students in graduating class of 2009 who entered ninth grade for first time in

September 2005; N = 77,190.

                                    (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)



                                                                                                                   On‐Time

                                 On‐Time         HS            HS                                                  graduate

                                 Graduate     Graduate      Graduate      Known non‐                               (U.S.DOE

Category                          (4 yrs.)    (in 5 yrs.)   (in 6 yrs.)    graduate     Transfer     Unknown         def.)

All students (N=77,910)           76.2%         2.2%          0.4%          10.8%        9.8%          0.7%          84.4%


Male (N=39,923)                   73.0%         2.8%          0.4%          12.5%        10.3%         0.9%          81.4%

Female (N=37,981)                 79.5%         1.6%          0.3%          9.0%         9.2%          0.6%          87.5%

                                                                            0.0%

African‐American (N=6,765)        62.1%         4.2%          0.8%          17.1%        14.5%         1.2%          72.6%

Asian‐American (N=3,489)          78.4%         2.0%          0.2%          6.9%         11.8%         0.7%          88.8%



                                                                 71
Hispanic (N=10,039)               54.2%         4.1%         0.9%         23.6%        16.3%         0.9%         64.8%

White (N=56,392)                  81.7%         1.6%         0.2%         8.0%         7.9%          0.6%         88.7%


Black female (N=3,280)            69.0%         2.9%         0.7%         13.1%        13.2%         1.0%         79.5%

Black male (N=3,485)              55.6%         5.4%         0.9%         20.9%        15.8%         1.4%         65.9%

Asian female (N=1,651)            81.5%         1.2%         0.0%         5.8%         10.8%         0.7%         91.4%

Asian male (N=1,837)              75.5%         2.8%         0.4%         8.0%         12.6%         0.8%         86.4%

Hispanic female (N=4,887)         59.3%         3.5%         0.7%         20.4%        15.6%         0.6%         70.3%

Hispanic male (N=5,150)           49.4%         4.7%         1.0%         26.7%        16.9%         1.2%         59.4%

White female (N=27,531)           84.2%         1.1%         0.2%         6.6%         7.4%          0.5%         91.0%

White male (N=28,859)             79.3%         2.1%         0.3%         9.3%         8.3%          0.8%         86.4%

Source: Author’s tabulations of longitudinal data provided by the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education.




                                                               72
Table 2. High school outcomes for on-time entrants and late entrants to the 2009 graduation cohort of an urban and a suburban

Massachusetts public high school.




                                      (1)           (2)              (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)                 (7)



                                                                                                                                   On‐Time HS

                                HS Graduate     HS Graduate      HS Graduate      Known Non‐                                    graduate (U.S.DOE

Category                            (4 yrs.)     (in 5 yrs.)      (in 6 yrs.)      graduate       Transfer       Unknown           definition)

Urban School

  On‐time entrants (N=984)              51.3%             2.5%             0.3%        11.1%          33.5%              1.2%                77.1%

  Late entrants (N=299)                 32.8%             5.4%             1.3%        14.3%          44.5%              1.7%                59.1%


Suburban School

  On‐time entrants (N=455)              84.6%             0.7%             0.0%            2.9%           8.6%           3.3%                92.6%

  Late entrants (N=66)                  72.7%             1.5%             3.0%            9.0%           9.1%           4.6%                80.0%




                                                                   73
Source: Author’s tabulations of longitudinal data provided by the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education.




                                                               74
Table 3: Adjusted status completion rates of twenty- to twenty-four-year-olds, by gender and race, and birth year range

                                  1946–      1951–       1956–       1961–      1966–       1971–      1976–       1981-   1986-

Year of Birth Range               1950        1955        1960       1965        1970       1975        1980       1985    1990

Year in which group was

aged 20-24                        1970        1975        1980       1985        1990       1995        2000       2005    2010

Males and Females

All Races                         80.8%      81.0%       78.6%       78.6%      78.5%       78.9%      77.6%       81.8%   83.7%

Whites                            83.8%      84.2%       81.7%       81.8%      82.0%       82.7%      81.8%       84.5%   86.3%

Blacks                            63.7%      69.1%       68.0%       69.4%      69.0%       71.6%      68.0%       75.2%   78.2%

Hispanics                         58.6%      64.6%       65.2%       59.8%      60.2%       62.4%      63.9%       74.3%   77.8%

Hispanics, including

immigrants                        56.6%      54.5%       56.8%      50.8%       51.4%       50.8%      53.3%       63.9%   71.0%

Males

All Races                         80.8%      80.6%       76.8%       76.5%      76.7%       76.2%      74.0%       78.5%   80.7%

Whites                            84.0%      83.8%       80.2%       79.9%      80.8%       80.7%      79.0%       81.9%   84.1%

Blacks                            60.9%      66.1%       66.1%       64.4%      63.8%       66.6%      61.2%       67.9%   72.0%

Hispanics                         60.0%      64.0%       64.0%       58.7%      57.7%       57.1%      59.3%       70.4%   74.0%

Hispanics, including              58.1%      54.0%       54.0%       48.3%      47.8%       45.9%      48.3%       59.8%   65.9%



                                                                     75
immigrants

Females

All Races                          80.7%      81.4%       80.5%       80.7%      80.3%       81.7%       81.2%      85.1%      86.9%

Whites                             83.6%      84.5%       83.2%       83.7%      83.3%       84.7%       84.7%      87.1%      88.6%

Blacks                             66.0%      71.5%       72.6%       73.8%      73.9%       76.1%       74.4%      81.7%      84.2%

Hispanics                          57.5%      64.4%       66.6%       61.0%      62.7%       67.8%       68.7%      78.2%      81.8%

Hispanics, including

immigrants                         55.4%      55.1%       59.0%       53.6%      55.6%       56.4%       59.3%      68.3%      76.8%



         Note: Estimates for cohorts born in years 1947-1950 to 1956-1960 are taken from Heckman and LaFontaine (2010).

         Author’s calculations for later cohorts, using information from Census 1990, 2000, American Community Survey 2010, and

         GED Testing Service data on number of individuals by race/ethnicity and age who passed GED tests in each year. Status completion

         rates of cohorts born in age ranges 1946-1950, 1956-1960, 1966-1970, 1976-1980, and 1986-1990 were estimated from data on 20-24 year-olds in

         the relevant Census year or the 2010 ACS. Staus completion rates of cohorts born in age ranges 1951-1955, 1961-1965, 1971-1975, and 1981-1985

         were estimated from data on twenty-five- to twenty-nine-year-olds in the relevant census year or the 2010 ACS. Except as noted, recent immigrants were

         excluded from the samples used in estimating the adjusted status completion rates. The estimates for all races include Asians,

         Native Americans, and other race groups not shown separately.




                                                                       76
Table 4: Percentage of Massachusetts public school students in 2009 graduation cohort who repeated

grade 9, and percentage of repeaters who graduated within six years



                                      (1)                      (2)



                                                       Percent of Grade 9

                                                         Repeaters with

                                                        Known Outcomes

                                Percent Repeating      Who Graduated in

                                Grade 9                     Six Years

All                                       9.8                 35.2


White                                     6.2                 37.2

Black                                     21.4                37.7

Hispanic                                  24.2                29.0

White



                                                                77
  Males                                  7.3                   35.8

  Females                                5.1                   39.3

Black

  Males                                 25.3                   36.5

  Females                               17.4                   39.5

Hispanic

  Males                                 27.1                   27.7

  Females                               21.2                   30.6

Urban Low-Income                        27.4                   30.2


Source: Author’s tabulations of longitudinal data provided by the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and

Secondary Education. Estimates reported in this table are based on information for students who were first-time

ninth graders in Massachusetts public schools in the 2005-2006 school year.




                                                                78
Figure 1: U.S. High School Graduation Rate for Twenty- to Twenty-four-year olds by race/ethnicity and birth cohort




90.0%

85.0%

80.0%

75.0%
                                                                                    All Races
70.0%                                                                               White
                                                                                    Black
65.0%
                                                                                    Hispanic
60.0%

55.0%

50.0%
     1940          1950         1960        1970              1980        1990
                           Approximate Cohort Birth Year




                                                         79
Sources: For birth cohorts 1946-1950 to 1956-1950, Heckman and LaFontaine (2010); for subsequent cohorts,

author’s estimation from U.S. Census, American Community Survey, and GED Testing Service data.




                                                       80
Figure 2: Real Wage Trends (2009 dollars) for High School Dropouts, Terminal High School Graduates, and Four-Year College Graduates




                                 Composition-adjusted mean hourly wages by gender
                                               Male                                                          Female
                     30




                                                                                30      25
                            25
           Mean Hourly Wage




                                                                       Mean Hourly Wage
                                                                              20
                 20




                                                                     15
                     15




                                                                                10
                     10




                                 1979   1989          1999    2009                           1979         1989          1999   2009
                                               Year                                                              Year


                                                             HSD                                    HSG
                                                             CLG



Note: HSD= high school dropout, HSG = high school graduate, CLG = four-year college graduate.

Source: Author’s tabulations from Current Population Survey MORG files. GED recipients are counted as high school graduates in the

MORG data.



                                                                                                           81
Figure 3: Trend (1980-2008) in the Ratio of the Average Real Wage of High School Dropouts to High School Graduates (including

GED recipients) by Gender and Race/Ethnicity




                                             Ratio of High School Dropout to High School Graduate
                                                         Mean Hourly Wages by Gender
                                                                   Male                                                                                 Female
                                               .92




                                                                                                                                .92
          Ratio of HSD to HSG mean hourly wage




                                                                                           Ratio of HSD to HSG mean hourly wage
                                    .87




                                                                                                                     .87
                           .82




                                                                                                            .82
                  .77




                                                                                                   .77
                               .72




                                                                                                                .72




                                                     1980   1990          2000      2008                                              1980         1990          2000   2008
                                                                   Year                                                                                   Year


                                                                                 White                                                       Hispanic
                                                                                 Black




       Source: Author’s tabulations from Current Population Survey MORG files. (To reduce random variation

       owing to small sample sizes, the real wages are expressed as three-year moving averages.)

                                                                                                                                                    82
       Figure 4: Trend (1980-2008) in the Employment to Population (EPOP) Ratio for Male and Female School Dropouts




                                           Employment to Population Rates Among High School Dropouts, By Gender
                         .6
          Employment to population rate
                .4       .3  .5




                                          1980                   1990                    2000               2008
                                                                               Year

                                                                        Male          Female




Source: Author’s tabulations from Current Population Survey MORG files. (To reduce random variation due to small sample sizes, the

EPOP ratios are expressed as three-year moving averages.)

                                                                                          83
Figure 5: Extent to Which Race-Based Gaps in High School Graduation Rates Can Be Accounted for by Differences in Low-Income

Status, Grade 8 Attendance Rates, and Grade 8 Mathematics Scores.




                      Gaps in High School Graduation
                                   Rates
                               Hispanic‐White
               Black‐White Gap      Gap
                                                                       Baseline model
                Males Females Males Females
          5
                                                                       Adding family‐income
          0                                                            indicator
         ‐5                                                            Adding grade 8
        ‐10                                                            attendance
                                                                       Adding grade 8
        ‐15
                                                                       mathematics score
        ‐20
        ‐25



                                                              84
Source: Author’s tabulations of data from Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education. Graphs based on the

coefficients of linear probability models in which the dichotomous outcome, graduated from high school within six years of entering Grade

9, was regressed, first, on a set of indicators for race/ethnicity-gender combinations. Then, sequentially, the following variables were added

to the baseline model: an indicator of family low-income status when student was in Grade 8, Grade 8 school attendance, and score on the

Grade 8 statewide standardized mathematics examination. Students who transferred from the Massachusetts public school system or for

whom information on graduation status was missing were excluded from the analysis sample.




                                                                   85
Figure 6. NAEP Long‐Term Trend Scores for Thirteen‐Year‐Olds Scoring in the Twenty‐fifth Percentile in

Mathematics and Reading, by Race




Source: Author’s tabulations of data from the NAEP.




                                                                      86
                                         Bibliography

Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua Angrist. 2001. "How Large are Human-Capital Externalities?
   Evidence from Compulsory Schooling Laws." In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000,
   edited by Ben S. Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff eds, 9-59. Volume 15. Cambridge and
   London: MIT Press.

Akerlof, George A. and Rachel E. Kranton. 2000. "Economics and Identity." Quarterly Journal
    of Economics 115 (3): 715-753.

———. 2002. "Identity and Schooling: Some Lessons for the Economics of Education." Journal
  of Economic Literature 40 (4): 1167-1201.

Alexander, Karl I., Doris R. Entwisle, and Carrie S. Horsey. 1997. "From First Grade Forward:
    Early Foundations of High School Dropout." Sociology of Education 70: 87-107.

Almond, Douglas and Janet Currie. 2011. "Human Capital Development before Age Five." In
   Handbook of Labor Economics, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card. Vol. 4,
   chapter 15. Amsterdam: North Holland.

Almond, Douglas, Lena Edlund, and Marten Palme. 2009. "Chernobyl's Subclinical Legacy:
   Prenatal Exposure to Radioactive Fallout and School Outcomes in Sweden." Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 124 (4): 1729-1772.

Altonji, Joseph G. and Richard Mansfield. 2011. "The Role of Family, School and Community
    Characteristics in Inequality in Education and Labor Market Outcomes." In Whither
    Opportunity: Growing Inequality, Schools, and Children's Life Chances, edited by Greg J.
    Duncan and Richard J. Murnane. New York: Russell Sage Foundation and Spencer
    Foundation.

Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger. 1991. "Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect
   Schooling and Earnings?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 (4): 979-1014.

Austen-Smith, David and Roland G. Fryer Jr. 2005. "An Economic Analysis of "Acting
    White."." Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (2): 551-583.

Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. 2008. "Trends in U.S. Wage
    Inequality: Revising the Revisionists." Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (2): 300-323.

Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane. 2003. "The Skill Content of Recent
    Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration." Quarterly Journal of Economics 118
    (4): 1279-1333.




                                              87
Bailey, Martha J. and Susan M. Dynarski. 2011. "Inequality in Postsecondary Education." In
    Whither Opportunity: Growing Inequality, Schools, and Children's Life Chances, edited by
    Greg J. Duncan and Richard J. Murnane. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Balfanz, Robert, John M. Bridgeland, Mary Bruce, and Joanna Hornig Fox. 2012. Building a
    Grad Nation: Progress and Challenge in Ending the High School Dropout Epidemic.
    Baltimore: Civic Enterprises Everyone Graduates Center at Johns Hopkins University.

Balfanz, Robert, John M. Bridgeland, Laura A. Moore, and Joanna Hornig Fox. 2010. Building a
    Grad Nation: Progress and Challenge in Ending the High School Dropout Epidemic.
    Washington, D.C.: America's Promise Alliance.

Banerjee, Abhijit V. and Esther Duflo. 2011. Poor Economics : A Radical Rethinking of the Way
    to Fight Global Poverty. New York: PublicAffairs.

Barnett, W. Steven and Donald J. Yarosz. 2007. Who Goes to Preschool and Why does it
    Matter?. New Brunswick, NJ: National Institute for Early Education Research.

Barton, Paul. 2009. Chasing the High School Graduation Rate: Getting the Data we Need and
    using it Right. Princeton: Educational Testing Service.

Becker, Gary S. 1964. Human Capital; a Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special
    Reference to Education,. Vol. no.80. New York,: National Bureau of Economic Research;
    distributed by Columbia University Press.

Becker, Gary S. and Casey B. Mulligan. 1997. "The Endogenous Determination of Time
    Preference." Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (3): 729-758.

Bedard, Kelly and Chau Do. 2005. "Are Middle Schools More Effective? the Impact of School
    Structure on Student Outcomes." Journal of Human Resources 40 (3): 660-682.

Bedard, Kelly. 2001. "Human Capital Versus Signaling Models: University Access and High
    School Dropouts." Journal of Political Economy 109 (4): 749-775.

Bertrand, Marianne, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Eldar Shafir. 2004. "A Behavioral-Economics
    View of Poverty." American Economic Review 94 (2): 419-423.

Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. "Are Emily and Greg More Employable
    than Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination." American
    Economic Review 94 (4): 991-1013.

Bertrand, Marianne and Jessica Pan. 2013. "The Trouble with Boys: Social in!Uences and the
    Gender Gap in Disruptive Behavior." American Economic Journal. Applied Economics 5
    (1): 1-35.




                                             88
Bettinger, Eric and Robert Slonim. 2007. "Patience among Children." Journal of Public
     Economics 91 (1-2): 343-363.

Betts, Julian R. and Robert B. Costrell. 2001. "Incentives and Equity Under Standards-Based
     Reform." In Brookings Papers on Education Policy: 2001, edited by Diane Ravitch.
     Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.

Betts, Julian R. 1998. "The Impact of Educational Standards on the Level and Distribution of
     Earnings." American Economic Review 88 (1): 266-275.

Bishop, John H., Ferran Mane, Michael Bishop, and Joan Moriarty. 2001. "The Role of End-of-
    Course Exams and Minimal Competency Exams in Standards-Based Reforms." In
    Brookings Papers in Education Policy 2001, edited by Diane Ravitch. Washington, D.C.:
    Brookings.

Black, Dan A., Terra G. McKinnish, and Seth G. Sanders. 2005. "Tight Labor Markets and the
    Demand for Education: Evidence from the Coal Boom and Bust." Industrial and Labor
    Relations Review 59 (1): 3-16.

Bloom, Howard S., Saskia Levy Thompson, and Rebecca Unterman. 2010. Transforming the
    High School Experience: How New York City's New Small Schools are Boosting Student
    Achievement and Graduation Rates. New York: MDRC.

Bloom, Howard S. and Rebecca Unterman. 2012. Sustained Positive Effects on Graduation
    Rates Produced by New York City’s Small Public High Schools of Choice. New York City:
    MDRC Policy Brief.

Bond, Timothy N. and Kevin Lang. in press. "The Evolution of the Black-White Test Score Gap
   in Grades K-3: The Fragility of Results." Review of Economics and Statistics.

Bozick, Robert and Erich Lauff. 2007. Education Longitudinal Study of 2002 (ELS:2002): A
    First Look at the Initial Postsecondary Experiences of the Sophomore Class of 2002.
    Washington, D.C.: National Center for Education Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences,
    U.S. Department of Education.

Cameron, Stephen V. and James J. Heckman. 1993. "The Nonequivalence of High School
   Equivalents." Journal of Labor Economics 11 (1): 1-47.

Cameron, Stephen V. and James J. Heckman. 2001. "The Dynamics of Educational Attainment
   for Black, Hispanic, and White Males." Journal of Political Economy 109 (3): 455-499.

———. 1998. "Life Cycle Schooling and Dynamic Selection Bias: Models and Evidence for
  Five Cohorts of American Males." Journal of Political Economy 106 (2): 262-333.

Card, David. 2009. "Richard T. Ely Lecture: Immigration and Inequality." American Economic
    Review 99 (2): 1-21.

                                               89
Cascio, Elizabeth U. 2009. Do Investments in Universal Early Education Pay Off? Long-Term
    Effects of Introducing Kindergartens into Public Schools. Cambridge, MA: working paper
    no. 14951, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Castillo, Marco, Paul J. Ferraro, Jeffrey L. Jordan, and Ragan Petrie. 2011. "The Today and
    Tomorrow of Kids: Time Preferences and Educational Outcomes of Children." Journal of
    Public Economics 95 (11-12): 1377-1385.

Chapman, Chris, Jennifer Laird, Nicole Ifill, and Angelina KewalRamani. 2011. Trends in High
    School Dropout and Completion Rates in the United States: 1972–2009. Washington DC:
    National Center for Education Statistics, U.S. Department of Education.

Charles, Kerwin Kofi and Ming Ching Luoh. 2010. "Male Incarceration, the Marriage Market,
    and Female Outcomes." Review of Economics and Statistics 92 (3): 614-627.

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hilger, Emmanuel Saez, Diane Schanzenbach, and
    Danny Yagan. 2011. "How does Your Kindergarten Classroom Affect Your Earnings?
    Evidence from Project STAR." Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (4): 1593-1660.

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Jonah H. Rockoff. 2011. The Long-Term Impacts of
    Teachers: Teacher Value-Added and Student Outcomes in Adulthood. Cambridge, MA:
    working paper no. 17699, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Clotfelter, Charles T., Helen F. Ladd, and Jacob L. Vigdor. 2009. "The Academic Achievement
    Gap in Grades 3 to 8." Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (2): 398-419.

Coleman, James S. and Thomas Hoffer. 1987. Public and Private High Schools : The Impact of
    Communities. New York: Basic Books.

Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, Lance J. Lochner, and Dimitriy V. Masterov. 2006.
   "Interpreting the Evidence on Life Cycle Skill Formation " In Handbook of the Economics
   of Education, edited by Eric A. Hanushek and Finis Welch. Vol. 1. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Cunha, Flavio, James Heckman, and Susanne Schennach. 2010. "Estimating the Technology of
   Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation." Econometrica 78 (3): 883-931.

Cunha, Flavio and James J. Heckman. 2008. "Symposium on Noncognitive Skills and their
   Development: Formulating, Identifying and Estimating the Technology of Cognitive and
   Noncognitive Skill Formation." Journal of Human Resources 43 (4): 738-782.

Cunha, Flavio and James Heckman. 2007. "The Technology of Skill Formation." American
   Economic Review 97 (2): 31-47.

Dee, Thomas S. and Brian A. Jacob. 2007. "Do High School Exit Exams Influence Educational
    Attainment Or Labor Market Performance?" In Standards-Based Reform and Children in


                                             90
    Poverty: Lessons for "no Child Left Behind" , edited by Adam Gamoran. Washington, DC:
    Brookings Institution Press.

Deming, David J. 2011. "Better Schools, Less Crime?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (4):
   2063-2115.

Deming, David, Justine S. Hastings, Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger. 2011. School
   Choice, School Quality and Academic Achievement. working paper, Harvard Graduate
   School of Education, Cambridge, MA.:.

Deming, David. 2009. "Early Childhood Intervention and Life-Cycle Skill Development:
   Evidence from Head Start." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1 (3): 111-
   134.

Dillon, Sam. 2010. "4,100 Students Prove 'Small is Better' Rule Wrong." New York Times, 1.

Duncan, Greg J. and Katherine Magnuson. 2011. "The Nature and Impact of Early Achievement
   Skills, Attention Skills, and Behavior Problems." In Whither Opportunity? Rising
   Inequality, Schools, and Children's Life Chances, edited by Greg J. Duncan and Richard J.
   Murnane, 47-70. New York: Russell Sage and Spencer Foundations.

Eckstein, Zvi and Kenneth I. Wolpin. 1999. "Why Youths Drop Out of High School: The Impact
    of Preferences, Opportunities, and Abilities." Econometrica 67 (6): 1295-1339.

Elmore, Richard F. 2004. School Reform from the Inside Out: Policy, Practice, and
   Performance. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press.

Evans, William N., Craig Garthwaite, and Timothy J. Moore. 2012. The White/Black
    Educational Gap, Stalled Progress, and the Long Term Consequences of the Emergence of
    Crack Cocaine Markets. Cambridge, MA: working paper no. 18437, National Bureau of
    Economic Research.

Ferguson, Ronald F., Sandra Hackman, Robert Hanna, and Ann Ballantine. 2010. How High
    Schools Become Exemplary: Ways that Leadership Raises Achievement and Narrows Gaps
    by Improving Instruction in 15 Public High Schools. Cambridge MA: The Achievement
    Gap Initiative at Harvard University.

Finn, Jeremy D., Susan B. Gerber, and Jayne Boyd-Zaharias. 2005. "Small Classes in the Early
    Grades, Academic Achievement, and Graduating from High School." Journal of
    Educational Psychology 97 (2): 214-223.

Frederick, Shane, George Loewenstein, and Ted O'Donoghue. 2002. "Time Discounting and
    Time Preference: A Critical Review." Journal of Economic Literature 40 (2): 351-401.

Fryer, Roland G., Jr and Steven D. Levitt. 2004. "Understanding the Black-White Test Score
    Gap in the First Two Years of School." Review of Economics and Statistics 86 (2): 447-464.

                                              91
Fryer, Roland G., Paul S. Heaton, Steven D. Levitt, and Kevin M. Murphy. in press. "Measuring
    Crack Cocaine and its Impact." Economic Inquiry.

Fryer, Roland G.,Jr and Steven D. Levitt. 2006. "The Black-White Test Score Gap through Third
    Grade." American Law and Economics Review 8 (2): 249-281.

Furstenberg, Frank F. 2011. "The Challenges of Finding Causal Links between Family
    Educational Practices and Schooling Outcomes." In Whither Opportunity? Rising
    Inequality, Schools, and Children's Life Chances, edited by Greg J. Duncan and Richard J.
    Murnane, 465-482: Russell Sage Foundation and the Spencer Foundation.

Garces, Eliana, Duncan Thomas, and Janet Currie. 2002. "Longer-Term Effects of Head Start."
    American Economic Review 92 (4): 999-1012.

GED Testing Service. 2012. 2011 Annual Statistical Report on the GED Test.

Goldin, Claudia D. and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. The Race between Education and Technology.
    Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

Goldman, Susan R. 2012. "Adolescent Literacy: Learning and Understanding Content." The
    Future of Children 22 (2): 89-116.

Gormley, William T. Jr, Deborah Phillips, and Ted Gayer. 2008. "Preschool Programs can Boost
   School Readiness." Science 320 (5884): 1723-1724.

Guryan, Jonathan. 2004. "Desegregation and Black Dropout Rates." American Economic Review
    94 (4): 919-943.

Hanushek, Eric A. and Steven G. Rivkin. 2009. "Harming the Best: How Schools Affect the
   Black–White Achievement Gap." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 28 (3): 366-
   393.

Hanushek, Eric A. and Ludger Woessmann. 2008. "The Role of Cognitive Skills in Economic
   Development." Journal of Economic Literature 46 (3): 607-668.

Hauser, Robert M. and Judy A. Koenig, eds. 2011. High School Dropout, Graduation, and
    Completion Rates: Better Data, Better Measures, Better Decisions. Washington, DC:
    National Academies Press.

Havnes, Tarjei and Magne Mogstad. 2011. "No Child Left Behind: Subsidized Child Care and
   Children's Long-Run Outcomes." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3 (2): 97-
   129.

Heckman, James J. 2011. "The American Family in Black & White: A Post-Racial Strategy for
    Improving Skills to Promote Equality." Daedalus 140 (2): 70-89.


                                              92
Heckman, James J., John E. Humphries, and Nicholas S. Mader. 2011. "The GED." In Handbook
    of the Economics of Education, edited by Eric A. Hanushek, Stephen J. Machin and Ludger
    Woessmann. Vol. 3, 423-484. Amsterdam: North Holland Elsevier.

Heckman, James J., John Eric Humphries, Paul A. LaFontaine, and Pedro L. Rodriguez. 2012.
    "Taking the Easy Way Out: How the GED Testing Program Induces Students to Drop Out."
    Journal of Labor Economics 30 (4): 495-520.

Heckman, James J. and Paul A. LaFontaine. 2010. "The American High School Graduation
    Rate:Trends and Levels." Review of Economics and Statistics 92 (2): 244-262.

Heckman, James J., Lance J. Lochner, and Petra E. Todd. 2006. "Earnings Functions, Rates of
    Return and Treatment Effects: The Mincer Equation and Beyond." In Handbook of the
    Economics of Education, edited by Eric A. Hanushek and Finis Welch. Vol. 1. Amsterdam:
    Handbook of the Economics of Education.

Heckman, James J. and Paul A. LaFontaine. 2006. "Bias-Corrected Estimates of GED Returns."
    Journal of Labor Economics 24 (3): 661-700.

Heckman, James J., Lance J. Lochner, and Petra E. Todd. 2008. "Earnings Functions and Rates
    of Return." Journal of Human Capital 2 (1): 1-31.

Heckman, James J., Seong Hyeok Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Peter A. Savelyev, and Adam Yavitz.
    2010. "The Rate of Return to the HighScope Perry Preschool Program." Journal of Public
    Economics 94 (1-2): 114-128.

Heckman, James J. and Yona Rubinstein. 2001. "The Importance of Noncognitive Skills:
    Lessons from the GED Testing Program." American Economic Review 91 (2): 145-149.

Heckman, James J. 2008. "Schools, Skills, and Synapses." Economic Inquiry 46 (3): 289-324.

Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua. 2006. "The Effects of Cognitive and
    Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior." Journal of Labor
    Economics 24 (3): 411-482.

Ho, Andrew D. 2008. "The Problem with “proficiency”: Limitations of Statistics and Policy
    Under no Child Left Behind." Educational Researcher 37 (6): 351-360.

Ingels, Steven J., Thomas R. Curtin, Philip Kaufman, Martha N. Alt, and Xianglei Chen. 2002.
    Coming of Age in the 1990s: The Eighth-Grade Class of 1988 12 Years Later. Washington,
    DC: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics.

Institute of Education Sciences. 2011. What Works Clearinghouse: Procedures and Standards
     Handbook (Version 2.1). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education.




                                             93
Jacob, Brian A. 2001. "Getting Tough? the Impact of High School Graduation Exams."
    Educational Evaluation & Policy Analysis 23 (2): 99-121.

Jepsen, Christopher, Peter Mueser, and Kenneth Troske. 2010. "Labor-Market Returns to the
    GED using Regression Discontinuity Analysis." Paper Presented at the November 2010
    Meetings of the Association of Public Policy Analysis and Management.

Jepsen, Christopher and Steven Rivkin. 2009. "Class Size Reduction and Student Achievement:
    The Potential Tradeoff between Teacher Quality and Class Size." Journal of Human
    Resources 44 (1): 223-250.

Johnson, Rucker C. 2011. Long-Run Impacts of School Desegregation & School Quality on
    Adult Attainments. Cambridge, MA: working paper no. 16664, National Bureau of
    Economic Research.

Kemple, James J., Corinne M. Herlihy, and Thomas J. Smith. 2005. Making Progress Toward
   Graduation: Evidence from the Talent Development High School Model.

Kemple, James J. 2008. Career Academies: Long-Term Impacts on Labor Market Outcomes,
   Educational Attainment, and Transitions to Adulthood. New York: MDRC.

Kirk, David S. and Robert J. Sampson. 2011. "Crime and the Production of Safe Schools." In
    Whither Opportunity: Growing Inequality, Schools, and Children's Life Chances, edited by
    Greg J. Duncan and Richard J. Murnane. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Kreider, Rose M. and Renee Ellis. 2011. Living Arrangements of Children: 2009," Current
    Population Reports, P70-126. Washington, DC, 2011: U.S. Census Bureau.

Lang, Kevin. 2007. Poverty and Discrimination. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Lang, Kevin and Paul A. Ruud. 1986. "Returns to Schooling, Implicit Discount Rates and Black-
    White Wage Differentials." Review of Economics and Statistics 68 (1): 41-47.

Lemieux, Thomas. 2008. "The Changing Nature of Wage Inequality." Journal of Population
   Economics 21 (1): 21-48.

Lillard, Dean R. and Philip P. DeCicca. 2001. "Higher Standards, More Dropouts? Evidence
     within and Across Time." Economics of Education Review 20 (5): 459-473.

Ludwig, Jens and Douglas L. Miller. 2007. "Does Head Start Improve Children's Life Chances?
   Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Design." Quarterly Journal of Economics 122
   (1): 159-208.

Lutz, Byron. 2011. "The End of Court-Ordered Desegregation." American Economic Journal:
    Economic Policy 3 (2): 130-168.


                                              94
Lyche, Cecilia S. 2010. Taking on the Completion Challenge. Paris: OECD.

McIntosh, Shelby. 2012. State High School Exit Exams: A Policy in Transition. Washington,
   DC: Center on Education Policy.

McLeod, Jane and Karen Kaiser. 2004. "Childhood Emotional and Behavior Problems and
   Educational Attainment." American Sociological Review 69 (5): 636-658.

Mechoulan, Stephane. 2011. "The External Effects of Black Male Incarceration on Black
   Females." Journal of Labor Economics 29 (1): 1-35.

Mincer, Jacob. 1958. "Investment in Human Capital and Personal Income Distribution." Journal
   of Political Economy 66: 281-302.

Mishel, Lawrence and Joydeep Roy. 2006. Rethinking High School Graduation Rates and
    Trends. Washington, D.C.: Economic Policy Institute.

Mulligan, Casey B. and Yona Rubinstein. 2008. "Selection, Investment, and Women's Relative
    Wages Over Time." Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (3): 1061-1110.

Murnane, Richard J., John B. Willett, and John H. Tyler. 2000. "Who Benefits from Obtaining a
   GED? Evidence from High School and Beyond." Review of Economics and Statistics 82 (1):
   23-37.

National Commission on Excellence in Education. 1983. A Nation at Risk: The Imperative for
    Educational Reform. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education.

Neal, Derek. 2004. "The Measured Black-White Wage Gap among Women is Too Small."
    Journal of Political Economy 112 (1): S1-28.

Neal, Derek A. and William R. Johnson. 1996. "The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-White
    Wage Differences." Journal of Political Economy 104 (5): 869-895.

Nelson, Charles A. and Margaret Sheridan. 2011. "Lessons from Neuroscience Research for
    Understanding Causal Links between Family and Neighborhood Characteristics and
    Educational Outcomes." In Whither Opportunity: Growing Inequality, Schools, and
    Children's Life Chances, edited by Greg J. Duncan and Richard J. Murnane. New York:
    Russell Sage Foundation.

Nord, Christine, Shep Roey, Robert Perkins, Marsha Lyons, Nita Lemanski, Janis Brown, and
    Jason Schuknecht. 2011. The Nation’s Report Card: America’s High School Graduates.
    Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics.
    U.S. Government Printing Office.

OECD. 2007. Education at a Glance 2007: OECD Indicators.


                                             95
———. . 2012. Education at a Glance 2012: OECD Indicators. Paris: OECD Publishing.

Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention. 2011. OJJDP Statistical Briefing Book.
    Washington, DC: OJJDP.

O'Neill, June. 1990. "The Role of Human Capital in Earnings Differences between Black and
    White Men." Journal of Economic Perspectives 4: 25-45.

Oreopoulos, Philip. 2009. "Would More Compulsory Schooling Help Disadvantaged Youth?
    Evidence from Recent Changes to School-Leaving Laws." In The Problems of
    Disadvantaged Youth: An Economics Perspective, edited by Jonathan Gruber, 85-112.
    Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Oreopoulos, Philip. 2007. "Do Dropouts Drop Out Too Soon? Wealth, Health and Happiness
    from Compulsory Schooling." Journal of Public Economics 91 (11-12): 2213-2229.

Page, Lindsay C. 2012. "Principal Stratification as a Framework for Investigating Mediational
    Processes in Experimental Settings." Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 5:
    215-244.

Patterson, Margaret Becker, Jizhi Zhang, Wei Song, and Anne Guison-Dowdy. 2010. Crossing
     the Bridge: GED Credentials and Postsecondary Educational Outcomes. Year One Report.
     Washington, D.C.: GED Testing Service.

Powell, Arthur G., Eleanor Farrar, and David K. Cohen . 1985. The Shopping Mall High School :
   Winners and Losers in the Educational Marketplace. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Quint, Janet, Howard S. Bloom, Alison Rebeck Black, and LaFleur Stephens. 2005. The
    Challenge of Scaling Up Educational Reform: Findings and Lessons from First Things First
    . New York: MDRC.

Reardon, Sean F., Allison Atteberry, Nicole Arshan, and Michal Kurlaender. 2010. "Effects of
    the California High School Exit Exam Requirement on Student Persistence, Achievement,
    and Graduation." Working Paper, Stanford University.

Reardon, Sean and Michal Kurlaender. 2009. Effects of the California High School Exit Exam on
    Student Persistence, Achievement, and Graduation. Stanford, CA: PACE Policy Brief.

Reynolds, Arthur J., Judy A. Temple, Suh-Ruu Ou, Irma A. Arteaga, and Barry A. B. White.
    2011. "School-Based Early Childhood Education and Age-28 Well-being: Effects by
    Timing, Dosage, and Subgroups." Science 333 (6040): 360-364.

Rodriguez-Planas, Nuria. 2012. "Longer-Term Impacts of Mentoring, Educational Services, and
    Learning Incentives: Evidence from a Randomized Trial in the United States." American
    Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4 (4): 121-139.


                                              96
Roy, Joydeep and Lawrence Mishel. 2008. "Using Administrative Data to Estimate Graduation
    Rates: Challenges, Proposed Solutions and their Pitfalls." Education Policy Analysis
    Archives 16.

Rumberger, Russell W. 2011. Dropping Out : Why Students Drop Out of High School and what
   can be done about it. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Schwerdt, Guido and Martin R. West. in press. "The Impact of Alternative Grade Configurations
    on Student Outcomes through Middle and High School." Journal of Public Economics.

Seastrom, Marilyn M., Chris Chapman, Robert Stillwell, Daniel McGrath, Pia Peltola, Rachel
    Dinkes, and Zeyu Xu. 2006. User’s Guide to Computing High School Graduation Rates,
    Volume 1: Review of Current and Proposed Graduation Indicators . Washington, DC: U.S.
    Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics.

Snipes, Jason C., Glee Ivory Holton, Fred Doolittle, and Laura Sztejnberg. 2006. Striving for
    Student Success:
    the Effect of Project GRAD on High School Student Outcomes in Three Urban School
    Districts . New York: MDRC.

Snyder, Thomas D. and Sally A. Dillow. 2012. Digest of Education Statistics 2011. Vol. NCES
    2012-001. Washington, D.C.: National Center for Education Statistics, Institute of
    Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education.

Steinberg, Laurence. 2010. "A Behavioral Scientist Looks at the Science of Adolescent Brain
     Development." Brain and Cognition 72: 160-164.

Stillwell, Robert, Jennifer Sable, and Chris Plotts. 2011. Public School Graduates and Dropouts
     from the Common Core of Data: School Year 2008-09. Washington, D.C.: National Center
     for Education Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education.

Supovitz, Jonathan A. 2009. "Can High Stakes Testing Leverage Educational Improvement?"
    Journal of Educational Change 10 (2): 211-227.

Swanson, Christopher B. 2003. Keeping Count and Losing Count: Calculating Graduation Rates
   for all Students Under NCLB Accountability. Washington D.C.: The Urban Institute
   Education Policy Center.

Tyler, John H., Richard J. Murnane, and John B. Willett. 2000. "Estimating the Labor Market
    Signaling Value of the GED." Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (2): 431-468.

U.S. Department of Education. 2008. No Child Left Behind: High School Graduation Rate Non-
    Regulatory Guidance. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2010. Head Start Impact Study: Final Report.
    Washington, DC: Department of Health and Human Services.

                                               97
Ventura, Stephanie J., Sally C. Curtin, Joyce C. Abma, and Stanley K. Henshaw. 2012.
    Estimated Pregnancy Rates and Rates of Pregnancy Outcomes for the United States, 1990–
    2008, National Vital Statistics Reports, V. 60, no. 7. Washington, DC: Centers for Disease
    Control and Prevention, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Warren, John R., Krista N. Jenkins, and Rachael Kulick. 2006. "High School Exit Examinations
   and State-Level Completion and GED Rates, 1975-2002." Educational Evaluation and
   Policy Analysis 28: 131-152.

Warren, John Robert and Andrew Halpern-Manners. 2009. "Measuring High School Graduation
   Rates at the State Level: What Difference does Methodology make?" Sociological Methods
   & Research 38 (1): 3-37.

Warren, Robert and Andrew Halpern-Manners. 2007. "Is the Glass Emptying Or Filling Up?
   Reconciling Divergent Trends in High School Completion and Dropout." Educational
   Researcher 36 (6): 335-343.

Weiland, Christina and Hirokazu Yoshikawa. in press. "Impacts of a Prekindergarten Program on
    Children’s Mathematics, Language, Literacy, Executive Function, and Emotional Skills."
    Child Development.




                                              98
