NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TASK SPECIALIZATION IN U.S. CITIES FROM 1880-2000
Guy Michaels
Ferdinand Rauch
Stephen J. Redding
Working Paper 18715
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18715

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2013, Revised August 2017

Previously circulated as "Tasks and Technology in the United States 1880-2000." We are grateful
to the Centre for Economic Performance and Princeton University for research support. We are
also grateful to Gilles Duranton and Matt Turner for sharing data. We thank William D. Caughlin
and George Kupczak for their help with data. We also thank the editor, four referees, Don Davis,
Gilles Duranton, Gene Grossman, Gordon Hanson, Marco Manacorda, Alan Manning, Nathan
Nunn, Vernon Henderson, Rick Hornbeck, Gianmarco Ottaviano, Steve Pischke, Esteban RossiHansberg, Yona Rubinstein, Will Strange, Nancy Qian, Tony Venables and seminar and
conference participants at Copenhagen, the London School of Economics, MIT, NARSC, Oxford,
Sorbonne and Sussex for helpful comments and suggestions. The usual disclaimer applies. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2013 by Guy Michaels, Ferdinand Rauch, and Stephen J. Redding. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Task Specialization in U.S. Cities from 1880-2000
Guy Michaels, Ferdinand Rauch, and Stephen J. Redding
NBER Working Paper No. 18715
January 2013, Revised August 2017
JEL No. N92,O18,R12
ABSTRACT
We develop a new methodology for quantifying the tasks undertaken within occupations using
over 3,000 verbs from more than 12,000 occupational descriptions in the Dictionary of
Occupational Titles (DOTs). Using micro-data from the United States from 1880-2000, we find
an increase in the employment share of interactive occupations within sectors over time that is
larger in metro areas than non-metro areas. We interpret these findings using a model in which
reductions in transport and communication costs induce urban areas to specialize according to
their comparative advantage in interactive tasks. We presenting suggestive evidence relating
increases in employment in interactive occupations to improvements in transport and
communication technologies. Our findings highlight a change in the nature of agglomeration over
time towards an increased emphasis on human interaction.
Guy Michaels
Department of Economics
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
g.michaels@lse.ac.uk
Ferdinand Rauch
Department of Economics,
University of Oxford
Manor Road
Oxford, OX1 3UQ
United Kingdom
ferdinand.rauch@economics.ox.ac.uk

Stephen J. Redding
Department of Economics
and Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
14 College Road
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
reddings@princeton.edu

1

Introduction

Agglomeration forces are widely understood to play a central role in sustaining the dense concentrations of
population observed in urban areas. Much less is known about the detailed tasks undertaken in urban areas
and how these have changed over time. Yet understanding the task content of employment in urban and
rural areas is central to evaluating alternative theories of agglomeration and assessing the likely impact of
improvements in transport and communication technologies on spatial concentrations of economic activity.
In this paper, we provide new evidence on the detailed tasks undertaken by workers in urban and rural areas
over a long historical time period in the United States (U.S.). We develop a new methodology for measuring
the individual tasks undertaken within occupations using the verbs from occupational descriptions in the
Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOTs). We implement this methodology using micro data on employment
in disaggregated occupations and sectors in metro and non-metro areas from 1880-2000.
To measure the individual tasks undertaken within each occupation, we use over 3,000 verbs from more
than 12,000 occupational descriptions in both historical and contemporary editions of the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOTs). Using these verbs, we find a systematic change in the composition of employment
across tasks in urban versus rural areas over time. We quantify this change in task content using the meaning
of verbs from Roget’s Thesaurus, as the standard reference for English usage. In both metro and non-metro
areas, we find a systematic reallocation of employment over time towards interactive occupations, which involve tasks described by verbs that appear in thesaurus categories concerned with thought, communication
and inter-social activity. At the beginning of our sample period, metro areas actually have lower shares of
employment in interactive occupations than non-metro areas. Over time, employment growth in interactive
occupations is much higher in metro areas, so that by the end of our sample period the initial pattern of
specialization is reversed, and metro areas are more interactive than non-metro areas. This increasing interactiveness of employment at higher population densities is observed not only between metro and non-metro
areas but also across metro areas of different population densities. While in 1880 there is little relationship
between specialization in interactive occupations and population density, by 2000 this relationship is positive,
strong and statistically significant. Taken together, these results suggest that human interaction has become
increasingly important in agglomerations of economic activity over time.
To interpret these empirical results, we develop a model of the spatial distribution of employment across
occupations, sectors and locations. The model features trade in the final good produced by each sector and
in the tasks undertaken by the occupations within each sector. When the costs of trading tasks between
locations are prohibitively high, all tasks are performed where the final good is produced. As the costs of
trading tasks fall, it becomes feasible to unbundle production across locations and trade tasks between them. If
agglomeration forces are stronger for interactive tasks, densely-populated urban locations have a comparative
advantage in interactive tasks, which implies that reductions in task trade costs induce them to specialize
2

in more-interactive occupations, while more sparsely-populated rural locations specialize in less-interactive
occupations.
We provide empirical evidence on the relationship between changes in the interactiveness of employment
and the major innovations in transport and communication technology that occurred during our sample
period. Following the award of Alexander Graham Bell’s patent for the telephone in 1886, the U.S. telephone
network grew rapidly in the opening decades of the twentieth century.1 After the award of Karl Benz’s patent
for the internal combustion engine in 1879 and after the passage of the Federal Aid Road Act of 1916 and the
Federal Highway Act of 1921, the U.S. road network and automobile use expanded rapidly over the same
period.2 We examine the implications of these new transport and communication technologies by combining
county data on employment by occupation and sector for 1880 and 1930 with newly-collected county data on
telephone use and the road network in the 1930s. We develop instruments for the geographical dissemination
of both technologies. For the telephone, we use its network properties to construct an instrument based
on proximity to nodes on the American Telegraph and Telephone’s (AT&T) company’s long distance trunk
network, whose construction was influenced by the strategic objectives of connecting the nation as a whole.
For roads, we use the 1922 “Pershing Map” of highway routes of military importance for coastal and border
defense.3 We provide suggestive evidence connecting increases in the interactiveness of employment to the
diffusion of these new technologies predicted by our instruments.
Our paper is related to a number of literatures. We build on the wider literature on agglomeration
economies, as surveyed in Duranton and Puga (2004) and Rosenthal and Strange (2004). One strand of this
literature emphasizes differences in the composition of economic activity between urban and rural areas.
Studies emphasizing the role of human capital and skills in promoting agglomeration include Glaeser and
Saiz (2004), Glaeser and Resseger (2010), Bacolod, Blum and Strange (2009a), Glaeser, Ponzetto and Toblo
(2014) and Moretti (2004). Particular types of skills are highlighted in Bacalod, Blum and Strange (2009b),
which introduces the concept of soft skills that enable agents to interact in cities and industry clusters. More
generally, the role of idea generation and exchange is emphasized in Davis and Dingel (2012), which develops
a system of cities model in which costly idea exchange is the agglomeration force.
Another line of research has distinguished different dimensions along which cities specialize. Duranton
and Puga (2005) provides theory and evidence that in recent decades cities have shifted from specializing by
sector – with integrated headquarters and plants – to specializing mainly by function - with headquarters
and business services clustered in larger cities and plants clustered in smaller areas.4 Rossi-Hansberg, Sarte
and Owens (2009) develops a model in which firms choose locations of their headquarters and production fa1

See, for example, John (2010). The electric telegraph was patented much earlier in 1837 by Samuel Morse and the U.S. telegraph
network was largely complete by 1880 (see Standage 2007).
2
See, for example, Swift (2011).
3
Following the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1921, the Bureau of Public Roads commissioned General John J. Pershing to draw up
a map of roads of military importance in the event of war, as discussed further below.
4
See Henderson (1974) for the classic analysis of industry specialization and the size distribution of cities.

3

cilities, and argues that the increased separation of these locations accounts for observed changes in patterns
of residential and business activity. Ota and Fujita (1993) models the distinction between the front-unit (e.g.
business office) and back-unit (e.g. plant or back-office) of firms and explores its implications for city structure. Helsley and Strange (2007) explicitly analyzes the vertical integration decision of the firm in conjunction
with its location decision. Fujita and Tabuchi (1997) provides evidence that the increased separation of headquarters and production has contributed to observed changes in the distribution of economic activity across
Japanese regions.5 Related research has examined the impact of roads and urban growth (e.g. Baum-Snow
2007 and Duranton and Turner 2012) and the implications of innovations in communication technologies for
cities (e.g. Pool 1977, Fischer 1992, Gaspar and Glaeser 1998, Leamer and Storper 2001).
Our analysis is also related to the task-based approach to the labor market, including in particular Autor,
Levy and Murnane (2003, henceforth ALM), Acemoglu and Autor (2011), Autor and Handel (2009), Autor
(2013), Gray (2013), and Deming (2017). This research has developed measures of the task content of employment based on numerical scores from the Dictionary of Occupations (DOTs), such as “Direction, Control
and Planning (DCP).” Prior to this research, the canonical model of the labor market in terms of skilled and
unskilled labor had assumed that technological change is skill-biased. In contrast, this task-based approach
recognizes that the direction of technological change is endogenous, as emphasized in Acemoglu (1998) and
Acemoglu (2002). Therefore the extent to which new technologies complement or substitute for skills or
tasks can change over time. In the labor literature, Autor, Katz, and Krueger (1998) argue that there was an
acceleration in the skill-bias of technical change in the 1980s and 1990s. In the historical literature, several
studies have argued that technical change often replaced rather than complemented skilled artisans in the
nineteenth-century, including Hounshell (1985), James and Skinner (1985) and Mokyr (1992).6
Relative to each these lines of research, our main contribution is to develop a new approach for measuring
individual production tasks that uses the verbs from occupational descriptions and their meanings. Using
this new methodology, we are able to track the production tasks performed by workers at a much higher
resolution than has hitherto been possible. We use our approach to provide evidence on changes in the task
content of employment over a much longer historical time period than previously considered. We also apply
this approach to the organization of economic activity in urban and rural areas separately.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 discusses the data. Section 3 introduces our
methodology and presents our main empirical results on changes in the task content of employment in urban
5

Other dimensions of specialization in urban areas examined in existing research include localization versus urbanization externalities (e.g. Jacobs 1969, Henderson 2003); the division of labor (e.g. Duranton and Jayet 2011); diversified versus specialized cities
(e.g. Duranton and Puga 2001); employment in newly-created occupations (e.g. Lin 2011); and agglomeration versus firm selection
(in particular Combes et al. 2012).
6
In their classic study of the race between technology and skills, Goldin and Katz (2008) present evidence that manufacturing
technologies were skill complementary in the early-twentieth century, but may have been skill substituting prior to that time. In
subsequent work, Katz and Margo (2014) report some evidence of de-skilling in manufacturing during the nineteenth-century, but
find a reallocation of employment towards high-skill jobs for the aggregate economy as a whole.

4

and rural areas over time. Section 4 outlines a theoretical framework for interpreting these empirical results
that points to the role played by transportation and communication technologies. Section 5 provides further
evidence on explanations for the observed changes in the task content of employment and their relationship
with changes in transportation and communication technologies. Section 6 concludes.

2

Data

Our empirical analysis uses two main sources of data. The first is individual-level records from the U.S.
Population Census for twenty-year intervals from 1880-2000 from Integrated Public Use Microdata Series
(IPUMS): see Ruggles et al. (2010). These census micro data report individuals’ location, occupation and
sector, as well as other demographic information. We use these data to determine whether an individual is
located in a metro area as well as the occupation and sector in which an individual is employed. A metro area
is defined as a region consisting of a large urban core together with surrounding communities that have a
high degree of economic and social integration with the urban core.7 We weight individuals by their person
weights to ensure the representativeness of the sample. Our main dataset is a panel from 1880-2000 that uses
information on the share of employment within an occupation and sector in metro areas. To provide evidence
on improvements in communication and transportation technologies, we also use long-differenced data from
1880-1930, aggregating our individual-level data to the county level.
We use the standardized 1950 occupation classification from IPUMS, which distinguishes eleven two-digit
occupations (e.g. “Clerical and Kindred”) and 281 three-digit occupations (e.g. “Opticians and Lens Grinders
and Polishers”). We also use the standardized 1950 sector classification from IPUMS, which distinguishes
twelve two-digit sectors (e.g. “Finance, Insurance and Real Estate”) and 158 three-digit sectors (e.g. “Motor
Vehicles and Motor Vehicle Equipment”).8 Since we are concerned with employment structure, we omit
workers who do not report an occupation and a sector (e.g. because they are unemployed or out of the labor
force). We also exclude workers in agricultural occupations or sectors, because we compare task specialization
in urban and rural areas over time, and agriculture is unsurprisingly overwhelmingly located in rural areas.9
We use time-varying definitions of metro areas to ensure that they correspond to meaningful economic units.
However, we also report robustness tests, in which we hold the sample composition of metro areas constant
over time, and in which we use administrative cities whose boundaries are more stable over time.
Our second main data source is the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (U.S. Department of Labor 1991),
which contains detailed descriptions of more than 12,000 occupations. Following Autor et al. (2003), previous
7
From 1950 onwards, the definitions of metropolitan areas are those constructed by the Census Bureau. Before 1950, IPUMS
applies to the historical population data the same criteria as used by the Census Bureau from 1950 onwards.
8
See IPUMS for the full concordance between two-digit and three-digit occupations and sectors. While both occupation and sector
classifications are standardized by IPUMS, there are a small number of occupations and sectors that enter and exit the sample over
time. All our results are robust to restricting attention to occupations and sectors that are present in all years.
9
Our key findings, however, are robust to the inclusion of these agricultural workers. For further analysis of the relationship
between urbanization and structural transformation away from agriculture, see Michaels et al. (2012).

5

research using DOTs typically uses the numerical scores that were constructed for each occupation by the
Department of Labor (e.g. a Non-routine Interactive measure based on the Direction, Control and Planning
of Activities (DCP) numerical score). In contrast, we use verbs from the detailed occupational descriptions
in DOTs to directly measure the tasks performed by workers in each occupation. We use a list of over 3,000
English verbs from “Writing English,” a company that offers English language consulting.10 This approach
enables us to provide a rich analysis of the tasks undertaken in urban and rural areas using the verbs and
occupational descriptions without being restricted to the numerical scores. Nonetheless, we also compare our
measures of occupational characteristics to those from the numerical scores. We match the DOTs occupations
to the three-digit occupations in our census data using the crosswalk developed by ALM. In our baseline
specification, we use a time-invariant measure of tasks based on the occupational descriptions from the digital
edition of the 1991 DOTs, which ensures that our results are not driven by changes in language use over time.
In sensitivity checks, we also report results using digitized occupational descriptions from the first edition of
the DOTs in 1939 (U.S. Department of Labor 1939).
We complement these two main data sources with information from a variety of other sources. We use
the standard reference for word usage in English (Roget’s Thesaurus) to quantify the meanings of verbs
from the occupational descriptions.11 We use ArcGIS shapefiles from the National Historical Geographical
Information System (NHGIS) to track the evolution of county boundaries over time. We also use measures of
improvements in transport and communication technologies. We measure the length of roads in each county
using a georeferenced 1931 road map (Gallup 1931).12 At the beginning of our sample in 1880, most U.S.
roads were little more than dirt tracks (see, for example, Swift 2011) and widespread paved road construction
only occurred following the Federal Aid Road Act of 1916 and the Federal Highway Act of 1921. Therefore
we use the 1931 map to construct a measure of the growth of the paved road network from 1880-1930. We
measure the number of residence telephones in each county in 1935 using newly-digitized data from American
Telephone and Telegraph Company (AT&T 1935). The telephone was not patented until 1876 just before the
beginning of our sample period and the telephone network developed rapidly from 1890 onwards (see, for
example, Fischer 1992). Therefore we use the data on telephones to construct a measure of the growth of
telephones from 1880-1930. To address the concern that the road network could be influenced by changes
in the interactiveness of economic activity, we use an instrument based on the “Pershing” map of highway
routes of military importance for coastal and border defense. To address similar concerns for the telephone,
we use an instrument based on proximity to primary and secondary outlets on AT&T’s long distance trunk
network, whose construction was influenced by the strategic objective of connecting the nation as a whole.
10

See http://www.writingenglish.com/englishverbs.htm.
We use a computer-searchable edition of Roget (1911) from the University of Chicago.
12
Recent economics research on the U.S. road network has largely concentrated on the later development of the interstate highway
system, as in Baum-Snow (2007), Michaels (2008) and Duranton and Turner (2012).
11

6

3

Empirical Evidence on Task Specialization

In this section, we present our main results on changes in the task content of employment in urban and rural
areas over time. In subsection 3.1, we begin by characterizing changes in specialization across occupations
and sectors in metro areas relative to non-metro areas over our long historical time period. In subsection
3.2, we introduce our new methodology for measuring individual production tasks using the verbs from
occupational descriptions. In subsection 3.3, we explain how we quantify the meanings of these verbs using
Roget’s thesaurus, and introduce a new measure of the interactiveness of the tasks undertaken by workers.
In subsection 3.4, we demonstrate the robustness of our results across a range of specifications.

3.1

Specialization Across Occupations and Sectors

To provide some initial motivating evidence of changes in specialization across occupations and sectors in
metro areas relative to non-metro areas, we estimate the following regression for each year t separately using
data across occupations o and sectors s:
MetroShareost = µot + ηst + εost ,

(1)

where MetroShareost is the share of employment in metro areas in occupation o, sector s and year t; observations are weighted by person weights; µot are occupation-year fixed effects; ηst are sector-year fixed effects;
and εost is a stochastic error. We normalize the sector-year and occupation-year fixed effects so that they
each sum to zero in each year, and hence they capture deviations from the overall mean in each year. While
we estimate the above regression using a share as the left-hand side variable so that the estimated coefficients
have a natural interpretation as frequencies, we find a very similar pattern of results in a robustness test in
which we use a logistic transformation of the left-hand side variable: MetroShareost /(1 − MetroShareost ).
The occupation-year fixed effects (µot ) capture the average probability of being in a metro area for workers in each occupation in each year, after controlling for differences across sectors in metro probabilities.
Similarly, the sector-year fixed effects (ηit ) capture the average probability of being located in a metro area
for workers in each sector in each year, after controlling for differences across occupations in metro probabilities. The sector and occupation fixed effects are separately identified because there is substantial overlap
in occupations and sectors, such that each sector contains multiple occupations and each occupation is employed in several sectors.13 We estimate this regression using both the aggregate (two-digit) and disaggregate
(three-digit) definitions of occupations and sectors discussed above.
As reported in Table 1 for two-digit occupations and sectors, we find substantial changes in specialization
across occupations and sectors in metro areas relative to non-metro areas over time. From Panel A, in 1880,
“Clerical and Kindred” workers were the most likely to be located in metro areas. In contrast, by 2000, “Clerical
13

The average three-digit sector employs workers from 111 three-digit occupations, while the average three-digit occupation
contains workers employed in 81 sectors.

7

and Kindred” workers were ranked only fourth, and “Professional and Technical” workers were the most
likely to be located in metro areas. From 1880-2000, declines in ranks were observed for “Craftsmen” (from 2
to 6) and “Operatives” (from 3 to 7), while increases in ranks were observed for “Professional and Technical”
workers (from 7 to 1) and “Managers, Officials and Proprietors” (from 6 to 3). As apparent from the first and
fourth columns of the table, these changes in ranks reflect substantial changes in the probabilities of workers
in individual occupations being located in metro areas over time.
Since the regression (1) includes sector-year fixed effects, these changes in the metro probabilities for each
occupation are not driven by changes in sector composition, but rather reflect changes in the organization
of economic activity within sectors. Nonetheless, we also observe substantial changes in sector structure
in metro areas relative to non-metro areas over time. From Panel B, declines in ranks from 1880-2000 were
observed for “Wholesale and Retail Trade” (from 2 to 6) and “Manufacturing” (from 4 to 10). In contrast,
increases in ranks from 1880-2000 were observed for “Transportation, Communication and Other Utilities”
(from 6 to 3) and “Business and Repair Services” (from 9 to 1).
In Figures A1 and A2 of the web appendix, we show the evolution of the occupation and sector coefficients
across each of the twenty-year intervals in our data. While “Professional and Technical” workers display an
increased propensity to locate in metro areas from 1880-1960, the probability that “Managers, Officials and
Proprietors” are located in urban areas increases particularly sharply from 1940-2000. In contrast, the likelihood that “Craftsmen” are found in metro areas declines throughout our sample period, while the probability
for “Clerical and Kindred” workers declines from 1900 onwards, and the probability for “Service” workers
initially rises until 1920 and later declines until around 1960.
Such changes in specialization are not limited to the aggregate categories considered so far, but are also
found using more disaggregated measures of occupations and sectors. In Table A1 of the web appendix,
we report the results of estimating the regression (1) including three-digit-occupation-year and three-digitsector-year fixed effects. Panels A and B report the twenty occupations within the largest increases and
decreases respectively in the within-sector probability of being located in a metro area from 1880-2000. Both
the top agglomerating occupations in Panel A and the top dispersing occupations in Panel B are diverse
and span multiple sectors. For example, leading agglomerating occupations include “Editors and Reporters,”
“Buyers and Department Heads,” and “Judges and Lawyers,” while prominent dispersing occupations are
“Book Binders,” “Welders and Flame Cutters,” and “Upholsterers.” In our empirical analysis below, we provide
evidence on the systematic characteristics shared by occupations that agglomerate versus disperse over time.

3.2

Measuring the Tasks Undertaken by Occupations

We now introduce our new methodology for individual production tasks using the detailed descriptions from
more than 12,000 disaggregated occupations included in the DOTs. We use the verbs from each occupation’s

8

description to measure the tasks performed by workers within that occupation, because verbs capture an
action (bring, read, walk, run, learn), an occurrence (happen, become), or a state of being (be, exist, stand),
and hence capture the task being performed. To focus on persistent characteristics of occupations and abstract
from changes in word use over time, our baseline analysis uses time-invariant occupational descriptions from
the 1991 digital edition of the DOTs. While the tasks undertaken within each occupation can change over time,
the relative task content of occupations is likely to be more stable. To provide evidence on the extent to which
this is the case, we have also digitized the occupational descriptions from the first edition of the DOTs in 1939.
Although the descriptions of occupations are less detailed and the boundaries between occupations are less
clear in the historical DOTs, we find a similar pattern of results using both sets of occupational descriptions,
as discussed further below.
The first step of our procedure uses a list of over 3,000 English verbs from “Writing English,” a company
that offers English language consulting. Using this list of verbs, we search each occupational description in
the 1991 DOTs for occurrences of each verb in the first-person singular (e.g. (I) talk), third-person singular
(e.g. (she) talks) or present participle (e.g. (he is) talking).14 For example, the occupational description for an
Economist is:
“ECONOMIST: Plans, designs, and conducts research to aid in interpretation of economic relationships and in solution of problems arising from production and distribution of goods and
services: Studies economic and statistical data in area of specialization, such as finance, labor, or
agriculture. Devises methods and procedures for collecting and processing data, utilizing knowledge of available sources of data and various econometric and sampling techniques. Compiles
data relating to research area, such as employment, productivity, and wages and hours. Reviews
and analyzes economic data in order to prepare reports detailing results of investigation, and to
stay abreast of economic changes ...,”
where the words detected by our procedure as capturing the tasks performed by an economist are italicized.15
Note that sometimes the first-person singular, third-person singular or present participle forms of a verb
have the same spelling as the corresponding adjectives and nouns (e.g. “prepare reports”). In this case, our
procedure treats these adjectives and nouns as verbs. To the extent that the use of the same word as an
adjective or noun is closely related to its use as a verb, both uses are likely to capture the tasks performed.
From this first step, we obtain the number of occurrences of each verb for each DOTs occupation. We
next match the more than 12,000 DOTs occupations to IPUMS standardized 1950 occupations using the crosswalk developed by ALM. Finally, we calculate the frequency with which each verb v is used for each IPUMS
14

An emerging literature in economics and the social sciences uses textual search as the basis for quantitative analysis: see for
example Gentzkow et al. (2012) on political influence and Michel et al. (2011) on culture.
15
As an indication of the wide coverage of our list of over 3,000 verbs, only 1,830 appear in the 1991 DOTs occupational descriptions.

9

occupation o:
VerbFreqvo =

Appearances of verb v matched to o
,
Appearances of all verbs matched to o

where we focus on the frequency rather than the number of verb uses to capture the relative importance of
tasks for an occupation and to control for potential variation in the length of the occupational descriptions
matched to each IPUMS occupation.
We provide evidence on changes in task specialization in metro areas relative to non-metro areas over time
by estimating the following regression for each verb v and year t separately using data across occupations o
and sectors s:
MetroShareost = αvt VerbFreqvo + ηvst + εost ,

(2)

where MetroShareost is again the share of employment in metro areas in occupation o, sector s and year t;
VerbFreqvo is defined above for verb v and occupation o; ηvst are verb-sector-year fixed effects; and εost is a
stochastic error.
The coefficient of interest αvt captures a conditional correlation: the correlation between occupations’
shares of employment in metro areas and their frequency of use of verb v. The verb-sector-year fixed effects
(ηvst ) control for differences across sectors in the frequency of verb use and for differences across sectors and
over time in the concentration of employment in metro areas. Since VerbFreqvo is time invariant, a rise in
αvt over time implies that employment in occupations using that verb is increasingly concentrating in metro
areas within sectors over time.
In Panels A and B of Table 2, we report for each year the ten verbs with the highest and lowest standardized
coefficient αvt (the estimated coefficient multiplied by the standard deviation of VerbFreqvo ).16 As apparent
from Panel A, we find substantial changes in the tasks most concentrated in metro areas within sectors over
time. In 1880, the verbs with the highest metro employment shares typically involve physical tasks such as
“Braid,” “Sew,” “Stretch” and “Thread.” By 1920, the top ten verbs include an increased number of clerical tasks,
such as “Bill,” “File,” “Notice,” and “Record.” By 1980 and 2000, the leading metro verbs include a proliferation
of interactive tasks, such as “Analyze,” “Advise,” “Confer” and “Report.” As shown in Panel B, we also find
some changes in the tasks least concentrated in metro areas, although here the pattern is less clear cut (e.g.
“Tread” appears from 1880-1960 and “Turn” appears from 1960-2000).

3.3

Quantifying Task Specialization

The approach developed in the previous section allows us to provide a detailed characterization of the tasks
performed in urban and rural areas using the full list of verbs and all occupational descriptions. In this
section, we now develop a quantitative measure of task specialization based on the meanings of these verbs.
16
We find a similar pattern of results just using the estimated coefficients instead of the estimated coefficients times the standard
deviation of VerbFreqvo .

10

To do so, we use the online computer-searchable version of Roget’s Thesaurus (1911), which has been the
standard reference for English language use for more than a century, and explicitly classifies words according
to their underlying concepts and meanings. Roget’s classification was inspired by natural history, with its
hierarchy of Phyla, Classes, Orders and Families. Therefore words are grouped according to progressively
more disaggregated classifications that capture ever more subtle variations in meaning. A key advantage of
this classification is that it explicitly takes into account that words can have different meanings depending
on context by including extensive cross-references to link related groups of words.17
Roget’s Thesaurus is organized into “Classes” which are further disaggregated into the progressively finer
partitions of “Divisions,” “Sections” and “Categories.” There are 6 classes, 10 divisions, 38 sections and around
1,000 categories.18 The first three classes cover the external world: Class I (Abstract Relations) deals with
ideas such as number, order and time; Class II (Space) is concerned with movement, shapes and sizes; and
Class III (Matter) covers the physical world and humankind’s perception of it by means of the five senses.
The last three classes relate to the internal world of human beings: the human mind (Class IV, Intellect), the
human will (Class V, Volition) and the human heart and soul (Class VI, Emotion, Religion and Morality).
To characterize the meaning of each verb v, we use the frequency with which it appears in each partition
k of Roget’s Thesaurus:
ThesFreqvk =

Appearances of verb v in category k of thesaurus
,
Total appearances of verb v in thesaurus

(3)

where the partition k could be a class, division, section or category of the thesaurus; our use of a frequency
takes into account that each verb can have multiple meanings and provides a measure of the relative importance of each meaning. In counting verb appearances, we make use of the thesaurus’s structure, in which
words with similar meanings appear under each thesaurus Category in a list separated by commas or semicolons. Based on this structure, we count appearances of a verb that are followed by a comma or semi-colon,
which enables us to abstract from appearances of a word in idioms that do not reflect its common usage.19
Combining the frequency with which a verb appears in each occupation’s description (VerbFreqvo in
the previous section) and the frequency with which the verb appears in each category of the thesaurus
(ThesFreqvk ), we construct a quantitative measure of the extent to which the tasks performed in an occu17

For further discussion of the genesis of Roget’s Thesaurus, see for example Hüllen (2003).
Division is an intermediate level in between class and section, which is only used in the thesaurus to disaggregate Classes IV and
V. In particular, “Class IV Words Relating to the Intellectual Faculties” is split into “Division I Formation of Ideas” and “Division II
Communication of Ideas.” Additionally, “Class V Words Relating to the Voluntary Powers” is split into “Division I Individual Volition”
and “Division II Intersocial Volition.” Classes I-III and VI are not disaggregated into divisions.
19
For example, the verb “Consult” appears in six thesaurus Categories. The entry followed by a comma is 695 Advice, which
captures the word’s meaning. Entries not followed by a comma correspond to idiomatic uses not closely related to the word’s
meaning: 133 Lateness (“consult one’s pillow”); 463 Experiment (“consult the barometer”); 707 Aid (“consult the wishes of”); 943
Selfishness (“consult one’s own pleasure”); 968 Lawyer (“juris consult [Latin]”). We do not require that a verb is preceded by a
comma or semi-colon, because this would exclude the first verb listed under each thesaurus category.
18

11

pation involve the concepts from each thesaurus category :
TaskContentko =

X

VerbFreqvo × ThesFreqvk .

v∈V

We use this measure to examine changes in task specialization in metro areas relative to non-metro areas
over time by estimating an analogous regression for each thesaurus category k and year t as for each verb
and year in the previous section:
MetroShareost = βkt TaskContentko + ηkst + εost ,

(4)

where MetroShareost is the share of employment in metro areas in occupation o, sector s and year t; TaskContentko
is defined above for thesaurus partition k and occupation o; ηkst are thesaurus-category-year fixed effects;
and εost is a stochastic error.
The coefficient of interest βkt again captures a conditional correlation: the correlation between occupations’ shares of employment in metro areas and their frequency of use of verbs in thesaurus category k. The
thesaurus-category-sector-year fixed effects (ηkst ) control for differences across sectors in the frequency of
use of thesaurus categories and differences across sectors and over time in the concentration of employment
in metro areas. Since TaskContentko is time invariant, a rise in βkt over time implies that employment in
occupations using that category of the thesaurus is increasingly concentrating in metro areas within sectors
over time.
In Table 3, we report the estimation results for the thirty-eight sections of the thesaurus (denoted by S),
organized by the 6 classes (denoted by C) and 10 divisions of the thesaurus (denoted by D). We calculate the
standardized coefficient for each thesaurus section (the estimated coefficient βkt multiplied by the variable’s
standard deviation) and report the ranking of these standardized coefficients in 1880 and 2000 as well the
difference in rankings between these two years (1880 minus 2000).20 Since the thesaurus section with the
highest standardized coefficient is assigned a rank of one, positive differences in rankings correspond to
thesaurus sections that are becoming more concentrated in metro areas within sectors over time.
The results in Table 3 reveal a sharp change the relative ranking of thesaurus sections involving the
external world (Classes I-III) and those involving the internal world of human beings (Classes IV-VI). In 1880,
the top-five thesaurus sections most concentrated in metro areas included: Quantity (Class I), Time (Class
I), Dimensions (Class II), Matter in General (Class III), and Affections in General (Class VI). In contrast, in
2000, the top-five thesaurus sections were: Nature of Ideas Communicated (Class IV), Special Intersocial
Volition (Class V), Extension of Thought (Class IV), Reasoning Processes (Class IV), and Results of Reasoning
(Class IV). The correlation between the rankings of the thesaurus sections in 1880 and 2000 is negative and
statistically significant (-0.63).
20

Again we find a similar pattern of results using just the estimated coefficient instead of the estimated coefficient times the
standard deviation of TaskContentko .

12

Positive changes in ranks in Table 3 are typically concentrated in thesaurus Classes IV and V, which
correspond to the human mind and the human will respectively. These Classes include Class IV, Division
1 (Formation of Ideas), Class IV, Division 2 (Communication of Ideas) and Class V, Division 2 (Intersocial
Volition). We summarize this combination of tasks – thought, communication and intersocial activity – as
“interactiveness.” Our interpretation is that interaction inherently involves each of these components: thinking for oneself, communication these thoughts, and communicating them to other people in a social environment. We exclude Class V, Division 1 (Individual Volition) from our definition of interactiveness, because
it is more concerned with individual reflection and decision making (e.g. motive, habit, willingness, choice)
rather than interaction between people. Although some of the categories in Class VI could be interpreted as
interactive (e.g. Section III, “Sympathetic Affections”), the other categories within this class seem to point
more to contemplation and introspection than interaction between people (e.g. “Affections in General,” “Personal Affections,” “Moral Affection,” and “Religious Affection”). Furthermore, the interpersonal relationships
described in “Sympathetic Affections” seem to largely concern relationships outside of work.
Therefore, we measure the interactiveness of an occupation using the frequency with which verbs appear
in that occupation’s description and the frequency with which those verbs appear in Divisions 1 and 2 of
Class IV and Division 2 of Class V of the thesaurus:
Interactiveo =

X

FreqVerbvo × FreqInteractivev ,

(5)

v∈V

where FreqVerbvo is the frequency with which verb v is used for occupation o from above; FreqInteractivev
is the frequency with which verb v appears in these partitions of the thesaurus (computed as in (3)). We also
report results below for all four divisions of Classes IV and V of the thesaurus.
In Panels A and B of Table 4, we report the top ten and bottom ten interactive occupations using our
measure. While any single quantitative measure of interactiveness is unlikely to capture the full meaning
of this concept, the occupations identified by our procedure as having high and low levels of interactiveness
appear intuitive. “Buyers and Department Heads”, “Clergymen” and “Pharmacists” arguably perform more
interactive tasks than “Blasters and Powdermen”, “Roofers and Slaters” and “Welders and Flame Cutters.”
In Figure 1, we measure the interactiveness of metro areas, non-metro areas and the economy as a whole
using the employment-weighted average of interactiveness for each occupation. In this measure, interactiveness only differs between metro and non-metro areas to the extent that they have different distributions of
employment across occupations:
Interactivejt =

O
X
Eojt
o=1

Ejt

Interactiveo ,

j ∈ {M, N } ,

(6)

where j indexes a type of location and we again denote metro areas by M and non-metro areas by N ; Eojt
corresponds to employment in occupation o in location type j ∈ {M, N } in year t.
13

In 1880, metro and non-metro areas have similar levels of interactiveness, with if anything metro areas
having lower interactiveness than non-metro areas. Over time, interactiveness increases in both sets of locations, but this increase is greater in metro areas than in non-metro areas. This increase in the relative
interactiveness of metro areas is particularly sharp from 1900-1920, which coincides with the dissemination
of improvements in communication and transport technologies in the form of the telephone and roads and
the automobile. In our empirical analysis below, we provide further evidence on the extent to which changes
in interactiveness are related to these new communication and transport technologies.

3.4

Robustness

Having presented our baseline evidence of an increase in the interactiveness of employment in metro areas
relative to non-metro areas over time, we now document the robustness of this finding across a range of
different specifications.
3.4.1

1939 DOTs

Our baseline specification measures the task content of employment using time-invariant occupational descriptions from the 1991 DOTs. While this approach ensures that our findings are not driven by changes
in language use over time, it assumes that the relative task content of occupations is persistent over time.
One concern is that the interactiveness of occupations could have changed over time and these changes in
interactiveness could be correlated with occupations’ shares of employment in metro areas.
To address this concern, we replicated our analysis using the first edition of the DOTs from 1939. We
digitized the occupational descriptions in the 1939 DOTs and implemented our procedure of searching for
verbs in each occupational description. The boundaries between occupations are less well defined and the
occupational descriptions are less detailed in the 1939 DOTs, which implies that the resulting measures of
the task content of employment are likely to be less precise than those using the 1991 DOTs. Nonetheless, as
reported in Table A2 of the web appendix, we find similar changes in task specialization in this robustness test.
The verbs most correlated with metro employment shares in 1880 include physical tasks such as “Retouch”,
“Trawl”, and “Lure.” In contrast, the verbs most correlated with metro employment shares in 2000 include
interactive tasks such as “Advise,” “Question,” and “Appraise.”
Using the verbs from the 1939 occupational descriptions and the frequency with which these verbs appear in Class IV and Division 2 of Class V of the thesaurus, we again find increase in the interactiveness of
employment over time that is more rapid in metro areas than in non-metro areas, as shown in Figure A3 in
the web appendix. This similarity of the results using both the 1939 and 1991 occupational descriptions suggests that our findings are unlikely to be driven by changes in the relative interactiveness of occupations over
time. Indeed, although the layout of the occupational descriptions implies that our measure of interactiveness
using the 1939 DOTs is less precise than our baseline measure using the 1991 DOTs (which by itself would
14

induce an imperfect correlation), we find that they are positively and statistically significantly correlated. As
reported in Table A3 of the web appendix, the unweighted correlation coefficient between the 1939 and 1991
measures across the sample of occupations in 2000 is 0.62.
3.4.2

Metro Areas and Administrative Cities

Our analysis has so far used variation between metro and non-metro areas. To provide further evidence
of a relative increase in the interactiveness of employment in densely-populated locations, we now present
evidence using a different source of variation across metro areas of differing population densities.
In the top-left and top-right panels of Figure 2, we display mean interactiveness for each metro area (as
calculated using (6)) against log population density for 1880 and 2000 respectively, as well as the fitted values
and confidence intervals from locally-weighted linear least squares regressions. To make the panels more
legible, we omit a few outliers on both ends of the distribution from the figure (but not from the locallyweighted linear least squares regressions). We use time-varying definitions of metro areas to ensure that
they correspond to meaningful economic units, which implies that the number of observations changes over
time as new metro areas enter the sample, as can be seen from comparing the two panels. In 1880, we find
little relationship between interactiveness and log population density across metro areas, which is reflected
in a negative but statistically insignificant OLS coefficient (standard error) of -0.0002 (0.0013). In contrast, in
2000, we find a positive and statistically significant relationship between interactiveness and log population
density, which is reflected in an OLS coefficient (standard error) of 0.0018 (0.0002). In the bottom-left panel of
Figure 2, we show that even when we restrict the 2000 sample to metro areas that exist in 1880, we continue
to find a positive relationship that is statistically significant at the 10 percent level, confirming that these
findings are not driven by a change in the composition of metro areas. Therefore the increase in the relative
interactiveness of densely-populated locations over time is observed not only comparing metro and nonmetro areas but also comparing metro areas of differing population densities. Metro areas with relatively high
levels of interactiveness conditional on population density in 2000 include Boston (BOS, MA) and New York
(NYC, CT/NY/NJ), while those with low levels of interactiveness conditional on population density include
Anniston (ANN, AL) and Mansfield (MAN, OH).
Although we use time-varying definitions of the boundaries of metro areas to ensure that they correspond
to meaningful economic units, we find similar results if we instead define urban areas as administrative cities,
which have much more stable geographical boundaries over time. Again we find an increase in the relative
interactiveness of urban areas over time, whether we compare administrative cities to all other locations
(Figure A4 in the web appendix) or only to non-metro areas (Figure A5 in the web appendix). Therefore the
increase in the relative interactiveness of urban areas also occurs within existing geographical boundaries.

15

3.4.3

Other Occupational Characteristics

Our approach of using verbs from the occupational descriptions enables us to measure individual production
tasks at a much finer level of resolution than has hitherto been possible. We now compare aggregations of
our individual task measures, such as interactiveness, to existing measures of tasks, including the numerical
scores from the DOTs used by ALM. Since these numerical scores are not available in the first edition of the
DOTs in 1939, we use their values from the 1991 digital edition of the DOTs.
As a point of comparison, in Figure A8 of the web appendix, we show the employment-weighted average
of the five ALM measures of task inputs over our long historical time period (analogous to Figure 1 in ALM but
for 1880-2000 instead of 1960-2000). In Figures A9-A10 of the appendix, we show the employment-weighted
average of our measures of task inputs based on the 38 thesaurus sections. As is clear from these figures,
there is a lot more variation using our thesaurus measures than using the five numerical scores. Therefore,
we obtain a much richer picture of changes in task inputs over time and in urban versus rural areas using our
measures based on the meanings of verbs from occupational descriptions.
In Table A3 of the appendix, we report the correlation coefficients between our interactiveness measure
and other measures of occupation characteristics across the sample of occupations in 2000. We report both
unweighted correlations and correlated weighted by occupation employment. The highest correlation coefficients are for the Non-routine Interactive (Direction, Control and Planning (DCP)) and Non-routine Analytic
(MATH) used by ALM. While both of these measures are related to the concepts of thought, communication
and intersocial activity captured by our interactiveness measure, the correlations are around 0.5. Therefore
our interactiveness measure captures distinctive information about the tasks performed by workers within
occupations. While DCP is orientated towards top-down interactions between workers (e.g. between a manager and her subordinates), our measure captures all interactions between workers (e.g. between members of
a product design team). Although MATH is orientated towards thought, our measure of interactiveness also
captures communication and intersocial activity.
As a further check on our measure of interactiveness, Table A4 reports the top-five verbs concentrated in
each thesaurus section. We find that the verbs most concentrated in those sections of the thesaurus included
in our definition of interactiveness do indeed seem to involve interactive tasks. For example, the top-five
verbs most concentrated in “Class IV. Division II. Section I. Nature of Ideas Communicated” are “Annotate,”
“Decipher,” “Interpret,” “Fudge,” and “Clarify.” As a final check on our measure of interactiveness, Table A5
in the web appendix compares it to a number of other measures of interactiveness from the Occupational
Information Network (O∗ NET). In particular, we report the correlation across occupations between our measure of interactiveness and seventeen subcategories of the work activity “Interacting with Others” from the
Occupational Information Network (O*NET). These measures were constructed by US Department of Labor/Employment and Training Administration (USDOL/ETA) based on questionnaires about detailed work

16

activities issued to a random sample of businesses and workers. Panel A reports unweighted correlations,
while Panel B reports correlations weighted by employment. The measures cover a wide range of forms of
interaction, including “Assisting and caring for others” and “Resolving conflict and negotiating with others.”
We find that the correlations with our measure of interactiveness are all positive and typically statistically
significant. The five categories with the highest unweighted correlations are as follows: “Communicating
with persons outside organization,” “Establishing and maintaining interpersonal relationships,” “Performing
administrative activities,” “Resolving conflict and negotiating with others,” and “Provide consultation and advice to others.” These five categories appear to correspond to the concepts of thought, communication and
intersocial activity captured in our measure of interactiveness.

4

Theoretical Model

In this section, we outline a theoretical model that we use to interpret our empirical finding of an increased
interactiveness of employment in urban areas relative to rural areas over time.21 The model explains the
distribution of employment across occupations, sectors and locations. Despite allowing for a large number
of locations and a rich geography of trade costs, the model remains tractable, because of the stochastic formulation of productivity differences across occupations, sectors and locations. The key predictions of the
model are comparative statics with respect to the costs of trading the tasks produced by each occupation and
the final goods produced by each sector. When these costs are large, all locations have similar employment
structures across sectors, and all tasks within each sector are undertaken in the same location where the final
good is produced. As the costs of trading final goods and tasks fall, locations specialize across sectors and
across occupations within sectors according to their comparative advantage as determined by productivity
differences. If densely-populated urban locations have a comparative advantage in interactive tasks relative
to sparsely-populated rural locations, the model predicts that a fall in the costs of trading tasks leads to an
increase in the interactiveness of employment within sectors in urban relative to rural areas.

4.1

Preferences and Endowments

The economy consists of many locations indexed by n ∈ N . Each location n is endowed with an exogenous
supply of land H̄n . The economy as a whole is endowed with a measure of workers L̄, who are perfectly mobile
across locations. Workers’ preferences are defined over a goods consumption index (Cn ) and residential land
use (Hn ) and are assumed to take the Cobb-Douglas form:22

Un =

Cn
α

α 

Hn
1−α

1−α

21

,

0 < α < 1.

(7)

A more detailed exposition of the model including the technical derivations of relationships is contained in the web appendix.
For empirical evidence using U.S. data in support of the constant expenditure share implied by the Cobb-Douglas functional
form, see Davis and Ortalo-Magne (2011).
22

17

The goods consumption index (Cn ) is assumed to be a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) function of
consumption indices for a number of sectors (e.g. Manufacturing, Services) indexed by s ∈ S:

Cn =

"
X

β−1
β

#

β
β−1

Cns

,

(8)

s∈S

where β is the elasticity of substitution between sectors. Sectors can be either substitutes (β > 1) or complements in goods consumption (0 < β < 1), where the standard assumption in the literature on structural
transformation in macroeconomics is complements (e.g. Ngai and Pissarides 2007, Yi and Zhang 2013).
The consumption index for each sector is in turn a CES function of consumption of a continuum of goods
(e.g. Motor Vehicles, Drugs and Medicines) indexed by j ∈ [0, 1]:
Z
Cns =

1

cns (j)

σs −1
σs

s
 σ σ−1
s

dj

,

(9)

0

where the elasticity of substitution between goods σs varies across sectors. While in the data we observe
a finite number of goods within sectors, we adopt the theoretical assumption of a continuum of goods for
reasons of tractability, because it enables us to make use of law of large numbers results in determining
specialization at the sectoral level. Goods can be either substitutes (σs > 1) or complements (0 < σs < 1)
and we can allow any ranking of the elasticities of substitution between goods and sectors, although the
conventional assumption in such a nested CES structure is a higher elasticity of substitution at the more
disaggregated level (σs > β).
Expenditure on residential land in each location is assumed to be redistributed lump-sum to residents of
that location, as in Helpman (1998). Therefore total income in each location (vn Ln ) equals payments to labor
used in production (wn Ln ) plus expenditure on residential land (rn Hn = (1 − α)vn Ln ):
vn Ln = wn Ln + (1 − α) vn Ln =

wn Ln
,
α

(10)

where vn is income per worker; wn is the wage; rn is the land rent; Ln is the population of location n; and
equilibrium land rents in each location are determined by land market clearing.

4.2

Production

Goods are homogeneous in the sense that one unit of a given good is the same as any other unit of that
good. Production occurs under conditions of perfect competition and constant returns to scale. The cost to a
consumer in location n of purchasing one unit of good j within sector s from location i is therefore:
pnis (j) =

dnis Gis (j)
,
zis (j)

(11)

where dnis are iceberg goods trade costs, such that dnis > 1 must be shipped from location i to location n
within sector s in order for one unit to arrive; zis (j) is productivity for good j within sector s in location i;
18

and Gis (j) is the unit cost of the composite factor of production used for good j within sector s in location
i, as determined below.
Final goods productivity is stochastic and modeled as in Eaton and Kortum (2002) and Costinot, Donaldson
and Komunjer (2012). Final goods productivity for each good, sector and location is assumed to be drawn
independently from a Fréchet distribution:23
ηs θs

Fis (z) = e−Tis Lis z ,

(12)

where θs > 1 is the Fréchet shape parameter that controls the dispersion of productivity across goods within
each sector; Tis is a scale parameter that controls average productivity for each sector s and location i; Lis is
employment in sector s and location i; and ηs parameterizes the strength of agglomeration forces in sector
s. We model these agglomeration forces as external economies of scale (as in Ethier 1982), which imply that
average productivity in sector s in location i is increasing in employment in that sector and location.
We assume that the final good for each sector is produced using a number of stages of production, where
each stage of production within a sector is supplied by a separate occupation indexed by o ∈ Os (e.g. Managers, Operatives). Output of good j within sector s in location i (yis (j)) is a CES function of the inputs of
each occupation (Xiso (j)):
"
yis (j) =

X

Xiso (j)

µs −1
µs

#

µs
µs −1

,

(13)

o∈Os

where µs is the elasticity of substitution between occupations and again we can allow occupations to be either
substitutes (µs > 1) or complements (0 < µs < 1). We allow sectors to differ in terms of the set of occupations
Os , and firms within each sector adjust the proportions with which workers in different occupations are
employed depending their cost.
Workers within each occupation perform a continuum of tasks t ∈ [0, 1] as in Grossman and RossiHansberg (2008) (e.g. as captured by the verbs Advising, Typing, Stretching, Stamping in our empirical analysis). The input for occupation o and good j within sector s and location i (Xiso (j)) is a CES function of the
inputs for these tasks (xiso (j, t)):
Z
Xiso (j) =

1

xiso (j, t)

νso −1
νso

 ν νso−1
so
dt

(14)

0

where the elasticity of substitution between tasks νso varies across sectors and occupations. While in the
data we observe a finite number of tasks within occupations, we again adopt the theoretical assumption of
a continuum of tasks for reasons of tractability, because it enables us to make use of law of large numbers
results in determining specialization at the occupational level.24 We allow tasks within occupations to be
23
To simplify the exposition, we use i to denote locations of production and n to denote locations of consumption, except where
otherwise indicated.
24
To reduce the notational burden, we assume the same [0, 1] interval of tasks for all occupations, but it is straightforward to allow
this interval to vary across occupations.

19

either substitutes (νso > 1) or complements (0 < νso < 1), and we can consider any ranking of the elasticities
of substitution between tasks and occupations, although the conventional assumption in such a nested CES
structure is again a higher elasticity of substitution at the more disaggregated level (νso > µs ).25
Tasks are performed by labor using a constant returns to scale technology and can be traded between
locations. For example, product design can be undertaken in one location, while production and assembly
occur in another location. The cost to a firm in location n of sourcing a task t from location i within occupation
o and sector s is:
gniso (j, t) =

τniso wi
,
aiso (j, t)

(15)

where wi is the wage; τniso are iceberg task trade costs, such that τniso > 1 units of the task must be performed
in location i in order for one unit to be completed in location n for occupation o and sector s; aiso (j, t) is
productivity for task t and good j within occupation o and sector s in location i.
Input productivity for each task, occupation, sector and location is also stochastic and is assumed to be
drawn independently from a Fréchet distribution:
χso −so

Fiso = e−Uiso Liso a

,

(16)

where so > 1 is the Fréchet shape parameter that controls the dispersion of productivity across tasks within
occupations; Uiso is a scale parameter that controls average productivity for each occupation o, sector s and
location i; Liso is employment in occupation o, sector s and location i; and χso parameterizes the strength of
agglomeration forces in occupation o and sector s. We again model these agglomeration forces as external
economies of scale (as in Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg 2012), which imply that average productivity in
occupation o and sector s in location i is increasing in employment in that occupation, sector and location.

4.3

Trade in Tasks

Firms within a given location n source each task t within an occupation o, good j and sector s from the lowest
cost source of supply for that task:
gnso (j, t) = min {gniso (j, t); i ∈ N } .
Given finite task trade costs, locations supply tasks for which they have high productivity draws themselves,
and source other tasks for which they have low productivity draws from other locations. Using our assumption of a Fréchet distribution of input productivity, the share of firm costs in location n accounted for by tasks
sourced from location i within occupation o and sector s (λniso ) is equal to the fraction of tasks sourced from
25

While we interpret production as being undertaken by workers in occupations that perform many tasks, an equivalent interpretation is that each occupation corresponds to a stage of production and each task corresponds to an intermediate input within that
stage of production.

20

that location:26
λniso

so
Uiso Lχiso
(τniso wi )−so
=P
χso
−so .
k∈N Ukso Lkso (τnkso wk )

(17)

Intuitively, the share of firm costs accounted for by tasks from each location depends on production costs
in each location (as determined by wages wi , the exogenous productivity parameter Uiso , and the endogenous
so
component of productivity from agglomeration forces Lχiso
) and the bilateral costs of trading tasks (τniso ).

4.4

Trade in Final Goods

Consumers within a given location n source each final good j within a sector s from the lowest cost source
of supply for that final good:
pns (j) = min {pnis (j); i ∈ N } .
For finite final goods trade costs, locations supply final goods for which they have low unit costs themselves,
and source other final goods for which they have high units costs from other locations. These unit costs for
final goods depend on input productivities and trade in tasks, as characterized in the previous subsection, as
well on final goods productivities. Using our assumption of a Fréchet distribution of final goods productivity,
the share of location n’s expenditure on final goods produced in location i within sector s (πnis ) is equal to
the fraction of final goods sourced from that location:27
πnis = P

Tis Lηiss (dnis Φis wi )−θs

ηs
−θs
k∈N Tks Lks (dnks Φks wk )

,

(18)

where Φis is a summary statistic for the unit costs of sourcing the tasks for all occupations in sector s in
location i, as derived in the web appendix.
Intuitively, the share of expenditure on final goods from each location within a given sector depends
on production costs in each location (as determined by wages wi , the unit cost summary statistic Φis , the
exogenous productivity parameter Tis , and the endogenous component of productivity from agglomeration
forces Lηiss ) and the bilateral costs of trading final goods (dnis ).

4.5

Population Mobility

Population mobility implies that workers must receive the same indirect utility in all populated locations:
Vn =

vn
α
Pn rn1−α

26

= V̄ ,

(19)

Since the Fréchet distribution is unbounded from above, each location draws an arbitrarily high input productivity for a positive
measure of tasks. To allow for the possibility that a location may not have positive employment in an occupation o and sector s, we
take lim Uiso → 0, in which case the location’s employment in that occupation and sector converges to zero. Similarly, to allow for
the possibility that an occupation o may not be traded, we take lim dnis → ∞, in which case trade in that occupation converges to
zero.
27
Since the Fréchet distribution is unbounded from above, each location draws an arbitrarily high final goods productivity for a
positive measure of final goods. To allow for the possibility that a location may not have positive employment in a sector s, we take
lim Tis → 0, in which case the location’s employment in that sector converges to zero. Similarly, to allow for the possibility that a
sector s may not be traded, we take lim dnis → ∞, in which case trade in that sector converges to zero.

21

where indirect utility depends on per capita income (vn ), the consumption goods price index (Pn ) and land
rents (rn ). Labor market clearing requires that the sum of total employment across all locations equals the
economy’s labor supply:
X

Ln = L̄.

(20)

n∈N

In the web appendix, we provide a further characterization of the general equilibrium of the model, including
the distribution of population across locations (Ln ) and each location’s own trade share for final goods (πnns )
and tasks (λnnso ).

4.6

Reductions in Transport and Communication Costs

The distribution of employment across occupations, sectors and locations in the model is determined by two
sets of forces: productivity differences (which depend on both an exogenous component and an endogenous
component through agglomeration forces) and the costs of trading both tasks and final goods. Together these
two sets of forces determine comparative advantages across occupations within sectors and across sectors.
Patterns of comparative advantage across occupations within sectors can be characterized by a double
difference for a given import market. The first difference computes the ratio of exports of tasks from two
locations i and k in a third market n in a single occupation; the second difference compares this ratio of
exports of tasks for two separate occupations o and m. Taking this double difference in the unit cost share in
equation (17), we obtain:

 

so
so
(τnkso wk )−so
(τniso wi )−so / Ukso Lχkso
Uiso Lχiso
λniso /λnkso
.
 
=
so
so
λnism /λnksm
(τnksm wk )−sm
(τnism wi )−sm / Uksm Lχksm
Uism Lχism

(21)

Therefore, a location i specializes more in occupation o relative to occupation m compared to another location
k when it has lower production costs (as determined by wages wi , the exogenous productivity parameter Uiso ,
so
and the endogenous component of productivity from agglomeration forces Lχiso
) and lower bilateral costs of

trading tasks (as determined by τniso )
Patterns of comparative advantage across sectors can be characterized by an analogous double difference
for a given import market. The first difference computes the ratio of exports of final goods from two locations
i and k in a third market n in a single sector; the second difference compares this ratio of exports of final
goods for two separate sectors s and r. Taking this double difference in the expenditure share in equation
(18), we obtain:
h

πnis /πnks
πnir /πnkr

i h
i
Tis Lηiss (dnis Φis wi )−θs / Tks Lηkss (dnks Φks wk )−θs
i h
i.
=h
Tir Lηirr (dnir Φir wi )−θr / Tkr Lηkrr (dnkr Φkr wk )−θr

(22)

Therefore a location i specializes more in sector s relative to sector r compared to another location k when
it has lower production costs (as determined by wages wi , the unit cost summary statistic Φis , the exogenous
22

productivity parameter Tis , and the endogenous component of productivity from agglomeration forces Lηiss )
and lower bilateral costs of trading final goods (as determined by dnis ).
When the costs of trading tasks and final goods are large, all locations have similar employment structures across sectors, and all tasks within each sector are undertaken in the same location where the final
good is produced. As the costs of trading final goods and tasks fall, locations specialize across sectors and
across occupations within sectors according to their comparative advantage as determined by productivity
differences.28 If densely-populated urban locations have a comparative advantage in interactive tasks relative
to sparsely-populated rural locations (e.g. as argued in Gaspar and Glaeser 1998), the model predicts that a
fall in the costs of trading tasks leads to an increase in the interactiveness of employment within sectors in
urban relative to rural areas.
Therefore, the model highlights the role of reductions in communication costs (e.g. telephones) and improvements in transport technologies (e.g. roads and the automobile) in influencing the interactiveness of
employment. In interpreting these predictions, several caveats are relevant. In particular, the model implies
that relative productivities across occupations, sectors and locations are an important determinant of comparative advantage across occupations within sectors and across sectors (and hence matter for the interactiveness
of employment). Additionally, our long historical time period includes other changes that could have influenced the relative importance of different occupations, including the extent to which technological change
was skill-biased. In the historical literature, several studies argue that technical change often replaced–rather
than complemented–skilled artisans in the nineteenth-century, including Hounshell (1985), James and Skinner (1985) and Mokyr (1992). However, there remains substantial debate about the extent to which this was
the case. In their classic study of the race between technology and skills, Goldin and Katz (2008) present
evidence that manufacturing technologies were skill complementary in the early-twentieth century, but may
have been skill substituting prior to that time.29 In subsequent work, Katz and Margo (2014) report some evidence of de-skilling in manufacturing during the nineteenth-century, but find a reallocation of employment
towards high-skill jobs for the aggregate economy as a whole.30

5

Explaining Increased Interactiveness

Having established a robust increase in the interactiveness of employment in urban areas relative to rural areas, and having developed a model to interpret these results in terms of specialization according to
28

For further discussion of trade in tasks and the unbundling of production, see for example Baldwin (2014).
Using data from the early-twentieth century, Gray (2013) finds that electrification led to a polarization of the employment distribution, increasing the demand for non-routine and routine cognitive tasks, while simultaneously reducing relative demand for the
non-routine manual jobs which comprised the middle of the skill distribution.
30
In a study of the merchant shipping industry in the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries, Chin, Juhn and Thompson
(2006) find that the adoption of the steam engine raised skill premia. Using data on manufacturing plants in the late-nineteenth
century, Atack, Bateman and Margo (2004) find that plant wages are decreasing in size, but are increasing in the use of steam power,
which is consistent with technology-skill complementarity.
29

23

comparative advantage, we now provide further evidence on explanations for the observed changes in interactiveness. First, we decompose the overall change in interactiveness into the contributions of individual
occupations and sectors, which enables us to explore explanations that emphasize particular occupations and
sectors. Second, we report regression specifications using variation in interactiveness between sectors, within
sectors, and within sectors and occupations over time. Using these regressions, we explore the importance of
the constituent components of interactiveness (thought, communication and intersocial) and present evidence
on a number of potential explanations. Third, we provide evidence on the relationship between changes in
interactiveness and the dissemination of new communication and transport technologies.

5.1

Decomposing Interactiveness

We begin by decomposing the change in the overall interactiveness of metro and non-metro areas into the
contributions of each two-digit occupation and sector. Overall interactiveness for metro and non-metro areas
is the employment-weighted average of interactiveness for each two-digit-sector-occupation cell:
Ijt =

X X Eojt
Io ,
Ejt

j ∈ {M, N } ,

(23)

z∈Ω o∈Ωz

where z indexes two-digit-sector-occupation cells; o indexes disaggregated three-digit occupations within
these cells; and t indexes time; Ω is the set of two-digit-sector-occupation cells; Ωz is the set of three-digit
occupations within each cell z; the interactiveness of each three-digit occupation is measured using (5) based
on the time-invariant occupational descriptions from the 1991 DOTs.
Taking differences between times T and t > T , the change in the overall interactiveness of metro and
non-metro areas can be decomposed as follows:
X X   Eojt 
4Ijt =
4
Io ,
Ejt

j ∈ {M, N } ,

(24)

z∈Ω o∈Ωz

where 4Ijt = Ijt − IjT ; 4 (Eojt /Ejt ) is the change in the employment share of occupation o in location j ∈
{M, N }; and we have used the fact that occupation interactiveness is constant over time. Taking differences
again between metro and non-metro areas, we obtain an analogous decomposition of the change in the relative
interactiveness of metro and non-metro areas:
4IM t − 4IN t


X X  EoM t
EoN t
−4
Io ,
=
4
EM t
EN t

(25)

z∈Ω o∈Ωz

where the right-hand sides of the decompositions (24) and (25) are summations over the contributions from
each two-digit-sector-occupation-cell. These contributions correspond to a matrix with two-digit sectors for
rows and two-digit occupations for columns, where the right-hand side is a summation across both rows and
columns. Metro areas display a larger increase in interactiveness than non-metro areas to the extent that they
experience a greater reallocation of employment shares towards high-interactiveness occupations.
24

Figure 3 and 4 summarize the results from the decompositions of the change in the relative interactiveness
of metro and non-metro areas in equation (25). Figure 3 shows the contributions for each two-digit occupation (summing across sectors in the rows of the matrix of contributions) for each twenty-year interval in
our sample, while Figure 4 show the corresponding contributions for each two-digit sector (summing across
occupations in the columns of the matrix of contributions).31 Figures A6 and A7 in the web appendix report
analogous results from the decompositions of the change in interactiveness for metro and non-metro areas
separately in equation (24).
Figure 3 show that the sharp increase in the relative interactiveness of metro areas from 1880-1920 is
largely driven by positive contributions from Clerks, with Operatives, Sales Workers and Managers all making
negative contributions. From 1920-1960, Professionals (and to a lesser but growing extent Managers) make the
largest positive contributions, while Craftsmen and Operatives make negative contributions. From 1960-2000,
Professionals and Managers have the largest positive contributions, while Clerks have the largest negative
contribution. Figure 4 shows that Professional and Business services are the two sectors that make the largest
contributions to the increase in the relative interactiveness of metro areas over the sample period as a whole.
Business Services make positive contributions towards the beginning and end of the sample period, while
Professional Services become more important later on. While the contribution from Manufacturing is initially
positive, it becomes negative later in the sample period.
Taking these decomposition results together, the increase in the relative interactiveness of metro areas
is not driven by any one occupation or sector. Our results are not solely explained by Managers (whose
contribution only becomes positive towards the end of our sample period). Clerks and Professionals make
notable positive contributions towards the beginning and end of our sample period respectively. Our results
are also not simply driven by a decline of Manufacturing in urban areas (indeed Manufacturing makes a
positive contribution in the early decades of our sample when some of the largest changes in interactiveness
were observed). Similarly, our findings are not simply attributable to an expansion of Services in urban
areas (indeed Services was a relatively small share of employment in the early decades of our sample when
some of the largest changes in interactiveness were observed). Furthermore, our regression specifications
above include sector-year fixed effects, which control for common changes across all occupations within
each sector. Therefore, our results cannot simply be explained by reallocation across sectors, and instead
reflective a pervasive reallocation of employment towards more interactive occupations within sectors.

5.2

Variation Within and Between Sectors

We now provide further evidence against explanations based on reallocation across sectors (such as the movement of manufacturing jobs out of cities or the concentration of service jobs in cities) by exploiting variation
31

Since the change in overall interactiveness is the sum across all elements in the matrix, adding the sums for occupations and the
sums for sectors would result in double-counting (since each element would be counted twice).

25

within versus between sectors. We begin by examining between-sector variation. We define sector interactiveness as the employment-weighted mean of the interactiveness of each occupation:
Interactivest =

X Eost
o

Est

Interactiveo .

(26)

Using this measures, we run a regression across sectors of the share of a sector’s employment in metro areas
(MetroSharest ) on its interactiveness (Interactivest ) for each year separately:
MetroSharest = αt Interactivest + εst ,

(27)

where εst is a stochastic error; αt captures the correlation between sectors’ shares of employment in metro
areas and their interactiveness in each year. While we estimate the above regression and the remaining
regressions in this section using a share as the left-hand side variable so that the estimated coefficients have
a natural interpretation as frequencies, we again find a very similar pattern of results in a robustness test in
which we use a logistic transformation of the left-hand side variable: MetroSharest /(1 − MetroSharest ).
Panel A of Table 5 reports the results, where each cell in the table corresponds to a separate regression.
In 1880, there is a negative but statistically insignificant correlation between a sector’s metro employment
share and its interactiveness. Starting in 1900, there is an increase in the correlation between a sector’s metro
employment share and its interactiveness, which is particularly sharp from 1900-1940, and becomes positive
and statistically significant at conventional critical values in 1960. Therefore more interactive sectors become
increasingly concentrated in metro areas over time. Although the estimated coefficients on the interactiveness
measure do not become significant until 1960, there is a relatively constant increase in the value of these
coefficients across decades, as also shown in Figure 1.
Panel A of Table 5 also breaks out overall interactiveness into its three components of thought (Class IV,
Division 1), communication (Class IV, Division 2), and intersocial (Class V, Division 2). We also include for
comparison individual volition (Class V, Division 1). Interpreting the magnitudes of the coefficients for these
measures in Table 5 involves taking into account both the estimated coefficients and the standard deviations
of each thesaurus measure. In Table A6 of the web appendix, we report the corresponding beta coefficients,
which scale the estimated coefficients using the standard deviations of the dependent and independent variables. We find a broad increase in the concentration of each of the components of interactiveness in urban
areas, which is larger for thought and communication and smaller for intersocial volition. The increase in
the beta coefficients for our overall measure of interactiveness can be larger or smaller than for its individual
components, depending on the correlation in verb use across these components and the relative standard
deviations of the verbs in each component.
In principle, these changes in patterns of specialization in metro versus non-metro areas could be explained in terms of relative demand or relative supply. An increase in the relative demand for an occupation

26

raises both its employment and its wage (and hence raises its wagebill). In contrast, an increase in the relative supply of an occupation raises its employment but reduces its wage (and hence reduces its wagebill if
the demand for occupations is inelastic). To assess the relative importance of these two explanations, Panel
A of Table 5 also reports the results of regressions in which we measure sector interactiveness using wagebill shares instead of employment shares in equation (26). Although the wage data are available for a much
shorter time period than the employment data, we find a similar pattern of results using this alternative lefthand side variable, which is consistent with relative demand moving relative wagebills and employment in
the same direction.
Having established these relationships between sectors, we next examine within-sector variation. We run
a regression across sectors and occupations of the share of a sector-occupation’s employment in metro areas
(MetroShareost ) on occupation interactiveness (Interactiveo ) for each year separately:
Metroost = αt Interactiveo + ηst + εost ,

(28)

where ηst are sector-year fixed effects and εost is a stochastic error. The sector-year fixed effects (ηst ) control
for changes in sector composition over time, so that the coefficient αt is identified solely from variation within
sectors. The coefficient αt captures the within-sector correlation between the share of employment in metro
areas and the interactiveness of occupations.
Panel B of Table 5 reports the results, where each cell in the table again corresponds to a separate regression. In line with our previous results, the correlation between metro employment shares and interactiveness
is negative in 1880. Over time, this correlation becomes more positive and becomes statistically significant
by 1960. Therefore, within sectors, more interactive occupations become increasingly concentrated in metro
areas over time. This finding of the same pattern of reallocation across occupations both between and within
sectors is consistent with a wide-ranging secular process favoring specialization in interactive occupations
in metro areas.
Panel B of Table 5 also breaks out overall interactiveness into its three components of thought, communication and intersocial volition. We again also include individual volition for comparison. We find a similar
pattern of results as in Panel A, with an increase in coefficient for all three components of interactiveness.
Panel B of Table 5 also reports the results of regressions in which we measure sector interactiveness using
wagebill shares instead of employment shares in equation (26). For the shorter period over which we have
the wage data, we again find a similar pattern of results using this alternative left-hand side variable, which
is consistent with relative demand moving relative wagebills and employment in the same direction.
Finally, to use variation within sectors and occupations, we pool our sector-occupation data over time and
estimate a panel data regression that facilitates the inclusion of sector, occupation and year fixed effects. We
regress the share of a sector-occupation’s employment in metro areas on these fixed effects and interaction

27

terms between time dummies and our measure of occupation interactiveness:
MetroShareost = αt [Interactiveo × Yeart ] + µo + ηs + δt + εost ,

(29)

where εost is a stochastic error; we choose 1880 as the excluded year from the interaction terms. The occupation fixed effects (µo ) control for time-invariant differences between metro and non-metro areas in the share
of an occupation in employment and capture the main effect of occupation interactiveness. The sector fixed
effects (ηs ) control for time-invariant differences between metro and non-metro areas in the share of a sector
in employment. The year fixed effects (δt ) control for changes in the shares of metro areas in employment
across all occupations and sectors. The coefficients αt capture the change in the correlation between metro
employment shares and interactiveness relative to 1880.
Table 6 reports the estimation results. Column (1) confirms our findings above of an increasing correlation between metro employment shares and occupation interactiveness over time, which becomes positive
and statistically significant by 1960. As shown in Column (2), this increasing correlation between metro employment shares and occupation interactiveness is robust to replacing the sector and year fixed effects with
sector-year fixed effects to control for changes in sector composition over time. These sector-year fixed effects also control for variation arising from variations in metropolitan area status of counties arising from
sectoral specialisation.
In Columns (3)-(4), we examine an alternative potential explanation for our findings based based on
changes in female labor force participation. Over our long historical time period, female labor force participation increased substantially, which implies that more and more couples face a colocation problem where
both partners are looking for work in a common location (e.g. Costa and Kahn 2000). Since solving such a
colocation problem is likely to be easier in more densely-populated locations, one concern is that the movement of such “power couples” into densely-populated locations could be driving the increase in the relative
concentration of employment in interactive occupations in metro areas. Although it is not necessarily the
case that power couples work in interactive occupations, Columns (3) and (4) provide evidence against this
concern by estimating the specification in Column (2) separately for single and married people. Comparing
the two columns, we find a similar pattern of results irrespective of marital status, which suggests that our
findings are not being driven by the location decisions of power couples.
In Columns (5)-(6), we provide further evidence against explanations based on individual sectors. In
Column (5), we include only workers in the manufacturing sector and demonstrate a similar pattern of results,
which corroborates that our findings are not simply being driven by the rise of the services sector in urban
areas. In Column (6), we include only workers in the services sector, which confirms that our findings are not
simply being driven by a decline in manufacturing in urban areas. Therefore the increase in the interactiveness
of urban areas over time does not simply reflect manufacturing jobs moving out of cities or service jobs moving
into cities.
28

In Columns (7)-(8), we examine the role of differences in human capital across cities. Glaeser and Resseger
(2010) find that the positive average relationship between productivity and metro area population is driven by
a strong positive relationship for more-skilled metro areas, whereas this relationship is almost non-existent for
less-skilled metro areas. Using Glaeser and Resseger (2010)’s classification of metro areas by skill, Columns (7)
and (8) re-estimate the specification in Column (2) excluding more and less-skilled metro areas respectively.32
In both samples, we find a positive and statistically significant increase in the relative concentration of employment in interactive occupations in metro areas over time. Therefore, although the size of this increase
is larger in the sample excluding less-skilled metro areas, even in the sample excluding more-skilled metro
areas we find the same reallocation of employment towards interactive occupations in metro areas. Therefore
our findings of an increased interactiveness of urban areas are not simply explained by differences in levels
of human capital across cities.

5.3

Improvements in Transport and Communication Technologies

We now provide some suggestive evidence on the role of improvements in transport and communication
technologies in influencing the interactiveness of employment. We combine data on employment by occupation, sector and county for 1880 and 1930 with information on the spatial diffusion of the telephone and road
network in the opening decades of the twentieth century. We focus on this period because both the telephone
and paved highways were virtually non-existent in 1880 and diffused rapidly from 1880-1930; we observe the
largest increase in the relative interactiveness of metro areas over these decades; and county identifiers are
reported in the individual-level population census data for these years.
Our baseline specification regresses the change in interactiveness in each county from 1880-1930 (4Interactivec )
on log telephones per capita (Phonepcc ) and highways per kilometer (Highwaypac ) in the 1930s:
4Interactivec = αP ln (Phonepcc ) + αH Highwaypac + Xc αX + uc ,

(30)

where Phonepcc is residence telephones in 1935 divided by population in 1930; Highwaypac is the length
of highways from the Gallup (1931) map in each county divided by county area; Xc are controls for other
county characteristics; uc is a stochastic error; since telephones and paved highways were both essentially
non-existent in 1880, the values of these variables in the 1930s capture their growth from 1880-1930.
Telephones and highways are unlikely to be randomly assigned to counties. Therefore a concern is that
changes in interactiveness and the diffusion of these technologies both could be influenced by omitted third
factors that enter the error term uc and hence induce a correlation between the diffusion of these technologies
and the error term. In particular, we have already shown that more densely-populated locations experienced
an increase in their relative interactiveness over time, and telephones and highways may have also diffused
32

In Glaeser and Resseger (2010)’s classification, more-skilled Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) have a share of adults with
college degrees of greater than 25.025 percent in 2006. The year 1960 is omitted in Columns (7) and (8) because the IPUMS 1960 data
do not contain the identifiers for individual MSAs.

29

more rapidly to more densely-populated locations. For this reason, we include among our controls Xc each
county’s initial log population in 1880 and its log area.
To further address the concern that telephones and roads are non-randomly assigned, we develop instruments based on institutional features of the development of the telephone and highway network. We include
these instruments alongside our controls in the following first-stage regressions:
ln (Phonepcc ) = βP ZP c + βH ZHc + Xc βX + εc ,

(31)

Highwaypac = γP ZP c + γH ZHc + Xc γX + ωc ,

(32)

where ZP c is our instrument for telephones (P is mnemonic for phones) and ZHc is our instrument for
highways (H is mnemonic for highways); εc and ωc are stochastic errors.
To develop an instrument for log telephones per capita, we exploit the network structure of telephone
communication. Following Alexander Graham Bell’s successful filing for a patent in 1876, the Bell Telephone
Company was incorporated in 1877, and the first telephone exchange was opened under license from Bell
Telephone in New Haven, CT in 1878. As local telephone exchanges began to emerge in major U.S. cities,
the American Telephone and Telegraph Company (AT&T) was formed in 1885 as a subsidiary of American
Bell Telephone to build and operate a long distance telephone network. In these early years, there was considerable debate within American Bell Telephone about the strategic rationale for developing a long distance
network and whether such a network would be profitable given that much of the initial demand for telephones
appeared to be local (see for example John 2010).
By the end of 1885, the first long distance line was completed between New York and Philadelphia with an
initial capacity of one telephone call, and it was not until 1892 that a long distance line to Chicago was finished
again with an initial capacity of one call. Following Theodore Vail’s accession to the Presidency of AT&T in
1907, the company aggressively pursued the development of its long distance network, with the strategic goals
of connecting the nation as a whole (e.g. Osbourne 1930) and pressing for nationwide monopoly powers
under Vail’s slogan of “One System, One Policy, Universal Service.” Ultimately this goal was achieved in
1913 with the issuance of the Kingsbury Commitment, which established AT&T as a government-sponsored
monopoly, in return for it divesting its interests in the manufacture of telephone and telegraph equipment
and allowing independent telephone companies to connect with its long distance network. By 1915, the first
transcontinental long distance line to San Francisco was completed.
As our instrument for county log telephones per capita, we use county proximity to AT&T’s long distance
network (see Map A1 in the web appendix). We measure proximity using the log of the sum of the distances
from each county’s centroid to the nearest primary and secondary outlets on this network, which captures
the centrality of each county relative to the network. This instrument uses the fact that AT&T’s long distance
network was developed with the strategic objective of connecting the nation rather than based on interactiveness in individual counties. Our identifying assumption is that conditional on our controls for initial
30

population and area there is no direct effect of proximity to long distance outlets on county interactiveness
other than through log telephones per capita. The locations of these long distance outlets have predictive
power for log telephones per capita, because they facilitated the connection of local telephone companies
to the long distance network, which increased the value of a telephone connection to local subscribers, and
hence increased telephone diffusion. In this way, we exploit the network properties of the telephone, which
it shares with for example distribution networks, as in Holmes (2011).
Our instrument for highways per kilometer uses the institutional development of the U.S. highways network. In 1880, paved roads were the exception and were concentrated in the immediate vicinity of central
business districts.33 Demand for road improvements grew following the production of the first American
gasoline-powered automobile in Chicopee, Massachusetts in 1893 and the rapid growth in car registrations,
which reached 8,000 in 1900, nearly 33,000 in 1903 and over 10 million by 1921 (U.S. Department of Transport
1976, Lewis 1997 and Swift 2011). The federal government’s involvement in the road network dates back to
the formation of the Office of Road Inquiry in 1893, which became the Office of Public Roads in 1905 and the
Bureau of Public Roads in 1915. Federal government participation was stimulated in part by its responsibility
for the postal service, which was a department of the federal government from 1792-1971. Thus the Federal
Aid Road Act of 1916 provided federal funding for rural post roads on the condition that these roads were
open to public at no charge and that states submitted plans, surveys and estimates for the approval of the
Secretary of Agriculture.
The scale of federal government participation grew with the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1921, which
provided 50-50 matching funds for state highway building. Each state was required to propose a system of
roads for federal aid that did not exceed 7 percent of its highway mileage, and the Department of Agriculture
was authorized to publish a map of the network on which federal aid would be spent by November 1923.
As part of the planning process for this network, the Bureau of Public Roads commissioned General John J.
Pershing to draw up a map of roads of military importance in the event of war. This “Pershing Map” identified
75,000 miles of road as strategically important for reasons of coastal and border defense (see Map A2 in the
web appendix).34 More than 10,000 miles of Federal Aid Highways were laid down in 1922 and by 1929 more
than 90 percent of the Federal Aid Highways (around 170,000 miles) had been improved.
We instrument the length of highways per kilometer from the Gallup (1931) map using the length of
Pershing highways per kilometer within each county from the Pershing Map. Our identifying assumption
is that conditional on our controls for initial population and area there is no direct effect of Pershing highways per kilometer on county interactiveness other than through actual highways per kilometer. Pershing
highways per kilometer have predictive power for actual highways per kilometer, because these highways of
33

At the end of 1909, concrete accounted for only nine miles of state and county roads (Macdonald 1928).
Consistent with these objectives, the Pershing Map excluded parts of the Deep South and Florida that were considered to be
sufficiently swampy as to render foreign invasion impractical.
34

31

military importance were incorporated into the final network of Federal Aid Highways in the Department of
Agriculture’s 1923 map.
In Column (1) of Table 7, we begin by running an OLS regression of the change in county interactiveness
from 1880-1930 on county log telephones per capita in 1935, highways per kilometer in 1931 and our controls (equation (30)). We find a positive and statistically significant coefficient for telephones and a positive
but statistically insignificant coefficient for highways.35 In Column (2), we report our instrumental variables
estimates of equations (30)-(32). We find positive and statistically significant coefficients for both telephones
and highways. Therefore both the diffusion of telephones induced by AT&T’s long distance network and the
development of highways for military reasons raise county interactiveness. The increase in the estimated
coefficients on highways between the OLS and IV specifications is consistent with the view that conditional
on our controls for population density highways are disproportionately assigned to locations with lower
growth in interactiveness. This finding is in line with Duranton and Turner (2012)’s results for the later
interstate highway system, in which conditional on their controls highways also appear to be disproportionately assigned to relatively less-developed locations. While these specifications control for population density
through the inclusion of log population and log area, we also find a very similar pattern of results if we also
include a (0,1) dummy for whether a county is located within a metro area.
In Columns (3)-(4) of Table 7, we report the first-stage regressions for phones and highways respectively,
while Column (5) reports the reduced-form regression. We find that proximity to the AT&T long distance network and Pershing highways have predictive power for the endogenous variables, with first-stage F-statistics
on the excluded exogenous variables of 38.40 and 26.35 in Columns (3) and (4) respectively. Consistent with
this, we reject the null hypotheses of underidentification and weak identification in the Kleibergen-Paap test
statistics reported in Column (2).
We acknowledge several caveats to these results. We cannot definitively rule out that areas on the Pershing map and further from ATT trunk lines could otherwise have changed differently even in the absence
of improvements in transportation and communication technologies. Our sample also includes counties in
cities, where the network connections may have been designed to connect these urban areas, and hence our
empirical approach differs from studies that focus solely on rural areas on the route between cities. Nonetheless, these results provide some suggestive evidence that the change in the interactiveness of employment is
related to reductions in transportation and communication costs.
35

As discussed in the data section above, our telephones data for 1935 are for residence telephones. Separate data for business and
residence telephones are available for 1945 and we find a strong correlation between them. Regressing log residence telephones on
log business telephones across counties in 1945, we find an estimated coefficient (standard error) of 0.8950 (0.0090) and a regression
R-squared of 0.87.

32

6

Conclusions

While there is a large literature on agglomeration, there is relatively little evidence on the tasks undertaken
within cities and how these have changed over time. We develop a new methodology for quantifying the
tasks undertaken in urban and rural areas that uses over 3,000 verbs from more than 12,000 occupational
descriptions over a period of more than a century. We first characterize changes in the task content of employment using verbs and their meanings in a way that imposes little prior structure on the data. Guided
by these findings, we construct a quantitative measure of the interactiveness of occupations based on the
frequency with which verbs from the occupational descriptions appear in thesaurus categories involving
thought, communication and intersocial activity. Using this measure, we find an increase in the employment
share of interactive occupations within sectors over time that is larger in metro areas than non-metro areas.
These findings highlight a change in the nature of agglomeration over time towards an increased emphasis
on human interaction.
We interpret these findings using a model of trade in the tasks produced by each occupation and in the
final goods produced by each sector. When the costs of trading tasks and final goods are large, all locations
have similar employment structures across sectors, and all tasks within each sector are undertaken in the
same location where the final good is produced. As the costs of trading final goods and tasks fall, locations
specialize across sectors and across occupations within sectors according to their comparative advantage as
determined by productivity differences. If densely-populated urban locations have a comparative advantage
in interactive tasks relative to sparsely-populated rural locations, a fall in trade costs leads to an increase in
the interactiveness of employment within sectors in urban relative to rural areas.
Guided by these predictions, we examine alternative potential explanations for the increase in the interactiveness of employment in urban areas relative to rural areas over time. Our results are not simply explained
by reallocation across sectors, because our regressions control for sector-year fixed effects. Furthermore, we
find a similar pattern of results when we restrict attention to workers within manufacturing or workers within
services. Although we find that the movement of manufacturing jobs out of cities contributes towards the
observed changes in interactiveness, it is only part of the story, because we also find important contributions
from Business Services, Personal Services and Professional Services. We establish similar results using both
employment and wagebill shares, consistent with an explanation for changes in interactiveness in terms of
movements in relative demand. Finally, we provide suggestive evidence that the increase in interactiveness
is related to improvements in communication and transport technologies, using the diffusion of telephones
and highways in the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries.

33

References
[1] Acemoglu, D. (1998) “Why do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed Technical Change and
Wage Inequality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113, 1055-1090.
[2] Acemoglu, D. (2002) “Directed Technical Change,” Review of Economic Studies, 69, 781-810.
[3] Acemoglu, D and D. Autor (2011) “Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for Employment and
Earnings,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, ed. by O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, vol. 4B, chapter 12, 10431171, Amsterdam: Elsevier.
[4] American Telephone and Telegraph Company (1935) Residence Telephones by Counties, New York: American Telephone and Telegraph Company
[5] Autor, D. (2013) “The ‘Task Approach’ to Labor Markets: An Overview,” Journal for Labour Market
Research, 1-15.
[6] Autor, David H. and Michael J. Handel (2009) “Putting Tasks to the Test: Human Capital, Job Tasks and
Wages,” Journal of Labor Economics, 31(2), S59-S96.
[7] Autor, D., L. Katz, and A. Krueger (1998) “Computing Inequality: Have Computers Changed the Labor
Market?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113, 1169-1214.
[8] Autor, David H., Frank Levy and Richard J. Murnane (2003) “The Skill Content of Recent Technological
Change: An Empirical Exploration,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November, 1279-1333.
[9] Bacolod, Marigee, Bernardo S. Blum and William C. Strange (2009a) “Skills in the City,” Journal of Urban
Economics, 65, 136-153.
[10] Bacolod, Marigee, Bernardo S. Blum and William C. Strange (2009b) “Urban Interactions: Soft Skills
Versus Specialization,” Journal of Economic Geography, 9, 227-262.
[11] Baldwin, Richard E. (2014) “Trade and Industrialisation after Globalisation’s 2nd Unbundling: How
Building and Joining a Supply Chain are Different and Why it Matters,” in Robert Feenstra and Alan
Taylor (Eds.), Globalization in an Age of Crisis: Multilateral Economic Cooperation in the Twenty-First
Century, Chapter 5, pp. 165-212, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
[12] Baum-Snow, Nate (2007) “Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
122(2), 775-805.
[13] Combes, Pierre-Philippe Combes, Gilles Duranton, Laurent Gobillon, Diego Puga and Sebastien Roux
(2012) “The Productivity Advantages of Large Cities: Distinguishing Agglomeration from Firm Selection,” Econometrica, 80(6), 2543-2594.
[14] Costa, Dora L. and Matthew E. Kahn (2000) “Power Couples: Changes In The Locational Choice Of The
College Educated, 1940-1990,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(4), 1287-1315.
[15] Costinot, Arnaud, Dave Donaldson and Ivana Komunjer (2012) “What Goods Do Countries Trade? A
Quantitative Exploration of Ricardo’s Ideas,” Review of Economic Studies, 79(2), 581-608.
[16] Davis, Donald R. and Jonathan I. Dingel (2012) “A Spatial Knowledge Economy,” NBER Working Paper,
18188.
[17] Davis, Morris A. and François Ortalo-Magne (2011) “Household Expenditures, Wages, Rents,” Review of
Economic Dynamics, 14(2), 248-261.
34

[18] Deming, David J. (2017) “The Growing Importance of Social Skills in the Labor Market,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, forthcoming.
[19] Duranton, Gilles and Diego Puga (2001) “Nursery Cities: Urban diversity, process innovation, and the
life cycle of products”, American Economic Review, 91(5), 1454-1477.
[20] Duranton, Gilles and Diego Puga (2004) “Micro-foundations of Urban Agglomeration Economies,” Chapter 48 in (eds.) J. V. Henderson and J.F. Thisse, Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Volume 4,
Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland.
[21] Duranton, Gilles and Diego Puga (2005) “From Sectoral to Functional Urban Specialization,” Journal of
Urban Economics, 343-370.
[22] Duranton, Gilles and Hubert Jayet (2011) “Is the Division of Labour Limited by the Extent of the Market?
Evidence from French Cities,” Journal of Urban Economics, 69(1), 56-71.
[23] Duranton, Gilles and Matthew Turner (2012) “Urban Growth and Transportation,” Review of Economic
Studies, forthcoming.
[24] Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel S. Kortum (2002) “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica, 70(5)
(2002), 1741-1779.
[25] Ethier, Wilfred J. (1982) “Decreasing Costs in International Trade and Frank Graham’s Argument for
Protection,” Econometrica, 50, 1243-1268.
[26] Fischer, Claude S. (1992) America Calling: A Social History of the Telephone to 1940, Los Angeles: University of California Press.
[27] Fujita, Masahisa and Takatoshi Tabuchi (1997) “Regional Growth in Postwar Japan,” Regional Science and
Urban Economics, 27, 643-670.
[28] Gallup (1931) Motor Trails Map of the United States, Kansas City: Gallup Map Company.
[29] Gaspar, Jess and Edward L. Glaeser (1998) “Information Technology and the Future of Cities,” Journal of
Urban Economics, 43(1), 136-156.
[30] Gentzkow, Matthew, Jesse M. Shapiro and Michael Sinkinson (2012) “Competition and Ideological Diversity: Historical Evidence from U.S. Newspapers,” Chicago Booth School of Business, mimeograph.
[31] Glaeser, Edward L. and Albert Saiz (2004) “The Rise of the Skilled City,” Brookings-Wharton Papers on
Urban Affairs, 5, 47-94. .
[32] Glaeser, Edward L., A. M. Ponzetto and Kristina Tobio (2014) “Cities, Skills and Regional Change,” Regional Studies, 48(1), 7-43.
[33] Glaeser, Edward L. and Matthew G. Resseger (2010) “The Complementarity Between Cities and Skills,”
Journal of Regional Science, 50(1), 221-244.
[34] Goldin, C., and L. Katz (2008) The Race between Education and Technology, Cambridge MA: Harvard
University Press.
[35] Gray, Rowena (2013) “Taking Technology to Task: The Skill Content of Technological Change in Early
Twentieth Century U.S.” Explorations in Economic History, 50(3), 351-367.
[36] Grossman, Gene and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg (2008) “Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of Offshoring,”
American Economic Review, 98(5), 1978-1997.
35

[37] Grossman, Gene and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg (2012) “Task Trade between Similar Countries,” Econometrica, 80(2), 593-629.
[38] Helpman, Elhanan (1998) “The Size of Regions,” In Topics in Public Economics: Theoretical and Applied
Analysis, ed. David Pines, Efraim Sadka, and Itzhak Zilcha, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
[39] Helsley, Robert W. and William C. Strange (2007) “Agglomeration, Opportunism and the Organization
of Production,” Journal of Urban Economics, 62, 55-75.
[40] Henderson, J. Vernon (1974) “The Sizes and Types of Cities,” American Economic Review, 64(4), 640-56.
[41] Henderson, J. Vernon (2003) “Marshall’s Scale Economies,” Journal of Urban Economics, 53, 1-28.
[42] Holmes, Thomas J. (2011) “The Diffusion of Wal-Mart and Economies of Density,” Econometrica, 79(1),
253-302.
[43] Hounshell, D. A. (1985) From the American System to Mass Production, 1800-1932: The Development of
Manufacturing Technology in the United States, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
[44] Hüllen, Werner (2003) A History of Roget’s Thesaurus: Origins, Development, and Design, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
[45] Jacobs, J. (1969) The Economy of Cities, Random House.
[46] James, J. A., and J. S. Skinner (1985) “The Resolution of the Labor-scarcity Paradox,” Journal of Economic
History, 45(3), 513-540.
[47] John, Richard R. (2010) Network Nation: Inventing American Telecommunications, Cambridge MA: Bellknap Press.
[48] Leamer, Edward and Michael Storper (2001) “The Economic Geography of the Internet Age,” Journal of
International Business Studies, 32(4), 641-665.
[49] Lewis, Tom (1997) Divided Highways: Building the Interstate Highways, Transforming American Life, New
York, N.Y.: Viking.
[50] Lin, Jeffrey (2011) “Technological Adaptation, Cities and New Work,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
93(2), 554-574.
[51] Katz, L. F., and R. A. Margo (2014) “Technical Change and the Relative Demand for Skilled Labor: The
United States in Historical Perspective,” in Human Capital in History: The American Record, ed. by L. P.
Boustan, C. Frydman, and R. A. Margo, pp. 15-58, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
[52] Macdonald, Thomas H. (1928) “The History and Development of Road Building in the United States,”
Transactions of the American Society of Civil Engineers, 92, 1181-1206.
[53] Michaels, Guy (2008) “The Effect of Trade on the Demand for Skill - Evidence from the Interstate Highway System,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(4), 683-701.
[54] Michaels, Guy, Ferdinand Rauch and Stephen Redding (2012) “Urbanization and Structural Transformation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127, 535-586.
[55] Michel, Jean-Baptiste, Yuan Kui Shen, Aviva Presser Aiden, Adrian Veres, Matthew K. Gray, The Google
Books Team, Joseph P. Pickett, Dale Hoiberg, Dan Clancy, Peter Norvig, Jon Orwant, Steven Pinker,
Martin A. Nowak, and Erez Lieberman Aiden (2011) “Quantitative Analysis of Culture Using Millions of
Digitized Books,” Science, 331, 176-182.
36

[56] Mokyr, J. (1992) The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
[57] Moretti, Enrico (2004) “Human Capital Externalities in Cities,” Chapter 51 in (eds) V. Henderson and J.F.
Thisse, Handbook of Urban and Regional Economics, Amsterdam: North Holland-Elsevier.
[58] Ngai, Rachel, and Chris Pissarides (2007) “Structural Change in a Multi-sector Model of Growth,” American Economic Review, 97(1), 429-443.
[59] Osbourne, H. S. (1930) “A General Switching Plan for Telephone Toll Service,” Bell System Technical
Journal, 9, 429-447.
[60] Ota, Mitsuru and Masahisa Fujita (1993) “Communication Technologies and Spatial Organization of
Multi-unit Firms in Metropolitan Areas,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 23, 695-729.
[61] Pool, Ithiel de Sola (1977) The Social Impact of the Telephone, Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
[62] Roget, Peter Mark (1911) Thesaurus of English Words and Phrases, Computer Readable Version of 1911
Edition, Evergreen Review, Inc.
[63] Rosenthal, Stuart S. and William C. Strange (2004) “Evidence on the Nature and Sources of Agglomeration Economics,” Chapter 49 in (eds.) J. V. Henderson and J.F. Thisse, Handbook of Regional and Urban
Economics, Volume 4, Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland.
[64] Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban, Pierre-Daniel Sarte and Raymond Owens III (2009) “Firm Fragmentation and
Urban Patterns,” International Economic Review, 50(1), 143-186.
[65] Ruggles, Steven, J. Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B. Schroeder, and Matthew
Sobek (2010) Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, Version 5.0 [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
[66] Standage, Tom (2007) The Victorian Internet: The Remarkable Story of the Telegraph and the Nineteenth
Century’s On-line Pioneers, New York: Walker & Company.
[67] Swift, Earl (2011) The Big Roads: The Untold Story of the Engineers, Visionaries, and Trailblazers Who
Created the American Superhighways, Mariner Books.
[68] U. S. Department of Labor (1939) Dictionary of Occupational Titles, Washington DC: U.S. Department of
Labor.
[69] U. S. Department of Labor (1991) Dictionary of Occupational Titles, Washington DC: U.S. Department of
Labor.
[70] U.S. Department of Transportation (1976) America’s Highways 1776-1976: A History of the Federal Aid
Program, Washington DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
[71] Yi, Kei-Mu and Jing Zhang (2013) “Structural Change in an Open Economy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 60(6), 667-682.

37

Table 1: Metro Area Specialization for Aggregate Occupations and Sectors
Panel A
Two-digit occupation
Clerical and Kindred
Craftsmen
Operatives
Sales workers
Service Workers
Managers, Officials, and Proprietors
Professional, Technical
Laborers

Coefficient
1880
0.15
0.09
0.06
0.01
0.00
-0.03
-0.07
-0.2

Standard Error
1880
0.08
0.06
0.07
0.07
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.18

Rank
1880
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Coefficient
2000
0.04
-0.01
-0.05
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.07
-0.15

Standard Error
2000
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.07

Rank
2000
4
6
7
2
5
3
1
8

Panel B
Coefficient
Standard Error
Rank
Coefficient
Standard Error
Rank
Two-digit sector
1880
1880
1880
2000
2000
2000
0.29
0.08
1
0.04
0.01
4
Entertainment and Recreation Services
0.13
0.05
2
0.02
0.01
6
Wholesale and Retail Trade
0.13
0.06
3
0.06
0.01
2
Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate
0.06
0.05
4
-0.01
0.01
10
Manufacturing
0.01
0.06
5
0.03
0.01
5
Personal Services
0.01
0.04
6
0.05
0.01
3
Transportation, Communication, and Other Utilities
-0.03
0.07
7
0.01
0.01
7
Public Administration
-0.03
0.06
8
0.00
0.01
9
Professional and Related Services
-0.12
0.08
9
0.08
0.01
1
Business and Repair Services
-0.14
0.08
10
0.00
0.01
8
Construction
-0.31
0.05
11
-0.27
0.03
11
Mining
Notes: Table reports the estimated coefficients from a regression of the share of employment in metro areas within an occupation, sector and year on two-digit occupationyear and two-digit sector-year fixed effects (equation (1) in the paper). A separate regression is estimated for each year. Occupation and sector fixed effects are each
normalized to sum to zero in each year. Standard errors are clustered by occupation. Occupations and sectors are sorted by the rank of their estimated coefficients for 1880.

Table 2: Verbs Most and Least Strongly Correlated with Metro Area Employment Shares
Panel A: Verbs Most Strongly Correlated with Metro Area Employment Shares
Rank 1880
1900
1920
1940
1960
1
Thread
Thread
File
File
Document
2
Stretch
Stitch
Distribute
Bill
Schedule
3
Interfere
Telephone
Record
Take
File
4
Hand
Sew
Notice
Compile
Record
5
Ravel
Hand
Telephone
Distribute
Distribute
6
Sew
Assist
Bill
Pay
Compile
7
Braid
Visit
Envelope
Letter
Notice
8
Visit
Describe
Document
Notice
Identify
9
Receive
Number
Learn
Record
Send
10
Sack
Stamp
Number
Send
Notify
Panel B: Verbs Least Strongly Correlated with Metro Area Employment Shares
Rank 1880
1900
1920
1940
1960
1821
Conduct
Abstract
Counsel
Recur
Accord
1822
Teach
Tread
Discuss
Enlist
Feed
1823
Channel
Pinch
Hear
Labor
Escape
1824
Sound
Assign
Assign
Tread
Hook
1825
Rule
Settle
Teach
Assign
Traverse
1826
Matter
Matter
Matter
Approve
Tread
1827
Drill
Tunnel
Consolidate
Extract
Loosen
1828
Tread
Sound
Rule
Tunnel
Range
1829
Tunnel
Rule
Tunnel
Malt
Activate
1830
Pinch
Sole
Sound
Establish
Turn

1980
Identify
Document
Advise
Concern
Report
Schedule
Develop
Analyze
Determine
Notify

2000
Develop
Determine
Analyze
Factor
Review
Confer
Advise
Report
Concern
Plan

1980
Power
Pour
Erect
Clean
Massage
Pump
Cut
Feed
Move
Turn

2000
Restrain
Cut
Power
Massage
Remove
Feed
Clean
Pump
Move
Turn

Notes: Table reports the ranks of standardized coefficients from a regression of the share of employment in metro areas within an occupation, sector and year on the frequency with which a
verb is used for an occupation and three-digit sector-year fixed effects (equation (2) in the paper). A separate regression is estimated for each verb and year. Sector fixed effects are
normalized to sum to zero in each year. Estimated coefficients are normalized by the standard deviation for the verb frequency. Verbs are sorted by the rank of their standardized coefficients.
Verbs are from the time-invariant occupational descriptions from the 1991 Dictionary of Occupations (DOTs).

Table 3: Ranking of Thesaurus Sections by Concentration in Metro Areas in 1880 and 2000
Rank
Section
1880

Rank
Section
2000

Difference

C 1, Abstract relations, S I. EXISTENCE

15

12

3

C 1, Abstract relations, S II. RELATION

6

15

-9

C 1, Abstract relations, S III. QUANTITY

1

34

-33

C 1, Abstract relations, S IV. ORDER

23

9

14

C 1, Abstract relations, S V. NUMBER

24

10

14

C 1, Abstract relations, S VI. TIME

3

23

-20

C 1, Abstract relations, S VII. CHANGE

34

11

23

C 1, Abstract relations, S VIII. CAUSATION

26

22

4

C 2, Space, S I. SPACE I N GENERAL

10

32

-22

C 2, Space, S II. DIMENSIONS

4

36

-32

C 2, Space, S IV. MOTION

19

27

-8

C 3, Matter, S I. MATTER IN GENERAL

2

31

-29

C 3, Matter, S II. INORGANIC MATTER

7

37

-30

C 3, Matter, S III. ORGANIC MATTER

11

38

-27

C 4, Intellect, D I, S I. OPERATIONS OF INTELLECT IN GENERAL

21

14

7

C 4, Intellect, D I, S II. PRECURSORY CONDITIONS & OPERATIONS

16

19

-3

C 4, Intellect, D I, S III. MATERIALS FOR REASONING

25

7

18

C 4, Intellect, D I, S IV. REASONING PROCESSES

35

4

31

C 4, Intellect, D I, S V. RESULTS OF REASONING

33

5

28

C 4, Intellect, D I, S VI. EXTENSION OF THOUGHT

8

3

5

C 4, Intellect, D I, S VII. CREATIVE THOUGHT

38

21

17

C 4, Intellect, D II, S I. NATURE OF IDEAS COMMUNICATED.

27

1

26

C 4, Intellect, D II, S II. MODES OF COMMUNICATION

28

17

11

C 4, Intellect, D II, S III. MEANS OF COMMUNICATING IDEAS

32

18

14

C 5, Will, D I, S I. VOLITION IN GENERAL

14

29

-15

C 5, Will, D I, S II. Prospective Volition 1

29

20

9

C 5, Will, D I, S III. VOLUNTARY ACTION

20

33

-13

C 5, Will, D I, S IV. ANTAGONISM

30

16

14

C 5, Will, D II, S I. GENERAL INTERSOCIAL VOLITION

31

13

18

C 5, Will, D II, S II. SPECIAL INTERSOCIAL VOLITION

37

2

35

C 5, Will, D II, S III. CONDITIONAL INTERSOCIAL VOLITION

9

30

-21

C 5, Will, D II, S IV. POSSESSIVE RELATIONS

13

8

5

C 5, Will, S V. RESULTS OF VOLUNTARY ACTION

22

25

-3

C 6, Emotion, Religion, Morality, S I. AFFECTIONS IN GENERAL

5

35

-30

C 6, Emotion, Religion, Morality, S II. PERSONAL AFFECTIONS

12

28

-16

C 6, Emotion, Religion, Morality, S III. SYMPATHETIC AFFECTIONS

18

26

-8

C 6, Emotion, Religion, Morality, S IV. MORAL AFFECTIONS

36

6

30

C 6, Emotion, Religion, Morality, S V. RELIGIOUS AFFECTIONS

17

24

-7

Thesaurus Class (C), Division (D) and Section (S)

Notes: Coefficients from a regression of the share of employment in metro areas within an occupation, sector and year on the frequency with
which the verbs used for an occupation are classified within thesaurus sections and three-digit sector-year fixed effects (equation (4) in the
paper). A separate regression is estimated for each thesaurus section and year. Verbs are from the time invariant occupational descriptions
from the 1991 Dictionary of Occupations. Thesaurus sections ranks in 1880 and 2000 based on their estimated coefficient normalized by the
standard deviation for the thesaurus section frequency, the largest value is assigned a rank of one. The difference in ranks in the final column
is defined such that a positive value corresponds to a thesaurus section that becomes more concentrated in metro areas from 1880-2000.

Table 4: Most and Least Interactive Occupations
Panel A: Top Ten Interactive Occupations
Economists
Nurses, professional
Pharmacists
Clergymen
Religious workers
Accountants and auditors
Postmasters
Buyers and dept heads, store
Aeronautical-Engineers
Statisticians and actuaries
Panel B: Bottom Ten Interactive Occupations
Brickmasons,stonemasons, and tile setters
Attendants, auto service and parking
Painters, except construction or maintenance
Plumbers and pipe fitters
Upholsterers
Asbestos and insulation workers
Welders and flame cutters
Blasters and powdermen
Dressmakers and seamstresses except factory
Roofers and slaters
Notes: The table reports the ten occupations with the lowest and highest interactiveness,
as measured by the frequency of verb use in Class IV, Division 1 (Formation of Ideas),
Class IV, Division 2 (Communication of Ideas) and Class V, Division 2 (Intersocial Volition)
of Roget's Thesaurus. Verbs are from the time-invariant occupational descriptions from
the 1991 Dictionary of Occupations (DOTs)

Table 5: Metro Employment and Wagebill Shares and Interactiveness
Panel A: Between sectors
LHS
Measure
1880
1900
Employment
Interactiveness
-0.130
-0.132
(0.267)
(0.239)
Employment
Thought
-0.722***
-1.293***
(0.260)
(0.261)
Employment
Communication
-0.459***
-0.582***
(0.146)
(0.151)
Employment
Intersocial
-0.351**
-0.481***
(0.135)
(0.135)
Employment
Individual volition
-0.157***
-0.195***
(0.051)
(0.054)
Wagebill
Interactiveness
Panel B: Within sectors
LHS
Measure
Employment
Interactiveness
Employment

Thought

Employment

Communication

Employment

Intersocial

Employment

Individual volition

Wagebill

Interactiveness
Sector-year fixed effects

1920
0.258
(0.419)
-1.806***
(0.357)
-0.645***
(0.186)
-0.599***
(0.165)
-0.268***
(0.079)

1940
0.556
(0.405)
-0.622
(0.487)
-0.220
(0.266)
-0.117
(0.209)
-0.212***
(0.059)
0.557
(0.366)

1960
0.728***
(0.267)
0.190
(0.310)
0.210
(0.193)
0.101
(0.133)
-0.115**
(0.054)
0.557*
(0.283)

1980
0.901***
(0.200)
0.788***
(0.274)
0.360*
(0.208)
0.268**
(0.122)
0.019
(0.054)
0.814***
(0.215)

2000
0.814***
(0.182)
1.202***
(0.237)
0.530**
(0.233)
0.342***
(0.109)
0.085
(0.062)
0.733***
(0.201)

1880
-0.410***
(0.120)
-0.340**
(0.134)
-0.041
(0.144)
-0.030
(0.130)
-0.095*
(0.056)

1900
-0.261**
(0.119)
-0.411***
(0.132)
-0.042
(0.118)
-0.081
(0.078)
-0.058
(0.070)

1920
-0.104
(0.119)
-0.299***
(0.093)
0.025
(0.098)
-0.017
(0.058)
-0.021
(0.054)

1940
-0.036
(0.119)
-0.145
(0.095)
0.118
(0.079)
0.0197
(0.049)
-0.016
(0.039)
0.0430
(0.0874)

1960
0.190***
(0.064)
0.153***
(0.049)
0.183***
(0.036)
0.105***
(0.032)
0.006
(0.025)
0.207***
(0.0529)

1980
0.274***
(0.051)
0.227***
(0.037)
0.168***
(0.032)
0.0652*
(0.034)
0.015
(0.016)
0.281***
(0.0433)

2000
0.317***
(0.040)
0.246***
(0.039)
0.140***
(0.038)
0.046
(0.048)
0.027**
(0.013)
0.311***
(0.0374)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Notes: Each cell of each panel of the table corresponds to a separate regression. Coefficients estimated from a regression of the share of either employment or the wagebill in metro areas on the frequency with
which the verbs from occupational descriptions appear in a thesaurus section; the wagebill data are only available from 1940 onwards; the frequency with which verbs appear in a thesaurus section is measured
using time-invariant occupational descriptions from the 1991 Dictionary of Occupations (DOTs); Interactiveness is the frequency with which verbs from occupational descriptions appear in Class IV, Division 1,
Class IV, Division 2 and Class V, Division 2 of the thesaurus; Thought is the frequency with which verbs appear in Class IV (Division 1) of the thesaurus; Communication is the frequency with which verbs appear
in Class IV (Division 2) of the thesaurus; Intersocial is the frequency with which verbs appear in Class V (Division 2) of the thesaurus; Individual volition is the frequency with which verbs appear in Class V
(Division 1). In Panel A, observations are three-digit sectors for each year, the frequency of verb use for each sector is the employment-weighted average of the frequency for occupations within that sector, and
standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust (equation (27) in the paper). In Panel B, observations are three-digit sectors and occupations for each year, three-digit sector-year fixed effects are included, and
standard errors in Panel B are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered on occupation (equation (28) in the paper). * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

Table 6: Metro Area Employment Shares and Interactiveness, Within-sector and Within-Occupation

Interactiveness x 1900
Interactiveness x 1920
Interactiveness x 1940
Interactiveness x 1960
Interactiveness x 1980
Interactiveness x 2000
Observations
Occupation fixed effects
Sector-Year fixed effects
Married only sample
Single only sample
Manufacturing only
Services only
No more skilled MSAs
No less skilled MSAs

(1)
Metro
Employment
Share
-0.261**
(0.117)
-0.104
(0.118)
-0.04
(0.119)
0.190**
(0.064)
0.274***
(0.052)
0.317***
(0.040)
56,760
Yes

(2)
Metro
Employment
Share
0.104
(0.162)
0.187
(0.218)
0.321
(0.235)
0.485***
(0.185)
0.560***
(0.174)
0.596***
(0.174)
56,760
Yes
Yes

(3)
Metro
Employment
Share
-0.001
(0.019)
0.019
(0.198)
0.177
(0.231)
0.331*
(0.180)
0.449***
(0.168)
0.478***
(0.169)
50,180
Yes
Yes
Yes

(4)
Metro
Employment
Share
0.260
(0.224)
0.428
(0.273)
0.534*
(0.286)
0.756***
(0.243)
0.777***
(0.231)
0.798***
(0.233)
42,460
Yes
Yes

(5)
Metro
Employment
Share
0.076
(0.159)
0.328
(0.198)
0.424**
(0.210)
0.578***
(0.200)
0.658***
(0.191)
0.794***
(0.196)
23,189
Yes
Yes

(6)
Metro
Employment
Share
0.126
(0.198)
0.214
(0.234)
0.405
(0.251)
0.563***
(0.215)
0.651***
(0.210)
0.697***
(0.227)
31,133
Yes
Yes

(7)
Metro
Employment
Share
-0.032
(0.092)
-0.012
(0.102)
0.012
(0.124)

(8)
Metro
Employment
Share
0.119
(0.158)
0.218
(0.203)
0.409
(0.157)

0.295***
(0.090)
0.339***
(0.091)
38,647
Yes
Yes

0.633***
(0.160)
0.684***
(0.157)
45,130
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: Each column of the table corresponds to a separate regression (equation (29) in the paper). Estimation sample is a panel of observations on three-digit occupations, three-digit sectors and years for
twenty-year time periods from 1880-2000; 1880 is the excluded year from the interaction terms; interactiveness is the frequency with which verbs from 1991 occupational descriptions appear in Class IV,
Division 1 (Formation of Ideas), Class IV, Division 2 (Communication of Ideas) and Class V, Division 2 (Intersocial Volition) of the thesaurus. Married only sample includes married workers only. Single only
sample excludes married workers. Manufacturing only sample includes workers in manufacturing only. Services only sample includes workers in services only. More and less-skilled metro areas are
defined as in Glaeser and Resseger (2009), based on whether the share of adults with a college degree in a Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) is greater than or less than 25.025 percent in 2006. The
year 1960 is omitted in Columns (7) and (8) because the IPUMS 1960 data do not contain the identifiers for individual MSAs. Standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered on occupation; *
significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

Table 7: Interactiveness and Improvements in Communication and Transport Technologies

Highways per km
Log phones per capita
Log area
Log population 1880

(1)
Change in
Interactiveness
1880-1930
0.007
(0.004)
0.022***
(0.002)
0.007***
(0.001)
0.004***
(0.001)

(2)
Change in
Interactiveness
1880-1930
0.086***
(0.028)
0.083***
(0.019)
0.010***
(0.001)
0.002*
(0.001)

2467
0.12
OLS
Second-stage

2467
0.19

Pershing highways per km
Log remoteness from long distance outlet
Observations
R-squared
Estimation
Specification
F-statistic instruments
Underidentification test (Kleibergen-Paap LM statistic)
Weak identification test (Kleibergen-Paap F-statistic)

2SLS
Second-stage

(3)

(4)

Log phones per
capita 1935

Highways per
km 1931

(5)
Change in
Interactiveness
1880-1930

-0.013**
(0.005)
0.006*
(0.003)
-0.113**
(0.055)
-0.063***
(0.009)
2467
0.02
OLS
First-stage
26.35

-0.030***
(0.003)
0.016***
(0.002)
0.274***
(0.032)
0.008**
(0.004)
2509
0.19
OLS
First-stage
38.4

0.007***
(0.001)
0.004***
(0.007)
0.015**
(0.005)
-0.005***
(0.001)
2509
0.09
OLS
Reduced-form
14.05

35.63
18.61

Note: Each column of the table corresponds to a separate regression; observations are a cross-section of counties; Interactiveness is the frequency with which verbs from 1991 occupational descriptions
appear in Class IV, Division 1 (Formation of Ideas), Class IV, Division 2 (Communication of Ideas) and Class V, Division 2 (Intersocial Volition) of the thesaurus; Highways per km is length of highways
within a county in the Gallup 1931 map divided by county area; Log phones per capita is log number of residence telephones in a county in 1935 divided by county population in 1930; Log area is log
county area; Log Population 1880 is log county population in 1880; Pershing highways per km is the length of highways proposed for military reasons within a county in the Pershing 1922 map divided by
county area; Log remoteness from long distance outlet is the log of the sum of the distances to primary and secondary outlets on the AT&T long distance telephone network. Heteroskedasticity robust
standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

Figure 1: Mean Interactiveness in Metro and Non-Metro Areas over Time

.55
Interactiveness
.53
.51
.49

.49

.51

Interactiveness
.53

.55

.57

Mean by metro

.57

Overall mean

1880

1900

1920

1940
Year

1960

Overall Mean

1980

2000

1880

1900

1920
Metro

1940
Year

1960

1980

2000

Non-Metro

Notes: Mean interactiveness is the employment-weighted average of interactiveness for each occupation. Interactiveness for each
occupation is measured using the frequency with which verbs from time-invariant occupational descriptions from the 1991 DOTs
appear in Class IV, Division 1 (Formation of Ideas), Class IV, Division 2 (Communication of Ideas) and Class V, Division 2 (Intersocial Volition)
of the thesaurus.

Figure 2: Mean Interactiveness Across Metro Areas in 1880 and 2000
.515

Panel A: 1880 MSAs

Panel B: 2000 MSAs
SFD, CT

.58

RIC, VA

IND, IN

SJO, CA
SFR, CA

.57

.51

DAN, CT
LOU, KY/IN
COL, OH
NYC, CT/NY/NJ

KCY, MO-KS

BER, NJ

PTL, ME
SCR, ICY,
CA IA
WOR, MA

.505

ROC, MN

.56
CIN OH/KY/IN

CHI, IL

.55

PHI, PA/NJ

.5

WOR, MA
CVL, OH

DTR, MI

BUF, NY

PVD, MA/RI
PBG, PA

.54

.495

NHV, CT

6

7

8

9

10

WIL, DE/NJ/MD
NHV, CT
SRO, CA
SAR, FL
NBU, NY

GAI,
VTA,
CAFL

PAL, FL
RIC, VA

MON, NJ
HAR,
CT MA/NH
LAW,
BAR, MA

NAR, NJ
CA
BRI, CT OAK,
STL, WA

MAD,
ALWI
COL,
MOHUN,
MEL,
FL
DUT, NY
FCO, CO
OMA, NE/IA
JAC, MS

8

9

10

.575

Panel C: 2000 MSAs, using only 1880 MSAs
DC, DC/MD/VA

.565

.57

SFR, CA

WOR, MA

PHI, PA/NJ

RIC, VA

NHV, CT

COL, OH

.56

ROC, NY
KCY, MO-KS

LOU, KY/IN

CIN OH/KY/IN
STL, MO-IL
IND, IN

BUF, NY

.555

PBG, PA
PVD, MA/RI
NOR, LA

SYR, NY

.55

TOL, OH/MI
SCR, PA

7

8

9

10

11

PHI, PA/NJ

FLA, FL
MIN, MN

BIR,COL,
AL OH
ANC, AK

DEN, CO

FWO,
TX CHA, SC
CIN OH/KY/IN
BUF, NY
AUG, GA-SC
ACY, NJ
AMA, TX

Bat, LA

ALB, GA

APP, WI
BAK, CA

JON, PA

MAN, OH
HOU, LA

7

ORA, CA

SDG, CA

COL, SC
SAC, CA
LOW, MA/NH
MEM, TN/AR/MS
ROC, NY
COL, CO
DM, IA
TAM, FL
KCY,
MO-KS
LOU, KY/IN
HON,
HI FL
PHX,
AZ
OLY, WA NPL, FL
ORL,
PTL,
OR FL
JVL,
BLO, IN
TOP, KS
FWA,
MON,
ALFL
NAS, TN
MIL, WI
GRE, NC
BOI, ID
CED, IA
NOR, VACHA,SC
PRO, UT
CHA, IL
TUL, OK TUC, AZ
MIA, FL
SPR, MA
CA CA
STL, MO-IL
SAV,SLU,
GA
SAT, WA
TX
SAL,
LR, AR KNX, TN
BRE,
COL,
GA/AL
JVL, NC
LUB, TX LIN, NE
FPI,HAM,
FL
IND, IN
TXC, TX
VAL, CA
BLO, IL SLC, UT
ROA, VA
JC, NJ
ATH, GA
OH
SPO, WA
WIL,
NC
OKC, OK
DAY, OH
PCY, FL
KIL, TX
PEN, FL
JAC, TN
FAY, NC
BIN, NY
ASH,
NCLA
RDG, CA
FL
ALX,
LAN, MI
PBG, PA
DAY, FL
BIL, MT
BRY,FMY,
TX
WIC, KS
CHA,
TN/GA
PVD, MA/RI
BRO,
MED, OR
FLA, AZ-UT
AUB,
ALMA GRE, SC
GRE, NC
FAR,NV
ND/MN
NOR,
LA
REN,
SYR,
SBD, IN
MAN, NH
MON, LA
TAC,
WANY
MYR, SC
BEL,
FIT,
MA IL MAC, GA
RIC, WA
HAR,
PAWA
PEO,
UTI, NY
GTR, MI
HAT,GOL,
MS NC
SHR, LA
FRE, CA
FAY, AR EUG, OR
LCR, WI
SAL,
OR
TUS, AL
OCA,
FL
CC, TX
RIV, CA
RAC, WI
WCO, TX
MO IL
CHI, CA
LFA, LA
ELP, TX
LCR, NM SPR, RCK,
KAL, MIDAV, IL
CLA, TN/KY
GLE, NY LYN, VA
FWA, IN
NBD, MA GTJ, CO
EVA, IN/KY
STO,DOT,
CA AL
TOL,GBA,
OH/MI
MOB, AL
KEN,
ODE,
TX WI
BRO, TX
STC, PA
WIPA
LAK, FL
BEN, MI
MUN, IN
SCR,
LFY, IN DOV, DE
VIS, CA
JON, TN/VA
RDG, PA
YOR,JAC,
PA MI
LV,
NV
RMT, NC
KAN, IL
JOP, MO
DEC, IL
LNV, TX LCH, LA
CAN, OH
GAR, IN
LIM, OH
SAG,FSM,
MI AR/OK MOD, CA
BIL, MS
DUL, MN/WI LAN, PA
HAG, MD
MCA, TX
ERI, PA
EC,
WI TX
BRA,
MER, CA
JAN, WI
ALT, PA
STC, MN
ANN, AL
ELK, IN
KOK, IN
GRE, CO DEC, AL
JAM, NY
YOU, OH-PA
LAR, TX
BEA,TX
DAN,
FLO,
AL VA
GAD, AL
FLI, MI
HIC, NC
SBA, CA

NOR, LA

RAL, NC

CHA, VA
LEX, KY

BTM, MD

STL, MO-IL

NAS, NY

MDX, NJ
TAL, FL TRE, NJ

SFR, CA

ROC, NY

DC, DC/MD/VA

BOU, CO

SFE, NM
NAS, NH

12

Notes: X-axes are log population density. Y-axes are mean interactiveness. Mean interactiveness is the employment-weighted average of
interactiveness for each occupation. Interactiveness for each occupation is measured using the frequency with which verbs from time-invariant
occupational descriptions from the 1991 DOTs appear in Class IV, Division 1 (Formation of Ideas), Class IV, Division 2 (Communication
of Ideas) and Class V, Division 2 (Intersocial Volition) of the thesaurus. Thick solid lines are the fitted values from locally-weighted
linear least squares regressions. Thin solid lines are 95 percent point confidence intervals. Figures (but not the regressions)
are truncated at both ends for outliers.

11

Figure 3: Decomposition of Difference in Change in
Interactiveness Between Metro and Non-Metro Areas, Occupations

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

.04
-.04 -.02

0

.02

.04
.02
0
-.04 -.02

-.04 -.02

0

.02

.04

.06

Operatives

.06

Craftsmen

.06

Clerical and Kindred

1900

1920

1960

1980

2000

1940

1960

1980

2000

1940

1960

.06
1960

1980

2000

1980

2000

1900

1920

1940

1960

.06
.02
0
-.04 -.02
1960

1980

2000

2000

.02
1940

.04

.06
.04
.02
0

1940

1980

0
1920

Professionals

-.04 -.02

1920

2000

-.04 -.02
1900

Managers

1900

1980

.04

.06
.04
0
-.04 -.02
1920

1920

Service Workers

.02

.04
.02
0
-.04 -.02
1900

1900

Laborers

.06

Sales Workers

1940

1900

1920

1940

1960

Notes: Decomposition of the difference between mean and non-metro areas in the change in mean interactiveness over 20-year time periods
(equation (25) in the paper) into the contributions of two-digit occupations. X-axes are 20-year differences. Y-axes are differences in the change
in mean interactiveness between metro and non-metro areas. Mean interactiveness is the employment-weighted average of interactiveness for
each three-digit occupation. Interactiveness for each three-digit occupation is measured using the frequency with which verbs from time-invariant
occupational descriptions from the 1991 DOTs appear in Class IV, Division 1 (Formation of Ideas), Class IV, Division 2 (Communication of Ideas)
and Class V, Division 2 (Intersocial Volition) of the thesaurus.

Figure 4: Decomposition of Difference in Change in
Interactiveness Between Metro and Non-Metro Areas, Sectors

1980

2000

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

1960

1980

2000

1980

2000

.04
.02
-.02
-.04

1940

1960

1940

1960

1980

2000

1980

2000

1900

1920

1940

1960

.02
0
-.02
1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

2000

1980

2000

.04
1920

-.04
1900

1980

.02
1900

.04

.04
0
2000

1920

Professional

-.02
1980

1900

Construction

.04
1960

-.04
1960

2000

0
1940

.02

.04
.02
0
-.02

1940

1980

-.02
1920

Personal

-.04

1920

1960

-.04
1900

Business

1900

1940

.02

.04
.02
-.02
-.04
1940

1920

Trade

0

.02
0
-.02
-.04

1920

1900

Entertainment

.04

Transportation

1900

0

.02
1900

0

1960

-.02

1940

-.04

1920

-.04

-.02

0

.02
-.04

-.02

0

.02
0
-.02
-.04
1900

Finance

.04

Public Admin

.04

Mining

.04

Manufacturing

1900

1920

1940

1960

Notes: Decomposition of the difference between mean and non-metro areas in the change in mean interactiveness over 20-year time periods
(equation (25) in the paper) into the contributions of two-digit sectors. X-axes are 20-year differences. Y-axes are differences in the change
in mean interactiveness between metro and non-metro areas. Mean interactiveness is the employment-weighted average of interactiveness for
each three-digit occupation. Interactiveness for each three-digit occupation is measured using the frequency with which verbs from time-invariant
occupational descriptions from the 1991 DOTs appear in Class IV, Division 1 (Formation of Ideas), Class IV, Division 2 (Communication of Ideas)
and Class V, Division 2 (Intersocial Volition) of the thesaurus.

