                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    INTERNATIONAL MONETARY COORDINATION AND THE GREAT DEVIATION

                                           John B. Taylor

                                        Working Paper 18716
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18716


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2013




For helpful comments I thank participants of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Globalization &
Monetary Policy Institute, where I serve as Chair of the Advisory Board, at the Bank for International
Settlements June 2012 Conference on The Future of Financial Globalization, and the Hoover Institution’s
Working Group on Economic Policy, where I serve as chair. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by John B. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
International Monetary Coordination and the Great Deviation
John B. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 18716
January 2013
JEL No. E5,E58,F3

                                              ABSTRACT

Research in the early 1980s found that the gains from international coordination of monetary policy
were quantitatively small compared to simply getting domestic policy right. That prediction turned
out to be a pretty good description of monetary policy in the 1980s, 1990s, and until recently. Because
this balanced international picture has largely disappeared, the 1980s view about monetary policy
coordination needs to be reexamined. The source of the problem is not that the models or the theory
are wrong. Rather there was a deviation from the rule-like monetary policies that worked well in the
1980s and 1990s, and this deviation helped break down the international monetary balance. There
were similar deviations at many central banks, an apparent spillover culminating in a global great deviation.
 The purpose of this paper is to examine the possible causes and consequences of these spillovers,
and to show that uncoordinated responses of central banks to the deviations can create an amplification
mechanism which might be overcome by some form of policy coordination.


John B. Taylor
Herbert Hoover Memorial Building
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
John.Taylor@stanford.edu
                    International Monetary Coordination and the Great Deviation

                                              John B. Taylor1
                                            Stanford University

                                               January 2013



                                                  Abstract

        Research in the early 1980s found that the gains from international coordination of
monetary policy were quantitatively small compared to simply getting domestic policy right.
That prediction turned out to be a pretty good description of monetary policy in the 1980s,
1990s, and until recently. Because this balanced international picture has largely disappeared, the
1980s view about monetary policy coordination needs to be reexamined. The source of the
problem is not that the models or the theory are wrong. Rather there was a deviation from the
rule-like monetary policies that worked well in the 1980s and 1990s, and this deviation helped
break down the international monetary balance. There were similar deviations at many central
banks, an apparent spillover culminating in a global great deviation. The purpose of this paper is
to examine the possible causes and consequences of these spillovers, and to show that
uncoordinated responses of central banks to the deviations can create an amplification
mechanism which might be overcome by some form of policy coordination.




       Research in the early 1980s with empirical multi-country monetary models found that the

gains from international coordination of monetary policy were quantitatively small compared to

simply getting domestic policy right.2 To be precise, the models showed that if each central bank

in a flexible exchange rate system followed a policy rule which optimized its own country’s

domestic macroeconomic performance—under the assumption that other countries would do the

same—then there would be little additional gain from the central banks’ jointly optimizing

policies. In game theory terminology, macroeconomic performance under a Nash non-

1
  Presented at the Session on International Policy Coordination, American Economic Association Annual
Meetings, San Diego, California
2
  See, for example, Oudiz and Sachs (1984) and Taylor (1985).These estimated or calibrated models
generally incorporated rational expectations, price rigidities, and perfect capital mobility

                                                  1
cooperative monetary policy is nearly as good as the under the optimal cooperative monetary

policy, and far superior to a policy which is suboptimal on purely domestic grounds.

       That prediction turned out, in my view, to be a pretty good description of monetary

policy in the 1980s, 1990s, and until recently. As central banks moved toward more rules-based

policies—with strong emphasis on domestic price stability and little emphasis on international

coordination of the policy rules for the instruments—macroeconomic performance improved

dramatically. It is hard to see how more international monetary policy coordination could have

improved macroeconomic stability in the advanced countries much further during the Great

Moderation. Indeed, there was a balance in the international monetary system in which central

banks chose policies mainly with domestic considerations in mind and thereby contributed to

better global economic conditions. There was little concern about adverse spillover effects and,

especially toward the later part of this period, central banks in emerging market countries began

moving from highly discretionary crisis-prone policies toward steadier policies with long-run

price stability goals. Thereby they also began contributing to the overall global monetary

balance.

       But in recent years this balanced international picture has largely disappeared. The

United States experienced a serious boom-bust financial crisis and a great recession with

repercussions throughout the world, and it is now experiencing a painfully slow recovery. Policy

makers in emerging market countries have been registering strong complaints about adverse

spillover impacts of monetary policy on their economies. Policy makers in some developed

countries such as Japan are expressing concerns about currency wars and competitive

devaluations due to monetary policies in other countries. At the same time central bank

independence, which was critical for the good performance in the 1980s and 1990s, seems to be



                                                2
eroding as the political authorities demand more from central banks, and central banks

voluntarily engage in policies beyond the normal scope of monetary policy. Not surprisingly the

head of the BIS has begun calling for international monetary policy coordination, and, also not

surprisingly given current disagreements, his call is viewed as quite controversial by a number of

central bankers.3

       Clearly the 1980s view about monetary policy coordination needs to be reexamined in

light of recent events. In my view the source of the problem is not that the models or the theory

are wrong, but rather that the policy assumptions that went into the theory changed. In particular

there was a deviation from the rule-like monetary policies that worked well in the 1980s and

1990s, and this deviation helped break down the international monetary balance. Empirical

research shows that this deviation started happening in the United States about a decade ago—

around 2003-2005—when interest rates were held low.4 But empirical research also shows that

there were similar deviations at many other central banks, an apparent spillover culminating in a

Global Great Deviation as pointed out and documented by Ahrend (2010) and Hofmann and

Bogdanova (2012). The policy deviations in other countries are in close synchronization with

that of the United States, and are similarly characterized by policy interest rates that were low

relative to simple rules that described policy during the Great Moderation. Hofmann and

Bogdanova (2012) show that the deviation began around 2003 and that it is continuing to the

present—especially when the unconventional central bank interventions and large-scale balance

sheet operations are included.

       The purpose of this paper is to examine the possible causes and consequences of these

spillovers of policy deviations, and to show with a simple model that the uncoordinated

3
  BIS General Manager Jaime Caruana’s (2012a) speech and discussion at Jackson Hole and his more
detailed follow-up speech in Uruguay (2012b).
4
  See, for example, Taylor (1977b) and Kahn (2010).

                                                 3
responses of central banks to the deviations creates an amplification mechanism that might be

overcome by some form of policy coordination. These issues have implications for the causes of

the global financial crisis, the recent slow recovery, and international monetary policy going

forward.



Reasons Why Monetary Policy Deviations Go Global

       I focus on the unusually large deviations of policy interest rates from policy rules that

described policy well in the 1980s and 1990s with particular emphasis on negative deviations

where the interest rate is too low. There are a number of reasons why an unusually low interest

rate at one central bank puts pressures on central banks in other countries to also choose

unusually low interest rates.

       First, in a wide variety of open economy monetary models with rational expectations and

capital mobility, arbitrage forces tend to align the rate of return in different currencies. Thus, a

very low federal funds rate or promises of a very low rate in the future, for example, will tend to

cause a depreciation of the dollar and a corresponding expected appreciation of the dollar which

compensates for the lower dollar interest rate. This depreciation effect on the dollar is, of course,

an appreciation in other currencies and exists in most empirical monetary models. 5       However,

many central banks will tend to resist large appreciations of their currency, and one way to do so

is to cut their own policy rate. This will reduce the gap between the federal funds rate and the

other country’s interest rate and will thus mitigate the appreciation of their exchange rate.

       Second, as shown in a recent paper by Bruno and Shin (2012), low policy interest rates at

major central banks can increase risk-taking in other countries, and one way to combat this is to


5
 See the open economy models in the model data base constructed and maintained by Volker Wieland
(2009).

                                                   4
lower interest rates abroad. In the Bruno-Shin model, firms abroad borrow in dollars to finance

their projects even though the returns on these projects are denominated in local currency. The

loans made to the firms by banks to fund these projects are subject to default risk in the event

that the project earns less than the loan, including interest payments.

        Banks that lend to these firms take account of this default risk by using a “value at risk”

approach. Accordingly, banks increase the size of the loans on the project up to the point where

the amount that must be paid back (including interest) results in a probability of insolvency of

the bank that just equals a given value. Let the amount to be paid back be (1+f)L, where f is the

interest rate and L is the loan. The higher is (1+f)L, the higher is the default risk, and, for a given

value at risk, the lower is f, the higher is L. In other words, a reduction in the interest rate

increases lending and encourages more risk taking on the part of these firms. This initial effect is

amplified because when the federal funds rate is reduced and L rises, the exchange rate

appreciates. The appreciation reduces the likelihood of default because local currency then

converts into more dollars to pay back the loan. This enables the banks to lend more, which in

turn causes the exchange rate to appreciate further. In other words there is a dynamic process

with lending responding to the exchange rate and the exchange rate responding to lending. The

process converges, but the eventual impact is larger than the initial impact. 6

        One way that a central bank can offset the increase in foreign lending is simply to keep

its own interest rate low. This reduces the incentive to borrow abroad and also reduces the

magnification effect by keeping the exchange rate from appreciating. In effect, an extra low

interest rate policy in one country leads to a similar deviation in other countries.


6
 While the magnitudes of these effects are uncertain and depend on the special value-at-risk assumption,
Bruno and Shin provide estimates of the overall effect on risk taking by estimating time series models.
They find interest rate effects on risk taking as measured by the VIX, which are similar to the results of
Bekaert, Hoerova, and Duca (2010).

                                                     5
       A third reason for an association between policy deviations in different countries is the

existence of a common global shock. Of course the financial crisis itself is an example of a

shock, and it is natural to argue that the recent multitude of policy deviations was a common

response to this shock. However, because the financial crisis occurred after the policy deviations

began, it is an unlikely candidate for such a shock. Another example comes from the research by

Hofmann and Bogdanova (2012). They empirically estimate simple policy rules in recent years

for a number of countries and find that the deviations can best be interpreted as due to a change

in the global equilibrium real rate of interest rather than to a change in the reaction coefficients.

       There are other possible reasons for the correlation between policy deviations in different

countries. Central bankers may simply follow each other. In the debate about rules versus

discretion, the case for discretion might become more popular thereby removing the incentive to

follow rules-based policies. Or governments in one country may become more aggressive in

challenging central bank independence if other central banks appear to be losing their

independence.



Empirical Evidence of Spillovers through Central Bank Interest Rate Responses

       Regardless of the reasons, there is considerable empirical evidence of the impact of

foreign interest rates on central bank decisions. Perhaps the best evidence comes from reports

from central banks themselves. Consider the Norges Bank, for example, which is one of the

most transparent central banks regarding the reasons for its policy decisions.7

        Figure 1 shows two charts which illustrate the reasons behind a decision by the Norges

Bank to lower its policy interest rate and the forecast of the policy rate. The change occurred in

7
 The following information is drawn from several Monetary Policy Reports of the Norges Bank and was
used in a presentation that I made at the Norges Bank in Taylor (2010). For more information on
monetary policy in Norway see Røisland (2010) and OECD Survey (2010).

                                                  6
2010. The top chart shows the interest rate decrease—from the black dashed line to the red

dashed line. The lower chart shows the reasons for the interest rate changes according to the

Norges Bank report. The red bars in the lower chart show that the main reason for the lower

interest rate choice in Norway was lower interest rates abroad.

       Figure 2 shows two similar charts illustrating the reverse case of an increase in the

interest rate in 2008. The top chart shows the increase in the Norges Bank’s policy interest

rates—from the black dashed line to the red dashed line. The blue bars in the lower chart show

that the main reason for the increase in Norway was the increase in interest rates abroad.




                                                 7
Figure 1 An illustration of the spillover of a cut in the foreign interest rate
The top chart shows the decrease in the interest rate by the Norges Bank in 2010 and the bottom
chart shows that the major contributor to the decision, according to the Norges Bank, was the
decrease in interest rates abroad


                                               8
Figure 2 An illustration of the spillover of an increase in the foreign interest rate
The top chart shows the increase in the interest rate by the Norges Bank in early 2008 and the
bottom chart shows that, according to the Norges Bank, the major contributor to the decision was
the increase in interest rates abroad.

                                               9
       The central banks reaction function or monetary policy rule is another way to show the

spillover of central bank decision in other countries. Again, consider the Norges Bank’s reports

on its own policy rules. Figure 3 shows the interest rate setting in 2010 along with several policy

rules that the Norges Bank uses and presents. The deviation of the actual policy rate (dashed red

line) from the domestic monetary policy rule (either the blue or orange line) is clearly shown in

the chart. That this deviation is almost entirely due to the very low interest rate abroad is shown

by the policy rule with external interest rates included (green line) which comes much closer to

describing the actions than the policy rules without external interest rates.




       Figure 3. Deviation from policy rule due to foreign central bank decisions.


       While there are only a few central banks as transparent as the Norges Bank, there is

econometric evidence from regressions using interest rate data from many other central banks.

                                                 10
Using panel data from 12 central banks (Australia, Canada, South Korea, the United Kingdom,

Norway, New Zealand, Denmark, Israel, Brazil, the Eurozone, China, and Indonesia), Gray

(2012) estimated policy rate reaction functions in which the federal funds rate or other measures

of foreign interest rates entered on the right hand side as deviations from their respective policy

rates. He found that the average reaction coefficient on the foreign rate was large and significant.

In Taylor (2007a) I estimated reaction functions and found that the coefficient on the federal

funds rate in the ECB reaction function was large and significant during 2001-2006.



Policy Spillover Amplification Mechanism

       While there is both theoretical and empirical evidence for spillovers of interest rate policy

deviations, the effect of these spillovers can be amplified as central banks react to each other. To

illustrate this amplification mechanism, consider a very simple two country model with policy

spillovers. Let i be the interest rate in one country—perhaps the United States—and i* be the

interest rate in the other country, say the rest of the world. Let z and z* symbolize domestic

factors (a weighted average of inflation and real GDP, for example) in the central banks’ policy

rules. But also assume for the theoretical and empirical reasons stated above that the central

banks deviate from these rules depending on interest rate settings at foreign central banks.

Although the responses are likely to be quite complicated and may not even be part of the

quantitative policy making apparatus, let us assume that the response is linear in the foreign

interest rate. Then the policy rules (including the deviation from z and z*) can be written




                                                 11
        I assume that both α and α* are positive and less than or equal to one. Thus the central

banks follow each other to some degree in the model. Solving these equations for the interest

rates in terms of z and z* gives:




        Observe that the term multiplying the domestic factors in the above equations is greater

than one. This is the spillover amplification mechanism which is caused by the banks

responding to each other. Figure 4 illustrates this. It graphs the first two equations with i on the

vertical axis and i* on the horizontal axis in the case there α = .5 and α* = 1. If the Federal

Reserve cuts its interest rate by 1 percentage point, for example, the rest of the world rate will

also reduce rates by 1 percentage point, which causes the Fed to cut its interest rate by another .5

percentage point leading to another cut in the rest of the world, and so on. The new equilibrium

is a 2 percentage point rate cut once other central banks and the Fed in turn react. In other

words, the deviation from the policy rule is 1 percentage point in the United States, for this

example, and 2 percentage points in the rest of the world.




                                                  12
Figure 4 Policy Spillover Amplification Mechanism: Central banks react to other central
banks’ interest rate changes and a new equilibrium is reached after an initial change in
domestic economic conditions.




Capital Controls and Currency Intervention

       Perhaps because of these dangers, central banks have looked for other ways to avoid the

interest rate impact of the unusually low interest rates of foreign central banks abroad. The most

common alternatives are capital controls and currency market interventions. Capital controls are

used to try to reduce the high levels of risky borrowing and to mitigate the currency appreciation.

However, capital controls create market distortions and may lead to instability as borrowers and

lenders try to get around them. Controls may also lead to other interventions as policy makers

endeavor to find other controls to prevent the circumventions. For these reasons, capital


                                                13
controls are usually considered part of a good macroeconomic policy framework. They also run

counter to the long term goal of an integrated global economy with higher economic growth.

        Many central banks have used currency intervention to try to prevent appreciation of their

currency in recent years. But even if the intervention is effective for a while it also creates

economic problems.

        For example currency interventions naturally lead to an accumulation of international

reserves. These reserves must be invested somewhere. They might be invested in U.S. Treasury

or mortgage backed securities in the United States, which tends to drive down these long term

interest rates. In effect, the gross outflow of loans due to the low policy rates is matched, at least

in part, by a gross inflow of funds from central banks into securities8

        One example of the adverse effects of these flows has been pointed out by Borio and

Disyatat (2011) and Beckworth and Crowe (2012). They argue that the low federal funds rate in

the U.S in 2003-2005 may have led to such inflows of funds into mortgage backed securities and

thus kept mortgage rates low, worsening the housing boom leading up to the financial crisis. This

is in contrast to the view of Bernanke (2010) who argued that the low federal funds rate was not

the reason for the boom in the housing market as I had found in Taylor (2007b). Rather

Bernanke (2010) argued that the low long term rates were due to a savings glut—unrelated to

monetary policy—by which the current account surpluses around the world caused the increased

demand for U.S. mortgage securities.




8
 It is important to note that these gross flows occur without any change in the current account. Obstfeld
(2012) emphasizes the importance of gross capital flow in comparison with the current account in his
2012 Ely Lecture, but does not develop the monetary policy connection. That too much focus on the
current account can take attention away from these gross flows was a concern to me when I served as
U.S. Treasury Under Secretary from 2001-2005. See (Taylor (2004).

                                                    14
Concluding Remarks

       Most discussions of international policy coordination focus on current account

imbalances—both surpluses and deficits. The term “rebalancing” refers to the coordinated policy

actions of different countries to reduce these imbalances. In this paper I considered another

equally important type of international imbalance that has received far less attention. It pertains

to monetary policy, and occurs when discretionary deviations from rules-based monetary policy

at one or more large central banks create incentives or pressures on other central banks to also

deviate from such policies. In the past decade economists have documented such policy

deviations at many central banks providing evidence of such an international monetary

imbalance problem. In particular, starting about ten years ago policy interest rates in a number

of countries were held below rates implied by monetary policy rules that worked during the

Great Moderation, which in my view represented a more balanced international situation. These

policy deviations can have a variety of adverse effects on economic performance, as Bordo and

Lane (2012) have recently shown. The deviations from a more rules-based interest rate policy

have continued at many central banks since the financial crisis ended, especially if one includes

unconventional interventions such as quantitative easing.

       Several reasons for the spillover of these deviations were pointed out in this paper,

including the desire to prevent excessive exchange rate fluctuations and risk-taking, though

political pressures or common factors may also be at work. Whatever the reason, there is plenty

of empirical support that central banks respond this way.

       Moreover, with central banks around the world responding this way there is a spillover

amplification mechanism which can create even larger deviations from policy rules. Efforts to

avoid this interest rate response through currency intervention or capital controls create



                                                 15
additional harmful side effects. Indeed, one of those harmful side effects may have been the

international capital flow into long term bond markets in the United States which accentuated the

boom leading to the financial crisis in 2008.

       The adverse effects on economic performance illustrate the advantages of a more

balanced rules-based policy similar to what existed during the Great Moderation period. Unlike

in the situation during the Great Moderation, which appears to be well described by models in

which international monetary policy coordination has a relatively small benefit, international

coordination might be quite useful in this rebalancing.




                                                16
References

Ahrend, Rudiger (2010), “Monetary Ease: A Factor Behind Financial Crises? Some Evidence

       from OECD Countries,” Economics: The Open Access, Open Assessment E-Journal, 4

Beckworth, David and Christopher Crowe (2012) “The Great Liquidity Boom and the Monetary

       Superpower Hypotheses,” in Boom and Bust in Banking: Causes and Cures of the Great

       Recession, David Beckworth, (Ed.), Oakland California: The Independent Institute. 17-54

Bekaert, Geert, Marie Hoerova, and Marco Lo Duca (2010), “Risk, Uncertainty and Monetary

       Policy,” NBER Working Paper Number 16397, September

Bernanke, Ben. (2010) “Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble”, speech delivered at the

       American Economic Association meeting in Atlanta

Bordo, Michael and John Landon Lane (2012) “Does Expansionary Monetary Policy Cause

       Asset Price Booms: Some Historical and Empirical Evidence,” Rutgers University

Borio, Claudio and Piti Disyatat (2011), “Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis: Link or No

       Link?” Bank for International Settlements, Working Paper, 346, May.

Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Song Shin (2012), “Capital Flows and the Risk-Taking Channel of

       Monetary Policy,” paper presented at the 11th BIS Annual Conference, June.

Caruana, Jamie (2012a),“Policymaking in an Interconnected World,” presented at Federal

       Reserve Bank of Kansas City Policy Symposium on The Changing Policy Landscape,

       Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 31

Caruana, Jamie (2012b), “International Monetary Policy Interactions: Challenges and Prospects,”

       Speech in Punta del Este, Uruguay, 16 November

Gray, Colin (2012), “Responding to a Monetary Superpower: Investigating the Behavioral

       Spillovers of U.S. Monetary Policy,” Department of Economics, Stanford University.



                                              17
Hofmann, Boris and Bilyana Bogdanova (2012), “Taylor Rules and Monetary Policy: A Global

       Great Deviation?” BIS Quarterly Review, September 2012

Kahn, George A. (2010), “Taylor Rule Deviations and Financial Imbalances.” Federal Reserve

       Bank of Kansas City Economic Review, Second Quarter, 63–99.

Obstfeld, Maurice (2012) “Does the Current Account Still Matter?” American Economic Review,
       Papers and Proceedings, May

Oudiz, Gilles and Jeffrey Sachs, (1984), “Macroeconomic Policy Coordination Among the

       Industrial Economies,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol, 1, pp. 1-64

OECD (2010) Economic Survey: Norway, p. 32

Røisland, Øistein (2010), “Monetary Policy in Norway,” Slide presentation, Norges Bank

Taylor, John B. (1985), “International Coordination in the Design of Macroeconomic Policy

       Rules,” European Economic Review, 28, 1985, pp. 53-81

Taylor, John B. (2004) “The U.S. Current Account: Recent Trends and Policies,” Speech at

       American Enterprise Institute, Washington, D.C. November 4

Taylor, John B. (2007a), “Globalization and Monetary Policy: Missions Impossible,” NBER

       Conference, Girona Spain, June, in M. Gertler and J. Gali (Eds.), The International

       Dimensions of Monetary Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010, 609-624

Taylor, John B. (2007b), “Housing and Monetary Policy,” (2007b) in Housing, Housing

       Finance, and Monetary Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Sept., pp. 463-476.

Taylor, John B. (2010), “Simple Rules for Open Economies,” Norges Bank Conference

       On the Use of Simple Rules as Guidelines for Policy Decisions, Oslo, June, (Slides)

Weiland, Volker, Tobias Cwik, Gernot Mueller, Sebastian Schmidt and Maik Wolters (2009),"A

       New Comparative Approach to Macroeconomic Modeling and Policy Analysis," Center

       for Financial Studies, Frankfurt.


                                               18
