                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        HOW BURDENSOME ARE
                       CAPITAL GAINS TAXES?




                        James M. Poterba




                     Working Paper No. 1871




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                            March 1986




I am grateful to Dan Feenberg, Jerry Hausman, Mervyn King, James
Wetzler, and especially Lawrence Summers for helpful discussions.
William Gentry provided excellent research assistance. Robert
Clarke of the Internal Revenue Service provided unpublished data.
This research was supported by the National Science Foundation.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation and projects in Government Budgets and Taxation and
Capital Formation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #1871
                                                 March 1986



                    How Burdensome are Capital Gains Taxes?



                                     ABSTRACT



    Several recent and provocative studies have described portfolio trading

strategies which permit investors to avoid all taxes on capital gains and to

shelter a substantial part of their ordinary income as well. Other studies

adopt the more traditional view that the capital gains tax raises the effective

tax burden on capital income. This paper uses capital gain realization data

from the 1982 IRS Individual Tax Model in an effort to distinguish between these

views. It shows that for about one-fifth of the investors who realize gains or

losses, the ordinary income loss—offset limitations are binding constraints.

Since additional gain realizations do not affect these investors' current tax

liability, they may be effectively untaxed on capital gains. Another signifi-

cant group escapes taxation by not reporting realized gains. However, the

largest group of investors trades in a less elaborate and more honest manner,

realizing and reporting gains without offsetting losses. The capital gains tax

may reduce the after-tax return earned by these investors.



                                                       James M. Poterba
                                                       Department of Economics
                                                       Massachusetts Institute
                                                         of Technology
                                                       Cambridge, MA 02139
                                                       (617) 253—6673
     Traditional analyses of the capital gains tax focus on three types of

investment distortions. First, the "lock-in effect," which arises because gains

are taxed on realization rather than accrual, may lead investors to hold

incompletely diversified portfolios. Second, risk-taking decisions may be

distorted by the limited loss offset provisions, and other changes in the risk--

return opportunity set, associated with the tax. Third, the tax may distort

savings decisions by affecting the after-tax return which investors earn on

appreciating assets. 1

    Empirical studies of capital gains taxation typically center on estimating

the effective tax rate under simple assumptions about the way investors manage

their portfolios. They focus on the importance of deferral and non-taxation of

gains at death in reducing the capital gains tax burden. These studies usually

find that because average asset holding periods are quite long, the effective

capital gains tax rate is only a fraction of the statutory rate.2

    An alternative view of the capital gains tax with radically different

implications both for analyzing distortions and for measuring effective tax

rates has recently been advanced by Allen (1982), Constantinides (1983, 1984),

and Stiglitz (1983). These authors recognize that by adopting appropriate

portfolio strategies, investors can avoid paying capital gains tax. With

perfect capital markets and no transactions costs, the current United States

tax code permits an investor to shelter not just his capital income, but his

ordinary income as well. By using one set of securities transactions, investors

can transform ordinary income into capital gains; a second set of transactions

will enable them to defer realization of taxable gains. In principle, the

second step can be repeated until assets with accrued gains are bequeathed,
                                    —2—



escaping capital gains taxation entirely. Although few investors may actually

behave as this "tax minimizing" view suggests, the new analysis emphasizes that

the impact of the capital gains tax depends upon the constraints or market im-

perfections which prevent investors from following tax-minimizing trading rules.

   This paper investigates the empirical importance of investors whose

trading strategies lead them to face zero marginal tax rates on realized

gains. It suggests that a large part of the investing public does not engage

in tax-minimizing portfolio transactions, but behaves in a fashion more accura-

tely characterized by the traditional view. This finding informs the debate on

the economic effects of capital gains taxation, and raises the more general

question of why households do act to minimize their tax liabilities.

     The paper is divided into five sections. The first describes the

detailed provisions of the U.S. tax code affecting capital gains, and sketches

the tax-minimizing trading rules examined in previous studies. The second

section estimates the distribution of statutory marginal tax rates on realized

gains, and examines the fraction of realized gains which are offset by capital

losses. Evidence that a large fraction of investors face marginal tax rates of

zero, or that a large share of realized gains are offset by losses, would sup-

port the "tax minimizing" view. The third section questions previous evidence

on the significance of tax-induced distortions in asset holding periods. The

fourth section discusses several omissions stemming from my focus on realized

gains, and the conclusion suggests a number of directions for future research.
                                     —3-


I. The Structure of Capital Gains Taxes

    Each investor's marginal tax rate on realized gains is a complicated func—

tion of his realized short—term and long-term gains and losses. The applicable

tax rate ranges between zero and the ordinary income tax rate, depending on the

configuration of realized gains. The principal difficulty in analyzing capital

gains taxation is the endogeneity of the very transactions which constitute the

tax base. Different assumptions about investors' trading rules imply different

effective capital gains tax rates. The first half of this section outlines the

statutory provisions which determine an investor's marginal tax rate on realized

gains. The second half sketches how different assumptions about investor beha-

vior affect the marginal tax rate on realized gains, and identifies their

empirical predictions.


l.A. The Legal Framework

    There are four provisions -in the U.S. tax code as of 1982 which must be

considered in determining an investor's statutory tax rate on realized capital

gains:3

      (i) Short—term and long—term gains are treated differently. Gains and

losses on assets which have been held for less than one year are considered

short—term.4 Forty percent of net long-term gains and all net short-term gains

are included in an investor's taxable income.

     (ii) Short-term losses offset long—term gains dollar—for-dollar, and

long-term losses offset a short-term gains dollar-for-dollar.

    (iii) After gains have been used to offset losses, an investor with a net

long-term loss may deduct one-half of the loss from ordinary income. If there
                                       -4-


is a net short—term loss, the full amount is deducted. However, no more than

$3,000 of ordinary income may be offset by capital losses in any tax year. This

limit is $1,500 for married taxpayers filing separately. Capital losses in

excess of the loss-offset limits may be carried forward indefinitely.

     (iv) When an investor dies and bequeathes assets to his heirs, the tax

basis of the transferred assets is raised to their current market value. Accrued

gains on assets transferred this way avoid capital gains taxation entirely.5

    Figure 1 shows how the first three provisions interact to determine the

statutory tax rates on long-term and short-term realized gains. The investor's

net short-term capital gain (Ns) is plotted on the vertical axis, while the

horizontal axis shows the net long-term gain (NL). The line NL +       = 0 divides

the plane into two regions, indicating the presence of a net gain or net loss.

Realizations above this line generate net capital gains, while those below it

correspond to net losses. The other line depicts the loss-offset constraint.

It represents the points at which net short-term losses plus one-half of net

long-term losses equal $3,000. For an investor whose losses exceed this limit,

i.e., one whose realizations lie below this line, marginal losses have no effect

on current tax liability. They must be carried forward.

    The net loss and loss-offset lines combine with the axes to divide the

figure into seven different regions with different pairs of tax rates (Ts,TL) on

realized short-term and long-term gains. In Region I, the investor realizes

both net long-term and net short—term gains. His capital gains tax liability is

T*(Ns + .4NL). where T is his marginal tax rate on ordinary income. His margi-

nal tax rate on realized long-term gains is therefore TL =    .4T, while that on
short-term gains is    =   T.   Most studies of effective capital gains tax rates
                                    —5—




                                        Short Term Gain (Ne)




                    Region II                               Region I

                   Ts      = T                           TS =   T, TL = .4T


 Region III

    =
        TL = T




                                                                              Net Long-
-6000                               0                                         Term Gain

                        Region IV
                        TL = .5T
                             = T




                                                                Region VII

        Region V                                            Ts = TL = .4T
        TS = TL = 0




                                          Loss                                Net
                                           Offset                              Gain
                                            Constraint                          Constraint



          Figure 1: Statutory Tax Rates Applicable to Marginal Gains
                                    —6—


assume that investors who realize gains face the tax rates in this region.

   An investor in Region II realizes net long-term losses which are smaller in

absolute value than his short-term gains. The losses offset the gains dollar-

for-dollar yielding a net gain of N5 + NL. The tax liability is T*(Ns + NL),

and his marginal tax rate on additional long-term or short-term gains is T.

Region III differs from Region II in that net short-term gains are smaller than

net long-term losses, so the investor realizes a net loss. Since one-half of

net long-term losses may be deducted from ordinary income, the investor's tax

liability is .5T*(NS + N1)1 implying TS = TL =   .5T.       Region IV depicts an in-

vestor who realized small net losses both long-term and short-term. His losses

enable him to reduce his taxable income by .5NL + N5, yielding a tax payment of

T*(.5NL + Ns). For this investor, TL = .5T and          =   T.   In both Regions III

and IV, the net loss included in taxable income must be less than $3,000.

    Region V contains all the cases in which net losses exceed $3,000. In this

situation, the investor includes a $3,000 loss in ordinary income, and carries

forward the balance of the loss. Marginal changes in gain and loss realizations

have no effect on current tax liability, although they affect the size of

capital loss carryforwards. The marginal tax rate on marginal realizations

depends upon the date at which the investor fully utilizes his capital loss

carryforwards. If an investor expects to be in Region V forever, either because

his loss-carryforwards are very large or because he continually realizes

significant losses, then marginal tax rates on both short—term and long-term

gains are zero.6

    Investors in Region VI realize net long—term gains and net short—term losses

but their short-term losses exceed long-term gains by less than $3,000. All net
c




                                               — 7-.




    losses (NL +                                                                 =            T.
                       Ns) can therefore be included in taxable income, so           TL
                                                                                          =

    Finally,    Region VII includes investors with realized net long-term gains and

    short—term losses, but for whom NL +
                                              Ns
                                                   >   0.   Since net short-term losses offset

    long-term gains dollar-for-dollar, the net gain included in taxable income is

    .4*(NL +    Ns).     For investors in this region, T5 = TL =


    I.B.     Portfolio Trading Rules

           The difference between traditional analyses of the capital gains tax and the

    "tax minimizing view" derives from their differential assumptions about trading

    rules. The traditional analysis either fails to specify, or makes naive assump-

    tions about, the trading rules used by investors. Studies suggesting important

    "lock—in" effects often provide no explanation of why investors trade their

    assets, but simply argue that trading will occur less frequently in tax regimes

    with high realization-based tax rates. Empirical studies of the effective tax

    rate such as Bailey (1969), King (1977), and Protopapadakis (1983) make the

    analytically tractable assumption that investors hold their assets for a fixed

    period, or assume that they face a constant probability each period of being

    forced to liquidate their assets. If investors do not trade unless forced to

    and asset returns are generated by a simple stochastic process, then it is

    possible to calculate the expected present value of the taxes which will be paid

    on a one dollar accrued capital gain. This tax rate is an increasing function

    of the probability of forced trades.

           If investors actually followed this trading strategy, the distribution of

    investors across the various tax brackets in Figure 1 would depend principally

    on the distribution of returns. Provided expected (nominal) pre-tax returns
                                      — 8-




were positive, the government would expect positive revenue from its capital

gains tax. An increase in marginal tax rates on ordinary income or a tightening

of the loss-offset constraints would raise revenue, and assuming no change in

pretax returns, lower the returns available to investors.

    More sophisticated portfolio strategies from the tax standpoint are examined

by Constantinides (1983). He assumes that investors face periodic forced asset

sales, and takes the tax rates in Region I of Figure 1 as applying to forced

realizations. He also assumes that losses are never large enough to cause the

loss-offset constraint to bind, so that investors with losses face the tax rates

of Region VI.   If capital markets are perfect and there are no transaction costs

or restrictions on wash sales, then the optimal trading rule is to (i) defer

short-term gains until they become long-term unless otherwise forced to realize;

(ii) realize losses when they occur7, (-iii) sell and repurchase long—term assets

whenever their price and tax basis are equal, and (iv) (possibly) sell assets

with accrued long-term gains to re-establish their short-term status and potent-

ial to generate short-term losses.8

    When the differential between the tax rates on short- and long-term gains is

large enough, the government may actually lose revenue through its capital gains

tax provisions. Most losses will be realized short-term for large deductions,

while most gains will be realized long-term for smaller tax liability. Raising

both long- and short-term capital gains tax rates proportionately will increase

the rates at which losses may be deducted from ordinary income, and raise the

effective tax burden on forced realizations. If forced realizations are

infrequent, such a tax increase may actually reduce government revenues and

raise the after-tax return to risky holding risky assets.
                                     —9—


    Constantinides' assumption that the loss—offset constraint does not bind

implies that investors could lower their taxes by realizing additional capital

losses. Both Allen (1982) and Stiglitz (1983) argue that investors can generate

tax losses at low cost and without exposing themselves to much risk and there-

fore reduce their tax liability until either (-I) the loss-offset provisions bind

or (ii) tax payments equal zero. By assuming perfect capital markets, unre-

stricted short sales, and no transactions costs, they exhibit a variety of zero-

net-worth investments which enable investors to realize capital losses while

deferring capital gains. Stiglitz (1983) suggests four particular strategies:

(i) the "locked in" strategy of postponing realization of long-term gains, (ii)

the "immediate realization" strategy of realizing all losses immediately, (iii)

the "indebtedness" strategy of borrowing to buy appreciating assets, and (iv)

the "loss—roll-over" strategy of buying and selling highly correlated securi-

ties. If there were no loss-offset limits, these strategies would permit

investors to avoid all taxes. With loss—offset constraints, investors must

transform ordinary income into capital gains before they offset it with losses.

This can be accomplished many ways: by shorting a dividend-paying stock around

its ex-dividend day, by purchasing assets with tax depreciation in excess of

their true economic depreciation, or by borrowing to purchase an appreciating

asset, for example.

     An investor who follows the Allen-Stiglitz tax minimizing strategies will

either be in Region V of Figure I, or or he will have generated enough ordinary

losses to offset all ordinary income and pay no taxes. For these investors,

changes in statutory capital gains tax rates have no incentive effects. They

also have no effect on the government's tax receipts.
                                    —10—



    The Allen-Stiglitz trading strategies may be difficult to implement for

several reasons. First, since they often require frequent trading, their value

is very sensitive to transaction costs. Deferring accrued gains on corporate

stock may require short sales which carry particularly high brokerage costs.9

Second, investors may be unable to realize gains or losses on particular assets

without affecting their portfolio risk. For assets with many close substitutes,

such common stocks, diversification issues may not arise. However, most capital

gains arise from assets other than common stock. Only 17 percent of net capital

gains in 1977, and 33 percent of those in 1981, were on corporate equities.

More than a third of all gains realized are on depreciable property and real

estate.1° It may be difficult and costly to discover close substitutes for these

assets. Finally, the transactions which generate the Allen—Stiglitz results may

attract IRS scrutiny of the investor's tax return and they are frequently the

target of loophole-closing tax reforms. For example, the 1984 changes in the

U.S. tax law have made it very difficult to generate losses from paper transac-

tions in the securities market.11

     Since the Allen—Stiglitz "tax-minimizing" view makes the strong prediction

that tax-paying investors should be found only in Region V1 it can be tested

easily. The modified tax—minimizing view of Constantinides, and the traditional

constant sale probability model, make less precise predictions with respect to

the distribution of marginal tax rates on realized gains. The long average

holding periods for most assets, however, suggest that the pressure of forced

realizations during the six month short-term holding period should be quite

small.12 Constantinides' model therefore would also imply a high concentration

of investors with significant taxable losses in Region VI.
                                        —11—



        The next section tests these predictions by studying the actual distribu-

tion of tax rates on realized gains. There is undoubtedly a great deal of

heterogeneity in the way investors manage their portfolios, and each of the

portfolio strategies outlined above probably describes some part of the invest-

ing population. My empirical analysis is designed to provide evidence on the

importance of tax-minimizing investors, by comparing the observed behavior of

investors who realize capital gains with the predictions of the tax-minimizing

view.
                                     —12—


II. The Realization of Gains and Losses

   The tax minimization view makes two prechctions regarding the realization

of gains and losses. First, a substantial fraction of investors should be

observed at or near the capital gain loss-offset constraints. Second, investors

should realize offsetting gains and losses. Investors should never realize and

pay taxes on large capital gains, since they could have sheltered these gains

with paper losses. This section uses data on reported capital gains and tax

status, drawn from the U.S. Treasury's Tax Model Data file for 1982, to test

these predictions. The data set contains a sample of 89,127 individual federal

income tax returns. It oversamples high—income returns, and includes all

returns with adjusted gross income in excess of $400,000.

    I first examine the distribution of investors across the seven tax regions

in Figure 1. Table 1 reports three different tabulations of investor tax

rates.13 The first column, which assigns each tax return in the sample a weight

based on its sampling proportion, describes the fraction of tax returns in each

category. The second column weights each return by the product of its sampling

weight and its reported dividend income, as a proxy for the taxpayer's total

wealth and importance as a stock market investor. This column shows the

fraction of total dividends received by investors in each tax region. The third

column weights observations by sampling weights, as in the first column, but is

restricted to returns with adjusted gross income in excess of $100,000.

   The results demonstrate that many investors realize only gains and therefore

face the tax rates of Region I. Over sixty percent of the investors with gains

or losses realized only gains. Slightly more than fifty percent of the divi-

dends received by the household sector accrued to investors in this region, who
                                               —13—



               Table 1: Marginal Statutory Tax Rates on Realized Capital Gains, 1982


                                                     Fraction of             Fraction of
                             Fraction of         Investors with Net      Investors with Ne
                         Investors Reporting       Gains or Losses        Gain or Loss and
Tax Region                 Net Gain or Loss      (Dividend Weighted)       AGI > $100,000


Region I                        .637                   .516                    .571
  TS = T, TL = .4T


Region II                       .011                   .013                    .009
      =        = T
          TL


Region III                      .116                   .075                    .071
      =      = .5T
          TL


Region IV                       .021                   .017                    .013
     = T, TL = .5T


Region V                       .112                    .189                    .146
      =
          TL
               =   0


Region VI                      .062                    .044                    .050
      =        = T
          TL


Region VII                     .040                    .146                    .139
  T =     TL
               =   .4T


Source: Author's tabulations based on 1982 U.S. Treasury Tax Model Data file.
         Further explanation of. the regions and corresponding tax rates, TL and
         may be found in the text and Figure I.
                                     —14—


do not behave as the "tax minimization" model predicts.

   A sizable group of investors do behave in ways consistent with the model,

however. Eleven percent of the investors who received gains or losses faced a

binding loss-offset constraint. Nearly nineteen percent of household dividends

were received by investors in this group. This may understate the importance of

these investors in the equity market if those persons who minimize their capital

gains tax liability by following sophisticated trading strategies also hold

low-yield common stocks to avoid dividend taxation.

    Fifty three percent of the investors who were in Region V in 1982 had also

been constrained by the loss—offset rules in 1981. For a sizable group of

taxpayers, therefore, the binding loss-offset constraint is not a transient

condition. The current data set cannot reveal the complete distribution of

loss-constrained spells, since it only enables us to compare two consecutive

years. An important issue which should be explored if longer panels of tax

returns with capital gains information became available is the persistence of

loss-constraint. This information is essential for assessing the effective tax

burdens on investors in Region V.

    Table 2 reports a more detailed calculation of the fraction of tax returns

for which the loss-offset provisions are binding or nearly binding. It disagg-

regates taxpayers into groups based on adjusted gross income (AGI), and presents

three sets of calculations corresponding to the weighting schemes in Table 1.

The results show that although the probability that the loss—offset constraint

will bind or nearly bind is low (.015) for the taxpaying population at large, it

increases with AGI and reaches .12 for returns with AGI in excess of $100,000.

The most striking result is that nearly one quarter of the dividends reported on
                                          —15--




        Table 2: Constraints on Capital Loss Offsets to Ordinary Income, 1982


                             Fraction of Returns                Fraction of Returns
Adjusted Gross Income        with Capital Losses                with Capital Losses
     Category                Greater Than Limit               Greater Than .50*Limit

                                                   All Returns

All Returns                        .010                                .015
<   0                              .045                                .063
0-10,000                           .003                                .005
10,000-50,000                      .010                                .015
50,000-100,000                     .048                                .075
>   100,000                        .099                                .126




                                      All Returns with Gains or Losses

All Returns                        .112                                .164
<   0                              .131                                .182
0—10,000                           .098                                .148
10,000-50,000                      .108                                .157
50,000—100,000                     .121                                .189
>   100,000                        .146                                .185




                                   All Returns Weighted by Dividend Income

All Returns                        .189                                .247
<   0                              .291                                .294
0-10,000                           .099                                .308
50,000—50,000                      .232                                .309
10,000—100,000                     .171                                .256
>   100,000                        .169                                .197




Source: Author's tabulations using a one-in three sample from the 1982 U.S. Treasury
         Individual Tax Model Data File.
                                     —16—



returns with gains or losses, or sixteen percent of dividends reported on all

individual tax returns, are on returns with net losses of more than half the

loss—offset limit. Nearly seventeen percent of dividends accruing to households

with more than $100,000 in AGI are on returns for which the constraint binds.

    My analysis of the fraction of investors for whom additional capital gains

generate no additional current tax liability closely parallels Feenberg's (1981)

study of dividend income.14 He found that almost no taxpayers were bound by the

interest deductibility constraints which make additional dividend income effec-

tively untaxed. His results are confirmed in my 1982 data, where 1.7 percent of

all taxpayers have interest deductions within $1000 of this constraint. Both

the loss—offset constraint and the interest deductibility constraint, were

binding for only .09 percent of the taxpayers in the sample, and 2.9 percent for

those with AGI of $100,000 or more. This finding suggests that few investors

simultaneously face zero tax rates on both dividends and capital gains, and it

does not suggest that there is a single group of "tax-minimizing" investors who

sucessfully avoid taxation on all forms of capital income.

    The calculations in Table 2 group all types of assets together, because

the Treasury Tax Model does not provide information on individual asset trans-

actions. For many purposes, however, such as analyzing the effect of capital

gains taxation on the intersectoral allocation of capital, it is important to

know effective tax burdens by asset type. Some disaggregated calculations can

be made using the 1973 Survey of Capital Asset Sales. For 1973, eighty percent

of all gain-producing long-term transactions, and 87.2 percent of all gross

long-term gains, are reported on tax returns with net gains. Only 71 percent of

common stock transactions with gross gains fall into this category, although
                                      —17—



86.1 percent of all gross long-term gains on common stock are reported on

returns with net gains. For non-business real estate and depreciable property,

nearly ninety-five percent of all gains are reported on returns with net gains.

These tabulations suggest that gains on corporate equity tend to face lower tax

burdens, when realized, than gains on real assets.

     The results from the 1982 Tax Model suggest that most capital gains are

reported by investors who realize only gains. This contradicts the tax-minimiz-

ing view's prediction that investors should realize offsetting gains and losses.

To explore the role of gain and loss offsetting in greater detail, Table 3 shows

the fraction of long term gross gains which were reported on returns with gross

losses which totally offset the gain. Only 2.7 percent of gross long-term

gains, and 23.1 percent of gross short-term gains, are reported on returns with

net capital losses. The table also shows the share of gross long—term gains

reported on returns with no long-term losses or short-term transactions of any

kind. They account for over half of all realized long-term gains, although only

one third of gains realized on returns with AOl of at least $100,000 fall into

this category.

     Although most gains are reported on returns without losses, many losses are

reported on returns with net gains. For long-term losses, ninety three percent

of the reported losses are on returns with net gains. For short-term losses

this effect is less pronounced: only one third of the reported losses are on

net gain returns. Short-term losses on high-income returns, however, shelter

gains to a greater extent, since roughly two thirds of these losses are on

returns with net gains.

     One difficulty with the tests in this section -is that the loss-offset
                                          —18—



                   Table 3: Offsetting of Capita) Gains and Losses, 1982



                                        All                        Returns with
                                      Returns                     AGI   $100,000

Share of Gross Long-Term
Gains Reported on Returns
with:

  - No Gross Losses or
       Short-Term Gains                .518                            .319

  -    Net Loss                        .027                            .011



Share of Gross Long-Term
Losses Reported on Returns
with:

  -    No Gross Gains or
       Short-Term Losses                 0                                 0

  -    Net Gain                         .930                           .978



Share of Gross Short-Term
Gains Reported on Returns
with:

  - No     Gross Losses or
        Long-Term Gains                 .097                           .020

  -     Net Loss                        .231                           .112



Share of Gross Short-Term
Losses Reported on Returns
with:

   - No    Gross Gains or
        Long-Term Losses                .155                           .040

   -    Net Gain                        .337                           .669




Source: Author's calculations based on 1982 U.S. Treasury Tax Model Data File.
                                     —19—


constraint might not be binding, even though an investor was following a tax-

minimizing trading strategy, because he might have borrowed enough to generate

interest payments larger than his other ordinary income. The borrowed funds

could be invested in appreciating assets, while the investor might not realize

any gains during a particular tax year. In this case, the tax return would show

no capital gains activity. An intermediate case obtains if investors borrow to

purchase capital assets and then sell them. The tax return would then show

interest deductions as well as reported capital gains. This can be studied

using the 1982 Tax Model data.

    Thirty—six percent of all returns with gains or losses have interest

payments in excess of the net gain, as might be expected under the tax minimiza-

tion view. Excluding mortgage interest, the fraction falls to 27.5 percent.

At the other extreme, forty one percent of all returns with gains (but only 14.6

percent with net gains and AGI   $100,000) report no interest payments.

     The results in this section reflect the substantial heterogeneity of the

investing population. Although some investors behave as the Allen-Stiglitz

"tax-minimizing" model suggests they should, the majority of investors who

realize capital gains do not adopt sophisticated tax reduction strategies. Many

realized gains, therefore, are taxed at substantial marginal rates.
                                     —20-


111. The Timing of Realizations

     The tax-minimizing model implies that capital losses should be realized as

soon as they occur to maximize the present value of loss-offsets, while capital

gains should be deferred at least until they become eligible for long-term gains

treatment. Previous studies of gains and losses reported on tax returns, such

as Fredlund, Gray and Sunley (1968) and Kaplan (1981), suggest some deferral

takes place. Unpublished IRS data reported by the New York Stock Exchange

(1982) show that in 1977, when transactions qualified for short—term treatment

if they lasted less than nine months, loss realizations were 108, 120, 163, 29,

94, and 256 on transactions of duration seven through twelve months, respec-

tively. These data suggest a sharp decline in loss realizations at nine months.

Gains show no decline before nine months and rise slightly after transactions

become eligible for long-term treatment. This section suggests that these data

may be unreliable and may overstate the importance of deferral.

     There is relatively little information on realization patterns from sources

other than tax returns; one unique source of such evidence is Schiarbaum,

Lewellen, and Lease's (1978) study of all security transactions between 1964 and

1970 in a sample of 2500 accounts at a large retail brokerage house. Their

sample includes 75,123 round trip common stock transactions, and they tabulate

the fraction of round-trip transactions which result in positive realized

returns for different holding periods.15

     Their findings are reproduced in the first column of Table 4. The probab-

ility of observing a negative gross return on a transaction with a duration of

less than six months is no different from that for transactions lasting more

than a year. The second and third columns in the table present calculations of
                                         —21—



           Table 4: Corporate Stock Transactions with Reported Capital Gains,
                                    by Holding Period



                           Percent of Reported Transactions which Show Net Gains


                                                                Tax Return Tabulations
                   Brokerage       Tax Return Tabulations      Weighted by Gain or Loss
                    Account
Holding Period    Tabulations           1962       1973            1962            1973


< 1    month          58                 54         51              48              51




1-6 months            57                 38         40              32              31




6—12 months           59                 32         35              33              31




> 12    months        51                 48         39              62              54




Source: Data in column one are from Schiarbaum, et al. (1978), p. 323. Tax return
         tabulations are based on author's calculations from U.S. Treasury (1966,
         Table 12) and (1980, Table 8). Statistics for transactions with holding
         periods of more than twelve months may not be comparable between column 1
         and subsequent columns. The value in the first column is based on a sample
         of transactions which lasted at most seven years. The tax return
         tabulations in later columns include all transactions with holding period
         between one and ten years.
                                    —22—


gain and loss realizations based on the 1973 Survey of Capital Asset Sales. For

transactions with holding periods of one month or less, both the IRS tabulations

and the brokerage firm data suggest that just over half of all transactions

result in capital gains. Calculations weighting each transaction by the size of

the resulting gain or loss, shown in the last two columns, yield conclusions

similar to those based on simple transaction counts. The conformity between the

data sources vanishes at longer holding periods. The brokerage firm data

suggest that fifty-seven percent of transactions which last between one and six

months yield capital gains, while the IRS tabulations imply approximately forty

percent (thirty percent when value-weighted). The brokerage firm data suggest

that nearly sixty percent of all transactions of between six and twelve month

durations yield gains, while the IRS tabulations suggest about thirty percent.

    A number of explanations might be proposed for the disagreement between

these two data sets. The first is that the tax return data are biased by

selective reporting of gains and losses. Investors may fail to report some

capital gains, while faithfully reporting capital losses. During the time

period covered by these data, there was no third party reporting system which

provided the IRS with data on capital asset transactions. Alternatively, they

may misclassify asset sales, erroneously (and perhaps deliberately) reporting

long-term losses as short-term. This is most consistent with the observed

pattern of gain and loss reports around the transition from short- to long-term

holding periods. Studies of taxpayer compliance reveal substantial underreport-

ing of capital gains tax liability, but do not disaggregate this into components

due to complete nonreporting of transactions versus misreporting. In future

work I hope to use unpublished IRS data to examine this issue.16
                                      —23—


   Since short-term gain realizations face higher tax rates than long-term

gains, the incentive to avoid taxes through nonreporting is greater at short

than at long holding periods. This suggests a potentially significant bias in

previous attempts to show that asset trading distortions are caused by the

holding period distinction. If all loss transactions but only a fraction of

gain transactions are reported, or if the holding periods are misreported, and

the misreporting probability is a function of the holding period, then analyses

of tax return data may yield the spurious conclusion that gain-producing tran-

sactions are deferred. This finding could be purely an artifact of the selec-

tive sample provided by gains and losses reported to the tax authorities, and

may have contaminated all of the previous studies which have used IRS data to

show that investors are locked-in.

   Tax avoidance is not the only possible explanation of the discrepancy

between the brokerage firm and IRS data. Another is that the divergences are

due to the different years covered by the two data sets. Both 1962 and 1973,

the years of the IRS surveys, were years in which few short term gains were

generated on common stock. One measure of the "realization potential" of a year

is the average value of the current Standard and Poor's Composite Index, divided

by its value six months earlier (similar results obtain for other holding

intervals). For 1962 and 1973, the average values of this ratio were .932 and

.965, respectively. For the period June 1964-December 1970, that covered by the

brokerage firm data, the corresponding average ratio was 1.008.

   Other possibilities could also be suggested. The particular brokerage firm

which was surveyed might have provided its clients with particularly poor tax

advice. The client pool might be unrepresentative of investors in general, and
                                    —24—


there may be sample selection issues which arise because the investors are

followed over a long period, but Schiarbaum et al. address these issues and find

the characteristics of investors in their sample to closely resemble those for

investors in general.

     If the explanation is non—reporting, however, it implies two things.

First, the distortions in asset trading patterns due to the capital gains tax

may be smaller than previously believed. Studies based on tax return data, such

as Feldstein, Slemrod, and Yitzhaki (1980), may yield a misleading picture of

these distortions. Second, -in analyzing the burden of the capital gains tax, it

may be important to treat issues in tax evasion. Future theoretical and

empirical work should be directed at assessing this burden.
                                      —25—


IV. Realized Gains Versus Effective Tax Rates

    The preceding sections ignore three important aspects of the taxation of

capital gains, all of which play a cental role in any attempt to estimate

effective marginal tax rates. First, a sizable fraction of realized capital

gains face a marginal tax rate of zero because they are never reported to the

Internal Revenue Service. The most recent estimates (Internal Revenue Service,

1983) show that in 1981, when $43.7 billion of taxable net capital gains should

have been reported on individual income tax returns, only $25.9 billion was

actually reported. This implies a nonreport-ing rate of 40.6 percent for capital

gains income, by comparison with 6.3 percent for wage and salary income, 16.3

percent for dividend income, and 13.7 percent for interest income. The only

significant income categories with comparable noncompliance rates are those for

partnerships and small businesses (53.0 percent nonreporting), nonfarm propriet-

or income (49.7 percent nonreporting), and informal supplier income (79.3 per-

cent nonreporting).17 The nonreporting rate should be reduced by the recent

introduction of third-party reporting for some gains, but a substantial share of

realized gains may continue to escape taxation.

     The second aspect of capital gains taxation which my analysis omits is the

possibility of tax-reducing asset transfers. Many gains never face the taxes

described above because the investor transfers his assets or dies before

realizing the gain.   If appreciated assets are bequeathed, their basis is

"stepped-up" to their market value, and all prior appreciation escapes taxation.

The Joint Tax Committee (1986) estimates that in 1986, the federal government

suffered a revenue loss of 4.4 billion dollars from basis step-up, compared to

22.2 billion from partially excluding long-term capital gains from income.
                                     —26—


Transferring appreciated assets to nontaxable institutions and minors also expo-

ses the gains to taxation at relatively low rates. Unfortunately, no estimates

of these flows are available.

    Finally, by focussing on the tax rates which apply to realized gains, my

analysis ignores the lengthy time periods which often elapse between accrual and

realization of gains. To measure the effective tax burden on accruing gains,

it is essential to know when they will be realized for tax purposes. Some indi-

cation of the impact of deferral is suggested by data on stock market transac-

tions, drawn from the New York Stock Exchange (1984). In 1983, the share

turnover rate for individual investors implied that shares were held an average

of four years. For institutional investors, the average holding period was only

one year. The average holding periods for securities which appreciate while the

investor owns them may be even longer.      Without a model of why investors trade,

however, it is difficult to model effective capital gains tax rates.
                                    —27—


V. Summary and Implications

    This paper suggests that a significant fraction of realized capital gains

are taxed at non-zero marginal tax rates. The investors who realize these gains

are not following tax—minimizing portfolio strategies, and the capital gains tax

has the effect of lowering their after-tax return. Other investors, however,

follow trading strategies which make their effective tax rates on capital gains

very low. Investor heterogeneity is an important aspect of capital gains taxa-

tion, and it is extremely difficulty to aggregate across investors in different

tax positions to obtain an overall measure of how the capital gains tax affects

savings and investment incentives. The results suggest, however, that the

"traditional" analysis of the capital gains tax which assumed that realized

gains faced nontrivial marginal tax rates does apply to a sizable part of the

investing population.

    These results suggest several directions for future research. Perhaps the

most important is explaining the evident divergence in investors' portfolio

behavior. Some investors follow tax-minimizing portfolio strategies, while

others do not. This heterogeneity may be due to differences in transaction

costs, information, or other exogenous factors which induce investors to buy or

trade securities.18 Investigating the sources of this heterogeneity will

facilitate better modelling of the distortions induced by capital gains

taxation. A second question raised by investor heterogeneity concerns the iden-

tity of the "marginal investors" who effectively determine asset prices and

hence the market's relative valuation of di)idends and capital gains. For both

tax—minimizers and individual investors who behave in an unsophisticated way

from the tax standpoint, capital gains are probably taxed more lightly than
                                    —28—


dividend -income. For other investors, however, principally corporations, the

tax rate on capital gains may be significantly higher than that on dividend

income. The resulting market equilibrium must depend on the relative wealths,

risk aversions, and trading costs of these different investor groups.

     A third issue, which applies in studying a wider range of taxes, concerns

unreported income. For capital gains, nonreporting is a more serious problem

than for most other income sources. However, it is not clear that the effective

tax rate on the unreported component of capital gains is zero. Investors who

decide to evade their tax liability may suffer a reduction in their expected

utility as a consequence; at the margin, this should exactly equal their

expected utility from the after-tax income they would receive if they report

their income. The effective tax rate may therefore be equal on reported and

unreported gains. Resolving the tax burden on tax evaders may be particularly

important in measuring the distribution of effective capital gains tax rates

across asset types. Some assets, notably collectibles and some types of

tangible property, provide much greater opportunities for generating unreported

income than do other assets. This could affect the relative tax rates on these

assets, and have potentially important effects on the interasset allocation of

capital.
                                     —29—


                                 Footnotes

1.   Domar and Musgrave (1944), Stiglitz (1969), and more recently Balcer and
Judd (1985), Judd (1985), and Kovenock and Rothschild (1983, 1984) examine the
distortionary effects of the capital gains tax.

2. Bailey (1969), King and Fullerton (1984), and Protopapadakis (1983) estimate
effective capital gains tax rates on households. Their results suggest that .05
is a rough approximation to the household tax rate. Lindsey (1986) presents
recent evidence on the average marginal tax rate on realized gains over the
1965-1982 period; his data could be used to update the other calculations.

3.   For a detailed discussion of several other provisions which affected the
taxation of capftal gains in years prior to 1978, see Lindsey (1986).

4. The definition of "short-term" has been changed numerous times. The
required holding period needed to qualify for long-term gains treatment was six
months prior to 1977 and nine months in 1978.

5. If assets are transferred as inter vivos gifts, the recipient inherits the
donor's tax base and remains subject to capital gains taxation on the accrued
gains, but the taxes are paid only when the recipient sells the asset. While
such gifts are less attractive than transfer at death for capital gains tax
purposes, they have the advantage of avoiding estate taxes.

6. If an investor is certain to exhaust his carryforwards in k years, then the

marginal tax rates on realized gains is -r =
                                               T÷kRk where r+k is the marginal
capital gains tax rate in period t+k, and Rk is the current price of risk-free

income in period t+k.

7. With perfect markets and no rules against wash sales, the investor does not
forego any investment opportunities by following this strategy. He can either
repurchase the security in which he realizes the loss, or buy a very close
substitute for it, immediately after the sale.

8.   The desirability of voluntarily realizing long-term gains depends upon the
level of transactions costs, the differential between the short-term and
long-term capital gains tax rates, and the asset's own variance.

9. It is not uncommon for personal investors who take short positions to be
required to hold a balance half as large as their short position in a non-
interest bearing brokerage account. The foregone interest cost may swamp the
value of deferring capital gains taxation. Some other trading strategies may
involve so many transactions that the brokerage costs, even at low marginal
rates, become prohibitive; Constantinides and Scholes (1980) examine a case
where this may be true.

10.  In 1981 (1977), 33.2 (17.3) of reported capital gains were on common
stock, 38.39 (33.0) were on nonbusiness real estate and other depreciable pro-
                                    —30—


perty, 9.0% (10.8%) were on sales of partnerships and fiduciaries, and
19.5% (37.7%) were on other assets. These data are drawn from Brame and Gilmour
(1982) and other unpublished IRS tabulations.

11. Wetzler (1984) presents a detailed discussion of the provisions in the 1984
Deficit Reduction Act which affected capital gains taxation.

12. The average holding period for noninstitutional investors trading on the New
York Stock Exchange was four years in 1983 (NYSE (1984)).

13. The 1982 Tax Model Data File reports net capital gains and losses to
four—significant-figure accuracy. For some returns with very large offsetting
gain and loss transactions it is therefore impossible to measure proximity to
the $3,000 limit accurately. To explore the importance of this problem, Table
1 was recalculated omitting any returns for which the net gain or loss could
not be determined to within one hundred dollars. (This excludes returns with
both offsetting gains and losses, and a gain or loss of more than one million
dollars). Only 0.11 percent of the returns with capital gains were excluded by
this rule, and the results were changed only in the third decimal place.

14. For a discussion of how constraints on interest deductability can make them
marginal dividend tax rate zero, see Miller and Scholes (1978). Peterson,
Peterson, and Ang (1985), as well as Feenberg, provide tax-return based evidence
against this view.

15. I first learned of these tabulations from Shefrin and Statman (1985).

16. Hinrichs (1964) calculated that 36 percent of equity capital gains are
never reported. His estimates are remarkably close to the total estimates of
unreported capital gains found by recent IRS surveys.

17. These estimates are based on detailed IRS audits which are part of the
Taxpayer Compliance Monitoring Program. Capital gains misreporting may take
three different forms: transactions may be completely reported, their basis may
be overstated, or their sale price may be understated. At present these are no
data on the relative importance of these different factors.

18. Balcer and Judd (1985) provide one example of directions for future work.
They explore the burden of the capital gains tax in a model where lifecycle
investment considerations are the source of trading activity.
                                     —31—


                                 References

Allen, Franklin, 1982, On the importance of interaction of tax code provisions,
    University of Pennsylvania, mimeo.

Balcer, Yves and Kenneth L. Judd, 1985, The efficiency of capital taxation:
    Capital gains versus corporate, Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern
    University, mimeo.

Bailey, Martin 3., 1969, Capital gains and income taxation, in Arnold C.
    Harberger and Martin 3. Bailey, eds., The Taxation of Income from Capital
    (The Brookings Institution: Washington, D.C.), 11-49.

Brame, Bertie and Keith Gilmour, 1982, Sales of capital assets, 1973-1980,
    Statistics of Income Bulletin 2, 31—39.

Constantinides, George M., 1983, Capital market equilibrium with personal tax,
    Econometrica 51, 611—636.

Constantinides, George M., 1984, Optimal stock trading with personal taxes:
    Implications for prices and the abnormal January returns, Journal of
    Financial Economics 13, 65—89.

Constantinides, George M. and Myron S. Scholes, 1980, Optimal liquidiation of
    assets in the presence of personal tax: Implications for asset pricing,
    Journal of Finance 35, 439-452.

Domar, Evsey and Richard Musgrave, 1944, Proportional income taxation and risk-
    taking, Quarterly Journal of Economics 58, 388-422.

Feenberg, Daniel, 1981, Does the investment interest limitation explain the
    existence of dividends, Journal of Financial Economics 9, 265-269.

Feldstein, Martin S., Joel Slemrod, and Shlomo Yitzhaki, 1980, The effects of
    taxation on the selling of common stock and the realization of capital
    gains, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 94, 777—791.

Fredland, J. Eric, John Gray, and Emil Sunley, 1968, The six month holding period
    for capital gains: An empirical analysis of its effect on the timing of gains,
    National Tax Journal 21, 467-478.

Hinrichs, Harley, 1964, Unreporting of capital gains on tax returns or how to
    succeed in gainsmanship without actually paying taxes, National Tax Journal
    17, 158—163.

Judd, Kenneth L., 1985, Capital gains taxation by realization, Kellogg School of
    Management, Northwestern University, mimeo.

Kaplan, Steven, 1981, The holding period distinction of the capital gains tax,
    National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 762, Cambridge, Mass.
                                     —32—


 ing, Mervyn A., 1977, Public Policy and the Corporation (Chapman and Hall:
    London).

--ing, Mervyn, and Don Fullerton, 1984, The Taxation of Income From Capital
    (University of Chicago Press: Chicago).

ovenock, Daniel J. and Michael Rothschild, 1983, Capital gains taxation in an
   economy with an 'Austrian sector,' Journal of Public Economics 21, 215-256.

ovenock, Daniel J. and Michael Rothschild, 1984, Notes on the effect of capital
   gains taxation on non-Austrian assets, University of California at San
   Diego, mimeo.

 indsey, Lawrence, 1986, Capital gains rates, revenues, and realizations, mimeo,
    Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.

 -iller, Merton H. and Myron Scholes, 1978, Dividends and taxes, Journal of Fin-
    ancial Economics 6, 333-364.

:ew York Stock Exchange, 1982, Analysis of the capital gains holding period,
    Office of Economic Research, mimeo.

•:eW York Stock Exchange, 1984, New York Stock Exchange Fact Book (New York Stock
    Exchange, New York).

 eterson, Pamela B., David R. Peterson, and James Ang, 1985, Direct evidence on
    the marginal rate of taxation and dividend income, Journal of Financial
    Economics 14, 267—282.

 -otopapadakis, Aris, 1983, Some indirect evidence on effective captial gains
    tax rates, Journal of Business 56, 127—138.

 chlarbaum, Gary G., Wilbur G. Lewellen, and Ronald C. Lease, 1978, Realized
    returns on common stock investments: The experience of individual investors,
    Journal of Business 51, 299-325.

 nefrin, Hersh and Meir Statman, 1985, The disposition to sell winners too early
    and ride losers too long: Theory and evidence, Journal of Finance 40,
    777-791.

 :-iglitz, Joseph E., 1969, The effects of income, wealth, and capital gains
    taxation on risk-taking, Quarterly Journal of Economics 83, 262-283.

 -iglitz, Joseph E., 1983, Some aspects of the taxation of capital gains,
    Journal of Public Economics 21, 257—294.

 S. Congress, Joint Committee on Taxation, Estimates of Federal Tax
   Expenditures for Fiscal Years 1986-1990 (U.S. Government Printing Office,
   Washington, D.C.).

 .5. Treasury Department, Internal Revenue Service, 1980, Statistics of
    Income—1973, Sales of Capital Assets Reported on Individual Income Tax
    Returns (U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, D.C.).
                                    —33—



U.S. Treasury Department, Internal Revenue Service, 1983, Income Tax Compliance
    Research: Estimates for 1973-1981 (Internal Revenue Service: Office of the
    Assistant Commissioner for Planning, Finance, and Research, Washington,
   D.C.).

Wetzler, James, 1984, The tax treatment of securities transactions under the Tax
    Reform Act of 1984, Tax Notes, 29 October 1984, 453-482.
