NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHICH NEWS MOVES STOCK PRICES? A TEXTUAL ANALYSIS
Jacob Boudoukh
Ronen Feldman
Shimon Kogan
Matthew Richardson
Working Paper 18725
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18725

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2012

We would like to thank John Griffin, Xavier Gabaix and seminar participants at the University of Texas,
Austin, and Stern NYU for their comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Jacob Boudoukh, Ronen Feldman, Shimon Kogan, and Matthew Richardson. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Which News Moves Stock Prices? A Textual Analysis
Jacob Boudoukh, Ronen Feldman, Shimon Kogan, and Matthew Richardson
NBER Working Paper No. 18725
January 2012
JEL No. G02,G14
ABSTRACT
A basic tenet of financial economics is that asset prices change in response to unexpected fundamental
information. Since Roll’s (1988) provocative presidential address that showed little relation between
stock prices and news, however, the finance literature has had limited success reversing this finding.
This paper revisits this topic in a novel way. Using advancements in the area of textual analysis, we
are better able to identify relevant news, both by type and by tone. Once news is correctly identified
in this manner, there is considerably more evidence of a strong relationship between stock price changes
and information. For example, market model R-squareds are no longer the same on news versus no
news days (i.e., Roll’s (1988) infamous result), but now are 16% versus 33%; variance ratios of returns
on identified news versus no news days are 120% higher versus only 20% for unidentified news versus
no news; and, conditional on extreme moves, stock price reversals occur on no news days, while identified
news days show an opposite effect, namely a strong degree of continuation. A number of these results
are strengthened further when the tone of the news is taken into account by measuring the positive/negative
sentiment of the news story.

Jacob Boudoukh
The Caesarea Center
Arison School of Business, IDC
3 Kanfei Nesharim St
Herzlia 46150
ISRAEL
jboudouk@idc.ac.il

Shimon Kogan
Finance Department
McCombs School of Business
University of Texas at Austin
1 University Station B6600
Austin, TX 78712
shimon.kogan@mccombs.utexas.edu

Ronen Feldman
School of Business Administration
Hebrew University
Mount Scopus, Jerusalem
ISRAEL 91905
ronenf@gmail.com

Matthew Richardson
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
mrichar0@stern.nyu.edu

I.

Introduction

A basic tenet of financial economics is that asset prices change in response to unexpected
fundamental information. Early work, primarily though event studies, seemed to confirm
this hypothesis. (See, for example, Ball and Brown (1968) on earning announcements,
Fama, Fisher, Jensen and Roll (1969) on stock splits, Mandelker (1974) on mergers,
Aharony and Swary (1980) on dividend changes, and Asquith and Mullins (1986) on
common stock issuance, among many others.) However, since Roll’s (1988) provocative
presidential address that showed little relation between stock prices and news (used as a
proxy for information), the finance literature has had limited success at showing a strong
relationship between prices and news, e.g., also see Shiller (1981), Cutler, Poterba and
Summers (1989), Campbell (1991), Berry and Howe (1994), Mitchell and Mulherin (1994),
and Tetlock (2007), to name a few. The basic conclusion from this literature is that stock
price movements are largely described by irrational noise trading or through the revelation
of private information through trading.
In this paper, we posit an alternative explanation, namely that the finance literature has
simply been doing a poor job of identifying true and relevant news. In particular, common
news sources for companies such as those in the Wall Street Journal stories and Dow Jones
News Service, et cetera, contain many stories which are not relevant for information about
company fundamentals. The problem of course is for the researcher to be able to parse
through which news stories are relevant and which are not. Given that there are hundreds of
thousands, possibly millions, of news stories to work through, this presents a massive
computational problem for the researcher. Fortunately, advances in the area of textual
analysis allow for better identification of relevant news, both by type and tone. This paper
employs one such approach based on an information extraction platform (Feldman,
Rosenfeld, Bar-Haim and Fresko (2011), denote Feldman at al. (2011)).
There is a growing literature in finance that uses textual analysis to try and convert
qualitative information contained in news stories and corporate announcements into a
quantifiable measure by analyzing the positive or negative tone of the information. One of
the earliest papers is Tetlock (2007) who employs the General Inquirer, a well-known
2

textual analysis program, alongside the Harvard-IV-4 dictionary (denote IV-4) to calculate
the fraction of negative words in the Abreast of the Market Wall Street Journal column.
Numerous papers have produced similar analyses to measure a document’s tone in a variety
of financial and accounting contexts, including Davis, Piger, and Sedor (2006), Engelberg
(2008), Tetlock, Saar-Tsechansky and Macskassy (2008), Demers and Vega (2010),
Feldman, Govindaraj, Livnat and Segal (2010), and Loughran and McDonald (2011),
among others. While all these papers support the idea that news, transformed into a
sentiment measure, have important information for stock prices, none represent a significant
shift in thinking about the overall relation between stock prices and information. Part of the
reason is that, other than refinements of IV-4 for financial applications (e.g., Engelberg
(2008) and Loughran and McDonald (2011)), the textual analysis methodology is similar.6
The aforementioned textual analysis methodology (Feldman et al. (2011)) employed in this
paper is quite different. It combines not only a dictionary-based sentiment measure as in
Tetlock (2007) and Loughran and McDonald (2011), but also an analysis of phrase-level
patterns to further break down the tone of the article and a methodology for identifying
relevant events for companies (broken down into 14 categories and 56 subcategories).
While the methodology is for the most part based on sets of rules (as opposed to say
machine learning),7 the implementation employs the commonly used technique of running
and refining these rules on a subset of training articles. This procedure greatly improves the
accuracy. In terms of relating stock prices to news, the methodology provides a number of
advantages over existing approaches. In particular, over the sample period 2000-2009 for all
S&P500 companies, the Dow Jones Newswire produces over 1.9M stories, only 50% of
which we identify as relevant events. As discussed shortly, this breakdown into identified
and unidentified news makes a massive difference in terms of our understanding of stock
price changes and news. Moreover, employing a more sophisticated textual analysis
methodology than one based on a simple count of positive versus negative words further
improves the results. In other words, when we can identify the news, and more accurately

6

Some exceptions include Li (2010), Hanley and Hoberg (2011), and Grob-Klubmann and Hautsch (2011)
who all use some type of machine learning-based application.
7
Some parts of the implementation, such as locating names of companies and individuals, employ machinelearning technology, that is, the use of statistical patterns to infer context.

3

evaluate its tone, there is considerably more evidence of a strong relationship between stock
price changes and information.
This paper documents several new results. First, and foremost, using the aforementioned
methodology that allows us to automatically and objectively classify articles into topics
(such as analyst recommendations, financial information, acquisitions and mergers, etc.),
we compare days with no-news, unidentified news, and identified news on several
dimensions. In particular, we show that stock-level volatility is similar on no-news days and
unidentified news days, consistent with the idea that the intensity and importance of
information arrival is the same across these days. In contrast, on identified news days, the
volatility of stock prices is over double that of other days. This evidence is provided further
support by noting that identified news days are 31-34% more likely to be associated with
extreme returns (defined by the bottom and top 10% of the return distribution) while
unidentified and no news days are slightly more likely to be associated with moderate day
returns (in the middle 30-70% range of the returns distribution). A major finding is that
when we revisit Roll's (1988) R2 methodology and estimate the R2 from a market model
regression for all days and for unidentified news days, consistent with his results, R2 levels
are the same for all days and for unidentified news days. However, when we estimate the
same model over just identified news days, the R2 drops dramatically from an overall
median of 28% to 16%, the precise result that Roll (1988) was originally looking for in his
work.
Second, beyond the parsing of news into identified events and unidentified news, the
methodology provides a measure of article tone (that is, positive versus negative) that builds
on Tetlock (2007) and others. As mentioned above, we perform both an analysis of phraselevel patterns (e.g., by narrowing down to the relevant body of text, taking into account
phrases and negation, etc.) and employ a dictionary of positive and negative words more
appropriate for a financial context. Using this more advanced methodology, in contrast to a
simple word count, we show that our measure of tone can substantially increase R2 on
identified news days, but not on unidentified news days, again consistent with the idea that
identified news days contain price-relevant information. Another finding is that tone
variation across topics and within topics is consistent with one's intuition. For example,
4

deals and partnership announcements tend to be very positive while legal announcements
tend to be negative. Analyst recommendations and financial information, on average, tend
to be more neutral, but tend to have greater variation within the topic. Moreover, some of
these topics are much more likely to appear on extreme return days (e.g., analyst
recommendations, financials) while others are not (e.g., partnership). This suggests that
different topics may have different price impact. Finally, the results are generally consistent
with a positive association between daily returns and daily tone, with this relationship being
more pronounced using the methodology presented here than of the more standard simple
word count.
Third, the above discussion contemporaneously relates relevant news to stock price
changes. An interesting issue is whether the differentiation between identified and
unidentified news has forecast power for stock price changes. There is now a long literature,
motivated through work in behavioral finance and limits of arbitrage, that stock prices tend
to underreact or overreact to news, depending on the circumstances (see, for example,
Hirshleifer (2000), Chan (2003), Vega (2006), Gutierrez and Kelley (2008), Tetlock, SaarTsechansky, and Macskassy (2008), and Tetlock (2010)). This paper documents an
interesting result in the context of the breakdown of Dow Jones news into identified and
unidentified news. Specifically, conditional on extreme moves, stock price reversals occur
on no news and unidentified news days, while identified news days show an opposite effect,
namely a small degree of continuation. That news days tend to be associated with future
continuation patters while no news days see reversals is consistent with (1) our
methodology correctly parsing out relevant news, and (2) a natural partition between
underreaction and overreaction predictions in a behavioral context. As an additional test,
we perform an out-of-sample exercise based on a simple portfolio strategy. The resulting
gross Sharpe ratio of 1.7 illustrates the strength of these results.
While our paper falls into the area of the literature that focuses on using textual analysis to
address the question of how prices are related to information, the two most closely related
papers to ours, Griffin, Hirschey and Kelly (2011) and Engle, Hansen and Lunde (2011),
actually lie outside this textual analysis research area. Griffin, Hirschey and Kelly (2011)
cross-check global news stories against earnings announcements to try and uncover relevant
5

events. Engle, Hansen and Lunde (2011) utilize the Dow Jones Intelligent Indexing product
to match news and event types for a small set of (albeit large) firms. While the focus of each
of these papers is different (e.g., Griffin, Hischey and Kelly (2011) stress cross-country
differences and Engle, Hansen and Lunde (2011) emphasizing the dynamics of volatility
based on information arrival), both papers provide some evidence that better information
processing by researchers will lead to higher R2s between prices and news.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the data employed throughout the
study. Of special interest, we describe in detail the textual analysis methodology for
inferring content and tone from news stories. Section III provides the main results of the
paper, showing a strong relationship between prices and news, once the news is
appropriately identified. In section IV, we reexamine a number of results related to the
existing literature measuring the relationship between stock sentiment and stock returns.
Section V discusses and analyzes the forecasting power of the textual analysis methodology
for future stock prices, focusing on continuations and reversals after large stock price
moves. Section VI concludes.
II. Data Description and Textual Analysis Methodology
A. Textual Analysis
With the large increase in the amount of daily news content on companies over the past
decade, it should be no surprise that the finance literature has turned to textual analysis as
one way to understand how information both arrives to the marketplace and relates to stock
prices of the relevant companies. Pre mainstream finance, early work centered on
document-level sentiment classification of news articles by employing pre-defined
sentiment lexicons.8 The earliest paper in finance that explores textual analysis is Antweiler
and Frank (2005) who employ language algorithms to analyze internet stock message
boards posted on “Yahoo Finance”. Much of the finance literature, however, has focused on
word counts based on dictionary-defined positive versus negative words.
8

See, for example, Lavrenko, Schmill, Lawrie, Ogilvie, Jensen, and Allan (2000), Das and Chen (2007) and
Devitt and Ahmad (2007), among others. Feldman and Sanger (2006) provide an overview.

6

For example, one of the best known papers is Tetlock (2007). Tetlock (2007) employs the
General Inquirer, a well-known textual analysis program, alongside the Harvard-IV-4
dictionary to calculate the fraction of negative words in the Abreast of the Market Wall
Street Journal column. A plethora of papers, post Tetlock (2007), apply a similar
methodology to measure the positive versus negative tone of news across a wide variety of
finance and accounting applications.9 Loughran and McDonald (2011), in particular, is
interesting because they refine IV-4 to more finance-centric definitions of positive and
negative words.10
More recently, an alternative approach to textual analysis in finance and accounting has
been offered by Li (2010), Hanley and Hoberg (2011), and Grob-Klubmann and Hautsch
(2011). These authors employ machine learning-based applications to decipher the tone and
therefore the sentiment of news articles.11 The basic approach of machine learning is not to
rely on written rules per se, but instead allow the computer to apply statistical methods to
the documents in question. In particular, supervised machine learning uses a set of training
documents (that are already classified into a set of predefined categories) to generate a
statistical model that can then be used to classify any number of new unclassified
documents. The features that represent each document are typically the words that are inside
the document (bag of words approach).12 While machine learning has generally come to
dominate rules-based classification approaches (that rely solely on human-generated rules),
there are disadvantages, especially to the extent that machine learning classifies documents
in a non transparent fashion that can lead to greater misspecification.
In this paper, in contrast, classification is not used at all. Instead, a rule based information
extraction approach is employed, appealing to recent advances in the area of textual analysis
(Feldman at al. (2011)). That is, we extract event instances out of the text based on a set of
9

See, for example, Davis, Piger, and Sedor (2006), Engelberg (2008), Tetlock, Saar-Tsechansky and
Macskassy (2008), Kothari, Li and Short (2009), Demers and Vega (2010), Feldman, Govindaraj, Livnat and
Segal (2010), and Loughran and McDonald (2011), among others.
10
For a description and list of the relevant words, see http://nd.edu/~mcdonald/Word_Lists.html.
11
12

Other papers, e.g., Kogan et. al. (2011), use machine learning to link features in the text to firm risk.
See Manning and Schutze (1999) for a detailed description and analysis of machine learning methods.

7

predefined rules. For instance, when we extract an instance of an Acquisition event, we find
who is the acquirer, who is the acquiree, optionally what was the amount of money paid for
the acquisition, and so forth. Feldman et al. (2011) employ a proprietary information
extraction platform specific to financial companies, which they denote The Stock Sonar
(TSS), and which is available on commercial platforms like Dow Jones. This textual
analysis methodology differs from current rules-based applications in finance in three
important ways.
First, TSS also adheres to a dictionary-based sentiment analysis. In particular, the method
uses as a starting point the dictionaries used by Tetlock (2007) and Loughran and
McDonald (2011), but then augments it by adding and subtracting from these dictionaries.
Beyond the usual suspects of positive and negative words, a particular weight is placed on
sentiment modifiers such as “highly”, “incredible”, “huge”, et cetera versus lower emphasis
modifiers such as “mostly” and “quite” versus opposite modifiers such as “far from”. For
example, amongst the modifiers, the most commonly used word in the context of the S&P
500 companies over the sample decade is “highly”, appearing over 6,000 times. A typical
usage is:
By the end of 2005 Altria is highly likely to take advantage of the provisions of the
American Jobs Creation Act of 2004. (Dow Jones Newswire, at 18:16:25 on 03-152005.)
These words were adjusted to the domain of financial news by adding and removing many
terms, depending on the content of thousands of news articles. Specifically, for developing
these lexicons and rules (to be discussed in further detail below), a benchmark consisting of
thousands of news articles was manually tagged. The benchmark was divided into a training
set (providing examples) and a test set (kept blind and used for evaluating the progress of
the methodology). The rulebook was run repeatedly on the system on thousands of articles,
each time revised and iterated upon until the precision was satisfactory (e.g., >90%).
Second, this same approach was used to create a set of rules to capture phrase-level
sentiments. Current systems employed in finance so far have operated for the most part at
the word level, but compositional expressions are known to be very important in textual
analysis. For example, one of the best known illustrations involve double negatives such as
8

“reducing losses” which of course has a positive meaning, yet would likely yield a negative
word count in most schemes. For example, combination phrases with “reducing” appear
over 1,200 times for the S&P 500 companies in our sample, such as:
Mr. Dillon said the successful execution of Kroger's strategy produced strong cash
flow, enabling the Company to continue its ''financial triple play'' of reducing total
debt by nearly $400 million, repurchasing $318.7 million in stock, and investing
$1.6 billion in capital projects. (Dow Jones Newswire, at 13:19:20 on 03-08-2005.)
Other examples include words like “despite” which tend to connect both positive and
negative information. For example, the word “despite” appears over 3,600 times across our
S&P 500 sample. A typical sentence is:
Wells Fargo & Co.'s (WFC) fourth-quarter profit improved 10% despite a continued
slowdown in the banking giant's once-booming home mortgage business. (Dow
Jones Newswire, at 12:04:21 on 01-18-2005.)
A large number of expressions of this sort are considered jointly with the word dictionary to
help better uncover the sentiment of the article.
Third, and most important, TSS sorts through the document and parses out the meaning of
the document in the context of possible events relevant to companies, such as new product
launches, lawsuits, analyst coverage, financial news, mergers, et cetera. The initial list of
events were chosen to match commercial providers such as CapitalIQ but were augmented
by events likely to impact stock prices. This process led to a total of 14 event categories and
56 subcategories within events. For example, the events fall into one of the following
categories: Analyst Recommendations, Financial, Financial Pattern, Acquisition, Deals,
Employment, Product, Partnerships, Inside Purchase, Facilities, Legal, Award, Stock Price
Change and Stock Price Change Pattern. Consider the Analyst Recommendation category.13
In terms of subcategories, it contains nine subcategories, including analyst expectation,
analyst opinion, analyst rating, analyst recommendation, credit - debt rating, fundamental
analysis, price target, etc.14

13

In practice, the categories, defined in terms of Pattern, represent cases in which an event was identified but
the reference entity was ambiguous.
14
For a complete list of the categories and subcategories, see http://shimonkogan.tumblr.com.

9

Because events are complex objects to capture in the context of textual analysis of
documents, considerable effort was applied to write rules that can take any news story and
then link the name of a company to both the identified event and sentiment surrounding the
event. For example, a total of 4,411 rules were written to identify companies with the
various event categories and subcategories. Because every event is phrased in different
ways, the process of matching companies to identified events is quite hard. For example,
consider the following three sentences in the “Deals” category for different companies in
the early January, 2005 period:
1. Northrop Grumman Wins Contract to Provide Navy Public Safety. (Dow Jones
Newswire, at 17:02:21 on 01-03-2005.)
2. A deal between UBS and Constantia could make sense, Christian Stark, banks
analyst at Cheuxvreux wrote in a note to investors. (Dow Jones Newswire, at
10:17:26 on 01-03-2005.)
3. Jacobs Engineering Group Inc. (NYSE:JEC) announced today that a subsidiary
company received a contract to provide engineering and science services to NASA's
Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. (Dow Jones Newswire, at 12:45:03
on 01-04-2005.)
The methodology behind TSS managed to get a recall of above 85% by first identifying
candidate sentences that may contain events (based on the automatic classification of the
sentences) and then marking these sentences as either positive or negative for each event
type (through quality assurance (QA) engineers). The tagged sentences were then used as
updated training data for the sentence classifier and the QA cycle was repeated.
An additional difficulty is that sentences which identify the events may not mention the
specific name of the company which is the subject of the sentence. The methodology
underlying TSS is able to resolve these indirect references by analyzing the flow of the
article. Examples of typical sentences are
1. For Fiscal Year 2006, the company announced that it is targeting pro forma earnings
per share growth of 22 to 28 percent or $0.76 to $0.80 per share. (Dow Jones
Newswire, at 12:06:01 on 01-26-2005.)
2. Based on results from November and December periods, the retailer expects fourthquarter earnings to come in towards the end of previous guidance. (Dow Jones
Newswire, at 13:13:15 on 01-06-2005.)
In the former case, the article referred to Oracle, while in the latter case the article referred
to J.C. Penney. The TSS methodology was able to determine that the company mentioned in
10

the previous sentence was also the subject of this sentence and hence J.C. Penney could be
tied to this event with negative sentiment. More generally, for each company, TSS tries to
identify the exact body of text within the document that refers to that company so that the
sentiment calculations will be based only on words and phrase that are directly associated
with that company. For example, one technique is to consider only words within a range of
the mention of the main company in the document. Another is to avoid historical events
cited in documents by capturing past versus present tense. Like the document sentiment
analysis, a training set of documents were used to refine the rulebook for events and then
evaluated against a test set.

B. Data Description and Summary
The primary dataset used in this paper consists of all documents that pass through the Dow
Jones Newswire from January 1, 2000 to December 31, 2009. For computational reasons,
we limit ourselves to the S&P500 companies with at least 20 trading days at the time the
news stories are released. Over the sample period, the dataset therefore includes at some
time or another 791 companies. To avoid survivorship bias, we include in the analysis all
stocks in the index as of the first trading day of each year. We obtain total daily returns
from CRSP.
TSS methodology described in II.A processes each article separately and generates an
output file in which each article/stock/day is represented as an observation. For each of
these observations, TSS reports the total number of words in the article, the number of
relevant words in the article, the event (and sub-event) identified, and the number of
positive and negative features as identified by TSS. For the same set of articles we also
count the number of positive and negative words using IV-4 (see, for example, Tetlock
(2007)).15 In terms of sentiment score, after parsing out only relevant sentences, and
15

It#should#be#pointed#out#that#Tetlock#(2007),#and#others#that#followed,#do#not#apply#a#word#count#
blindly#to#IV>4.#For#example,#Tetlock#(2007)#counts#words#in#each#of#the#77#categories#in#IV>4#and#then#
collapses#this#word#count#into#a#single#weighted#count#based#on#a#principal#components#analysis#across#
the#77#categories.##
#

11

determining the appropriate context of words at the phrase-level, the sentiment score is
analyzed through the standard method of summing up over positive and negative words,
e.g., S =

P−N
, where P and N stand for the number of positive and negative words,
P + N +1

respectively.
A key feature of our methodology is its ability to differentiate between relevant news for
companies (defined in our context as those related to specific firm events) as opposed to
unidentified firm events. For each news story, therefore, our application of TSS produces a
list of relevant events connected to this company and to this particular piece of news. It is
possible that multiple events may be connected to a given story. In our analysis we ignore
the Stock Price Change and Stock Price Change Pattern categories as these categories do
not, on their own, represent fundamental news events. We also ignore Award, Facilities,
and Inside Purchase, since these categories do not contain a sufficient number of
observations. We are therefore left with eight main categories.
To be more precise, our goal is to analyze the difference in return patterns based on the type
of information arrival. We therefore classify each stock/day into one of three categories:
1.

No news – observations without news coverage.

2.

Unidentified news – observations for which none of the news coverage is
identified.

3.

Identified news – observations for which at least some of the news coverage is
identified as being at least one of the above events.

Moreover, we define “new” news versus “old” news by whether the news identifies the
same event that had been identified in similar recent news stories of that company.16
Specifically, a given event coverage is considered “new” if coverage of the same event type
(and the same stock) is not identified during the previous five trading days.

16

See Tetlock (2011) for a different procedure for parsing out new and stale news.

12

Since our goal is to relate information arrival to stock returns, which are observed at the
stock/day level, we rearrange the data to follow the same stock/day structure. To that end,
we consolidate all events of the same type for a given stock/day into a single event by
averaging their scores. The resulting dataset is structured such that for each stock/day we
have a set of indicators denoting which events were observed, and when observed, the
relevant score for each of the event types. We also compute a daily score by adding the
number of positive and negative features across all relevant articles.
In order to ensure that the analysis does not suffer from a look-ahead bias, we use the article
timestamp and line it up with the trading day. Specifically, we consider date t articles those
that were released between 15:31 on date t-1 and 15:30 on date t. Date t returns are
computed using closing prices on dates t-1 and t. Articles released on non-trading days
(weekends and holidays) are matched with the next available trading day.
Table 1 provides an overview of the data. The first column in panel A reports the number of
observations under each of the day classifications. First, we see that most days have no
news coverage, i.e., 696,985 of 1,229,359 stock/day observations contain no news reported
on the Dow Jones Newswire. Second, and most important, the vast majority of the days
with news coverage, 374,194 of 532,374, do not have a single topic-identified news event.
As shown in columns 2-4 of Panel A, most identified news days contain only a singeidentified event (124,158 of 158,180). We also observe that identified news days contain a
larger number of articles compared with unidentified news days (6.1 vs. 2.6 per stock/day).
While the number of words per article does not seem to vary much by day type, the number
of relevant words (as identified by TSS) is much larger on identified news days (81 vs. 49).
The bottom part of Panel A reports the same set of statistics by event type. For example, the
row labeled Acquisition contains all day/stock observations in which an acquisition event
type was observed. Note that this sorting is not mutually exclusive as there may be
day/stock observations with multiple event types. The largest event type is Financials, with
69,205 observations. Outside of financials, the other event types contain between 10,047
observations (Partnerships) and 30,101 (Deals).

13

Panel B of Table 1 reports the average firm returns, market returns, and factor
characteristics (size, book-to-market, and momentum) of observations across stock/day
types. Consistent with the prior literature, we find that firm size is correlated with media,
even if this effect is small for our sample of S&P500 firms -- quintile assignment of 4.48 for
no news vs. 4.71 for unidentified news and 4.76 for identified news. Importantly, return and
factor characteristics are very similar for identified and unidentified news days. In
unreported results we considered a fourth category, stock/days with both identified and
unidentified news. The results were unaffected by merging these categories.
A key finding of this paper is that when we can identify news, the news matters. As a first
pass at the data, Table 2 provides a breakdown of news stories by the distribution of returns.
In brief, the main result is that identified news days are more likely than unidentified news
to lie in the negative and positive tails of the return distribution. On the surface, this is
consistent with rational models, which would suggest that information arrival should be
associated with increases in volatility.
In particular, if identified news days proxy for information arrival, then we should find that
news arrival would be concentrated among days with large return movements, positive or
negative. To relate news arrival intensity with returns, we assign daily returns into
percentiles separately for each stock and year: bottom 10%, next 20%, middle 40%, next
20%, and top 10%. We perform the assignment for each stock separately to control for
cross-sectional variation in total return volatility, and perform the assignment for each year
separately to control for large time-series variations in average return volatility, e.g., 20089. The columns in Table 2 group observations according to this split. The first three rows of
the table show that extreme day returns are associated with somewhat larger number of
articles (for each stock appearing in the news) and on these days, there is a larger total
number of words used in the articles.
Next, we compare the observed intensity of different day types to the intensity predicted
under the null that these distributions are independent. For example, the null would suggest
that of the 700 thousand no news days, 70 thousand would coincide with returns at the
bottom 10%, 140 thousand would coincide with returns at the following 20%, and so forth.
14

The results in rows five through fourteen report the difference between the observed
intensity and the null in percentage terms.
Several observations are in order. First, we find that no news days are less concentrated
among days with large price changes: -6.6% (-6.5%) for the bottom (top) 10% of days. This
is consistent with the notion that news coverage proxies for information arrival.
Interestingly though, we observe a very similar pattern for unidentified news days: 2.2%
(1.1%) for the bottom (top) 10% of days. Second, in sharp contrast to these results, we find
that identified news days are 30.8% (34.2%) more likely to coincide with the bottom (top)
10% of return days. Thus, while we might expect under independence to have 15,818
identified news stories in the lower tail, we actually document 20,690 news stories. That is,
identified news days, but not unidentified news days, are much more likely to be extreme
return days.
Third, this last pattern is also observed when we examine the frequency of individual event
types, one at a time. The bottom part of Table 2 shows a U-shaped pattern suggesting that
each of the event types is more likely to coincide with extreme return days compared with
moderate return days. It should be noted that for some event types, the pattern is not
symmetric. For example, Deals are more likely to appear on extreme positive days,
compared with extreme negative days. This is consistent with the intuition that deals would
generally be regarded as a positive event for the firm. At the same time, Legal events are
more likely to coincide with extreme negative days compared with extreme positive days.
The news categories with the greatest concentration of events in the tails – Analyst
Recommendations and Financial – are not surprisingly dispersed in a much more symmetric
way.

III. R2
A seminal paper on the question of whether stock prices reflect fundamental information is
Roll (1988). In that paper, Roll (1988) argues that once aggregate effects have been
removed from a given stock, the finance paradigm would imply that the remaining variation
15

of firm returns would be idiosyncratic to that firm. As a proxy for this firm specific
information, Roll (1988) uses news stories generated in the financial press. His argument is
that, on days without news, idiosyncratic information is low, and the R2s from aggregate
level regressions should be much higher. Roll (1988) finds little discernible difference.
Thus, his conclusion is that it is difficult to understand the level of stock return variation.
Working off this result, a number of other papers reach similar conclusions with respect to
prices and news, in particular, Cutler, Poterba and Summers (1989), and Mitchell and
Mulherin (1994).
The evidence that asset prices do not reflect seemingly relevant information is not just
found with equity returns. For example, Roll (1984)’s finding that, in the frozen
concentrated orange juice (FCOJ) futures market, weather surprises explain only a small
amount of variability of futures returns has been a beacon for the behavioral finance and
economics literature. Given that weather has theoretically the most important impact on
FCOJ supply, and is the focus of the majority of news stories, Roll (1984) concludes, like in
his 1988 paper, that there are large amounts of “inexplicable price volatility”. In contrast,
Boudoukh, Richardson, Shen and Whitelaw (2007) show that when the fundamental is
identified, in this case temperatures close to or below freezing, and when relevant path
dependencies are taken into consideration, e.g., first freeze versus second, third etc., there is
a close relationship between prices and weather surprises. In this section, we make a similar
argument to Boudoukh, Richardson, Shen and Whitelaw (2007). We parse out news stories
into identified versus unidentified events and reevaluate Roll’s (1988) finding and
conclusion.
In a different context, and using a different methodology, Griffin, Hirschey and Kelly
(2011) and Engle, Hansen and Lunde (2011) also provide evidence that price volatility can
be partially explained by news. For example, by cross-checking global news stories against
earnings announcements to try and uncover relevant events, Griffin, Hirschey and Kelly
(2011) document better information extraction can lead to higher R2s between prices and
news. Engle, Hansen and Lunde (2011) utilize the Dow Jones Intelligent Indexing product
to match news and event types for a small set of (albeit large) firms, and show that the
arrival of this public information has explanatory power for the dynamics of volatility.
16

The results of Table 2 suggest that our textual analysis methodology will have similar
success at linking identified events to stock return variation.17 Therefore, as a more formal
look at the data, we study the link between news arrival and volatility by computing daily
return variations on no news days, unidentified news days, and identified news days.
Specifically, for each stock we compute the average of squared daily returns on these day
types. We then calculate the ratio of squared deviations on unidentified news days to no
news days, and the ratio of squared deviations on identified news days to no news days.18 If
both unidentified and identified news days have no additional effect on stock volatility, then
we should find that these ratios are distributed around one.
Table 3 reports the distribution of these variance ratios. Consistent with Table 2 results, we
find that the median variance ratio of unidentified news days is close to one (i.e., 1.2) while
the variance ratio of identified news days exceeds two. That is, the median stock exhibits
return variance on identified news days that is 2.2 times the variance of no news days. The
result appears quite robust with over 90% of stocks exhibiting variance ratios exceeding one
on identified news days.
Figure 1 depicts the distribution of these ratios across the 672 stocks for which these ratios
are available (out of 791), winsorized at 10.19 As evident, the ratios are not distributed
around one for neither unidentified nor identified news days. However, the difference in
distributions between unidentified and identified news days’ ratios is clear: the variance
ratio is much higher on identified news days compared with unidentified news days. These
results clearly demonstrate that our day classification has power to distinguish between days
on which price-relevant information arrives and days on which information may or may not
arrive, but if it does, it is not price-relevant.

17

Note that, while most researchers focus on Roll’s (1988) R2 result, Roll (1988) also provided evidence that
kurtosis was higher on news versus no news days, a result similar to that provided in Table 2.
18
We include only stocks with at least 20 observations for all day classifications.
19
We eliminate stocks for which we do not have at least twenty trading days of under each of the day
categories.

17

The middle part of Table 3 reports variance ratios for each of the event types (Acquisition,
Analyst Recommendations, etc.). The event-level analysis reveals similar patterns with
median variance ratios exceeding 1 for all event types and exceeding two for two of the
eight event categories, in particular, Analyst Recommendations and Financial. Most striking
is that for 25% of the firms, five of the event types exceed variance ratios of two. In general,
consistent with a priori intuition, Acquisitions, Legal, Financial and Analyst
Recommendations appear to be the most informative.
As an additional measure of the informative of news, Section 2 defined “new” news versus
“old” news by whether the news identifies the same event that had been identified in similar
recent news stories of that company. One might expect that new news would have more
information and thus greater price impact. Indeed, we find that among identified news days
there is a substantial difference between the variance of old news days, with a median
variance ratio of 1.5, and new news days, with the corresponding statistics of 2.2.
This fact, that variances are higher on days in which we can identify important events and
on days with “new” news, supports a relation between prices and fundamentals. As a more
formal analysis, we reproduce the aforementioned Roll (1988) analysis for our setting.
Table 4 reports results for a reinvestigation of the R2 analysis of Roll (1988). Specifically,
we estimate a one-factor pricing model and a four-factor pricing model separately for each
firm and for each day classification: all, no news, unidentified news, and identified news.20
We repeat the same analysis at the 2-digit SIC industry classification thereby imposing a
single beta for all firms within a given industry and utilizing weighted least squared
regressions. All R2 are adjusted for the number of degrees of freedom.
The results in the top part of Table 4 report the mean and median R2 across firms (columns
2 and 3) and industries (columns 5 and 6). Consider the median calculations for the CAPM
model at the firm level. The R2s are similar on no news and unidentified news days (i.e.,
33% vs. 30%). The magnitude of the R2s and similarity of these numbers between no news
and news days (albeit unidentified) are consistent with Roll’s puzzling results. However,
20

We impose a minimum of 40 observations to estimate the regressions.

18

R2s are much lower on identified news day, i.e., 15.9%. The difference in R2 between
identified news and no-news days is striking – the ratio of median R2 between identified
news and no-news days is 2.1, in sharp contrast to Roll’s results.
Roll's original theory-based conjecture, dramatically refuted empirically by his 1988 work,
was that the performance of a market model, as measured by R2, should be much worse
during days on which firm-specific information arrives, compared with days when no such
information arrives. In contrast to Roll’s results, our results do lend support to this
conjecture, since we are able to better proxy for firm-specific information arrival days using
event identification.
Our results appear to be robust to the pricing model and firm/industry specification. For
example, the results are analogous for the four factor model that, along with the market,
includes the book-to-market, size and momentum factors. In particular, the ratio of median
R2 between no-news and identified news days is still greater than two, and the R2s between
no-news and unidentified days is again similar. All these results change only barely when
we perform the analysis at an industry level in which we constrain the betas against the 1or 4-factor models to be the same within industry. Constraining the betas allows greater
degrees of freedom for subsequent analysis when we try and understand the source of the
differences between the R2s of no-news versus unidentified days. Specifically, in the next
section, we ask the question whether our estimate of news sentiment/tone, coupled with the
exact event identifier, can help explain these R2s. As a brief preview, we find that, even in a
simple regression framework using the score S defined in section II.B, there is a strong link
between this information and the unexplained variation from factor model regressions.

IV.
Measuring Sentiment
#
One of the main applications of textual analysis in finance has been to link sentiment scores
to both contemporaneous and future stock returns. The evidence is statistically significant
albeit weak in magnitude. For example, Tetlock (2007) and Tetlock, Saar-Tsechansky and
Macskassy (2008), show that negative word counts of news stories about firms based on
IV-4 have contemporaneous and forecast power for the firms’ stock returns, though the R2s
19

are low. Loughran and McDonald (2011) argue that for a finance context the Harvard
dictionary is not appropriate and build a sentiment score using a more finance-centric
dictionary. Their application focuses on creating a dictionary appropriate for understanding
the sentiment contained in 10-K reports. For their 10-K application, sentiment scores based
on word counts from this alternative dictionary generally provide a better fit.
In this section, we first extend the analysis of Section III on news versus no news R2s to
include sentiment scores. In the above analysis, we showed that identified news days are a
good proxy for information arrival. Below, we show that the sentiment of these articles, i.e.,
the directional content of this information, has explanatory power for returns. As a preview,
consider Table 4. Table 4 shows that market model regressions on news days have low R2,
that is, most of the variation of stock returns is idiosyncratic in nature. A reasonable
hypothesis is that the R2s should increase if idiosyncratic information is incorporated
directly. We use the sentiment score as our proxy for this direct information, and we
compare the score based on TSS and that using IV-4.
Recall that for each day and event type (within the day) we compute a sentiment score using
the number of positive and negative features identified by TSS. For comparison purposes,
we also compute a score using IV-4, similar to Tetlock (2007). We refer to these scores as
“IV4”. Table 5 provides a set of summary statistics with respect to sentiment scores.
The first column in the table reports the number of observations classified as unidentified
and identified news days (first two rows), followed by the number of observations falling
into each of the event types.21 The set of columns under “TSS” report score statistics for
each of the classifications. For example, of the 374,194 unidentified news days, TSS is able
to compute a sentiment score for only 158,180. In contrast, virtually all identified news days
are matched with sentiment output from TSS. The remaining columns in the column block
report the mean, percentiles (10%, 50%, 90%), and spread between the top and bottom 10%
of observations within each category. The next block of columns, under “IV4”, reports the

21

Recall that the sum of observations under all event types exceeds the number of observations under
“identified days” since they are, on average, multiple events for each identified news day.

20

same set of statistics using the IV-4 based dictionary. The last column in the table reports
the correlation between the TSS and IV4 scores.
First, for virtually every category, the number of observations with available TSS scores is
smaller than the number of observations with available IV4 scores available. This is
consistent with the set of negative and positive words in the IV4 dictionary being generally
larger than the set of positive and negative features in TSS. The average score for
unidentified and identified news days is on average positive, demonstrating the tendency of
media coverage to have a positive tone. This bias is similar in magnitude for TSS and IV4.
Second, TSS appears to produce more discerning sentiment scores compared with IV4. For
both unidentified and identified days, the spread of TSS scores is much larger than the
spread of IV4 scores; the difference between the top and bottom 10% of identified news
days is 1.23 under TSS but only 0.50 under IV4.22 This holds across many of the event
types. Examining variations across event types, we find that TSS scores vary much more
than IV4 scores. Also, the variation in average TSS scores is consistent with one’s priors
about these event types. For example, the average scores of Analyst Recommendations is
close to neutral (0.06) consistent with the idea that analysts revisions are equally likely to be
positive as they are to be negative. On the other hand, legal events are on average negative
and correspond to negative TSS scores (-0.21), while partnership events are on average
positive and correspond to positive TSS scores (0.63).
These differences between TSS and IV4 scores are not merely an artifact of rescaling. The
last column in Table 5 reports the correlation between TSS and IV4 scores. While the
correlations are positive, they range between 0.17 and 0.38 -- far from one. In fact, for three
of the eight event types, event-specific scores correlations are lower than 0.20.
To see the additional explanatory power of event-specific scores, consider the results of
Table 6. The R2s reported in the table are adjusted R2s derived from industry regressions.
We augment the one-factor or four-factor models with event-level scores obtained from

22

Recall that the score ranges from -1 to 1.

21

TSS or IV4, utilizing weighted least squared regressions estimated on the 2-digit SIC
industry level (with at least 80 observations). That is, we assume that all firms within the
industry have the same return response magnitude to a given event type but we allow this
magnitude to vary across events and industries. Focusing on identified event days, we see
that at the firm level, daily scores obtained from TSS increase R2 from a median of 16.2% to
17.2% under the one-factor model, and from 17.1% to 20.2% under the four-factor model
(while essentially unimproved using IV-4 scores). Most important, these increases are
attained only for identified news days. In contrast, for unidentified news days, there is no
increase in R2s when sentiment scores are taken into account. In other words, to link stock
prices to information, it is necessary to measure both the news event and the tone (i.e.,
sentiment) of this news.
In order to investigate this further, we also report R2 from a weighted least squares pooled
industry regression while separating observations by event types. Consider the CAPM-like
model. The results show a large degree of variation across events. For example,
Acquisitions (12.8%) and Financial (12.6%) are lower than the 16% cited above for
identified news days, and substantially lower than the 33% on no news days and 30% on
unidentified news days. In contrast, Analyst Recommendations (14.8%), Deals (19.9%),
Employment (16.4%), Partnerships (23.0%) and Product (28.6%) produce much higher R2s.
Of particular interest, the increase in adjusted R2s are all positive once the news’ sentiment
is taken into account, with the percent increase in the ratio of R2s ranging from 11% to 62%,
the latter being Analyst Recommendations. Sample size aside, to the extent these categories
can be further broken down and the sentiment of each event be incorporated, one would
expect an even greater bifurcation of the R2s between unidentified/no news days and further
refined identified news days. In conclusion, the TSS sentiment score, when allowing for
event-specific scores, increases the explanatory power significantly for all event types.
For comparison purposes, Table 6 also provides the same type of analysis for IV-4 scores.
While IV-4 scores also add to the explanatory power of stock market returns on news and
specific event days, the gains are of a significantly smaller magnitude. In fact, for all event
types, TSS dominates the IV-4 score methodology. This result is loosely consistent with

22

previous analyses using IV-4 scores which show statistical (albeit economically weak)
significance (e.g., see Tetlock (2007), and Loughran and McDonald (2010), among others).
V.
News Type, Reversals and Continuations
#
Though the results of Sections III and IV are supportive of one of the main hypotheses from
efficient markets, namely, that prices respond to fundamental information, the growing
literature in the area of behavioral finance also has implications for our research. There are
a number of papers that describe conditions under which stock prices might under- or
overreact based on well-documented behavioral biases. (See, for example, Daniel,
Hirshleifer and Subrahmanyam (1998), Barberis, Shleifer and Vishny (1998), Hong and
Stein (1999), Hirshleifer (2002), and Barber and Odean (2008), among others.) Essential
findings from this literature based on behavioral theory are that (i) investors only partially
adjust to real information, leading to a continuation of the price response to this
information, and (ii) investors overreact to shocks to prices (i.e., unreal information),
leading to higher trading volume and reversals of these shocks.
Indeed, there are a number of studies that provide some empirical support for these
hypotheses. For example, Stickel and Verrecchia (1994) and Pritamani and Singal (2001)
report stock price momentum after earnings announcements. Tetlock, Saar-Tsechansky and
Macskassy (2008) report similar underreaction to news events focused on negative words
(as measured through a word count based on a textual analysis). The closest papers to ours,
however, are Chan (2003) and Tetlock (2010, 2011) who focus on days with and without
news. Specifically, Chan (2003) separates out companies hit by price shocks into those with
public news versus no news. Chan (2003) finds that after bad news stock prices continue to
drift down while after no news stock prices reverse. Tetlock (2010, 2011) generally finds
that public news, and especially new as opposed to stale news, reduce the well-known shortterm reversals of stock returns. In contrast, Gutierrez and Kelley (2008) do not find any
difference.
In this section, we extend the above analyses to our dataset, in particular, to our
differentiation of public news into identified news events versus unidentified news. To the
23

extent the behavioral literature tries to explain the theories of under- and overreaction in
terms of stock price responses to real news versus false news, our methodology provides an
effective way to study this issue further.
#
As mentioned above, the results so far suggest a strong contemporaneous response of stocks
to their media coverage on identified news days but not on unidentified news days. One
interpretation is that identified news days are days on which price-relevant information
arrives. To examine this, we measure return autocorrelation on different day types (i.e., nonews, unidentified news, and identified news). Table 7 reports the results of a weighted
least squared regression in which the dependent variable is day t+1 returns. In the first
column of the table, the independent variables are time t returns and day classification
dummies (no-news days dummy is dropped), along with the TSS daily sentiment score.
Consistent with the aforementioned literature (e.g., Chan (2003)), Table 7 suggests a
reversal following no-news days. For example, the day t return coefficient of -0.037 implies
a negative daily autocorrelation of 3.7%. While this negative autocorrelation is consistent
with microstructure effects such as bid-ask spreads and state prices, the reversal is sizable
considering the S&P500 universe of stocks in our sample and their average bid-ask spreads.
Unidentified news days are characterized by reversals too, while the magnitude of the
negative autocorrelation is smaller compared with no-news days (i.e., -2.9%).

This

reduction in the magnitude of reversals on news days is also consistent with findings in the
prior literature (e.g., Tetlock (2010, 2011)).
The more interesting and novel finding is that the well-known reversal result disappears
when we condition on identified news days. The marginal coefficient of 4.4% implies that
identified news days are followed by continuations (i.e., positive autocorrelation of 0.7%).
Furthermore, we find that on identified news day, the continuation follows the direction of
the day t sentiment – positive sentiment days are followed by higher than average returns on
subsequent days, controlling for date t return. For example, using Table 5, consider the 90%
quantile of TSS scores, i.e., 0.83, times the 0.068 coefficient, which adds an additional
5.6bp to the continuation. While these numbers are arguably small, the coefficients are all
statistically significant at the 1% level.
24

Columns 2-9 of Table 7 study these patterns for each of the event types separately. In these
regressions, we set the event dummy to be equal to one if the event occurred on date t and
zero otherwise. This specification contrasts days on which a specific event took place with
all other days. The results suggest that many event types exhibit continuations, with the
largest ones following Analyst Recommendations, Deals, Employment, and Financials.
Together, the results in the table suggest that the contemporaneous price response to
identified news days is unlikely to be due to irrational over-reaction to news coverage of the
events underling our study. If anything, it suggests that the price response is insufficiently
strong for many of the event types.
The analysis underlying Table 7 has resulted from a pooled time series regression of all
S&P 500 stocks over the 10-year sample period. The regression model imposes the same
coefficients across all stocks, making it difficult to gauge the economic significance of the
results. To further evaluate the economic magnitude of the impact the type of news has on
stock prices, we consider three separate zero-cost strategies, each implemented on a subset
of the day classifications – no-new, unidentified news, and identified news.
Specifically, following no-news and unidentified news days we follow a reversal strategy
which goes long one unit of capital across all stocks with time t excess returns (returns
minus CRSP value-weighted returns) falling below minus one standard deviation based on
lagged 20 day excess returns, and go short one unit of capital across all stocks with time t
returns exceeding plus one standard deviation.23 In contrast, following identified news days,
we follow a continuation strategy which goes long one unit of capital across all stocks with
time t excess returns (returns minus CRSP value-weighted returns) exceeding plus one
standard deviation based on lagged 20 day excess returns, and go short one unit of capital
across all stocks with time t returns falling below minus one standard deviation. The return
of the zero cost strategy is equal to the returns on the longs minus the returns on the shorts,
provided that we have at least five stocks on the long side and at least five stocks on the
short side. Thus, at any time, the strategy is long 1/NL units of capital across NL positive
23

The results are robust to changes in the threshold.

25

extreme moves and short 1/NS units of capital across NS negative extreme moves. In all
cases we hold the stocks for one day.
Table 8 reports results for these three strategies separately. The top panel of the table reports
time series regressions for a four-factor model. The alpha of the strategy formed using nonews stocks is 0.16% (per day), suggesting a return pattern consistent with reversals. In
sharp contrast, the strategy formed using identified-news stocks exhibits large continuation
and daily alpha of 0.20%; finally, the strategy formed using unidentified news days
produces an alpha that is indistinguishable from zero. These results, differentiating between
identified and unidentified news, further highlight the importance of parsing out the content
of the news. Of some note, the strategies load significantly only on one of the aggregate
factors, resulting in negative albeit small betas. Apparently, going long and short stocks
subject to extreme moves is on average short the market.
The second panel of the table reports the average daily return of the each of the strategies.
The continuation strategy using identified news stocks generates an average daily return of
19.6bp per day and was profitable in every single year in our sample, including the crash of
internet stocks and the financial crisis period. The reversal strategy using no news days was
also profitable in every year, achieving an average daily return of 15.6bp per day. The
bottom panel of the table reports the mean and standard deviation of daily returns along
with the strategies’ annualized alphas. While the reversals strategy produces a Sharpe ratio
of 1.8, the continuations strategy produces a Sharpe ratio of 1.7 – economically large given
that our sample includes only S&P500 stocks.24 It should be pointed out that unlike many
standard long-short strategies analyzed in the academic literature (e.g., value or
momentum), the strategy evaluated here exhibits daily variations in the number of stocks
held. The bottom part of the table reports the average number of stocks held by each of the
strategies on the long and the short sides. Not surprisingly, the number of stocks in the
reversal strategy is much larger than the number of stocks in the continuation strategy as we

24

The strategy turns over the stocks after one day of trading, resulting in significant roundtrip trading costs,
even for liquid stocks such as those in the S&P500. The use of the trading strategy is illustrative and is
intended to demonstrate the economic significance through aggregation across S&P500 stocks each period.

26

have over four times more no-news observations compared with identified news
observations.
Figure 2 facilitates a further comparison between the strategies’ relative performance over
the 10-year sample period. The figure, reported in log scale, shows what would have
happened to the value of a $1 invested in each of the strategies on Feb 1st, 2000.25 In
addition to the three strategies, we include the cumulative value of investing in the market,
in excess of the risk-free rate. Consistent with the Sharpe ratios, and transaction costs aside,
both the reversals and continuations strategies are very profitable. Of course, as mentioned
in footnote 23, an individual trading on a daily basis would generate significant transactions
costs, resulting in much lower profits.
The results provided in Table 8 ignore the information contained in the sentiment scores
associated with identified news events. To rectify this, we evaluate the economic
significance of the daily sentiment score by including it in the trading strategy described
above. Specifically, with the strategy described above, we focus on identified news, going
long (short) one unit of capital of stocks with large positive (negative) excess returns
(exceeding one standard deviation). However, we now break this strategy into two strategies
by sorting additionally on the sentiment scores across each stock each day. That is, the first
strategy, labeled “Long Score”, goes long stocks with above median sentiment scores
among all stocks with large positive returns (that day) and goes short stocks with below
median score among all stocks with large negative returns (that day). The strategy labeled
“Short Score” still goes long stocks with large positive returns but now with below median
scores, and goes short stocks with large negative returns but with above median scores.
Thus, effectively, we have split the holdings of the previous strategy into two portfolios of
roughly equal size. If the continuation pattern observed following identified news days is
unrelated to the informational content of the news that day, then the two strategies would
yield similar results.

25

Recall that we use the first 20 trading days to compute lagged volatility.

27

The top part of Table 9 reports time-series alphas of these zero-cost strategies controlling
for the four factors. The findings are clear: the informational content of the news appears to
affect the continuation strategy dramatically. The “Long Score” strategy generates a daily
alpha of 34bp while the short-score strategy produces an alpha that is indistinguishable from
zero. Clearly, this strategy is quite volatile since it relies on a relatively smaller universe of
stocks by halving the existing portfolio. That said, the “Long Score” strategy produces
positive returns in 9 of the 10 years in our sample compared to the “Short Score” strategy
which splits the period by returning positive profits in 7 of the 10 years.
As a final comment, the strategy focuses on one-day holding periods. It seems worthwhile
commenting on the price patterns following no-news days and identified news days on
subsequent days. Figure 3 plots the cumulative abnormal returns of the three strategies
described in Table 8 based on no news, unidentified news and identified news for days 1
through 10 following extreme moves of S&P 500 stocks. First, consider no-news days.
Stocks exhibit a reversal that appears to continue on, reaching around 40bps at the end of
the two-week period. The results also now show a reversal, albeit of 20bps, for unidentified
news stocks. These results are again consistent with the broad theme of this paper that no
news and unidentified news days display similar characteristics. In contrast, following
identified news days, stocks exhibit a one-day continuation with no clear subsequent price
movement. This suggests that, whatever under-reaction to “real” news that takes place, it is
short lived.
VI.

Conclusions

#
The bottom line from this paper is in stark contrast to the last 25 years of literature on stock
prices and news. We find that, when information can be identified and that the tone (i.e.,
positive versus negative) of this information can be determined, there is a much closer link
between stock prices and information. Examples of results include market model R2s that
are no longer the same on news versus no news days (i.e., Roll’s (1988) infamous result),
but now are 16% versus 33%; variance ratios of returns on identified news days double than
those on no news and unidentified news days; and, conditional on extreme moves, stock

28

price reversals occur on no news unidentified news days, while identified news days show
continuation.
The methodology described in this paper may be useful for a deeper analysis of the relation
between stock prices and information, especially on the behavioral side (e.g., as pertaining
to the reversals/continuation analysis of Section V). There is a vast literature in the
behavioral finance area arguing that economic agents, one by one, and even in the
aggregate, cannot digest the full economic impact of news quickly. Given our database of
identified events, it is possible to measure and investigate “complexity”, and its effect on
the speed of information processing by the market. For example, “complexity” can be
broken down into whether more than one economic event occurs at a given point in time,
how news (even similar news) gets accumulated through time, and cross-firm effects of
news. We hope to explore some of these ideas in future research.

29

References
Aharony, J., and I. Swary, 1980, Quarterly Dividend And Earnings Announcements And
Stockholders’ Returns: An Empirical Analysis, Journal of Finance 35, 1–12.
Antweiler, W., and M. Z. Frank, 2004, Is All That Talk Just Noise? The Information Content Of
Internet Stock Message Boards, Journal of Finance 59, 1259–1293.
Asquith, P., and D. W. Mullins, 1986, Equity Issues And O↵ering Dilution, Journal of Financial
Economics 15, 61–89.
Ball, R., and P. Brown, 1968, An Empirical Evaluation Of Accounting Income Numbers, Journal
of Accounting Research 6, 159–178.
Berry, T. D., and K. M. Howe, 1994, Public Information Arrival, Journal of Finance 49, 1331–1346.
Campbell, J. Y., 1991, A Variance Decomposition For Stock Returns, Economic Journal 101, 157–
179.
Chan, W. S., 2003, Stock Price Reaction To News And No-News: Drift And Reversal After
Headlines, Journal of Financial Economics 70, 223–260.
Cutler, D. M., J. M. Poterba, and L. H. Summers, 1989, What Moves Stock Prices?, Journal of
Portfolio Management 15, 4–12.
Das, S. R., and M. Y. Chen, 2007, Yahoo! For Amazon: Sentiment Extraction From Small Talk
On The Web, Management Science 53, 1375–1388.
Davis, A. K., J. Piger, and L. M. Sedor, 2012, Beyond The Numbers: An Analysis Of Optimistic
And Pessimistic Language In Earnings Press Releases, Contemporary Accounting Research 29, 845–
868.
Demers, E., and C. Vega, 2010, Soft Information In Earnings Announcements: News Or Noise?,
Working Paper, INSEAD.
Devitt, A., and K. Ahmad, 2007, Sentiment Polarity Identification In Financial News: A Cohesion-

30

Based Approach, Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational
Linguistics, 984–991.
Engelberg, J., 2008, Costly Information Processing: Evidence From Earnings Announcements,
Working Paper, University of North Carolina.
Engle, R. F, M. Hansen, and A. Lunde, 2011, And Now, The Rest Of The News: Volatility And
Firm Specific News Arrival, Working Paper.
Fama, E. F., L. Fisher, M. C. Jensen, and R. Roll, 1969, The Adjustment Of Stock Prices To New
Information, International Economic Review 10, 1–21.
Feldman, R., S. Govindaraj, J. Livnat, and B. Segal, 2010, ManagementS Tone Change, Post
Earnings Announcement Drift And Accruals, Review of Accounting Studies 15, 915–953.
Feldman, R., B. Rosenfeld, R. Bar-Haim, and M. Fresko, 2011, The Stock Sonar Sentiment Analysis
Of Stocks Based On A Hybrid Approach, Proceedings of the Twenty-Third Innovative Applications
of Artificial Intelligence Conference, 1642–1647.
Feldman, R., and J. Sanger, 2006, The Text Mining Handbook, Cambridge University Press.
Griffin, J. M., N. H. Hirschey, and P. J. Kelly, 2011, How Important Is The Financial Media In
Global Markets?, Review of Financial Studies 24, 3941–3992.
Grob-Klubmann, A., and N. Hautsch, 2011, When Machines Read The News: Using Automated
Text Analytics To Quantify High Frequency News-Implied Market Reactions, Journal of Empirical
Finance 18, 321–340.
Gutierrez, R. C., and E. K. Kelley, 2008, The Long-Lasting Momentum In Weekly Returns, Journal
of Finance 63, 415–447.
Hanley, K. W., and G. Hoberg, 2012, Litigation Risk, Strategic Disclosure And The Underpricing
Of Initial Public O↵erings, Journal of Financial Economics 103, 235–254.
Kogan, S., Routledge, B. R., Sagi, J. S., and N. A. Smith, 2011, Information Content of Public

31

Firm Disclosures and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, Working Paper.
Kothari, S. P., X. Li, and J. E. Short, 2009, The E↵ect Of Disclosures By Management, Analysts,
And Financial Press On The Equity Cost Of Capital: A Study Using Content Analysis, Accounting
Review 84, 1639–1670.
Lavrenko, V., M. Schmill, D. Lawrie, P. Ogilvie, D. Jensen, and J. Allan, 2000, Mining
Of Concurrent Text And Time Series, Proceedings of the Sixth ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 37–44.
Li, F., 2010, The Information Content Of Forward-Looking Statements In Corporate Filings A
Nave Bayesian Machine Learning Approach, Journal of Accounting Research 48, 1049–1102.
Loughran, T., and B. McDonald, 2011, When Is A Liability Not A Liability? Textual Analysis,
Dictionaries, And 10-Ks, Journal of Finance 66, 35–65.
Mandelker, G., 1974, Risk And Return: The Case Of Merging Firms, Journal of Financial
Economics 1, 303–335.
Manning, C. D., and H. Schutze, 1999, Foundations Of Statistical Natural Language Processing,
Cambridge Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Mitchell, M. L., and J. H. Mulherin, 1994, The Impact Of Public Information On The Stock Market,
Journal of Finance 49, 923–950.
Roll, R., 1984, Orange Juice and Weather, American Economic Review, 74, 5, 861-880.
Roll, R., 1988, R2, Journal of Finance 43, 541–566.
Shiller, R. J., 1981, Do Stock Prices Move Too Much To Be Justified By Subsequent Changes In
Dividends?, American Economic Review 71, 421–436.
Tetlock, P. C., 2007, Giving Content To Investor Sentiment: The Role Of Media In The Stock
Market, Journal of Finance 62, 1139–1168.
Tetlock, P. C., 2010, Does Public Financial News Resolve Asymmetric Information?, Review of

32

Financial Studies 23, 3520–3557.
Tetlock, P. C., M. Saar-Tsechansky, and S. Macskassy, 2008, More Than Words: Quantifying
Language To Measure Firms Fundamentals, Journal of Finance 63, 1437–1467.
Vega, C., 2006, Stock Price Reaction To Public And Private Information, Journal of Financial
Economics 82, 103–133.

33

1

Tables
Table 1: Summary Statistics
Panel A
# Obs.

Total
No News
Unid News
Iden News
Acquisition
Analyst Rec
Deals
Employment
Financial
Legal
Partnerships
Product

1,229,359
696,985
374,194
158,180
22,270
12,411
30,101
21,489
69,205
10,764
10,047
25,181

# Obs. with event count
=1
=2
>3
124,158 26,600 7,422
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
124,158 26,600 7,422
11,811
7,068
3,391
6,665
3,920
1,826
17,001
8,790
4,310
14,024
5,269
2,196
48,873 14,989 5,343
6,244
2,881
1,639
4,765
3,347
1,935
14,775
6,936
3,470

# Tickers
791
790
791
790
724
680
718
741
783
581
587
652

# Articles
(daily)
3.6
NA
2.6
6.1
8.6
8.5
6.8
6.3
7.6
8.6
7.3
7.1

# Words
(per art.)
325
NA
329
316
302
335
315
283
309
291
371
366

# Relv. Words
(per art.)
59
NA
49
81
76
66
93
87
71
71
110
108

Panel B

No News
Unid News
Iden News
Total

Stock Return
(daily)
4.6bp
2.9bp
3.3bp
3.9bp

Market Ret
(daily)
1.4bp
0.6bp
0.8bp
1.1bp

SIZE

BM

MOM

4.48
4.71
4.76
4.59

2.92
2.92
2.88
2.91

2.85
2.84
2.81
2.84

The table reports summary statistics for observations (stock/day) classified as first as having no news, unidentified
news (i.e., containing news all with unidentified events), or identified news (i.e., containing news with some identified
events), and then by event type. Panel A reports the total number of observations and their distribution by event
type count, the number of unique tickers, the average number of articles per day, the average number of words per
article (day), and the average number of relevant words (as identified by TSS) per article (day). Panel B reports
the average daily stock return, average daily market return, and the average size, book-to-market, and momentum
quintile assignments.

34

Table 2: Event Frequency Across Return Ranks
Return rank
# of articles
# of words
% of rel. words
No News
Unid News
Iden News
Acquisition
Analyst Rec
Deals
Employment
Financial
Legal
Partnerships
Product

p0-p10
4.5
1,445
17.5%
-6.6%
2.2%
30.8%
18.8%
71.1%
6.5%
20.5%
66.2%
16.8%
3.3%
10.4%

p10-p30
3.5
1,140
16.6%
0.5%
-0.4%
-5.7%
-4.2%
-11.9%
-4.0%
-2.1%
-11.1%
0.2%
-2.3%
-2.2%

p30-p70
3.3
1,093
16.5%
2.8%
-0.4%
-10.7%
-6.2%
-22.1%
-3.1%
-5.8%
-23.0%
-5.1%
-1.0%
-4.1%

p70-p90
3.5
1,133
16.6%
0.5%
-0.4%
-5.4%
-5.4%
-10.3%
-1.9%
-2.8%
-10.3%
-4.4%
-2.9%
-2.6%

p90-p100
4.4
1,423
17.3%
-6.5%
1.1%
34.2%
25.3%
61.9%
17.6%
12.3%
68.2%
11.9%
11.2%
15.6%

The table reports summary statistics of all observations based on return rank sorts. For each stock and every year
separately, we assign each day based on its percentile return rank – bottom 10%, following 20%, middle 40%, following
20%, and top 10%. The statics reported are the average number of article per observation, the average number of
words, the fraction of all words identified as relevant (per TSS). Next, we report the di↵erence between the observed
distribution and the distribution that would obtain under independence based on observations’ classification as having
no news, unidentified news (i.e., containing news all with unidentified events), or identified news (i.e., containing news
with some identified events). For example, out of a total of 700K no news observations, 70K should fall under the
bottom 10% of returns, but only 65K do resulting in a -6.6% di↵erence. The bottom panel of the table groups
observations into non-mutually exclusive event types and reports the results of the same comparison described above.

35

Table 3: Variance Ratios by Day and Event Type

Unid News
Iden News

p10
0.75
1.05

p25
0.95
1.49

Median
1.2
2.2

p75
1.5
3.3

p90
2.0
5.1

N
754
672

Acquisition
Analyst Rec
Deals
Employment
Financial
Legal
Partnerships
Product

0.64
1.05
0.65
0.65
1.29
0.46
0.49
0.62

1.01
1.70
0.94
0.96
1.95
0.71
0.69
0.86

1.5
2.7
1.4
1.4
2.9
1.3
1.1
1.3

2.7
5.1
2.1
2.4
4.7
2.3
1.5
2.1

6.3
13.5
4.0
4.1
7.6
4.9
2.0
3.1

294
190
273
329
581
116
110
223

Old news
New news

0.74
1.13

1.08
1.59

1.5
2.2

2.2
3.5

3.6
5.8

432
654

The table reports daily return variations (daily returns squared) ratios where no-news days serve as the denominator
in all calculations. Specifically, we compute squared returns for each stock under each of the day classifications,
provided at least 20 observations were available. Next, we computed the ratio for each day and event types for each
of the stocks. The table reports the distribution of these ratios. Observations (stock/day) are classified as having
no news, unidentified news (i.e., containing news all with identified events), or identified news (i.e., containing news
with some identified events). Identified news days are classified by event types (not mutually exclusive). “New news”
classification denotes observations for which at least one of the events types did not appeared in the previous five
trading days and “Old news” denotes the complementary set of identified news days.

36

Table 4: R2 s – Firm and Industry-level Regressions (adjusted R2 )
Firm Level
Mean R2 Med R2

All
No News
Unid News
Iden News
N oN ews
IdenN ews

All
No News
Unid News
Iden News
N oN ews
IdenN ews

28.6%
32.1%
30.8%
18.5%
1.73

33.6%
38.0%
35.8%
22.3%
1.71

N

Industry Level
Mean R2 Med R2

N

27.8%
33.3%
30.3%
15.9%
2.10

1 Factor
791
28.5%
774
32.3%
721
30.9%
597
17.3%
1.87

27.6%
34.1%
30.1%
16.2%
2.10

60
60
58
55

32.7%
38.6%
35.9%
19.6%
1.96

4 Factors
791
31.8%
774
36.3%
721
34.0%
597
19.2%
1.89

31.0%
36.9%
33.6%
17.1%
2.16

60
60
58
55

Panel A of the table reports daily return regressions with one factor (total market, value weighted) in the first panel,
and with four factors in the second panel (market, value, size and momentum). Regressions are run separately for
each day category – on all days, no news days, unidentified news days (i.e., containing news all with unidentified
events), and identified news days (i.e., containing news with some identified events). Firm level regressions estimate
firm-level betas and R2 s while industry level regressions estimate 2-digit SIC industry level betas and R2 s. All R2 ’s
are adjusted for the number of degrees of freedom and regressions use WLS. Firms (industries) with fewer than 40
(80) observations are excluded from the firm-level (industry-level) regressions.

37

38

22,270
12,411
30,101
21,489
69,205
10,764
10,047
25,181

Acquisition
Analyst Rec
Deals
Employment
Financial
Legal
Partnerships
Product

22,228
12,371
30,082
21,482
69,124
10,761
10,040
25,166

N
135,643
158,097
0.54
0.06
0.60
0.42
0.29
-0.21
0.63
0.55

mean
0.25
0.38
0.25
-0.67
0.50
-0.41
-0.54
-0.80
0.50
0.18

0.50
0.00
0.67
0.50
0.50
-0.40
0.67
0.67

0.80
0.75
0.83
0.80
0.83
0.57
0.83
0.83

p90
0.75
0.83
0.55
1.42
0.33
1.21
1.37
1.37
0.33
0.65

p90-p10
1.25
1.23
22,238
12,401
30,084
21,475
69,156
10,763
10,040
25,155

N
364,969
158,150
0.36
0.23
0.42
0.30
0.29
0.16
0.44
0.34

mean
0.33
0.32

0.06
-0.06
0.12
-0.07
-0.01
-0.16
0.16
0.00

0.36
0.22
0.43
0.33
0.29
0.17
0.46
0.37

IV4
p10 p50
0.01 0.32
0.08 0.31

0.67
0.54
0.69
0.64
0.62
0.50
0.69
0.65

p90
0.69
0.58

0.61
0.60
0.57
0.71
0.63
0.66
0.53
0.65

p90-p10
0.68
0.50

0.19
0.32
0.19
0.17
0.38
0.31
0.24
0.31

IV4-TSS
Corr.
0.33
0.34

P N
.
P +N +1

Observations are sorted by day type: unidentified news (i.e., containing news all with unidentified events), or identified news (i.e., containing

report the distribution of scores. The last column in the table reports the correlation between TSS and IV4 scores for each of the days types.

“TSS”(“IV4”) reports results obtained from TSS(IV4). N corresponds to the number of observations with non-missing scores, and the remaining columns

news with some identified events), and event types. The first column reports the total number of observations under each day type. The column block titled

equal to

The table reports summary statistics of scores computed based on TSS and IV4 identification of positive (P ) and negative (N ) features. Scores in all cases

Event count
374,194
158,180

Unid News
Iden News

TSS
p10
p50
-0.50 0.50
-0.40 0.50

Table 5: TSS and IV4 Scores – Summary Statistics

Table 6: Industry-level R2 ’s with Event-Level Scores (adjusted R2 )
Factor(s) Only
Mean R2

with TSS Scores
Mean R2

with IV4 Scores
Mean R2

Unid News
Iden News
New News
Acquisition
Analyst Rec
Deals
Employment
Financial
Legal
Partnerships
Product

30.9%
17.3%
15.7%
13.1%
17.3%
20.6%
19.4%
14.1%
16.9%
25.0%
28.2%

30.9%
18.9%
17.9%
14.7%
25.3%
25.7%
24.7%
17.0%
23.5%
29.7%
34.3%

Unid News
Iden News
New News
Acquisition
Analyst Rec
Deals
Employment
Financial
Legal
Partnerships
Product

34.0%
19.2%
17.7%
15.1%
19.8%
23.0%
22.4%
15.8%
20.8%
28.5%
30.5%

4 Factors
34.0%
20.8%
20.0%
16.5%
27.8%
28.1%
27.7%
18.7%
27.6%
33.3%
37.0%

N

R2
(TSS)

31.0%
17.5%
16.0%
14.3%
21.5%
26.3%
23.5%
15.0%
20.8%
28.4%
34.0%

58
55
55
31
32
34
37
52
23
17
30

1.00
1.09
1.14
1.12
1.46
1.25
1.27
1.20
1.39
1.19
1.22

34.1%
19.4%
18.0%
16.3%
24.0%
28.5%
26.6%
16.8%
24.5%
31.6%
36.3%

58
55
55
31
32
34
37
52
23
17
30

1.00
1.09
1.13
1.09
1.40
1.22
1.24
1.18
1.33
1.17
1.21

1 Factor

Panel A of the table reports daily return regressions with one factor (total market, value weighted) in the first panel,
and with four factors in the second panel (market, value, size and momentum) – with and without article sentiment
scores. Regressions are run separately for each day category – on all days, no news days, unidentified news days (i.e.,
containing news all with unidentified events), and identified news days (i.e., containing news with some identified
events). Sentiment score include a separate dummy for each event type (e.g., “acquisition” dummy) and event-level
scores (e.g., “acquisition” score). The column titled “TSS”(“IV4”) reports results using TSS(IV4) scores. Industry
level regressions estimate 2-digit SIC industry level betas and R2 s. All R2 ’s are adjusted for the number of degrees
of freedom and regressions use WLS. Industries with fewer than 80 observations are excluded from the industry-level
regressions.

39

40
1,228,568
0.001

Observations
R2

1,228,568
0.001

-0.03
[0.046]
0.048
[0.024]**
1,228,568
0.001

-0.052
[0.037]
0.048
[0.024]**

0.042
[0.024]*
0.167
[0.073]**

-0.026
[0.012]**

AnalystRec

1,228,568
0.001

-0.077
[0.048]
0.048
[0.024]**

0.04
[0.014]***
0.117
[0.073]

-0.026
[0.012]**

Deals

1,228,568
0.001

-0.075
[0.029]**
0.048
[0.024]**

0.048
[0.016]***
0.104
[0.045]**

-0.026
[0.012]**

Employment

1,228,568
0.001

-0.035
[0.022]
0.049
[0.024]**

0.047
[0.010]***
0.076
[0.030]**

-0.031
[0.013]**

Financial

1,228,568
0.001

-0.034
[0.027]
0.048
[0.024]**

0.038
[0.034]
-0.016
[0.048]

-0.025
[0.012]**

Legal

1,228,568
0.001

-0.071
[0.087]
0.048
[0.024]**

0.013
[0.027]
0.058
[0.129]

-0.025
[0.012]**

Partner

1,228,568
0.001

-0.011
[0.030]
0.048
[0.024]**

-0.002
[0.011]
-0.026
[0.045]

-0.025
[0.012]**

Product

column event type. “Score” denotes daily scores and “EventScore” denotes even-level score. All regressions use WLS with time clustered standard errors.

classification dummy: Iunid equals one for days with unidentified news, Iiden equals one for days with identified news, and Ievent equals one for days with the

The dependent variable in all regressions is day t + 1 stock returns. The dependent variables include day t stock returns, in all specifications, and day t

0.052
[0.024]**

-0.007
[0.009]
-0.045
[0.016]***

Constant

Ievent

Iiden

Iunid

Ievent x EventScore0

Ievent x Ret0

Iiden x Score0

Iunid x Score0

Iiden x Ret0

-0.005
[0.017]
0.075
[0.072]

-0.024
[0.012]**

-0.037
[0.014]***
0.008
[0.006]
0.044
[0.009]***
0.002
[0.015]
0.068
[0.025]***

Ret0

Iunid x Ret0

Acquisition

By day type

(Ret1 )

Table 7: Return Reversals and Continuations

Table 8: Reversals and Continuations Strategies

Alpha
Mkt-rf
SMB
HTM
UMD
Observations
R2

No News
0.161
[0.027]***
0.197
[0.035]***
-0.067
[0.070]
-0.152
[0.075]**
0.064
[0.049]
2487
0.046

Unid News
0.062
[0.032]*
0.164
[0.040]***
-0.132
[0.081]
-0.06
[0.097]
0.072
[0.060]
2417
0.021

Iden News
0.197
[0.041]***
-0.203
[0.064]***
0.057
[0.106]
-0.006
[0.111]
-0.012
[0.064]
2030
0.022

Mean
s.d.
SR
Drawdown
N Longs
N Shorts

Daily Statistics
0.156%
0.059%
0.196%
1.340%
1.545%
1.857%
1.837
0.604
1.666
-18.2%
-46.5%
-34.5%
35.8
21.7
11.2
38.0
20.6
10.5

Year
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009

Mean Strategy Returns
0.351%
0.108%
0.087%
0.094%
-0.039%
0.522%
0.207%
0.117%
0.519%
0.126%
0.050%
0.040%
0.067%
0.032%
0.215%
0.086%
0.061%
0.141%
0.048%
0.023%
0.121%
0.043%
-0.020%
0.205%
0.235%
0.102%
0.105%
0.312%
0.164%
0.026%

The table reports zero-cost trading strategy returns based on day t

1 classification: no-news, unidentified news (i.e.,

containing news all with unidentified events) and identified news (i.e., containing news with some identified events).
The first two columns’ strategy goes long (short) stocks classified on day t 1 as having at least one standard deviation
negative (positive) returns, i.e., it is a reversal trading strategy. The last column strategy goes long (short) stocks
classified on day t

1 as having at least one standard deviation positive (negative) returns, i.e., it is a continuation

trading strategy. Standard deviations are computed on a rolling basis, for each stock separately, using the prior 20
days. Holding period for all strategies is one day and we assume an investment of one unit of capital in the long
strategy and one unit of capital in the short strategy. Each day strategy requires at least 5 long position and at least
short positions. The top panel reports four factor time-series regressions. The middle panel reports the average daily
return statistics and the average number of stocks held in the long and short side of the strategies, and the bottom

41the years in the sample.
panel reports the average strategy daily return for each of

Table 9: Reversals and Continuations Strategies – Score Based

Observations
R2

Long Score
0.342
[0.087]***
-0.369
[0.163]**
0.266
[0.230]
-0.458
[0.253]*
0.156
[0.144]
751
0.106

Year
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
Total

Mean Strategy
0.363%
0.638%
0.611%
0.309%
0.294%
0.253%
0.416%
0.382%
-0.031%
0.296%
0.322%

Alpha
Mkt-rf
SMB
HTM
UMD

Short Score
0.083
[0.082]
-0.048
[0.135]
0.143
[0.197]
0.21
[0.225]
-0.171
[0.114]
740
0.015
Returns
0.411%
0.240%
0.843%
-0.326%
0.045%
-0.016%
-0.045%
0.217%
0.068%
0.092%
0.106%

The table reports zero-cost trading strategy returns based on day t 1 classification into identified news (i.e., containing
news with some identified events) and day t
classified on day t

1 sentiment score. The “Long Score” strategy goes long (short) stocks

1 as having at least one standard deviation positive (negative) returns and above (below) median

scores. The “Short Score” strategy goes long (short) stocks classified on day t

1 as having at least one standard

deviation positive (negative) returns and below (above) median scores. Standard deviations are computed on a rolling
basis, for each stock separately, using the prior 20 days. Holding period for all strategies is one day and we assume
an investment of one unit of capital in the long strategy and one unit of capital in the short strategy. The top panel
reports four factor time-series regressions. The bottom panel reports the average strategy daily return for each of
the years in the sample. The “Long Score” strategy goes long half of the stocks

42

0

.1

Fraction

.2

.3

Figure 1: Variance Ratios

0

2

4

6

8

10

Ratio
Unidentified

Identified

The figure reports the distribution of variance ratios unidentified news days and identified news days, compared with
no-news days. We estimate variances by squaring daily returns and compute a separate ratio for each stock/day type.
Stocks with less than 20 observations in each of the day types are excluded. Ratios are winsorized at 10.

43

Figure 2: Strategies’ Cumulative Payo↵s

20

2

2-Feb-00

2-Feb-01

2-Feb-02

2-Feb-03

2-Feb-04

2-Feb-05

2-Feb-06

2-Feb-07

2-Feb-08

2-Feb-09

0.2
No-News

Unid News

Iden News

Mkt-Rf

The figure plot cumulative returns over the sample period of zero-cost trading strategies based on day t

1

classification: no-news, unidentified news (i.e., containing news all with unidentified events) and identified news
(i.e., containing news with some identified events). No-news and identified news day strategies go long (short) stocks
classified on day t

1 as having at least one standard deviation negative (positive) returns, while identified news

strategy goes long (short) stocks classified on day t

1 as having at least one standard deviation positive (negative)

returns. Standard deviations are computed on a rolling basis, for each stock separately, using the prior 20 days.
Holding period for all strategies are one day and we assume an investment of one unit of capital in the long strategy
and one unit of capital in the short strategy, with 1 initial investment. For comparison, we include the cumulative
market excess returns.

44

Figure 3: Strategies’ CAR
0.3%
0.2%
0.1%
0%
C"
A" !0.1%
R"
"
!0.2%

1%

2%

3%

4%

5%

6%

7%

8%

9%

10%

!0.3%
!0.4%
!0.5%

Days%
No%News%

Unid%News%

Iden%News%

The figure plot cumulative returns for zero-cost trading strategies based on day t

1 classification: no-news,

unidentified news (i.e., containing news all with unidentified events) and identified news (i.e., containing news with
some identified events). Each strategy goes long (short) stocks classified on day t

1 as having at least one standard

deviation positive (negative) returns. Standard deviations are computed on a rolling basis, for each stock separately,
using the prior 20 days. Holding period for all strategies varies from one day to ten days and we assume an investment
of one unit of capital in the long strategy and one unit of capital in the short strategy.

45

