NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LEARNING FROM CUSTOMERS:
INDIVIDUAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL EFFECTS IN OUTSOURCED RADIOLOGICAL SERVICES
Jonathan R. Clark
Robert S. Huckman
Bradley R. Staats
Working Paper 18723
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18723

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2013

We thank management at our field site for providing the data for this study. Frank Levy provided valuable
feedback on an earlier draft of this paper. We are grateful to Linda Argote and three anonymous reviewers
for helpful comments. All errors are the responsibility of the authors. We acknowledge support from
the Division of Research and Faculty Development at Harvard Business School. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Jonathan R. Clark, Robert S. Huckman, and Bradley R. Staats. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Learning from Customers: ¸˛Individual and Organizational Effects in Outsourced Radiological
Services
Jonathan R. Clark, Robert S. Huckman, and Bradley R. Staats
NBER Working Paper No. 18723
January 2013
JEL No. I1,J24,L2,M2
ABSTRACT
The ongoing fragmentation of work has resulted in a narrowing of tasks into smaller pieces that can
be sent outside the organization and, in many instances, around the world. This trend is shifting the
boundaries of organizations and leading to increased outsourcing. Though the consolidation of volume
may lead to productivity improvement, little is known about how this shift toward outsourcing influences
learning by providers of outsourced services. When producing output, the content of the knowledge
gained can vary from one unit to the next. One dimension along which output can vary —a dimension
with particular relevance in outsourcing—is the end customer for whom it is produced. The performance
benefits of such customer experience remain largely unexamined. We explore this dimension of volume-based
learning in a setting where doctors at an outsourcing firm complete radiological reads for hospital
customers. We examine more than 2.7 million cases read by 97 radiologists for 1,431 customers and
find evidence supporting the benefits of customer-specific experience accumulated by individual radiologists.
Additionally, we find that variety in an individual’s customer experience may increase the rate of individual
learning from customer-specific experience for a focal task. Finally, we find that the level of experience
with a customer for the entire outsourcing firm also yields learning and that the degree of customer
depth moderates the impact of customer-specific experience at the individual level. We discuss the
implications of our results for the study of learning as well as for providers and consumers of outsourced
services.

Jonathan R. Clark
601A Donald H. Ford Building
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park PA 16802
jrc24@psu.edu
Robert S. Huckman
435 Morgan Hall
Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
rhuckman@hbs.edu

Bradley R. Staats
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599
bstaats@unc.edu

Learning from Customers

Abstract
The ongoing fragmentation of work has resulted in a narrowing of tasks into smaller pieces that can be
sent outside the organization and, in many instances, around the world. This trend is shifting the
boundaries of organizations and leading to increased outsourcing. Though the consolidation of volume
may lead to productivity improvement, little is known about how this shift toward outsourcing influences
learning by providers of outsourced services. When producing output, the content of the knowledge
gained can vary from one unit to the next. One dimension along which output can vary —a dimension
with particular relevance in outsourcing—is the end customer for whom it is produced. The performance
benefits of such customer experience remain largely unexamined. We explore this dimension of volumebased learning in a setting where doctors at an outsourcing firm complete radiological reads for hospital
customers. We examine more than 2.7 million cases read by 97 radiologists for 1,431 customers and find
evidence supporting the benefits of customer-specific experience accumulated by individual radiologists.
Additionally, we find that variety in an individual’s customer experience may increase the rate of
individual learning from customer-specific experience for a focal task. Finally, we find that the level of
experience with a customer for the entire outsourcing firm also yields learning and that the degree of
customer depth moderates the impact of customer-specific experience at the individual level. We discuss
the implications of our results for the study of learning as well as for providers and consumers of
outsourced services.
Key Words: Customer specificity, Experience, Healthcare, Learning, Outsourcing

1. Introduction
The division of labour, by reducing every man's business to some one simple operation, and by
making this operation the sole employment of his life, necessarily increases very much the dexterity
of the workman — Adam Smith (1776: Section I.1.6).
As noted by Adam Smith (1776) the division of labor has served as a central driver of economic
progress. Through increased specialization, individuals and organizations gain knowledge, enabling
performance improvement and innovation (Skinner 1974; Newell and Rosenbloom 1981; Argote 1999).
The trend toward specialization has been bolstered by institutional and technological change. With respect
to the former, the opening of previously closed economies such as Brazil, China, and India have flooded
the global labor markets with low-cost talent (e.g., Arora et al. 2001). In terms of the latter, innovations in
information and communication technologies have created the opportunity to divide work into smaller
pieces and send it around the world to be completed (Zuboff 1988; Autor, Levy and Murnane 2002).
This increasing atomization of work has also reshaped the boundaries of the firm (Levy and
Murnane 2004; Levy 2008; Malone, Laubacher and Johns 2011). In a wide variety of settings, from
manufacturing to call centers and software services to healthcare services a number of tasks that were

2

Learning from Customers
once done within a focal firm are now contracted out to external service providers. Work may be
outsourced for many reasons, but one of the key rationales is to take advantage of the expertise that
outsourcers build through volume-based learning (Huckman, Staats and Upton 2009; Narayanan,
Balasubramanian and Swaminathan 2009). This idea draws on the concept of the learning curve (Yelle
1979; Argote 1999; Lapré and Nembhard 2010), as outsourcers can combine volume from multiple
customers to build experience and thus improve their productivity.
Not only is outsourcing increasing, in part due to the opportunities for volume-based learning, but
outsourcing is also changing the industrial landscape in ways that affect how we conceptualize the study
of learning. Prior studies of organizational learning highlight that the knowledge gained can vary
dramatically from one unit of output to the next based on the characteristics of the work being done
(Mishina 1999; Lapré, Mukherjee and Wassenhove 2000; Argote and Miron-Spektor 2011). This tradition
of work has highlighted the important, but largely distinct, roles of intraorganizational learning (e.g.,
Argote and Ophir 2002) and interorganizational learning (e.g., Ingram 2002). While intraorganizational
learning has focused on “internal” dimensions that are independent of things outside the firm (e.g.,
number of units the organization produced, how teams are organized, etc.), interorganizational learning
has centered on “external” dimensions (e.g., competitors’ experience).
Outsourcing provides a context in which internal and external distinctions are increasingly
blurred. For example, as noted previously, outsourcing offers the promise of combining experience from
multiple customers to increase aggregate volume. Therefore, a key dimension upon which a unit of output
can vary is the end customer to whom it is delivered. However, customer experience—the experience
gained with a focal customer—is both an internal dimension (e.g., individual or firm experience gained)
and an external dimension (e.g., exposure to a variety of customers).1 Though the increased use of
outsourcing has led to a rise in the number of customer-supplier interactions, the learning benefits of
customer experience remain largely unexamined. An important exception is Ethiraj et al. (2005), which
We emphasize that our use of the term “customer experience” refers to experience that a service provider (either an individual or an
organization) gains with a focal customer rather than experience that has been accumulated by that customer outside of its relationship with the
service provider.
1

3

Learning from Customers
theorizes about, but finds limited evidence of, learning from customer experience in outsourced software
projects.
Why might customer experience be an important determinant of learning in service contexts? Due
to the interdependent nature of services, the customer and outsourced provider must interact to
“coproduce” service output (Larsson and Bowen 1989). By repeatedly interacting with the same customer
an individual may learn the customer’s standard operating procedures (March and Simon 1993; Boone,
Ganeshan and Hicks 2008), improve her communication and mutual adaptation with the customer (Arrow
1974; Weber and Camerer 2003; Ko, Kirsch and King 2005), and learn or transfer new knowledge from
the customer (Simonin 1997; Inkpen and Tsang 2007). Therefore, our first area of exploration examines
customer learning at the level of individual workers.
In addition to examining the overall effect of individual customer learning, we also consider a key
factor that may affect the rate at which individuals learn from focal customer experience – an individual’s
variety of experience across customers. Drawing on recent work examining learning from varied
experience (i.e., related, but different from the focal task, Schilling et al. 2003; Narayanan et al. 2009;
Staats and Gino 2012), we consider how experience with other customers may affect an individual’s rate
of learning with respect to a focal customer. In particular, while prior work does not examine customer
experience, its underlying theory suggests that varied experience may have a complementary effect
whereby individuals use knowledge gained across areas (in this case, customers) to learn at a faster rate
(Hargadon and Sutton 1997; Haunschild and Sullivan 2002; Clark and Huckman 2012). Thus, we ask
whether greater variety in the customers with whom an individual works increases her rate of learning
from customer-specific experience.
In addition to examining customer learning at the individual level, it is necessary to account for
the fact that learning can occur at the level of either the individual or organization (Walsh and Ungson
1991; Kim 1993; Argote and Ingram 2000; Reagans, Argote and Brooks 2005). Therefore, we add to our
analysis an examination of the effect of organizational customer experience. Finally, although individual
and organizational customer experience may each have independent effects on individual performance, it

4

Learning from Customers
is not clear whether and how they interact to affect performance. This question is important because prior
theory suggests that the two types of experience could have a complementary or a substitutive effect on
individual performance – in other words, the total effect from individual and organizational customer
experience could be greater (a complementary effect) or less (a substitutive effect) than the sum of its
individual effects. A complementary effect is possible as individual customer experience could build
absorptive capacity (Cohen and Levinthal 1990; Lubatkin, Florin and Lane 2001; Inkpen and Tsang 2007)
that helps an individual make better use of the organization’s knowledge. Further, greater organizational
knowledge may increase the learning an individual gleans from each unit of customer experience as she
becomes better able to connect different pieces of information to gain a causal understanding of a
situation (Bohn 2005; Bohn and Lapré 2011). Alternatively, the effect may be substitutive to the extent
that individual and organizational experience both capture the same underlying knowledge about a
customer (Walsh and Ungson 1991; Argote and Ingram 2000) or an individual with more experience
becomes more likely to ignore or not use the knowledge of others (Weiss, Suckow and Rakestraw Jr
1999; Schwab 2007). Therefore, our final area of exploration considers whether and how customer
experience at the individual level interacts with that at the organizational level to affect individual
performance. That is, are these two types of customer experience complements or substitutes?
Likely one of the reasons that customer experience has received little attention in the academic
literature is that finding an appropriate research setting is quite difficult. An ideal setting includes not only
individuals working for many customers, outcome measures that can be tied clearly to individuals, and a
panel of sufficient length to exhibit learning, but also an unbiased data-generation process for matching
employees with customers (e.g., a process that does not assign better or faster workers to repeat
customers). The setting for this paper, outsourced teleradiology, permits us to address each of these
issues. Our data include information from July 2005 through December 2007 on 2,766,209 cases for
1,431 customers read by 97 radiologists working at OutsourceCo (a pseudonym), one of the largest
teleradiology firms in the US. Further, as we detail later, OutsourceCo’s computer-based algorithm for
assigning work reduces concerns about non-random assignment biasing our empirical estimates.

5

Learning from Customers
In the next section, we motivate our hypotheses. We then describe the details of our empirical
setting, introduce our data, and discuss our empirical results. Finally, we offer concluding remarks.

2. Customer Experience and Learning
That greater cumulative experience leads to improved performance – the learning curve – is one
of the more robust phenomena in the study of organizations (Yelle 1979; Argote 1999; Lapré 2011). This
relationship has been identified at several levels of analysis – individuals, teams, and firms (e.g., Newell
and Rosenbloom 1981; Argote, Beckman and Epple 1990; Pisano, Bohmer and Edmondson 2001).
Despite the importance of the volume of cumulative experience, recent work suggests that the specific
traits of individual units of experience need to be considered in determining their contribution to learning
(Mishina 1999; Lapré et al. 2000; Argote and Miron-Spektor 2011). In the next section we explore why
one of these traits—the customer to whom a service is provided—may prove important in determining
learning and performance in a focal task.
2.1. Customer Experience for Individual Providers
In settings such as outsourced services, where tasks are completed for many different customers,
working with a specific customer may lead to better performance due to improved coordination and
knowledge transfer. With respect to coordination, due to the interdependent nature of services, the
customer and outsourced provider must interact to “coproduce” many services (Larsson and Bowen
1989). For example, in outsourced radiology, a technician at a hospital takes the image while a doctor at
the hospital requests that the outsourced radiologist read the image (and may provide specific, written
instructions with the read request) and the actions of both of these individuals at the customer affect the
outsourced radiologist’s ability to complete her work.
Generalizing this example from our setting, one finds several reasons why repeated interaction
with a given customer may improve an individual’s ability to provide outsourced services to that
customer. First, repeated experience with a customer may provide an outsourcer with insight into that
customer’s standard operating procedures and may allow more efficient execution of work (March and

6

Learning from Customers
Simon 1993; Boone et al. 2008). Second, different organizations often use varying language to describe
similar phenomena (Arrow 1974; Weber and Camerer 2003; Ko et al. 2005). As an individual provider
gains experience with a specific customer, she may be better able to communicate with employees at that
customer (in addition to any specific individuals with whom she may work repeatedly), aiding in the
transfer of knowledge (Szulanski 1996; 2000). In our empirical setting such improved communication is
likely to manifest itself in written messages, rather than verbal ones. Prior work highlights the challenge
in successfully coding and decoding written messages (Arrow 1974). Third, given that customers are
often reticent to share information with an outsourced provider (Metiu 2006), repeated interaction may
increase trust and build relationship-specific capital (Uzzi 1997; Lubatkin et al. 2001; McEvily, Perrone
and Zaheer 2003). Again, this effect could occur between an individual at the outsourced provider and an
individual at the customer as they work together; or more generally when an individual at the outsourced
provider works with multiple people at a customer. For example, with repeated experience a referring
physician may be more likely to include additional information in the request that is sent to the radiologist
(such as guidance on the specific anatomy to examine). These latter two points—communication and
information sharing—are particularly salient in outsourced radiology where the coordination between
parties may not be sequential, but rather reciprocal (i.e., requiring ongoing, mutual adjustments,
Thompson 1967; Argote 1982), across multiple reads.
While theory suggests that prior experience with a customer may improve coordination and
knowledge transfer, it is not clear if this theory will translate to the teleradiology context we study, and to
outsourcing more generally. A common claim is that activities that are ideal candidates for outsourcing
are “commoditized”, thus suggesting that aspects such as customer characteristics, should not impact the
relationship between experience and performance. Commoditized activities tend to be well-specified, or
codified, which allows clear contracts to be written between outsourcers and customers and allows
process and product specifications to be transferred easily between those parties. For example, clear
standards can be set for the formulation of chemical compounds or the assembly of cellular phones, both
of which are activities that are often outsourced.

7

Learning from Customers
In contrast to this view, Steinbrook (2007) suggests that experience with a customer may play a
significant role in determining teleradiology performance, noting:
Physicians may be less likely to know the radiologists who read their patients’ studies,
and there may be more opportunities for miscommunication and misunderstandings. A
teleradiologist will often have no information about the patient beyond that contained in
the study requisition.
Wachter (2006) in quoting the CEO of one of the largest teleradiology firms, echoes this perspective in
describing how even in teleradiology, as compared to on-site interpretation, the radiologist and doctor
interaction is maintained: “‘You can’t reach over and slap [the radiologist] on the back, but every other
aspect of the interaction is preserved.’”
The claim that radiological interpretation benefits from familiarity with referring physicians (i.e.,
customers) suggests that there may be significant benefits derived from customer experience in a
teleradiology setting. To examine fully the customer specificity of individual experience, however, it is
necessary to consider an additional dimension of experience. Namely, just as it is possible to gain
customer experience, it is also possible to gain experience specific to a given knowledge domain. Prior
work studying software development finds evidence for such domain specificity (Boh, Slaughter and
Espinosa 2007; Kang and Hahn 2009). In some cases, the choice of domain may limit activity to a
specialized population of workers. For instance, an individual suffering from cancer in the brain is likely
to visit a neurologist or neurosurgeon, while an individual suffering from prostate cancer will visit a
urologist. In many other contexts, however, the same worker may complete the activity regardless of the
domain examined. For example, in this study a unit of output is a radiological read, which many
radiologists can perform regardless of whether the study was conducted on different body parts such as
the head, pelvis, or abdomen.
Customer-domain experience may have a greater effect on individual performance than does
customer experience in other domains (though we expect both to have a greater effect on performance
than the final category of experience with other customers). Different domains have domain-specific
terminology and practices. These practices may vary across hospitals making the customer-domain

8

Learning from Customers
experience most relevant for performance for a focal task. Further, given the need for domain
specialization most hospitals are divided according to domain. For example, the department of cardiology
has primary responsibility for heart conditions, and the department of orthopedics is tasked with
musculoskeletal issues. Therefore, when executing tasks for a given customer-domain combination, an
individual radiologist in our sample is likely to work with the same sub-group of referring physicians
within a hospital and build the important ties mentioned above. Given all of these factors, we offer the
following related hypotheses:
HYPOTHESIS 1a:

An individual’s customer, domain experience has a more positive effect
on performance of a focal task than experience gained from the same
customer in different domains.

HYPOTHESIS 1b:

An individual’s customer, domain experience has a more positive effect
on performance of a focal task than experience gained from all other
customers.2

2.2 Variety in Individual Customer Experience
Hypothesis 1 details why we expect customer-specific experience to have a greater effect on
individual performance than all other experience. In addition to understanding the main effect of customer
experience on individual performance, related work on specialization and variety in task experience (Boh
et al. 2007; Narayanan et al. 2009) suggests that it is important to examine also the interaction effects of
different types of experience (Clark and Huckman 2012; Staats and Gino 2012). In other words, although
specialized experience (in our case, customer experience) may have a greater direct effect than varied
experience on individual performance of a focal task, varied experience may prove useful in increasing
the learning derived from specialized experience (Lapré and Nembhard 2010).
There are several reasons why varied experience (in this case, the distribution of experience
across other customers) may increase an individual’s rate of learning from customer experience in the
focal task. When working for different customers, an individual may identify best practices from one
customer that can be transferred to another (Hargadon and Sutton 1997; Bohn 2005; Huckman and Staats
2

For simplicity and clarity, in the remainder of the paper we refer to an individual’s customer-domain experience
and customer experience interchangeably.

9

Learning from Customers
2011) or may recognize higher-order principles that affect multiple customers (Schilling et al. 2003; KC
and Staats 2012). Literature on varied experience also suggests, that by working across multiple areas, an
individual may change her learning process by reconsidering underlying assumptions, processing data in
new ways, and searching for deeper, more-causal explanations – all of which may lead to learning at a
faster rate (Piaget 1963; Ellis 1965; Haunschild and Sullivan 2002).
Alternatively, individual variety in experience may slow individual learning within a focal
customer. For example, greater variety in experience could prove cognitively distracting (cf, Monsell
2003) making it harder for an individual to learn from her present experience. However, prior work
suggests that over time the distraction effects of variety are likely outweighed by its benefits (Staats and
Gino 2012). We therefore hypothesize:
HYPOTHESIS 2:

Individual variety in customer experience will have a positive,
moderating effect on the relationship between individual customer
experience and the performance of a focal task.

2.3 Customer Experience throughout the Organization
Although individuals complete tasks in an organization, individuals may also learn from the
experience that the organization accrues (Argote 1999; Reagans et al. 2005; Lapré and Nembhard 2010).
Organizational experience can improve individual performance in multiple ways. With repeated
experience, an organization may develop operating procedures and routines for completing work (Nelson
and Winter 1982). These routines may be captured explicitly in standardized work practices (Staats,
Brunner and Upton 2011) or enterprise information technology systems (Brunner 2009) or, alternatively,
may be captured tacitly in the norms and culture of an organization (Nonaka 1994; Nonaka and Takeuchi
1995). Over time the organization may build a capability, defined as the consistent ability to do that
which is intended, out of these routines (Dosi, Nelson and Winter 2000; Hayes et al. 2005).
Organizational experience may also improve individual performance through better problem
solving. Depending on the setting, an individual may learn by watching others complete the same task
(Bandura 1977; Gino et al. 2010; KC and Staats 2012). Additionally, organizational experience creates a

10

Learning from Customers
reservoir of knowledge (Walsh and Ungson 1991; Argote and Ingram 2000) and individual members may
be able to draw on that knowledge by seeking the help of others when they encounter difficulties (Lee
1997; Hofmann, Lei and Grant 2009).
In this study we focus on organizational experience gained with a specific customer. There are
several reasons why this type of experience may aid individual performance. The organization may use
the knowledge gained from its experience to develop focused practices to serve a customer. For example,
in one context, Indian software services, outsourcers often set up offshore delivery centers (ODC) to
execute work for customers (Arora et al. 2001). One objective of an ODC is to capture customer learning
across projects. Also, in contexts where customers are involved in the production of a service (Larsson
and Bowen 1989), for example, healthcare or software, the customer may also learn from its experience
with the outsourcer, changing its own practices to work more effectively. This mutual adaptation may
lead to organizational-level learning from customer experience. Overall, we hypothesize:
HYPOTHESIS 3:

An organization’s customer experience has a positive effect on individual
performance of a focal task.

2.4 Individual and Organizational Customer Experience: Complements or Substitutes?
As outlined in Hypotheses 1a, 1b, and 3, both individual customer experience and organizational
customer experience are likely to have independent beneficial effects on individual learning and
performance. An important and unexamined question is how these two types of experience interact with
one another to affect individual performance. The answer to this question has meaningful theoretical
consequences, in part because theory suggests that individual- and organizational-level customer
experience could be either complements or substitutes.
The argument in favor of complements rests on the theoretical idea of absorptive capacity – it
often takes one’s own knowledge to utilize fully the knowledge held by others (Cohen and Levinthal
1990). This is because an individual’s existing knowledge helps her not only to identify, acquire, and
understand external knowledge, but also allows her to transform and exploit that knowledge (Mowery and
Oxley 1995; Zahra and George 2002). Through identifying, acquiring and understanding external

11

Learning from Customers
knowledge, an individual is likely to see a direct effect of organizational experience on individual
performance (Hypothesis 3).
It is in the transformation and exploitation of external knowledge that the potential
complementarity between individual and organizational customer experience arises. The literature on
alliances finds that absorptive capacity may not be just a general characteristic but also a dyadic one
between two partners (Lane and Lubatkin 1998; Mowery, Oxley and Silverman 2002). Similarly, if an
individual’s customer experience builds absorptive capacity in understanding a customer, that individual
may be better positioned to transform and use the knowledge arising from her organization’s experience
with that same customer (Lubatkin et al. 2001). When an individual completes a task for a customer, she
has an opportunity to learn about that customer. However, learning requires making connections between
different pieces of information to gain a causal understanding of a situation (Bohn 2005; Bohn and Lapré
2011). When completing a task, an individual typically does not have complete knowledge and
understanding of the situation. Therefore, organizational experience with a customer might help fill in
missing information. Further, learning and innovative solutions often arise from combining existing
knowledge in new ways (Fleming and Sorenson 2004). Together, these conditions suggest that individual
and organizational experience with a particular customer can be mutually reinforcing.
Alternatively, individual- and organizational-level customer experience may act as substitutes. In
other words the joint benefit of individual and organizational experience may be less than the sum of the
two individual effects (Schwab 2007). First, it is possible that the knowledge gained from either
individual or organizational experience may capture the same underlying information. If information is at
least partially redundant, then either type of experience, by itself, could be sufficient to improve
performance (Walsh and Ungson 1991; Argote and Ingram 2000). Second, if adaptation by the customer
is the key driver of learning and improved performance (Lubatkin et al. 2001; Inkpen and Tsang 2007)
then either individual or organizational customer experience could trigger such change, causing individual
and organizational experience to have similar effects on learning. Finally, the salience or increased
understanding from individual knowledge may affect an individual’s use of knowledge held at the

12

Learning from Customers
organizational level (Levinthal and March 1993). Namely, prior research shows that as an individual has
increased experience, she may be more likely to ignore the knowledge of others (Weiss et al. 1999;
Schwab 2007). Together, these factors suggest that individual and organizational customer experience
may have a substitutive effect on individual performance.
Given the compelling motivation for either a complementary or substitutive interaction, we
specify competing hypotheses as follows:

HYPOTHESIS 4A:

Organizational customer experience will have a positive, moderating
effect (complementary interaction) on the relationship between
individual customer experience and the performance of a focal task.

HYPOTHESIS 4B:

Organizational customer experience will have a negative, moderating
effect (substitutive interaction) on the relationship between individual
customer experience and the performance of a focal task.

3. Setting – Outsourced Teleradiology Services
Radiology is a medical specialty that involves performing and interpreting imaging studies (e.g.,
x-ray, computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), ultrasound, and nuclear
medicine) to diagnose and treat disease. Historically, both the performance and interpretation of
radiological studies occurred within the boundaries of a single provider organization, such as a hospital or
radiology group practice. During the past decade, however, provider organizations have experienced a
dramatic increase in the volume of radiological studies they perform and, therefore, need to interpret.
Between 1999 and 2004, cumulative growth in the volume of all physician services per Medicare 3
beneficiary was 31%; analogous figures for radiological services, however, were much larger at 62%
across all radiological services, 112% for nuclear medicine, and 140% for non-brain MRI (Steinbrook
2007). This growth is potentially due to several factors, the most prominent being technological

3

Medicare is the United States’ federal health insurance program for individuals 65 years and older and those falling
into a small number of other specific categories.

13

Learning from Customers
advancements in imaging (Levy and Goelman 2005; Steinbrook 2007) and the practice of “defensive
medicine” to avoid the threat of malpractice liability (Studdert et al. 2005).
The rapid growth in imaging studies has outpaced growth in the supply of radiologists to read
them. In addition, hospitals, particularly smaller community facilities, are not able to find or afford
employed radiologists to provide “off-hours” coverage for the interpretation of the growing number of
studies performed on an emergency basis. This dual need for additional capacity and 24-hour coverage
has fueled demand for teleradiology—the computerized transmission and interpretation of radiological
studies outside the physical locations in which those studies are conducted. Teleradiology services can be
provided either by a hospital or practice’s employed radiologists (e.g., from their homes outside of
traditional business hours) or by an outsourcer either in the United States or abroad.4 Surveys of over
1,900 radiologist practices indicate that between 2003 and 2007, the percentage of practices outsourcing
some portion of their radiology services nearly tripled from 15% to 44% (Lewis, Sunshine and Bhargavan
2009). It is reasonable to expect that this percentage has grown in recent years due to continued increases
in volume and technological advances in imaging.
The data for our study were obtained from OutsourceCo, one of the largest U.S.-based providers
of outsourced teleradiology services. OutsourceCo employs radiologists who are board-certified and
licensed to practice radiology in the United States. Approximately 55% of its radiologists are based in the
United States, working from either their homes or one of several reading centers owned by OutsourceCo.
The remainder is based overseas, again working either from home or a reading center. OutsourceCo has
more than 1,400 client sites—mostly hospitals and group radiology practices—across the United States.
Most of the studies interpreted by outsourced teleradiology providers can be categorized based on
the technology used to generate them. The most common technologies used in these studies are:

4

Some of the leading providers of outsourced teleradiology services are NightHawk Radiology, Teleradiology
Solutions, and Virtual Radiologic. All of these companies have radiologists in the United States and most also have
radiologists based in other countries who are able to work during their standard business hours to interpret “offhours” studies from the United States. For further discussion of these outsourced models, see Wachter (2006).

14

Learning from Customers


X-ray: The oldest radiologic technology, X-ray involves the use of ionizing electromagnetic radiation
to view various parts of the human anatomy. X-ray accounts for 4% of OutsourceCo’s case volume.



Computed tomography (CT): Introduced in the 1970s, CT allows for the generation of threedimensional images of various anatomical regions by combining a series of two-dimensional images
taken around an axis of rotation. CT accounts for 84% of OutsourceCo’s case volume.



Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI): In contrast to X-ray and CT, MRI relies on a magnetic field
rather than ionizing radiation to generate images of various anatomical regions. In addition to
reducing exposure to radiation, MRI also provides greater contrast between various soft tissues in the
body than can be obtained with either X-ray or CT. MRI accounts for 1% of OutsourceCo’s case
volume.



Ultrasound: Ultrasound involves the use of high-frequency acoustics to obtain real-time images of
various parts of the body. It does not involve the use of ionizing radiation and tends to be cheaper and
more portable than both CT and MRI. One of the most common uses of ultrasound is for routine
obstetric diagnosis and monitoring. Ultrasound accounts for 10% of OutsourceCo’s case volume.



Nuclear medicine: Nuclear medicine involves combining radioactive isotopes with other
pharmaceutical compounds to examine cellular function and physiology. Nuclear medicine accounts
for 1% of OutsourceCo’s case volume.
Customers upload studies performed at their hospitals or offices to OutsourceCo’s proprietary system.

Each study is initially processed by an administrative assistant, who assigns it to the queue of an eligible
radiologist who is on duty at that time. For any given study, an eligible radiologist is one who is trained in
the relevant anatomical area (e.g., head, spine, and abdomen) and technology (e.g., CT, MRI, nuclear
medicine). In addition, an eligible radiologist must be licensed to practice medicine in the state—and be a
member of the medical staff of the hospital—where the image was generated. Given these requirements,
the typical radiologist at OutcourceCo is eligible to practice in over 35 states and at more than 400
hospitals. During our study period, more than 90% of OutsourceCo’s radiologists performed reads using
each of the technologies described above. In terms of anatomical specialties, all but one of OutsourceCo’s

15

Learning from Customers
radiologists performed reads in at least 7 of the 11 possible anatomical areas and 94% performed reads in
at least 10 such areas.5
Conditional on a radiologist being on duty and appropriately trained and licensed, the assignment of
cases to radiologists is random. A radiologist completing tasks more quickly will have the opportunity to
complete more tasks, but the OutsourceCo system does not assign “more-important” tasks to specific
doctors. Once a case has been read, the radiologist completes a report that is checked for clerical and
administrative completeness by the assistant before being forwarded to the customer.

4. Data and Empirical Strategy
4.1 Data
Images arriving at OutsourceCo’s central image distribution system are assigned primarily on a
reading radiologist’s current workload relative to her capacity. We note that, within the universe of
customers, domains, and technologies for which a radiologist is eligible to provide services, the customer,
domain, and technology characteristics of an image are not factored into the assignment algorithm. Our
data include information on every radiological image assigned to OutsourceCo radiologists between July
2005 and December 2007. Data include unique identifiers for each radiologist and each ordering
customer; the body part imaged (i.e., domain); the technology used to take the image; and time stamps for
when a case was received and when the radiologist finished reading it. The raw data contains an
observation for each image, though a single case (i.e., one patient) may consist of multiple images. Time
stamps are case specific and not image specific. Accordingly, we are only able to calculate estimated read
times at the case level. To do so, we collapse the image-level observations to case-level observations,
retaining indicators for body location, technology, and number of images in addition to unique identifiers
for the reading radiologist and customer. The resulting data set includes 2,766,209 cases read by 97
radiologists for 1,431 customers over the 30-month period covered by the data.

5

Anatomical specialties observed in our dataset include: abdomen, body, brain, breast, cardiovascular, chest,
gastrointestinal/genitourinary, head and neck, musculoskeletal, obstetrics, spine and other.

16

Learning from Customers
4.2 Dependent Variable
Our outcome of interest is the length of time it takes a radiologist to read a case (READTIME).
Time to completion is not only a commonly used performance measure in the learning literature (Pisano
et al. 2001; Reagans et al. 2005), but it is also an important measure for operational performance in this
context for both OutsourceCo (which garners greater productivity from its radiologist labor) and its
customers (who receive more timely response for what are often emergency cases). In theory, an
additional performance variable is performance quality; however, only 0.3% of our cases are
characterized by a “discrepancy”. Given this low rate and the fact that many of these discrepancies result
from a need for clarification rather than deficient performance, we are not able to examine quality
performance in this study.
To calculate READTIME, we rely on information about when each case is received (time in) and
when the radiologist completes the read (time out). Time-in, however, does not necessarily represent
when the radiologist begins reading a case. For example, when a case is assigned to a reading radiologist,
it enters his queue. The radiologist may read his queue in the order received or may choose to rearrange
images to better suit his workflow. Therefore, we make two key assumptions, derived from our
discussions with personnel at OutsourceCo, to calculate READTIME. First, we assume that during a
radiologist’s work shift, time out for the prior case is a reasonable approximation for the start time of the
current case. Radiologists work on cases sequentially and do not start a new case until they have finished
the prior case. Second, we assume that any elapsed time between the time out of the current case and the
time out of the prior case greater than 30 minutes represents a “break” between a radiologist’s shifts. The
30-minute break window was determined based on the data. Specifically, we examined the average and
standard deviation of the difference between the time out of a radiologist’s current read and the time out
of the prior read. The 30-minute cutoff is approximately equivalent to the average plus four standard
deviations. Nevertheless, we examine the robustness of our results to shorter and longer break windows.

17

Learning from Customers
Using these assumptions, we partition each radiologist’s list of cases into shifts using the break
window described above. For each radiologist and each shift, cases are ordered by time out and
READTIME is calculated as follows:
(1) First case of a shift: read time equals time out minus time in
(2) All subsequent shift cases: read time equals time out for the current case minus time out for the
prior case
4.3 Independent Variables
To examine our hypotheses we split the prior experience of individual radiologists into segments
that enable us to estimate the learning benefit of customer-domain experience relative to all other types of
experience. As a baseline model, we divide a radiologist’s prior experience into two categories.
IndvlCustomer represents what we term individual customer experience, the cumulative number of prior
cases read by a radiologist for the customer of the current case. IndvlOtherCustomer represents the
cumulative number of prior cases read by a radiologist for all customers other than the customer of the
current case. We next divided experience within each of the two customer categories by domain to create
four categories of experience. These measures consist of components that are unique to the customer and
the domain, customer but not the domain, domain but not the customer, or neither category. Domains are
defined based on the body-part imaged and are categorized consistent with the subspecialties recognized
by the American College of Radiology and the Radiological Society of North America and with the way
radiology departments are organized in typical academic medical centers in the United States. These
categories include: Abdomen, Body (combination images), Brain, Breast, Cardiovascular, Chest,
Gastrointestinal/Genitourinary, Head and Neck, Musculoskeletal, Obstetrical, and Spine.
Based on these categories, IndvlCustomerDomain represents the cumulative number of prior
cases read by a radiologist in the domain, and for the customer, of the current case; IndvlCustomerOther
Domain represents the cumulative number of prior cases (outside the domain of the current case) read by
a radiologist for the customer, of the current case; IndvlOtherCustomerDomain represents the total
cumulative number of prior cases for a given radiologist that match the domain (e.g., Body, Chest, Spine,

18

Learning from Customers
etc.), but not the customer, of the current case; and IndvlOtherCustomerOtherDomain represents the
cumulative number of prior cases read by a given radiologist in all domains and for all customers other
than those of the current case. Figure 1 provides an illustration of how these measures relate to one
another. Having constructed these four, collectively exhaustive combinations of customer and domain
experience, we use them to test Hypotheses 1a and 1b.
*********************************[Insert Figure 1] ******************************
To test Hypothesis 2, we examine the extent to which the experience of a reading radiologist is
distributed across a variety of customers. Specifically, we measure the degree to which a radiologist’s
cumulative volume prior to the current case is concentrated by customer. To do so, we use a Herfindahlstyle index of customer concentration. Thus IndvlCustomerFocus is produced by first measuring, for each
case, the share of that radiologist’s prior volume devoted to each customer. These volume shares are then
squared and summed, producing a measure for which higher values indicate a greater degree of customer
concentration (i.e., less variety). The interaction of this measure with IndvlCustomerDomain allows a test
of Hypothesis 2.
To test Hypothesis 3, we create a variable, OrgCustomer, which captures the depth of
OutsourceCo’s experience with a particular customer. Specifically, OrgCustomer is the total number of
prior cases a customer has sent to OutsourceCo. To distinguish this variable from the customer experience
of the current reading radiologist (and to facilitate the interactions necessary to test Hypothesis 4), we
subtract the current reading radiologist’s experience with the current customer. Thus, OrgCustomer is the
cumulative number of prior cases the current customer has sent to OutsourceCo, less the current
radiologist’s cumulative experience (across all domains) with that customer. In our models, we examine
this variable in both a linear and discrete form. The discrete form consists of three categories representing
the linear variable split into thirds: OrgCustomer1, OrgCustomer2, and OrgCustomer3. This categorical
version is intended to facilitate the interpretation of the interactions with radiologist experience and to
reduce the correlation present between OrgCustomer and IndvlCustomerDomain (correlation = 0.64).
Specifically, the correlation between IndvlCustomerDomain and OrgCustomer2 and OrgCustomer3 is

19

Learning from Customers
0.26 and 0.46, respectively. These notably lower levels of correlation increase our confidence that the
thirds of OrgCustomer and the continuous IndvlCustomerDomain are in fact capturing different
characteristics when we interact them to test Hypothesis 4. Table 1 contains summary statistics and
correlations for our key variables of interest.
*********************************[Insert Table 1] ******************************
4.4 Empirical Models
To examine the impact of various types of experience on individual performance, we use ordinary
least squares regression to estimate a series of exponential learning curve models. We rely on the
exponential form of the learning curve to examine our hypotheses because as Lapre and Tsikriktsis (2006)
have demonstrated, “for the exponential form, accounting for prior experience is a nonissue—omission of
prior experience will not bias learning-rate estimates.” Given that our data only includes the experience
of radiologists with OutsourceCo between July 2005 and December 2007—and no experience
accumulated prior to that window—the exponential form avoids the bias problem that would arise with
the power form.
Individual Customer Experience
To test for customer specificity at the individual level (Hypotheses 1a and 1b), we estimate the
following:

(1)
where

and

are fixed effects for customer h-radiologist i pairings and year t, respectively. The

former captures time-invariant characteristics of customer-radiologist pairs that may influence
READTIMEhijt; the latter captures changes in the average value of READTIMEhijt for the sample over time.
Backlogij represents the number of cases in the queue of radiologist i when reading case j. Xj represents a
vector of characteristics for individual case j, including binary indicators for the technology employed and
the knowledge domain addressed to control for differences in the average read time across these

20

Learning from Customers
dimensions. The model also includes the number of images for case j to capture the amount of
information

a

reading

radiologist

IndvlCustomerOtherDomainhij,

must

consider

to

IndvlCustomerDomainhij,

complete

the

current

case.

IndvlOtherCustomerDomainij,

IndvlOtherCustomerOtherDomainij and IndvlCustomerFocusij are as described previously, with
IndvlCustomerDomainhij the key variable of interest. Given that negative values of β1, β2, β3 and β4 are
associated with better performance (i.e., shorter read times), Hypothesis 1a predicts that β2 will be less
than β1 and Hypothesis 1b predicts that β2 will be less than β3, and β4.
Organizational Customer Experience
To test Hypothesis 3 related to the benefits of an organization’s depth of experience with a
particular customer, we examine the following models:
(2)
(3)

Where

,

and Xj are as previously described. In (2), OrgCustomer enters in linear form; in (3), it

enters in discrete thirds (with OrgCustomer1 omitted).
Customer Experience Interactions
To examine Hypotheses 2 and 4, we interact each segment of the radiologist’s prior customer
experience with either an individuals’ variety of customer experience (IndvlCustomerFocus) or the
customer’s depth of interaction with OutsourceCo (OrgCustomer). This involves merging the variables
from (3) with those from (1) above and creating the appropriate interactions as follows:

(4)

21

Learning from Customers
Where

,

, Xj, Backlogij and each of the key independent variables are as previously described.

Hypothesis 2 predicts that the interactions with focus (the opposite of variety) will have a negative effect
on performance (θ2 > 0, given that positive estimates indicate longer completion time). Hypothesis 4A
predicts that the interactions with the organization’s customer experience will have a positive effect on
performance (θ6 < θ5 < 0), while Hypothesis 4B predicts that these interactions will have a negative effect
on performance (θ6 > θ5 > 0).

5. Results
Table 2 contains estimates from models testing our four hypotheses. We present baseline
estimates related to overall customer-specific volume in Column 1. The estimate on IndvlCustomer in
Column 1 is in the expected direction and larger in magnitude than the estimate on IndvlOtherCustomer.
However, this estimate is not significant at conventional levels.
With respect to Hypotheses 1a and 1b, the estimate on IndvlCustomerDomain in Column 2 is
larger in absolute magnitude than any of the other three estimates, and the estimate on
IndvlCustomerDomain is significantly different from each of the other three estimates at conventional
levels (p-values from F-tests are each less than 0.03). This result supports Hypotheses 1a and 1b,
suggesting that individual customer-domain experience is more beneficial, on average, than other types of
experience. Relative to the mean level of customer-domain experience of 43.51, an additional 1,000
cases6 of experience yields a reduction in READTIME of approximately 13.83 seconds. This reduction in
READTIME would result in approximately 54 additional cases read during a typical 40-hour work week, a
7.4% increase in the average weekly volume for a radiologist. This compares to a reduction of
approximately 0.98 seconds from 1,000 additional units of domain experience, and 0.64 seconds from the
same amount of other experience. Consistent with Hypotheses 1a and 1b, these findings suggest that there
is substantial customer-domain specificity in learning at the level of the individual radiologist.
6

Though this represents a substantial increase from the mean, it is well within the relevant range of customerdomain experience found in our data. The maximum number of reads in our data set that are customer and domain
specific is 1,430. Moreover, this level of increase makes for a more meaningful comparison to other types of
experience (e.g., IndvlOtherCustomerDomain) for which mean levels are much higher (e.g., 7,579).

22

Learning from Customers
*************************************[Insert Table 2]***********************************
We

also

note

that

the

estimates

on

IndvlOtherCustomerDomain

and

IndvlOtherCustomerOtherDomain suggest that, although increases in both measures significantly
improve individual performance, domain-specific experience is more beneficial than experience with
other domains and other customers (Column 2). An F-test of the difference between these two estimates is
statistically significant (p <0.001). This result empirically supports why subspecialties in radiology are
organized according to specific domains.
Columns 3 and 4 present models testing Hypothesis 3. Column 3 shows the results of the model
in which OrgCustomer is entered in linear form. The estimate is negative and significant at conventional
levels suggesting that productivity improves across all radiologists the more experience OutsourceCo has
with a particular customer. Specifically, relative to mean levels of OrgCustomer, a customer sending an
additional 1,000 cases to OutsourceCo yields a reduction in READTIME of approximately 3.67 seconds.
Similarly, the estimates in Column 4 suggest that, relative to customers in OrgCustomer1, customers in
OrgCustomer2 and OrgCustomer3 have values of READTIME that are 10.81 and 16.72 seconds faster,
respectively. We note that the estimates for customers in OrgCustomer2 and OrgCustomer3 are
significantly different from each other at conventional levels (p < 0.001). These findings support the
predictions of Hypothesis 3.
Columns 5 and 7 include estimates testing Hypothesis 2. Specifically, in these models
IndvlCustomerFocus

is

interacted

with

our

customer-specific

experience

variables—

IndvlCustomerDomain and IndvlCustomerOtherDomain—with the IndvlCustomerDomain interaction
constituting the key test of our hypothesis. In Column 5, the OrgCustomer interactions are excluded. We
note that the estimates on the main effect of IndvlCustomerFocus in Columns 1, 2, 5, 6 and 7 provide
consistent and significant evidence that variety is beneficial for individual performance, as higher levels
of IndvlCustomerFocus indicate less variety. With respect to the interaction effects, the results in Column
5 suggest that variety has a complementary impact on the effect of customer-specific experience. In other
words, the more variety in a radiologist’s previous experience (lower levels of the focus variable) the

23

Learning from Customers
stronger is the effect of customer-specific experience on read times. However, while this estimated effect
is significant with respect to the interaction with IndvlCustomerOtherDomain, the interaction with
IndvlCustomerDomain is not significant at conventional levels. Thus, the results in Column 5 do not
provide strong support in favor of Hypothesis 2. We note, however, that in the fully specified model (4) in
Column 7, both interaction estimates that include IndvlCustomerFocus are in the expected direction and
significant at conventional levels. Nevertheless, though the magnitude and significance of the interaction
with IndvlCustomerDomain in Column 7 support Hypothesis 2, the lack of a consistent finding in Column
5 suggests only partial support for Hypothesis 2.
Finally, Columns 6 and 7 present the results for interactions between individual and
organizational customer experience. In Column 6, the IndvlCustomerFocus interactions are excluded. We
note that the estimates on the radiologist experience variables demonstrate the same pattern seen in
Column 2, with statistically significant differences suggesting strong evidence of radiologist domain
specificity across the full sample and customer-domain-specificity among customers in the first third of
OrgCustomer. We also note that the estimates on IndvlCustomerOtherDomain in Columns 6 and 7 are
significant at conventional levels. The estimates on the main effects of OrgCustomer2 and OrgCustomer3
in Columns 6 and 7 are similar to, though slightly lower in magnitude, than the results presented in
Column 4. Collectively these findings on the main effects in Columns 6 and 7 are consistent with
Hypotheses 1 and 3, suggesting that customer learning takes place at the individual (among relatively new
OutsourceCo customers) and organization levels.
The key question with respect to Hypothesis 4, however, is whether individual and organizational
customer experience are complements or substitutes. The estimated interactions in Columns 6 and 7
suggest a substitutive effect. Note that the estimated interactions of OrgCustomer with
IndvlCustomerDomain and IndvlCustomerOtherDomain, respectively, in both columns are positive and
follow a moderating pattern. Specifically, these estimates run in the opposite direction of the main effects,
suggesting that the benefit of individual customer experience is diminishing with increasing
organizational customer experience. In the fully specified model in Column 7 the absolute magnitude of

24

Learning from Customers
the relevant OrgCustomer3 interaction term equals 63 percent of the IndvlCustomerOtherDomain main
effect and 90 percent of the IndvlCustomerDomain main effect. A similar pattern, though slightly smaller
in magnitude, is observed in the interaction with OrgCustomer2. These interaction effects for
IndvlCustomerDomain and IndvlCustomerOtherDomain are significant at conventional levels and support
Hypothesis 4B (over Hypothesis 4A), suggesting that individual customer specificity diminishes as
OutsourceCo gains more experience with a particular customer.
5.1 Robustness
As with other studies of this nature, our results may be sensitive to the choices we have made in
constructing our variables and selecting our methods. First, as described previously, measuring
READTIME required us to define radiologist shifts by estimating breakpoints based on the elapsed time
between the time out of the prior read and the time out of the current read. We use 30 minutes as the
breakpoint threshold for our base models but also examine the sensitivity of our results to using 20minute and 40-minute breakpoints. These results, reported in Columns 1 and 2 of Table 3, are similar in
direction, magnitude, and statistical significance to those appearing in Column 7 of Table 2. Further, test
statistics comparing the various estimates in each column in Table 3 for customer specificity are
consistent with those reported above for Table 2. Specifically, the main effect for IndvlCustomerDomain
is

greater

in

absolute

magnitude

than

those

for

IndvlOtherCustomerDomain

and

IndvlOtherCustomerOtherDomain, and both of these differences are significant at the 1% level. In
addition, the main effects for OrgCustomer2 and OrgCustomer3 are consistent in direction, magnitude
and significance with the estimates in Table 2. Finally, the results in Table 3 suggest that customer
specificity is diminishing in the level of OrgCustomer. Collectively, the results in Table 3 suggest that our
base findings are robust to changes in how breaks between shifts are defined.
Second, our base model includes OrgCustomer entered categorically in thirds. As noted earlier,
this was done in part to reduce the correlation between OrgCustomer and IndvlCustomerDomain. A
second reason for this choice relates to the interpretation of interaction effects. By dividing a linear
variable into categories, or levels, interpretation of its moderating influence on another linear variable is

25

Learning from Customers
substantially simplified. Nevertheless, our choice to categorize OrgCustomer in thirds may seem
arbitrary. Accordingly, we also examine our base model with OrgCustomer categorized in halves (above
and below median) and quartiles. These results (not shown, but available from the authors) are consistent
with the results from our base model and suggest that our findings are robust to how OrgCustomer is
divided into discrete categories.

6. Discussion and Conclusion
Though many markets have traditionally been restricted by geography (Baumgardner 1988),
innovations in information and communication technologies have reduced these barriers (Zuboff 1988;
Autor et al. 2002). Given the ability to convert the information on a piece of paper or an image into bits
(e.g., through scanning technology or digital imaging) and send those bits around the world (e.g., via the
internet), the potential market size for certain service providers is increasing; offering the opportunity for
greater specialization. In turn, these effects are leading to more outsourcing (Levy and Murnane 2004;
Levy 2008; Malone et al. 2011) and an increase in arms-length interactions between customers and
suppliers. The experience that arises from these interactions, however, remains understudied.
Our results highlight the importance of learning curves in interdependent, knowledge-based work.
Further, they suggest that the established relationship between volume and performance that underpins the
learning curve needs to account for the multiple dimensions of experience that can be accumulated (Lapré
and Nembhard 2010; Argote and Miron-Spektor 2011). In particular, we find that both individual and
organizational customer experience aid individual performance. Moreover, we find that experience across
a wider variety of customers may aid the rate at which individuals learn from their own customer-specific
experience. Finally, we find that individual customer specificity is moderated by the depth of the
organization’s experience with a customer, suggesting that individual and organizational customer
experience are substitutes.
Our findings have important theoretical and managerial implications. At the individual level, we
find that both customer-specific experience and variety across customers have positive effects on

26

Learning from Customers
individual performance, with the magnitude of the former being significantly greater than that of the
latter. We also find that variety in experience across customers can aid the rate of learning from
customer-specific experience. The caveat is that increasing variety across customers leads to a
simultaneous limiting of the degree to which one can gain customer-specific experience. The question
thus arises as to how one should combine the seemingly contradictory approaches of increasing customerspecific experience and increasing variety across customers served. Our findings provide insight into this
issue by highlighting that customer specialization and variety may be mutually reinforcing strategies
(Narayanan et al. 2009; Clark and Huckman 2012; Staats and Gino 2012). The implication is that there
may be limits to the benefits of both customer-specific volume and variety across customers, suggesting
the need for an optimal mix of both types of experience. Future work should build on this finding through
the use of field or laboratory experiments to examine the nature of this optimal mix.
Our findings in an outsourcing context offer important insights into the study of organizational
and individual learning. Prior work on organizational learning highlights the important, but largely
separate roles of interorganizational (e.g., Ingram 2002) and intraorganizational learning (e.g., Argote and
Ophir 2002). The shifting boundaries of firms, however, suggest the need for theory that bridges the
traditional interorganizational-intraorganizational distinction. Beyond the customer-specificity of
individual learning, repetitive interactions with a customer may also lead to knowledge transfer across
firm boundaries that could lead to changes in organizational processes. There is a need for detailed studies
to understand how such learning and knowledge transfer does (or does not) occur and whether these
knowledge transactions can be structured in a way that produces performance benefits comparable to (or
even exceeding) what is possible within a single firm (Nickerson and Zenger 2004). While studies such as
Hansen (1999) and Szulanski (1996) examine the factors that help or hinder knowledge transfer within
the firm, the shifting boundaries of firms offer the opportunity to examine both the cross-firm factors that
lead to knowledge transfer and how those compare to and interact with within-firm factors.
Our findings also inform the strategic management literature concerning the microfoundations of
organizational capability (Ethiraj et al. 2005; Felin and Foss 2005), where an important question is

27

Learning from Customers
whether capabilities reside at the level of individuals or the organization as a whole (Staats 2012).
Individuals are the actors who complete most of the work for an organization (Argote and Ingram 2000),
and a large body of work highlights the key role that individual human capital plays in organizational
success (Hatch and Dyer 2004; Hitt et al. 2006). Through norms, systems, and routines, however,
capability may also reside at the level of the organization. This question is not simply important in the
abstract. From a strategic perspective, if customer specificity resides mainly at the level of the individual,
the organization may face difficulty in leveraging its human capital to build a sustainable competitive
advantage (Hatch and Dyer 2004). Instead, employees may capture rents through either salary increases
or moving to a competitor.
Our results, however, show that capability resides at both levels, as organizational and individual
experience act as substitutes in their effects on performance. Thus although individuals certainly play a
key role in successfully delivering a service—particularly early in a customer’s relationship with the
organization—customer capability may also be built at the level of the organization over time. Future
work should examine the applicability of our framework in other contexts and seek to identify other
dimensions along which experience might meaningfully vary.
Determining whether customer experience at the individual level is a complement to or substitute
for the same at the organizational level also has meaningful implications for the management of
outsourcing firms. Operationally, minimizing individual customer specificity is preferable because, if
individual workers must be dedicated to a customer, outsourcers lose flexibility in task allocation and face
lower labor utilization. Dedicating particular staff to a small number of customers also might limit variety
in the work of those individuals, which could lead to employee dissatisfaction and eventual turnover
(Fried and Ferris 1987). Our findings suggest that, for new customers, an outsourcing firm may wish to
keep individual providers relatively more focused on serving a specific customer. As organizational
experience accrues with a specific customer, however, such dedication becomes less critical.
6.1. Limitations and Future Research

28

Learning from Customers
Despite the robustness of our results, our study faces several limitations. First, we cannot assume
that our findings generalize to other settings. We note, however, that our results are likely relevant for a
wide range of settings that are characterized by an individual performing a varied set of related and
roughly repetitive activities for a range of customers. Similar contexts might include settings in
manufacturing or professional services (e.g., software development, legal, or consulting services).
Second, despite our efforts to control for time-invariant factors such as individual talent and the
“match” between individual providers and customers, our results may still be subject to concerns of bias
due to remaining sources of endogeneity. Nonetheless, we reiterate that—within pre-defined bounds
based on the range of technologies for which an individual has been trained and the hospitals at which an
individual is able to practice—the assignment of individual cases does not depend on the unobserved
characteristics of cases, customers, or individual radiologists.
Third, the realities of our data require us to analyze individual and organizational experience
differently. For individual experience, we are able to test for learning from customer experience, as well
as customer specificity. We examine the latter concept by including all types of experience for each
radiologist in the model and testing whether customer-domain experience has a greater effect on learning
than other types of experience. We find that this is the case. For organizational experience, our data only
allow us to test whether learning occurs at the organizational level. Including a variable that captures all
other OutsourceCo experience—which would be required to test for customer specificity at the
organizational level—is not feasible as this variable is highly correlated with other experience variables in
the model and would be akin to adding a variable for calendar time, which is already in our models.
Future work should thus examine whether customer specificity also occurs at the organizational level. In
addition, future work should explore the effect that other employees’ experience with different customers
has on an individual’s performance with a focal customer.
Fourth, though our study provides accurate measurement of the number of interactions between
an individual radiologist and a customer, we do not observe what takes place during each interaction.
Future work should seek to examine how these interactions can be structured more effectively to improve

29

Learning from Customers
coordination. For example, Huckman and Pisano (2006) find that an individual’s experience with the
specific assets of his or her employer is important to improving performance (i.e., experience is firmspecific). They suggest that one source of this firm-specificity may be the familiarity that emerges
between workers within a given firm (Huckman et al. 2009; Staats 2012). Research that examines both
how a radiologist interacts with a customer, as well as how radiologists at a firm interact with each other
could provide valuable additional insight.
Finally, our results only measure performance in terms of speed rather than clinical outcome or
some other measure of performance quality. This is due to the fact that our data reveal that only 0.3% of
our cases are characterized by a quality “discrepancy” and that many of these discrepancies are simply the
result of a need for clarification rather than deficient performance. This low level of quality problems is
beneficial not only for patients but also for our empirical identification strategy. Specifically, to the extent
that quality is almost uniformly acceptable across all providers in our sample, we are able to use read time
as a measure of performance effectiveness. Future work should explore the effect of customer experience
on quality. For example, outsourcing may lead to unexpected quality challenges, in some settings, as
complex information must often be transmitted and translated across the boundaries of multiple
organizations. While we expect hat our results would hold with quality as a dependent variable, it is an
important topic for further study.
Even with these potential limitations, our results have significant implications for both the
suppliers and users of outsourced services. For firms that provide outsourced services, we emphasize that
the observed nature of learning implies that staffing decisions should account for multiple dimensions of
experience, such as prior experience with a specific customer, that are often overlooked in settings where
activities are assumed to be “commoditized”. For firms that use outsourced services, our findings suggest
that performance may be improved by efforts to leverage customer experience, particularly early in their
relationship with an outsourcing firm. Such firms, however, should realize that just as such individual
specificity improves performance; it also increases the potential for an outsourcer to “hold up” a customer

30

Learning from Customers
that becomes reliant on its expertise. Overall, our findings point to the need for future research that
examines the long-term costs and benefits of leveraging the specific nature of experience.
6.2 Conclusion
Our study follows calls in the academy to go “behind” the learning curve (Adler and Clark 1991;
Argote 1999; Lapré 2011). In particular, we are able to examine how experience accumulation across
multiple-levels in the firm affects individual performance (Hackman 2003) and, in so doing, makes six
contributions. First, we study a type of experience – customer experience – that is both underexamined
and of growing importance. Our setting not only provides us with detailed data to examine multiple
interactions between providers and customers but also provides the “clean” assignment of tasks to
individuals required for us to draw causal inferences from our results. Second, we find evidence of
customer specificity in individual performance. Further, our results also support the concept of domain
specificity in healthcare. Given that not all experience has an equal impact on future performance, it is
important to understand the incremental impact of these various types of experience on performance. Our
results show that specialization in customer experience offers performance benefits for individuals. Future
work should not only examine where experience comes from (e.g., customer) but also the heterogeneity
of the knowledge gained within a particular type of experience (e.g., heterogeneity within a given
customer, Haunschild & Sullivan 2002).
Third, we find that organizational customer experience leads to improved individual
performance. Because the work of an organization is conducted by individuals, it is important to identify
the distinct impact of customer experience at each of these two levels. Our result at the organizationallevel also offers insight for research on strategic alliances. Prior work on learning in strategic alliances
emphasizes the need to learn about a partner to build a successful alliance (Doz 1996; Arino and Torre
1998) and also highlights the possibility of knowledge transfer and learning from the alliance partner (see
Inkpen and Tsang 2007, for a literature review). Though learning may be possible, it often requires
significant effort on the part of both parties (Teece 1977; Inkpen and Pien 2006). Further, learning from

31

Learning from Customers
other parties requires that the parties internalize their experience together to convert it into know-how
(Simonin 1997). As noted by Inkpen and Tsang (2007, p. 504), the above stream of research has not
directly examined repeated interactions between partners – the focus of our study.
Fourth, we find that increasing the variety of customer experience at the individual level may be
related to faster customer-specific learning. Thus, we find that specialization and variety may be
optimally used as mutually reinforcing rather than mutually exclusive strategies (Narayanan et al. 2009;
Clark and Huckman 2012; Staats and Gino 2012; KC and Staats 2012). Fifth, our work speaks to a recent
suggestion that “…[u]nderstanding when different types of experience are complements or substitutes for
one other is an important topic for future research (Argote and Miron-Spektor, 2011, p. 1127).” In
examining customer experience, we find that individual and organizational customer experience are
substitutes in terms of their effects on individual performance—greater organizational experience with a
given customer reduces the importance of customer experience at the individual level. We recognize,
however, that various circumstances (e.g., technology, work practices, structure, culture) might moderate
the relationship between individual and organizational experience. Future work should seek to understand
these factors and how they lead to either a complementary or substitutive relationship.
Finally, our work offers guidance for both providers and customers in service settings. Namely,
each should be cognizant of the detailed experience profiles of the individuals completing the work.
Increasingly, managers looking to improve performance must focus on the portfolio of experiences gained
not only by their employees, but also by their service providers. Our hope is that unpacking experience
along these lines will help build more accurate theory and generate additional insights for managers.

32

Learning from Customers

7. References
Adler, P. S. and K. B. Clark (1991). "Behind the learning curve: A sketch of the learning process."
Management Sci. 37(3): 267-281.
Argote, L. (1982). "Input uncertainty and organizational coordination in hospital emergency units."
Administrative Sci. Q. 27(3): 420-434.
Argote, L. (1999). Organizational Learning: Creating, Retaining, and Transferring Knowledge. Boston,
Kluwer Academic.
Argote, L., S. L. Beckman and D. Epple (1990). "The persistence and transfer of learning in industrial
settings." Management Sci. 36(2): 140-154.
Argote, L. and P. Ingram (2000). "Knowledge transfer: A basis for competitive advantage in firms."
Organ. Behav. Human Decision Processes 82(1): 150-169.
Argote, L. and E. Miron-Spektor (2011). "Organizational learning: From experience to knowledge."
Organ. Sci. 22(5): 1123-1137.
Argote, L. and R. Ophir (2002). Intraorganizational learning. The Blackwell Companion to Organizations.
J. Baum. New York, Blackwell.
Arino, A. and J. d. l. Torre (1998). "Learning from failure: Towards an evolutionary model of
collaborative ventures." Organ. Sci. 9(3): 306-325.
Arora, A., V. S. Arunachalam, J. Asundi and R. Fernandes (2001). "The Indian software services
industry." Research Policy 30(8): 1267-1287.
Arrow, K. J. (1974). The Limits of Organization. New York, W.W. Norton & Co.
Autor, D. H., F. Levy and R. J. Murnane (2002). "Upstairs, downstairs: Computers and skills on two
floors of a large bank." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 55(3): 432-447.
Bandura, A. (1977). "Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change." Psych. Rev. 84(2):
191-215.
Baumgardner, J. R. (1988). "Physicians' services and the division of labor across local markets." Journal
of Political Economy 96(5): 948-982.
Boh, W. F., S. A. Slaughter and J. A. Espinosa (2007). "Learning from experience in software
development: A multilevel analysis." Management Sci. 53(8): 1315-1331.
Bohn, R. E. (2005). "From art to science in manufacturing: The evolution of technological knowledge."
Foundations and Trends in Technology, Information and Operations Management 1(2): 129-212.
Bohn, R. E. and M. A. Lapré (2011). Accelerated learning by experimentation. Learning Curves: Theory,
Models, and Applications. M. Y. Jaber. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press, Taylor and Francis: 191209.
Boone, T., R. Ganeshan and R. L. Hicks (2008). "Learning and knowledge depreciation in professional
services." Management Sci. 54(7): 1231-1236.
Brunner, D. J. (2009). "Computer-assisted organizing: Implications of information technology for firm
strategy and business scalability." Unpublished doctoral dissertation: Boston, MA.
Clark, J. R. and R. S. Huckman (2012). "Broadening focus: Spillovers and the benefits of specialization in
the hospital industry." Management Sci. 58(4): 708-722.
Cohen, W. M. and D. A. Levinthal (1990). "Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on learning and
innovation." Administrative Sci. Q. 35(1): 128-152.
Dosi, G., R. R. Nelson and S. G. Winter (2000). The Nature and Dynamics of Organizational Capabilities.
London, Oxford University Press.
Doz, Y. L. (1996). "The evolution of cooperation in strategic alliances: Initial conditions or learning
processes?" Strategic Management J. 17(Evolutionary Perspectives on Strategy): 55-83.
Ellis, H. C. (1965). The transfer of learning. New York, Macmillan.
Ethiraj, S. K., P. Kale, M. S. Krishnan and J. V. Singh (2005). "Where do capabilities come from and how
do they matter? A study in the software services industry." Strategic Management J. 26(1): 25-45.

33

Learning from Customers
Felin, T. and N. J. Foss (2005). "Strategic organization: A field in search of micro-foundations." Strategic
Organization 3(4): 441-455.
Fleming, L. and O. Sorenson (2004). "Science as a map in technological search." Strategic Management
J. 25(8-9): 909-928.
Fried, Y. and G. R. Ferris (1987). "The validity of the job characteristics model: A review and metaanalysis." Pers. Psych. 40(2): 287-322.
Gino, F., L. Argote, E. Miron-Spektor and G. Todorova (2010). "First, get your feet wet: The effects of
learning from direct and indirect experience on team creativity." Organ. Behav. Human Decision
Processes 111(2): 102-115.
Hackman, J. R. (2003). "Learning more by crossing levels: Evidence from airplanes, hospitals, and
orchestras." J. of Organ. Behav. 24: 1-18.
Hansen, M. T. (1999). "The Search-Transfer Problem: The role of weak ties in sharing knowledge across
organization subunits." Administrative Sci. Q. 44(1): 82-111.
Hargadon, A. and R. I. Sutton (1997). "Technology brokering and innovation in a product development
firm." Administrative Sci. Q. 42(4): 716-749.
Hatch, N. W. and J. H. Dyer (2004). "Human capital and learning as a source of sustainable competitive
advantage." Strategic Management J. 25(12): 1155-1178.
Haunschild, P. R. and B. N. Sullivan (2002). "Learning from complexity: Effects of prior accidents and
incidents on airlines' learning." Administrative Sci. Q. 47(4): 609.
Hayes, R. H., G. P. Pisano, D. M. Upton and S. C. Wheelwright (2005). Operations, strategy and
technology: pursuing the competitive edge. Hoboken, NJ, Wiley.
Hitt, M. A., L. Bierman, K. Uhlenbruck and K. Shimizu (2006). "The importance of resources in the
internationalization of professional service firms: The good, the bad, and the ugly." Academy
Manage. J. 49(6): 1137-1157.
Hofmann, D. A., Z. Lei and A. M. Grant (2009). "Seeking help in the shadow of doubt: The sensemaking
processes underlying how nurses decide whom to ask for advice." J. Appl. Psych. 94(5): 12611274.
Huckman, R. S. and G. P. Pisano (2006). "The firm specificity of individual performance: Evidence from
cardiac surgery." Management Sci. 52(4): 473-488.
Huckman, R. S. and B. R. Staats (2011). "Fluid tasks and fluid teams: The impact of diversity in
experience and team familiarity on team performance." Manufacturing Service Oper.
Management 13(3): 310-328.
Huckman, R. S., B. R. Staats and D. M. Upton (2009). "Team familiarity, role experience, and
performance: Evidence from Indian software services." Management Sci. 55(1): 85-100.
Ingram, P. (2002). Interorganizational learning. The Blackwell Companion to Organizations. J. Baum.
Oxford, Blackwell Business: 181-207.
Inkpen, A. C. and W. Pien (2006). "An examination of collaboration and knowledge transfer: China–
Singapore Suzhou Industrial Park." Journal of Management Studies 43(4): 779-811.
Inkpen, A. C. and E. W. K. Tsang (2007). "Learning and strategic alliances." Academy of Management
Annals 1(1): 479-511.
Kang, K. and J. Hahn (2009). "Learning and forgetting curves in software development: Does type of
knowledge matter?" ICIS 2009 Proceedings Paper 194.
KC, D. and B. R. Staats (Forthcoming). "Accumulating a portfolio of experience: The effect of focal and
related experience on surgeon performance." Manufacturing Service Oper. Management.
Kim, D. H. (1993). "The link between individual learning and organizational learning." Sloan
Management Review 35(1): 37-50.
Ko, D.-G., L. J. Kirsch and W. R. King (2005). "Antecedents of knowledge transfer from consultants to
clients in enterprise system implementations." MIS Quarterly 29(1): 59-85.
Lane, P. J. and M. Lubatkin (1998). "Relative absorptive capacity and interorganizational learning."
Strategic Management J. 19(5): 461-477.

34

Learning from Customers
Lapré, M. A. (2011). Inside the learning curve: Opening the black box of the learning curve. Learning
Curves: Theory, Models, and Applications. M. Y. Jaber. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press, Taylor and
Francis: 23-35.
Lapré, M. A., A. S. Mukherjee and L. N. V. Wassenhove (2000). "Behind the learning curve: Linking
learning activities to waste reduction." Management Sci. 46(5): 597-611.
Lapré, M. A. and I. M. Nembhard (2010). "Inside the organizational learning curve: Understanding the
organizational learning process." Foundations and Trends in Technology, Information and
Operations Management 4(1): 1-103.
Lapré, M. A. and N. Tsikriktsis (2006). "Organizational learning curves for customer dissatisfaction:
Heterogeneity across airlines." Management Sci. 52(3): 352-366.
Larsson, R. and D. E. Bowen (1989). "Organization and customer: Managing design and coordination of
services." The Academy of Management Review 14(2): 213-233.
Lee, F. (1997). "When the going gets tough, do the tough ask for help? Help seeking and power
motivation in organizations." Organ. Behav. Human Decision Processes 72(3): 336-363.
Levinthal, D. A. and J. G. March (1993). "The myopia of learning." Strategic Management J. 14: 95-112.
Levy, F. (2008). "Computers and the supply of radiology services: Anatomy of a disruptive technology."
Journal of the American College of Radiology 5(10): 1067-1072.
Levy, F. and A. Goelman (2005). Offshoring and radiology. Brookings Trade Forum: Offshoring White
Collar Work. L. Brainard and S. M. Collins.
Levy, F. and R. J. Murnane (2004). The New Division of Labor: How Computers are Creating the Next
Job Market. Princeton, N.J., Princeton University Press.
Lewis, R., J. Sunshine and M. Bhargavan (2009). "Radiology Practices Use of External Off-Hours
Teleradiology Services in 2007 and Changes since 2003." American Journal of Roentgenology
193: 1333-1339.
Lubatkin, M., J. Florin and P. Lane (2001). "Learning together and apart: A model of reciprocal interfirm
learning." Human Relations 54(10): 1353-1382.
Malone, T. W., R. J. Laubacher and T. Johns (2011). "The age of hyperspecialization." Harvard Business
Rev. 89(7/8): 56-65.
March, J. G. and H. A. Simon (1993). Organizations. Cambridge, MA, Blackwell.
McEvily, B., V. Perrone and A. Zaheer (2003). "Trust as an organizing principle." Organ. Sci. 14(1): 91103.
Metiu, A. (2006). "Owning the code: Status closure in distributed groups." Organ. Sci. 17(4): 418-435.
Mishina, K. (1999). Learning by new experiences: Revisiting the flying fortress learning curve. Learning
by Doing in Markets, Firms, and Countries. N. R. Lamoreaux, D. M. G. Raff and P. Temin.
Chicago, University of Chicago Press: 145-179.
Monsell, S. (2003). "Task switching." Trends in cognitive sciences 7(3): 134-140.
Mowery, D. C. and J. E. Oxley (1995). "Inward technology transfer and competitiveness: The role of
national innovation systems." Cambridge Journal of Economics 19(1): 67-93.
Mowery, D. C., J. E. Oxley and B. S. Silverman (2002). The two faces of partner-specific absorptive
capacity: Learning and cospecialization in strategic alliances. Cooperative Strategies and
Alliances. F. J. Contractor and P. Lorange. Amsterdam, Pergamon: 291-320.
Narayanan, S., S. Balasubramanian and J. M. Swaminathan (2009). "A matter of balance: Specialization,
task variety, and individual learning in a software maintenance environment." Management Sci.
55(11): 1861-1876.
Nelson, R. R. and S. G. Winter (1982). An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change. Cambridge, MA,
Belknap Press.
Newell, A. and P. Rosenbloom (1981). Mechanisms of skill acquisition & the power law of practice.
Cognitive Skills & Their Acquisition. J. Anderson. Hillsdale, NJ, Erlbaum: 1-55.
Nickerson, J. A. and T. R. Zenger (2004). "A knowledge-based theory of the firm: The problem-solving
perspective." Organ. Sci. 15(6): 617-632.
Nonaka, I. (1994). "A dynamic theory of organizational knowledge creation." Organ. Sci. 5(1): 14-37.

35

Learning from Customers
Nonaka, I. and H. Takeuchi (1995). The Knowledge-Creating Company: How Japanese Companies
Create the Dynamics of Innovation. New York, Oxford University Press.
Piaget, J. (1963). The Psychology of Intelligence. New York, Routledge.
Pisano, G. P., R. M. J. Bohmer and A. C. Edmondson (2001). "Organizational differences in rates of
learning: Evidence from the adoption of minimally invasive cardiac surgery." Management Sci.
47(6): 752-768.
Reagans, R., L. Argote and D. Brooks (2005). "Individual experience and experience working together:
Predicting learning rates from knowing who knows what and knowing how to work together."
Management Sci. 51(6): 869-881.
Schilling, M. A., P. Vidal, R. E. Ployhart and A. Marangoni (2003). "Learning by doing something else:
Variation, relatedness, and the learning curve." Management Sci. 49(1): 39-56.
Schwab, A. (2007). "Incremental organizational learning from multilevel information sources: evidence
for cross-level interactions." Organ. Sci. 18(2): 233-251.
Simonin, B. L. (1997). "The importance of collaborative know-how: An empirical test of the learning
organization." Academy Manage. J. 40(5): 1150-1174.
Skinner, W. (1974). "The focused factory." Harvard Business Rev. 52(3): 113-121.
Smith, A. (1776). An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, Edwin Cannan, ed.
Library of Economics and Liberty. Retrieved March 9, 2011:
http://www.econlib.org/library/Smith/smWN1.html.
Staats, B. R. (2012). "Unpacking team familiarity: The effect of geographic location and hierarchical
role." Production and Operations Management. 21(3): 619-635.
Staats, B. R., D. J. Brunner and D. M. Upton (2011). "Lean principles, learning, and knowledge work:
Evidence from a software services provider." J. of Operations Management 29(5): 376-390.
Staats, B. R. and F. Gino (2012). "Specialization and variety in repetitive tasks: Evidence from a Japanese
bank." Management Sci. 58(6): 1141-1159.
Steinbrook, R. (2007). "The age of teleradiology." N. Engl. J. Med. 357(1): 5-7.
Studdert, D. M., M. M. Mello, W. M. Sage, C. M. DesRoches, J. Peugh, K. Zapert and T. A. Brennan
(2005). "Defensive medicine among high-risk specialist physicians in a volatile malpractice
environment." Journal of the American Medical Association 293(21): 2609-2617.
Szulanski, G. (1996). "Exploring internal stickiness: Impediments to the transfer of best practice within
the firm." Strategic Management J. 17(Special Issue: Knowledge and the Firm): 27-43.
Szulanski, G. (2000). "The process of knowledge transfer: A diachronic analysis of stickiness." Organ.
Behav. Human Decision Processes 82(1): 9-27.
Teece, D. J. (1977). "Technology transfer by multinational firms: The resource cost of transferring
technological know-how." The Economic Journal 87(346): 242-261.
Thompson, J. D. (1967). Organizations in Action. New Brunswick, NJ, Transaction Publishers.
Uzzi, B. (1997). "Social structure and competition in interfirm networks: The paradox of embeddedness."
Administrative Sci. Q. 42(1): 35-67.
Wachter, R. M. (2006). "International teleradiology." N. Engl. J. Med. 354(7): 662-663.
Walsh, J. P. and G. R. Ungson (1991). "Organizational memory." Acad. Management Rev. 16(1): 57-91.
Weber, R. A. and C. F. Camerer (2003). "Cultural conflict and merger failure." Management Sci. 49(4):
400-415.
Weiss, H. M., K. Suckow and T. L. Rakestraw Jr (1999). "Influence of modeling on self-set goals: Direct
and mediated effects." Human Performance 12(2): 89.
Yelle, L. E. (1979). "The learning curve: Historical review and comprehensive story." Decision Sci.
10(2): 302-328.
Zahra, S. A. and G. George (2002). "Absorptive capacity: A review, reconceptualization, and extension."
Acad. Management Rev. 27(2): 185-203.
Zuboff, S. (1988). In the age of the smart machine: The future of work and power. New York, Basic
Books.

36

Learning from Customers

Figures & Tables
Figure 1. Segmenting individual experience by customer and domain relative to the current case.

37

Learning from Customers

Table 1a. Summary statistics for key variables.

Mean

Std. Dev.

4.99

8.90

43.51

71.75

-0.058

(3) IndvlCustomerOtherDomain

106.42

155.21

-0.076

0.650

(4) IndvlOtherCustomerDomain

7,579.36

8,034.62

-0.112

0.486

0.228

20,295.17

17,646.61

-0.147

0.262

0.453

0.569

0.009

0.012

0.106

-0.086

-0.096

-0.221

-0.270

829.61

1,075.47

-0.013

0.638

0.340

0.367

0.111

-0.115

4.79

3.86

-0.130

0.091

0.111

0.203

0.261

-0.109

Variable
(1) READTIME
(2) IndvlCustomerDomain

(5) IndvlOtherCustomerOtherDomain
(6) IndvlCustomerFocus
(7) OrgCustomer
(8) Backlog

(1)

(2)

Table 1b. Distribution of images by domain and technology
Variable

Frequency

Domains
Abdomen

5.5%

Body

37.8%

Brain

32.3%

Breast

0.0%

Cardiovascular

0.2%

Chest

12.6%

GI/GU

1.7%

Head and Neck

2.4%

Musculoskeletal

1.3%

Obstetrics

2.5%

Spine

0.0%

Other

3.6%

Technologies
Computed Tomography (CT)

84.5%

Magnetic Resonance (MR)

0.9%

Nuclear Medicine (NM)

1.0%

Ultrasound (US)
X-Ray (XR)

10.0%
3.6%

38

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.037

Learning from Customers

Table 2. Regressions testing the effect of cumulative customer experience.
(1)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Ln(READTIME)

Ln(READTIME)

Ln(READTIME)

Ln(READTIME)

-0.0818*
(0.0470)
-0.0384*
(0.0224)
-0.0045***
(0.0002)
-0.0030***
(0.0001)
3.126***
(0.185)

-1.750***
(0.413)
-0.0508**
(0.0228)
-0.0045***
(0.0002)
-0.0030***
(0.0001)
2.990***
(0.178)

-2.200***
(0.2520)
-0.1020***
(0.0252)
-0.0043***
(0.0002)
-0.0028***
(0.0001)
3.005***
(0.181)

-0.0240***
(0.00220)
-0.0245***
(0.00331)

-0.0286***
(0.0037)
-0.0485***
(0.0056)

-0.0309***
(0.00321)
-0.0545***
(0.00410)

-0.0222
(0.0162)
-0.0036 ***
(0.0001)

IndvlOtherCustomer (000’s)
IndvlCustomerDomain (000’s)
IndvlCustomerOtherDomain (000’s)
IndvlOtherCustomerDomain (000’s)
IndvlOtherCustomerOtherDomain (000’s)
IndvlCustomerFocus

(2)

Ln(READTIME) Ln(READTIME) Ln(READTIME)

VARIABLES
IndvlCustomer (000’s)

3.153***
(0.186)

-0.0717**
(0.0283)
-0.0045
(0.0178)
-0.0049***
(0.0002)
-0.0032***
(0.0001)
3.152***
(0.186)

OrgCustomer (000’s)

-0.0161***
(0.0017)

OrgCustomer2

-0.0457***
(0.0023)
-0.0716***
(0.0031)

OrgCustomer3
IndvlCustomerDomain x
IndvlCustomerFocus
IndvlCustomerOtherDomain x
Indvl Customer Focus

1.5130

17.200***

(5.9150)

(5.160)

4.617**

6.720***

(1.950)

(1.750)

IndvlCustomerDomain x
Org Customer2
IndvlCustomerDomain x
Org Customer3
IndvlCustomerOtherDomain x
OrgCustomer2
IndvlCustomerOtherDomain x
OrgCustomer3
Backlog

Observations
Customer-radiologist Pairs
R-squared

-0.0246***
(0.0002)

-0.0246***
(0.0002)

-0.0254***
(0.0002)

-0.0255***
(0.0002)

-0.0246***
(0.0002)

2,766,209
2,766,209
2,766,209
2,766,209
2,766,209
44,159
44,159
44,159
44,159
44,159
0.235
0.235
0.234
0.234
0.235
Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by customer-radiologist pairs
Model includes a constant term and covariates not reported
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

39

1.160***

1.380***

(0.355)

(0.246)

1.640***

1.970***

(0.403)

(0.250)

0.0500***

0.0582***

(0.0142)

(0.0139)

0.0562***

0.0638***

(0.0179)
-0.0247***
(0.0002)

(0.01.79)
-0.0247***
(0.0002)

2,766,209
44,159
0.236

2,766,209
44,159
0.236

Learning from Customers

Table 3. Regressions with alternative radiologist “break” windows.
(1)
Ln(READTIME)
20 min. window
-2.530***
(0.301)
-0.111***
(0.0350)
-0.0056***
(0.0003)
-0.0037***
(0.0002)
3.415***
(0.215)
-0.0387***
(0.00424)
-0.0670***
(0.00553)
12.90**
(5.530)
7.270***
(2.180)
1.550***
(0.283)
2.340***
(0.291)
0.0890***
(0.0209)
0.0675***
(0.0234)
-0.0384***
(0.0003)

VARIABLES
IndvlCustomerDomain (000’s)
Indvl CustomerOtherDomain (000’s)
IndvlOtherCustomerDomain (000’s)
IndvlOtherCustomerOtherDomain (000’s)
IndvlCustomerFocus
OrgCustomer2
OrgCustomer3
IndvlCustomerDomain x IndvlCustomerFocus
IndvlCustomerOtherDomain x IndvlCustomerFocus
IndvlCustomerDomain x OrgCustomer2
IndvlCustomerDomain x OrgCustomer3
IndvlCustomerOtherDomain x OrgCustomer2
IndvlCustomerOtherDomain x OrgCustomer3
Backlog

(2)
Ln(READTIME)
40 min. window
-2.450***
(0.312)
-0.103***
(0.0348)
-0.0055***
(0.0003)
-0.0038***
(0.0002)
3.473***
(0.218)
-0.0356***
(0.00430)
-0.0626***
(0.00557)
14.50***
(5.550)
6.850***
(2.110)
1.460***
(0.296)
2.260***
(0.303)
0.0844***
(0.0209)
0.0575**
(0.0232)
-0.0392***
(0.0003)

Observations
2,766,209
2,766,209
Customer-radiologist Pairs
44,159
44,159
R-squared
0.182
0.181
Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by customer-radiologist pairs
Model includes a constant term and covariates not reported
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

40

