NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MEASURING MARGIN
Robert L. McDonald
Working Paper 18724
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18724

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2013

Prepared for the NBER Initiative on Systemic Risk and MacroModeling. I am grateful to Markus Brunnermeier,
Arvind Krishnamurthy, Richard Heckinger, John McPartland, and Robert Steigerwald for helpful discussions
and comments, but of course errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
The author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research. Further information
is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18724.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Robert L. McDonald. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Measuring Margin
Robert L. McDonald
NBER Working Paper No. 18724
January 2013
JEL No. G18,G32
ABSTRACT
Policy makers and market participants alike wish to understand the amount, economic significance,
and concentration of derivatives trading activity. This paper suggests that systematic measuring and
reporting of margin by market participants, disaggregated by asset class, would provide more meaningful
insights into derivatives activity. Where margin is not required, it could nevertheless be imputed and
reported. The Dodd-Frank financial reform bill, by contrast, moves away from transparency by granting
non-financial firms an end-user exemption from posting initial margin on their trades. This is economically
equivalent to a borrowing from the counterparty and effectively permits these firms to issue off-balance-sheet
debt.

Robert L. McDonald
Department of Finance Jacobs Center
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Rd.
Evanston, IL 60208-2006
r-mcdonald@northwestern.edu

Measuring Margin∗
Robert L. McDonald†
April 4, 2012

Abstract
Policy makers and market participants alike wish to understand
the amount, economic significance, and concentration of derivatives
trading activity. This paper suggests that systematic measuring and
reporting of margin by market participants, disaggregated by asset
class, would provide more meaningful insights into derivatives activity.
Where margin is not required, it could nevertheless be imputed and reported. The Dodd-Frank financial reform bill, by contrast, moves away
from transparency by granting non-financial firms an end-user exemption from posting initial margin on their trades. This is economically
equivalent to a borrowing from the counterparty and effectively permits these firms to issue off-balance-sheet debt.

1

Introduction

In discussions related to derivatives and regulatory policy, three questions
often arise:
• How great is the exposure to derivatives in the aggregate?
• How is this exposure split across different asset classes?
• How sensitive is the magnitude of exposure to economic shocks?
∗
Prepared for the NBER Initiative on Systemic Risk and Macro Modeling. I am grateful
to Markus Brunnermeier, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Richard Heckinger, John McPartland,
and Robert Steigerwald for helpful discussions and comments, but of course errors are my
own.
†
Erwin P. Nemmers Professor of Finance, Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern
University. Phone: 847-491-8344, e-mail: r-mcdonald@northwestern.edu

1

Margin—collateral that protects the counterparty against losses from failure to pay—is an economic measure of exposure that differs by asset and
by the topology of risk. In this paper I discuss the idea that reporting of
margin, disaggregated by product class and by entity, would provide a standardized measure of the specific net risks being borne with derivatives, and
provide information about entity vulnerabilities to specific market shocks,
along with sector concentrations in particular derivative asset classes.1 The
future configuration of contracts, institutions, trading, and market practices is difficult to forecast. As markets evolve, routine margin reporting
would provide information about risks potentially helpful to policy makers,
analysts, and market participants.
The Bank of International Settlements (BIS) estimates that at year-end
2010, the outstanding notional amount of over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives was $601 trillion (BIS, 2011). According to the BIS, the vast majority
(77%) of these contracts are interest rate derivatives (with over 10% of this
amount as options), with foreign exchange derivatives second at 9.6% and
credit default swaps (CDS) third at about 5%. Equity contracts represent
about 1% and commodity contracts about 0.5%. The BIS obtained this estimate by surveying market participants and eliminating the double-counting
that results from both A and B reporting the same derivative contract between A and B.
The BIS estimate is difficult to interpret for several reasons.2 First,
by definition the count includes positions that are effectively offsets. For
example, if two dealers in the ordinary course of business enter into a series of
1
Acharya (2011) suggests even more detailed reporting on derivatives. Whereas I emphasize reporting of existing margins, Acharya (2011) emphasizes reporting of what he
calls “potential exposure”, including additional margin calls due to credit downgrades.
2
ISDA (2011) makes two additional adjustments to the BIS number. First, it eliminates foreign exchange swaps. Second, it reduces the BIS estimate for double-counting of
interest rate swaps cleared at LCH Clearnet. Regarding the treatment of foreign exchange
swaps, ISDA subtracts the value of FX swaps on the grounds that these are short-term
and, bizarrely, that they are “older products”. Duffie (2011), in a comment on the Treasury proposal to exempt FX swaps from clearing requirements, expresses skepticism that
foreign exchange swaps should be treated differently than other derivatives. Regarding the
treatment of cleared swaps, the adjustment for double-counting arises from the observation that a single swap presented to a clearing house becomes two swaps, one each between
the original counterparties and the clearinghouse. Clearing therefore leads to an increase
in the measured notional value of swaps. This is correct, but it is also true that the use
of a clearinghouse does create new counterparty relationships for a given contract. Both
the FX and clearing adjustments illustrate the limited usefulness of aggregate numbers.
Disaggregated statistics permit the statistical consumer to make whatever adjustments
seem appropriate for the analysis at hand.

2

non-identical but functionally similar swaps, there are likely to be significant
economic offsets, so that the net exposure of one dealer in the event of
bankruptcy by the other dealer is small. How overstated is the notional
amount reported by BIS?
Second, the number includes derivatives based on interest rates, equity,
credit, foreign exchange, and commodities. A swap of a given notional
amount will embody different risks depending on the underlying asset, maturity, and structure of the product. A $1 million vanilla equity swap will
typically be riskier than a $1 million vanilla interest rate swap. However,
swaps, including interest rate swaps, can be designed to have additional layers of leverage and thus be substantially riskier than vanilla swaps per dollar
of notional value. A famous example of this is the Procter and Gamble swap
(McDonald, 2006, p. 264).
In Section 2 I discuss the economic interpretation of margin for individual contracts and for portfolios of contracts. I present examples showing
how margin is assessed in practice for different kinds of underlying assets. In
Section 3, I discuss discuss different margin practices in centrally cleared and
OTC markets. Depending upon whether the margining system is gross or
net, margin may be held by different parties. Section 4 presents several examples illustrating different margin calculations for cleared and non-cleared
transactions. Using these examples, I contrast margin with notional amount
and VaR as measures of risk. In Section 5 discuss a controversial feature of
Dodd-Frank, the end-user examption. I show that this feature can be seen
as creating implicit off-balance sheet borrowing by the exempt end-user.
Section 6 concludes.

2

Understanding Margin

Derivatives contracts have future settlement based on a reference price, but
it is common to settle the contracts on an ongoing mark-to-market basis as
prices change prior to contract maturity. The term “margin” encompasses
at least two different kinds of payments related to this settlement in advance: the maintenance margin, which is referred to in the OTC market as
the “independent amount,” and the variation margin.3 The maintenance
margin, which is the focus of this paper, is an amount that provides collat3

The CME also distinguishes between initial margin and maintenance margin. Initial
margin is the amount a trader must provide at the initiation of a position, while maintenance margin is the amount below which the trader must provide additional margin. We
will focus on maintenance margin in this discussion.

3

eral against possible future loss before the next marking to market of the
contract. Depending upon the context, market participants under current
rules may or may not post maintenance margin. The variation margin, by
contrast, is a payment that covers realized loss, thereby resetting the value
of the derivative to zero, and preventing losses from cumulating.
Margin is collateral for a contractual obligation and as such reflects the
riskiness of the contract. Although the notional amount of a position can be
difficult to interpret, the margin on a position is an economically meaningful
value, routinely computed and used by market participants as a protection
against counterparty default. Margin thus provides a common denominator
with which to compare the risk of different contracts and positions. In this
section I provide some examples to illustrate margin practices in several
different contexts.
Throughout this discussion we will be assuming that the derivative contract under discussion resembles a futures contract or swap, in that it has
no initial premium (i.e., no payment from one party to the other, distinct
from margin), there is futurity, i.e. the contract will require future performance, and at the future settlement date there is a possibility of payments
from either one of the two parties to the other. Credit risk is therefore
two-sided. Contracts for which the buyer fully pays (such as options) are
different because the buyer has no further obligation, and thus credit-risk is
one-sided.

2.1

Margin in Theory

Assume that there are two firms, A and B, that enter into a derivative
contract such as a vanilla swap. A firm posts margin to protect the counterparty against the failure of the other to make a required payment on
the derivative. In pratice margin is often computed as the expected loss on
the position that occurs with some probability. The amount of margin will
depend upon the frequency with which the position value is measured and
settled.
Various methods can be used to compute the margin amount, but it is
helpful to think of margin as a tail VaR, which is the conditional expectation
of a position value if it falls below a certain level. Let Vt be the value of the
derivative for A, so that −Vt is the value for B. Assuming that A is long, so
that Vt+1 < Vt represents a loss, margin for A is


p
(1)
, Vt
MtA = −Et Vt+1 − Vt | Vt+1 < Vt+1
where Vt is the value of the derivative position at time t (it can be positive
4

p
is the value of the claim such that
or negative), Vt+1
p
| Vt ) = p
Pr(Vt+1 < Vt+1

that occurs with (or is exceeded with) probability p, and Mt is margin at
time t. For example, margin might be computed based on a value that is
exceeded with 1% probability. Note that there is a time period implicit in
the calculation of MtA . For exchanges, the time period is typically a day.
In OTC markets, the time period can be several days, in which case margin
will be correspondingly greater, other things equal.
Margin for B, who is short, is
i
h
1−p
(2)
, Vt
MtB = Et Vt+1 − Vt | Vt+1 > Vt+1
1−p
as
We define Vt+1
1−p
| Vt ) = p
Pr(Vt+1 > Vt+1

In practice, for futures traded at exchanges, margin is set symmetrically so
that MtA = MtB . Symmetry is not necessary, however. For options, margin
applies only to levered or written positions. Equations (1) and (2) provide a
rough conceptual description of the margin calculations of many derivatives
clearinghouses.
Equations (1) and (2) are statistical definitions of margin. These measures are not based on an economic theory of optimal margin, which would
require modeling default and systemic risk.4 The margin calculations also
make no adjustment for the risk of the specific counterparty. Nevertheless,
MtA and MtB correspond conceptually to clearinghouse practice.
In this discussion we have not specified the time horizon over which
marking to market occurs. In practice, clearinghouses compute margin with
respect to daily price moves. In the OTC market, revaluations may occur
only weekly, in which case margins are larger due to less frequent marking-tomarket. Margin is often approximated as a multiple of the asset standard
√
deviation. A weekly return standard deviation will be approximately 5
times the daily standard deviation. If margin were being used to compare
exposures across classes of derivatives, it would be neccesary to know the
mark-to-market horizon in order to infer the underlying positions.
4

Bolton and Oehmke (2011) develop a model of optimal derivatives use and collateral
in a context where hedging has value for firms but entails real costs, and there is credit
risk.

5

2.2

Netting and Portfolio Margining

The preceding discussion defined margin for a single asset. For a portfolio
of assets, margin can be computed in the same way. Suppose there are
two derivatives with values Vt and Qt held in quantities αv and αq . Let
Wt = αv Vt + αq Qt denote the value of the portfolio. (Buyers and sellers can
be distinguished by setting αv and αq appropriately.) The tail VaR for this
portfolio is


p
(3)
, Wt
MtP = −Et Wt+1 − Wt | Wt+1 < Wt+1
where Mt (W ) denotes the margin for asset W . By the Cauchy-Schwarz
inequality,
αv Mt (V ) + αq Mt (Q) ≥ Mt (W )
(4)
Setting margin for the position W using equation (3) is called portfolio
margining, with the margin based on the aggregate risk of the portfolio
components rather than the individual risks.5
The calculation in equation (4) depends upon the return correlations of
V and Q. Correlations may vary over time and increase across asset classes
in times of stress. As a result, portfolio margining is generally used only
within specific asset classes, where correlations are likely to be high and
relatively stable.

2.3

Margin Examples

The economic risk, and thus the margin, associated with a given notional
amount differs by asset class and other characteristics, including maturity
and the structure of the contract. In the following we use CME Group
margin levels to illustrate possible differences in margin amount for a $100
million notional position in different assets.
5
Suppose that V and Q are marked to market over different horizons, which we will
call one period and T periods. To understand portfolio margining in this case, let σV
and σQ represent the two one-period standard deviations (corresponding to the more
frequent mark-to-market interval) and ρ the return correlation. Suppose that Q is marked
to market every T > 1 periods. The
√ variance of the portoflio over T periods will be
σ 2 = αv2 σv2 + αq2 σq2 T + 2ραv αq σv σq T . The horizon T does not affect the variance of V
in this calculation because the position is refreshed every period and there is never more
than one period of exposure. As we vary T , we have

∂σ
1
1
=
(αq2 σq2 + ραv αq σv σq √ )
∂T
2σ
T
As T increases, margin increases due to the risk of Q.

6

Consider a contract to hedge a future $100 million 90-day loan with a
rate that will be linked to LIBOR on the lending date. One way to hedge this
loan is by entering into a Eurodollar futures contract, which is an exchange
traded contract. The notional value of the contract is $1 million, so hedging
the loan requires a position in 100 contracts.6
For each exchange-traded contract, the CME Group web site reports the
intial margin — the amount that must be posted to enter into an outright position (long or short) in one contract — and the maintenance margin, which
is the minimum amount permitted in the margin account. Exchange-traded
contracts are marked-to-market daily. In June, 2011, the CME Group website reported that initial margin and maintenance margin for the Eurodollar
contract was $608/$450 for contracts with an expiration date of less than
one year, $743/$550 for contracts with an expiration date between one and
three years, and $1013/$750 for longer-dated contracts. In all three cases
the maintenance margin is 74% of the initial margin, which in turn is less
than 0.1% of the notional amount of $1 million. For our purposes, maintenance margin is the required minimum and thus corresponds most closely
to equations (1) and (2).
Thus, hedging the $100 million loan would require that traders on each
side of the contract maintain a margin balance of between $45,000 and
$75,000, depending on the maturity of the contracts. In this example, we
would observe open interest of 100 contracts and, because there is both a
long and a short, total margin of roughly $90,000 to $150,000, depending
upon maturity.
There are trading strategies such as spreads that would result in different margin amounts. For example, consider a trader who goes long 50
Eurodollar contracts expiring in one month and short 50 Eurodollar contracts expiring in a later month. The risk of a spread is lower than the risk
of an outright position, so the spread — which also generates open interest of 100 contracts — would require initial margin of between $23,600 and
$57,400, depending on maturity. This is about half the margin for a 100
contract outright position.
Some trading strategies require substantially smaller margin amounts
per contract. For example, going long one December 2012 contract, long
three June 2013 contracts, short three March 2013 contracts, and short one
September 2013 contract—a so-called “condor”—would have initial margin
6

In this example it is irrelevant whether the party is hedging a lending or borrowing
position. However, hedging a loan would entail going long Eurodollar futures, which are
designed to behave like a bond, making money when the interest rate goes down. A short
position would hedge borrowing.

7

Asset

Ticker

Eurodollar
Treasury Bond
S&P 500 Index
Crude Oil (WTI)
Natural Gas (Henry Hub)
Gold
Copper
Corn

ED
US
SP
CL
NG
GC
HG
C

Number
of contracts
100
1000
320
1000
2174
667
1000
3077

Margins
Outright
Spread
$45,000
$20,000
$2,000,000
$300,000
$6,400,000
$80,000
$5,250,000
$300,000
$4,347,826
$869,565
$3,000,000
$54,667
$4,250,000
$225,000
$5,384,615 $2,307,692

Table 1: Maintenance margin for different representative futures at CME
Group exchanges, assuming a $100 million notional amount in the case of
outright trades, and a $100 million notional amount on each side in the
case of spread trades (this is twice the number of contracts). The “Number
of Contracts” column reports the number of contracts with a $100 million
notional amount. Source: CMEGroup.com
of $68. If a trader entered into 12 such positions, there would be open
interest of 96 contracts and total margin of $816. Depending on the spread
strategy, required margin can vary by a factor of 10.

2.4

Margin for Different Assets

Table 1 shows representative margin levels for positions with a notional value
of $100,000,000 for different contracts.7 The main point of Table 1 is that
for a given notional amount, the risk of a position, as measured by margin,
can vary significantly.8 Even ignoring the Eurodollar contract, margin can
vary by a factor of three (T-bonds vs the S&P 500 index), and margin on
7
Table 1 is intended only to be illustrative, but it is worth noting that there can be a
great deal of contract-to-contract variation in margin characteristics even holding fixed the
underlying asset or commodity. The Table emphasizes differences across assets, but the
differences in margin for a given asset, across different expirations, can also be considerable.
For example, crude oil maintenance margins on outright positions start at $6,250 for the
near months, and decline to $5,000 for contracts more distant than 20 months. Corn
spread margins are $750/contract for spreads that cross harvests (for example summer
against winter months), and $300/contract for spreads in the same season. The examples
in Table 1 are necessarily somewhat arbitrary.
8
The Eurodollar contract has a deceptively low margin. A common use of the contract
is the hedging of swaps. The equivalent of a 10-year swap would be a set of eurodollar
contracts with 40 different maturities. Multiplying the Eurodollar margin by 40 yields a
margin of $1.8 million, close to that of Treasury bonds.

8

spread positions can vary still more widely. For some assets, spreads are low
risk (the S&P 500 index and gold, for example), while for others, spreads
are relatively risky (corn and natural gas).

3

Margin in Practice

In this section I discuss how margin is handled at a central clearinghouse
and in the OTC market. It is important to keep in mind that all derivatives
are in zero net supply. Also, for futures and swaps with zero value, both the
buyer and seller post margin because either could experience a loss.

3.1

Clearinghouse Margin Practice

A typical clearinghouse becomes the counterparty for all traders: the seller
to all buyers and the buyer to all sellers. This process by which the clearinghouse substitutes itself as counterparty is called novation. A clearinghouse
does not novate all counterparty relationships, but typically deals directly
only with clearing members, who in turn have obligations to the clearinghouse.9 Other traders interact with the clearinghouse through clearing members.
A clearinghouse will have procedures and safeguards to protect clearing
members against default by other clearing members. One common practice
is for the clearinghouse to hold margin. For example, the CME Group in
2010 (CME Group Inc., 2010) reported holding $82 billion of performance
bonds. Depending upon the requirements of the clearinghouse and regulators, this reported margin number can have different interpretations. The
following discussion is intended to outline the possibile practices concerning
margin, rather than the specific practices of any particular exchange.
3.1.1

Outright Positions

Consider the left-hand side of Figure 1, in which there are two clearing
members, and Clearing Member 1 has two customer accounts. Suppose
that Customer A is long two contracts, Customer B is short one contract,
and Clearing Member 2 is short one contract. Margin is M per contract,
so total margin deposited by customers at Clearing Member 1 is 3M , and
Clearing Member 2 must deposit M . The disposition of the margin depends
9

Clearing members will contribute to a clearinghouse guarantee fund, must be in financial good standing, and may have an obligation to contribute further to the clearinghouse
in the event another clearing member defaults.

9

on clearinghouse rules, but the important point is that the total margin of
4M on deposit from customers measures their one-period economic exposure
resulting from their derivatives positions.10
What happens to the 4M on deposit? The clearinghouse could mandate
that Clearing Member 1 post with the clearinghouse all margin received,
in which case the clearinghouse would show performance bond holdings of
4M . This treatment of margin by the clearinghouse is referred to as gross
margining. Alternatively, rules could be such that the clearinghouse would,
in the event of a failure, have a net obligation of one contract to Clearing
Member 1, and the clearinghouse could then require a deposit only of M ,
the margin on one contract, with Clearing Member 1 continuing to hold the
remaining 2M . This is a net margining system.
Thus, depending upon its rules, the clearinghouse could hold two units
of margin, four units of margin, or something in between. In a net margin
system, Clearing Member 1 would hold the two units of margin that are
not held by the clearinghouse. The specific rights and obligations of customers, clearing members, and the clearinghouse under the two systems are
potentially quite complicated and are beyond the scope of this discussion.
The point is that the margin held by the clearinghouse provides different
measures under the two systems, even when there is only contract.
3.1.2

Cross-margined Positions

As discussed above, margin can be based on a total portfolio position, taking
into account diversification. Clearinghouses routinely use portfolio margining for calendar spreads (e.g., long September and short October in the
same asset or commodity) and spread positions in different equity indexes
(e.g. long Dow-Jones and short the S&P 500). Going long and short the
same contract is a limiting case of portfolio margining (the two positions are
perfectly negatively correlated). Portfolio margining is generally not used
across asset classes.
Once margin is computed for a position, margin can be held by the broker
or clearinghouse depending upon whether there is gross or net margining.
10

Note that there are credit relationships in the clearinghouse model that do not involve
payment of margin. Generally, Clearing Member 1, not the clearinghouse, is the counterparty for Customers A and B. If Clearing Member 1 were to fail, the clearinghouse would
protect other clearing members against losses, but customers of Clearing Member 1 could
potentially suffer losses, depending upon the precise legal obligation of the clearinghouse.

10

Customer A

Customer B

Customer D

Clearing Member 1

OTC Dealer
Clearinghouse

Customer C

Clearing Member 2

Figure 1: Derivatives counterparties with and without a clearinghouse.

3.2

OTC Margin Practice

Under Dodd Frank, margin treatment in the OTC market should closely
resemble that for clearinghouses, with the dealer bank serving as the clearing
entity. Prior to Dodd-Frank, however, margin practice in the OTC market
typically differed from that in clearinghouses.11
The OTC market is illustrated on the right hand side of Figure 1. Suppose that Customers C and D enter into offsetting positions in an OTC
version of the same contract that A and B are holding. The OTC Dealer is
counterparty to each, effectively serving the same role as the clearinghouse.
The customers are exposed to the dealer, and the dealer is exposed to each
customer. Prior to Dodd-Frank, it would have been possible that none
of the participants in Figure 1 would have posted maintenance margin.12
Typically, the dealer would compute the independent amount (analogous to
maintenance margin) for a counterparty and then the party with the larger
independent amount (typically the customer) would post collateral equal to
11

OTC margining is discussed in detail in Appendix A of Brunnermeier and Pedersen
(2009). One issue pertaining to OTC margining that I do not address is the effect of
non-standardized contracts and illiquid markets for the underlying asset.
12
Under proposed rules, The SEC and CFTC would designate large dealer firms as
“covered swap entities.” These firms would be required to collect margin from one another.

11

the difference in the independent amounts. This is in contrast with the situation at a clearinghouse, where the two clearing members would both post
margin for their positions. Another difference is that OTC margin calculations for different asset classes may cover different horizons: several days,
for example, rather than one day.
As with a clearinghouse, OTC dealers make use of portfolio margining
but only for closely-related assets.

4

Using Margin to Assess Risk

Margin requirements attempt to measure risk in a precise way, so systematic reporting of margin, broken down by asset class, reported by market
participants, would provide potentially valuable information to regulators,
analysts, and other market participants. One could imagine a reporting
scheme in which derivatives would be broken out into standard asset class
categories, for example: equity, index, fixed income, energy, agricultural
commodities, metals, and foreign exchange. Derivative margin by such categories would be reported by clearinghouses, swap clearing entities, dealers,
and corporate end-users.
Major market participants such as clearinghouses and swap clearing entities could report margin broken down by asset class, with and without
incorporating the effects of cross-margining. This number could be divided
by two in order to compare directly to open interest.
• Clearinghouse rules might leave substantial customer margin held by
clearing members (for example, if the clearinghouse uses net margining). In this case, the margin in the custody of clearing members could
be reported as well.
• Covered swap entities could report margin, by asset class, for noncleared swaps.
• For users subject to the end-user exemption, margin that would have
been otherwise required would be reported by asset class
To illustrate the role of margin in measuring economic exposure, Table
2 summarizes a series of transactions undertaken by different entities. The
discussion in this section will be based upon the amounts in Table 1. The
transactions illustrate three issues in assessing derivatives risk:
1. The existence of partial offsetting positions between two counterparties
(transactions 1 and 2, group A)
12

Group
A
B

C

Item
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Description
$125 1.25-year swap
$150 1.5-year swap
$100 1-year swap
$100 1-year swap
$100 1-year swap
$100 1-year exotic levered
swap
$100 1-year swap

Long
D1
D2
D3
D4
D5
C

Outright
Short
D2
D1
D4
D5
D3
D6

Margin
$6.25
$7.50
$5.00
$5.00
$5.00
$20.00

D6

C

$5.00

Table 2: Hypothetical oil derivatives positions among six dealers (D1 – D6)
and one customer (C). All swaps are based on 83,333 barrels/month and
outright margin is assumed to be 5% of notional for standard swaps. All
dollar amounts are millions.
2. Cyclical transactions, where individual firms face exposure that could
be netted, but is not (transactions 3, 4, and 5, group B)
3. Non-standard derivatives (transactions 6 and 7, group C)
Note that none of the positions in Table 2 are exactly offsetting both with
respect to both the contract and the counterparty. The notional amounts for
oil swaps in the table are based upon a price of $100/barrel and settlement
based on 83,333 barrels/month. The stated notional amount is the total
barrels over the life of the swap times price. We assume that the margin is
$5/barrel or $5 million on a $100 million swap and $20 million for the exotic
swap. The measured total notional derivatives positions implied by Table
2, as well as the amount and location of risk exposures, will depend upon
whether the trades are cleared.

4.1

Clearinghouse Treatment

Suppose first that trades are centrally cleared. Table 2 illustrates the original
trades, but assume that the ordinary swaps have been presented to the
clearinghouse and novated. For the purpose of this discussion it does not
matter whether the dealers are clearing members.
In transactions 1 and 2, D1 and D2 have partially offsetting positions in
swaps. Because each party is both long and short closely related contracts,
margin on the net position is that of a spread, reflecting the remaining

13

exposure in months 16 through 18. The margin in this example would be
about $1.25 million for each counterparty.13
Transactions 3-5 illustrate the netting function of a clearinghouse. Each
dealer is both long and short the same contract, albeit with a different counterparty. Novation of the contracts makes the clearinghouse a counterparty
to all three contracts, eliminating the positions and therefore the exposure
of the dealers.
Finally, transactions 6 and 7 again represent partial offsets for the customer, who is long oil via an exotic swap and short oil with an ordinary swap,
with Dealer 1. Assuming the exotic swap cannot be cleared, the customer
owes $5 million margin to the clearinghouse for the ordinary swap and $20
million margin to the dealer for the exotic swap. The ordinary swap is novated, resulting in the dealer and customer both having a standard cleared
contract.
Summarizing, with a clearinghouse, the transactions in Table 2 would
result in reported notional amounts of $475 million (transactions 3-5 vanish
due to novation) and margins of $1.25 million for Transactions 1 and 2
(counting one firm’s margin) and $25 million for Transactions 6 and 7.
Margins thus reveal low risk associated with the $275 million notional
amount of transactions 1 and 2, and the very high risk associated with the
$200 million notional of transactions 6 and 7. Transactions 3-5 do not exist.

4.2

OTC Treatment

Suppose now that all of the transactions in Table 2 are OTC, and therefore
not centrally cleared.14 Both open interest and margins are different due to
differences in netting with and without central clearing.
Transactions 1 and 2 should result in the same margin as with central
clearing. As the counterparties are the same, only net exposure matters and
both sides are margined.
Transactions 3 to 5 are treated quite differently with and without central
clearing. In the OTC market there is no novation; all bilateral transactions
remin in place with the original counterparties. Therefore, the transactions,
13

Margin in this case would reflect the different notional amounts and also the different
maturities. Presumably there would be a positive but small margin for equal notional
amounts in the two contracts, and an additional margin for the residual $25 million,
whence the assertion that margin would be “about” $1.25 million.
14
The examples here would also apply if there were multiple clearinghouses for the same
product. The examples illustrate the incentive to consolidate trades in an asset class at a
single clearinghouse.

14

which net to zero with central clearing, will remain outstanding. This increases total notional amounts by $300 million. Further, under Dodd-Frank,
all dealers will post margin with their counterparties. (This creates a powerful incentive to identify and unwind such transactions, achieving the same
outcome as novation.)
Finally, with the standard swap receiving OTC treatment, it is possible
for dealer 1 and the customer to net the exotic and ordinary swap, transactions 6 and 7. The same notional amounts would be outstanding for these
transactions but the amount of margin is reduced from $25 million when
cleared to $15 million when the exotic and ordinary swaps are not cleared.
Without clearing, notional amounts outstanding increase to $775 million
and required margins increase by approximately $5 million. This takes account of the increase of $15 million from transactions 3-5 and the reduction of
$10 million from transactions 6 and 7. The increase in OTC margin relative
to clearinghouse margin in this example reflects the increase in counterparty
credit risk from the inability to novate in an OTC setting.

4.3

Discussion

The examples illustrate how margin measures the net exposure to a given
counterparty, providing a convenient and consistent measure of exposure to a
given asset class. The aggregate notional amount of derivatives outstanding
is quite different in the cleared and uncleared case, but margin is almost
the same. The examples illustrate one case where margin is the same in
a cleared and non-cleared system (transactions 1 and 2), one case where
margin and risk are both reduced in the cleared system (transactions 3-5),
albeit because derivatives positions are eliminated by clearing; and one case
where margin declines in the uncleared system (transactions 6 and 7). In
each case, margin shows who is bearing risk and how it is distributed.
Note that it would be difficult to obtain this risk exposure information in
other ways. One possibility would be to acquire precise information about
the terms and counterparties of derivatives claims outstanding, but assessing risk would require valuing these claims and computing net exposure to
each counterparty. With margin, the counterparties have performed this
calculation. The requirement of consistent margin reporting is thus a decentralized form of regulation: margin is computed by agents with economic
stakes, rather than by a central entity.
In addition to margin, there at least two other leading natural measures of derivatives usage and exposure applicable both to OTC and cleared
positions.
15

• Notional amount measures the notional dollar value of contracts uotstanding, with no adjustment for risk or offsetting positions. In table
2, notional amounts with clearing are $475 and without clearing $775,
but aggregate margin is almost the same. As discussed in the introduction, notional amount takes no account of the different risks of
positions or whether there are offsetting positions. It is inherently
difficult to interpret the economic significance of notional amounts.
• Value at Risk (VaR). VaR measures the firm’s specific exposure. As
discussed in Section 2, margin is conceptually similar to value at risk.
The difference is that value at risk may be zero in circumstances where
margin would be positive. For example, in Group B without clearing,
each of the three firms would show zero VaR, whereas under the rules
proposed by Dodd-Frank, each would post margin for both positions.
The positive margin amount would indicate that there is a chain of
uncleared obligations, which is indicative of systemic risk.
The implementation questions for a margin reporting system include the
following:
• How finely should asset classes be subdivided? It is common to subdivide products as equity, interest rates, credit, foreign exchange, and
commodities. Finer subdivisions would include splitting equity and
interest rates by currency of denomination, and commodities into agriculture, energy, and metals.
• How fine-grained should entity-level reporting be? Two objections to
fine-grained reporting by dealer banks would be the costs of reporting
and the possibility of releasing proprietary information. Presumably
regulators will be receiving detailed information, so the issue of cost
should be moot. The issue of proprietary information is potentially
more problematic.
• How frequent should reporting be? Under Dodd-Frank, OTC derivatives trades are to be publicly reported on a near real-time basis, and
dealers presumably will be performing margin calculations at least
daily. Daily or weekly margin reporting should be feasible.
• Does portfolio margining raise special issues? If portfolio margins were
sensitive to correlation assumptions, margins could change abruptly
at the onset of a crisis. One could require reporting of margins with
and without portfolio margining. This is probably not important with
16

current practice, but could be a significant issue if the scope of portfolio
margining were to increase.

5

The End-User Exemption

The exception to the requirement to post margin under Dodd-Frank is the
proposed “end-user exemption” for non-financial firms. Specifically, under
the Treasury’s proposed margin and capital requirements for covered swap
entities (Department of the Treasury et al, 2011),
. . . a covered swap entity would not be required to collect
initial or variation margin from a nonfinancial end user counterparty as long as the cover swap entity’s exposures to the nonfinancial end-user were below the credit exposure limits that the
covered swap entity has established . . . (p. 25)
Note that under this proposed rule, because the trigger is credit exposure
to the dealer, an exempt end-user could avoid posting margin by splitting
positions among multiple dealers.
The end-user exemption has been controversial because it exempts a
large class of traders from the requirement to post explicit margin. Large
end-users lobbied for the exemption on the grounds that their hedging
transacations are implicitly offsetting risk on non-financial assets and the
margin requirement would make such transactions more costly. Nevertheless, large derivative positions would expose counterparties to credit risk.
Large firms would take derivatives positions correlated with their business,
so failure of the end-user would be correlated with failure to pay on the
contract. If failure occurs due to losses in the line of business associated
with the hedged asset, this correlation would be negative. But if failure occured due to systemic stresses, it is possible that failure of the business and
failure to pay on the contract could occur simultaneously. In any event, the
end-user exemption creates the economic equivalent of an off-balance-sheet
transaction between the dealer and end-user. The exemption also creates an
incentive for end-users to use non-cleared non-standard contracts in order
to obtain the exemption.
Suppose an end-user enters into an exchange-traded contract. The resulting hypothetical balance sheet, including margin and financing, is depicted in Figure 5. Margin posted by the end-user, ME , is assumed to be
debt-financed. This captures the idea that a failure to pay variation margin
triggers default. For example, suppose the firm has A of assets and financing, and posts margin of ME . If the firm suffers a loss on the position of
17

End-user
Assets
Risky asset
Derivative
Cash (Margin)

Liabilities
Financing
A
—
—
Debt
ME

A
0
ME

Figure 2: Hypothetical balance sheets for a firm transacting in a derivatives
contract via a clearinghouse, and posting margin for derivatives transaction
that has a zero initial value. Firm has pre-existing assets and financing of
A. Assumes that margin is debt-financed.
End-user
Assets
Risky asset
Derivative
Cash (Margin)
Dealer Margin

A
0
ME
MD

Liabilities
Financing
—
Debt (3rd party)
Exposure to Dealer

A
—
ME
MD

Dealer
Assets
—
Cash (Margin)
End-user Margin

—
MD
ME

Liabilities
Derivative
Debt (3rd party)
Exposure to end-user

0
MD
ME

Figure 3: Hypothetical balance sheets for a firm and dealer transacting in
an OTC derivatives contract, with both posting margin for a derivatives
transaction that has a zero initial value. Assumes that margin is debtfinanced.
λME , it is obligated to pay that amount, or else it is in default. Entering
into a derivative is analogous to a firm issuing short-term debt of ME and
investing the proceeds in a risky asset. Any failure to pay the loan due to a
loss on the invested value would trigger default.
Figure 3 generalizes Figure 5 to the case where there is an OTC contract
and both the firm and dealer post margin. Both issue debt to finance margin.
Each has an off-balance-sheet asset, margin posted by the other, to offset
exposure to the other. The resulting conceptual balance sheet is in Figure
3.
Finally, consider the case whether neither firm posts margin. Each has
credit exposure to the other and thus, implicitly, each has made a loan to the
other. The end-user exemption, by allowing firms to avoid posting margin,

18

End-user
Assets
Risky asset
Derivative
Margin
Loan to dealer (Margin)

Liabilities
Financing
—
Debt (from dealer)
Exposure to Dealer

A
0
ME
MD

A
—
ME
MD

Dealer
Assets
—
Margin
Loan to end-user (margin)

Liabilities
Derivative
Debt (from end-user)
Exposure to end-user

—
MD
ME

0
MD
ME

Figure 4: Hypothetical balance sheets for a firm and dealer transacting in
an OTC derivatives contract, with neither posting margin for a derivatives
transaction. Implicitly, each lends to the other.
effectively permits off-balance-sheet financing of the margin amount.
The upshot is that the end-user exemption creates an obligation resembling an off-balance-sheet loan that finances an implicit margin deposit.
Exempt firms could report the amount of margin they would have posted
in the absence of the exemption. This would permit consistent analysis of
entity exposures and aggregate measures of derivatives activity.

6

Conclusion

The Dodd-Frank act was intended to reduce systemic risks. A central goal
of the legislation was to increase clearing of derivatives transactions, but at
this point no one knows the consequences of new rules. In particular, we
don’t know
• How large clearinghouses will be
• How many clearinghouses there will be
• How international integration and resolution will function
• How empirically important the end-user exemption will be.
• How much market-making business will flee traditionally-regulated entities (e.g., banks subject to Basel III)

19

Whatever the new configuration of firms and markets, the push to central
clearing will likely create new systemically important clearinghouses or related financial utilities, some of which will be too big or interconnected to
fail. A critical question is what information will be useful across different
possible future configurations of activity.
Frequent, disaggregated, public reporting of margin provides a mechanism that should help regulators and market participants assess the risk of
aggregate positions and the effects of changes in the level of risk. It should
help to assess the risks borne by clearinghouses, dealers, and large market participants. Such reporting would reveal which asset classes have the
greatest risk exposure and potentially, depending on the level of disaggregation, which sectors have exposure to which risks (for example, insurance
companies writing credit default swaps).

References
Acharya, V. V., 2011, “A Transparency Standard for Derivatives,” in
M. Brunnermeier and A. Krishnamurthy, (eds.) “Risk Topography: Measuring Systemic Risk,” NBER.
BIS, 2011, OTC derivatives market activity in the second half of 2010 , Technical report, Bank for International Settlements, Monetary and Economics
Department.
Bolton, P. and Oehmke, M., 2011, “Should Derivatives Be Senior?” Unpublished, Columbia University.
Brunnermeier, M. K. and Pedersen, L. H., 2009, “Market Liquidity and
Funding Liquidity,” Review of Financial Studies, 22(6), 2201–2238.
CME Group Inc., 2010, “Annual Report,” .
Department of the Treasury et al, 2011, Margin and Capital Requirements
for Covered Swap Entities (Notice of Proposed Rule-making), Technical
report, Department of the Treasury.
Duffie, D., 2011, “On the Clearing of Foreign Exchange Derivatives,” Graduate School of Business, Stanford University.
ISDA, 2011, OTC Derivatives Market Analysis Year-end 2010 , Technical
report, International Swap Dealers Association.

20

McDonald, R. L., 2006, Derivatives Markets, Addison Wesley, Boston, MA,
2nd edition.

21

