NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AIR POLLUTION AND INFANT MORTALITY:
EVIDENCE FROM THE EXPANSION OF NATURAL GAS INFRASTRUCTURE
Resul Cesur
Erdal Tekin
Aydogan Ulker
Working Paper 18736
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18736
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2013

We would like to thank two anonymous referees, Laura Arygs, aduman Cesur, Ala Cubukcu, Francesc
Ortega, Stephen Ross, and the participants at the 2013 Health Economics Spring Meeting of the National
Bureau of Economic Research, George Mason University, Queens College of the City University of
New York, University of Connecticut, Johns Hopkins University, IZA Workshop on Labor Market
Effects of Environmental Policies, the 2012 Southern Economic Association Meeting, and the 2013
European Society for Population Economics Conference for their comments and suggestions. Chandler
McClellan provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Resul Cesur, Erdal Tekin, and Aydogan Ulker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Air Pollution and Infant Mortality: Evidence from the Expansion of Natural Gas Infrastructure
Resul Cesur, Erdal Tekin, and Aydogan Ulker
NBER Working Paper No. 18736
January 2013, Revised February 2015
JEL No. I0,I12,I15,I18,O10,O13,Q42,Q48,Q53
ABSTRACT
Natural gas has emerged as an increasingly attractive source of energy since it is highly efficient, abundant,
and cleaner than any other fossil fuel. In this paper, we examine the impact of widespread adoption
of natural gas as a source of fuel on infant mortality in Turkey, using variation across provinces and
over time in the intensity of natural gas utilization. Our estimates indicate that the expansion of natural
gas infrastructure has resulted in a significant decrease in the rate of infant mortality. Specifically,
a one-percentage point increase in natural gas intensity - measured by the rate of subscriptions to natural
gas services - would cause the infant mortality rate to decrease by 3.9 percent, which would translate
into approximately 340 infant lives saved in 2011 alone.
Resul Cesur
Department of Finance
University of Connecticut
2100 Hillside Road Unit 1041
Storrs, CT 06269-1041
and University of Connecticut
cesur@business.uconn.edu
Erdal Tekin
Department of Public Administration and
Policy
School of Public Affairs
American University
4400 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20016-8070
and IZA
and also NBER
tekin@american.edu

Aydogan Ulker
School of Accounting, Economics and Finance
Deakin University
221 Burwood Highway
Burwood VIC, 3125 Australia
ulker@deakin.edu.au

I. Introduction
Concerns over the consequences of global climate change on public health and
communities around the world have raised widespread awareness of an urgent need for
developing technologies and practices that would enable a carbon-free future as well as
sustainable development (Acemoglu et al. 2012). There is little dispute that burning of
coal, which produces far more carbon than any other fuel, is a major contributor to global
climate change and worsening air quality in many parts of the world. Despite this
agreement, consumption of coal continues to rise at a pace that now presents a formidable
threat to some of the gains in health outcomes achieved by the developing world over the
last several decades. Furthermore, efforts aimed at reducing carbon emissions through
environmental regulations have produced little success.

This is in part due to the

reluctance of emerging economies to committing to legal obligations as they face
mounting pressure to sustain their economic development.1 Accordingly, it seems that
any viable solution to the problem of global climate change ought to involve actions that
are not only voluntary, but also in the economic interest of these countries. One such
example is the investments undertaken by countries to diversify their energy portfolios,
and thereby to reduce the vulnerability of their economies to global supply shortages in
any particular fuel. To the extent that these actions would result in less-carbon intensive
energy portfolios, they could reduce air pollution and produce benefits for the
environment and public health.
In this paper, we consider the health effects of one such action adopted by the
Republic of Turkey, which has begun investing in building a natural gas infrastructure in
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1

There are also challenges to effective enforcement of regulations due to weak governance and corruption
in many parts of the world (Jayachandran, 2009; Greenstone and Hanna, in press).

3	  
	  
	  

1980s by expanding a network of pipelines originating in its neighbors, including Russia
and Iran. This infrastructure, which has enabled 61 of the 81 Turkish provinces to gain
access to natural gas to this date, has led to a widespread replacement of the consumption
of coal by natural gas for residential and commercial space heating and cooking purposes
(see Figure 1 for the number of provinces with access to natural gas over time). As we
discuss below, this has led to significant improvements in air quality in these provinces.
This is not surprising because combustion of natural gas emits virtually no sulfur oxide,
which is a key component of acid rain. Furthermore, emissions of total particulate matter,
carbon monoxide, and nitrogen oxide are also at much lower levels from burning of
natural gas compared to coal. Then an important question to consider is whether the
expansion of the natural gas infrastructure has had any impact on infant mortality. To the
best of our knowledge, the current study is the first attempt in the literature to examine
the effect of a nationwide change in a fuel delivery system on infant health. The
knowledge to be gained from this analysis has far-reaching implications as similar
investment processes have been taking place in other parts of the world, including Latin
America, Europe, and Asia2. As the consumption of natural gas continues to rise, any
impact is likely to be felt beyond the borders of investing countries through global air
circulation patterns.
The current investigation is particularly timely because of the recent spike in the
supply of natural gas, enabled by an extraction technology called hydraulic fracturing or

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
2

A few examples include the recently opened North Stream pipeline from Russia to Germany through the
Baltic Sea, the Mazatlan pipeline project in Mexico, and Myanmar-China and Kazakhstan-China pipeline
projects.

4	  
	  
	  

“fracking.”3 The impact of fracking boom on energy markets has been especially
spectacular in the United States, which has seen its natural gas production to rise by 25
percent since 2010 and recently outstripped Russia as the world’s largest gas producer
(Morse, 2014). The proponents argue that fracking is not only an economically sound
practice, but also an environmentally friendly one as it replaces coal-fired power plants
with those using natural gas. Accordingly, they claim that natural gas could serve as a
“bridge fuel” towards the eventual replacement of carbon-based fossil fuels by renewable
energy sources (Podesta and Wirth, 2009; Paltsev et al., 2011). However, there is also a
deep skepticism among many experts and policymakers about the so-called benefits of
fracking for the environment and public health. The skeptics worry about the potential
environmental damages that might be caused by gas extraction through fracking, such as
the release of methane gas to the atmosphere, underground water contamination,
discharge of toxic chemicals during the process, and physical impacts in the form of
increased seismic activity, and argue that the net benefits may be negligible or even
negative as a result (Finkel, 2011; Krupp, 2014; Caulton et al., 2014).4
This paper also extends the growing literature on air pollution and infant mortality
in developing countries by using a novel source of variation from a country that has not
been studied in this context. Despite growing concerns about the harmful health impacts
of air pollution in developing countries, most of the available evidence on the subject
comes from the United States and a few other developed countries (e.g., Chay and
Greenstone, 2003a, b; Currie and Neidell, 2005; Currie, Neidell, and Schmieder, 2009;
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3

Fracking involves the process of injecting sand, water, and certain chemicals into shale rocks to crack
them open and release the natural gas trapped inside.	  
4
There is currently little evidence available on the health impacts of fracking (Mitka, 2012; Mash et al.,
2014). While investigating the health impacts of this practice is an extremely important question, it is
beyond the main focus of our paper.

5	  
	  
	  

Currie and Walker, 2011; Currie, Greenstone, and Moretti, 2011; Knittel, Miller, and
Sanders, 2011).5 One explanation for the relative paucity of evidence from developing
countries is the fact that policy changes and environmental regulations in the developing
world are rare and weakly enforced, failing to generate enough variation in air pollution
levels to detect statistically significant effects (Arceo-Gomez, Hanna, and Oliva, 2012;
Tanaka, 2012). In the absence of exogenous sources of variation, the associations
obtained in much of the earlier research on air pollution and health may reflect the impact
of omitted factors, such as socio-economic status, that are correlated with both pollution
exposure and health outcomes rather than the impact of air pollution per se. Only recently
have researchers responded to this challenge by turning their attention to identifying
exogenous sources of variation, which could yield estimates of the causal impact of air
pollution on health in developing country settings.6
In order to account for unobserved heterogeneity, we rely on the fact that the
adoption and the subsequent expansion of the use of natural gas across Turkish provinces
have been gradual. In particular, we exploit the variation in both the timing of the
adoption of natural gas across provinces and the intensity of natural gas consumption as
measured by the number of subscribers to natural gas services per 100 persons. As shown
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
5

There are several explanations offered for the pathways through which prenatal exposure to air pollution
can affect infant health. For example, it has been suggested that exposure to pollutants like carbon
monoxide and particulate matter could lead to impaired fetal tissue growth through oxygen deprivation (Ha
et al., 2001; Dejmek et al., 2000; Maisonet, Correa, and Jaakkola, 2004; Siddiqui et al. 2008; Li et al.,
2003). These impacts can be particularly damaging for infants, whose lungs are not developed and immune
systems are weak. It is also argued that air pollution can harm the infant through adversely affecting the
health of the pregnant mother, for example, by weakening her immune system (Currie, Neidell, and
Schmieder, 2009).
6
For example, Jayachandran (2009) studies the impact of particulate matter on infant health using variation
in pollutants caused by massive wildfires in Indonesia. Tanaka (2012) uses variation in the regulations on
emissions from power plants to examine the impact of air pollution on infant mortality in China. ArceoGomes, Hanna, and Oliva (2012) exploit the number of thermal inversions as an instrument to investigate
the impact of air pollution on infant mortality in Mexico City. Finally, Greenstone and Hanna (in press)
study the impact of air and water pollution regulations on infant mortality in India.

6	  
	  
	  

in Figures 1 and 2, both the number of provinces with a natural gas infrastructure and the
intensity of its consumption have grown rapidly in Turkey between 2001 and 2011.
Our results indicate that a one-percentage point increase in the rate of
subscriptions to natural gas services would result in a 3.9 percent decline in infant
mortality rate, which could translate into approximately 340 infant lives saved in 2011
alone. Our auxiliary analysis using supplemental data on total particulate matter suggests
that the reductions in infant mortality associated with the expansion of natural gas
services are driven by the improvement in air quality.

II. Expansion of Natural Gas Infrastructure in Turkey
Over the last two decades, the Turkish economy has gone through a major
transformation marked by rapid growth and structural changes, such as privatization of
state enterprises and integration into global economy.7 During the same period, Turkey
has also intensified its efforts to diversify its energy portfolio by investing in building a
network of natural gas pipelines. The country’s close proximity to some of the world’s
major natural gas producers such as Russia, Iran, and Azerbaijan, has especially played
an important role in its decision to raise the share of natural gas in its energy mix.8 These
efforts have led to an expansion of natural gas networks across Turkish provinces,
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
7

Turkey’s recognition as a candidate for European Union membership in December 1999 and the accession
talks that started in 2005 have brought the country’s environmental record under increased scrutiny. This
has led to the Turkish government putting in place a number of legislations and regulations to improve
energy efficiency and address environmental concerns, including flue gas desulfurization requirements on
all newly commissioned coal-fired power plants, new by-laws on air pollution control from heating in
2005, 2007, and 2009, the ratification of the Kyoto protocol, and setting a unilateral target for carbon
emissions introduced by the 2009 National Climate Change Strategy (International Energy Agency, 2009).
Furthermore, the use of leaded gasoline was banned in 2004.
8
Natural gas is imported from mainly Russia and a few other neighboring countries through pipelines that
are operated by the state owned company, BOTAS. It is then transmitted to individual provinces by private
distribution companies.

7	  
	  
	  

resulting in a gradual migration from coal to natural gas for space heating and cooking
purposes by dwellings and businesses. First introduced in Ankara in 1988 and followed
by Istanbul and Bursa in 1992, the natural gas infrastructure has spread rapidly across
Turkish provinces since then, especially over the period of 2001-2011 (see Figure 1).
Consequently, this expansion has led to a significant increase in the overall consumption
of natural gas. According to the statistics from the International Energy Agency, the total
consumption of coal and peat in Turkey increased from 11 Million tons of oil equivalent
(Mtoe) to 14 Mtoe between 2000 and 2010, while the total consumption of natural gas
almost tripled from 4.9 Mtoe to 13.1 Mtoe during the same period (International Energy
Agency, 2012). Similarly, the share of natural gas in electricity production increased
from 37 percent in 2000 to about 46 percent in 2010. Concurrently, the share of coal
decreased mildly from 31 percent to 26 percent. In terms of residential use, the demand
for natural gas exhibited an average increase of 28 percent between 1990 and 2009, while
the demand for coal increased only by 3.6 percent (International Energy Agency, 2011).
Moreover, the average annual increase in the industrial use of natural gas has been 10.6
percent compared to only 1.5 percent for coal during that period.
There are a number of factors that are associated with the timing of the adoption
and the rate of expansion of natural gas across provinces in Turkey. As we discuss below,
these factors are primarily related to economic viability and are unrelated to a particular
plan designed to improve health outcomes, especially once observed characteristics of
and permanent differences across provinces are accounted for. This is reassuring for our
identification strategy, which is explained in detail in Section IV. It is important to keep
in mind that the investments in infrastructure required to expand natural gas networks to
8	  
	  
	  

individual provinces are very costly and often take many years to recoup. Since the
establishment and administration of infrastructure at the province level are controlled by
privately owned firms, the factors associated with economic viability, such as the number
of housing units (or the population size), the climate, the conditions of the geographical
terrain, and the proximity to main natural gas ports operated by the central government
appear to play an important role in the timing of adoption and the rate of expansion (Aras
and Aras, 2005). Therefore, it is not surprising that centrally located provinces with large
populations and relatively cold and long winters, like Istanbul, Ankara, Bursa, and
Eskisehir, are among the early adopters. It is also not surprising that many of the
remaining provinces without a natural gas infrastructure are located in the far eastern and
southern regions of Turkey since these are areas that are both mountainous and distant
from the main ports. Once a province gains access to natural gas, a household’s decision
to migrate to natural gas for the purposes of heating and cooking is determined by the
type of housing unit occupied by the household. For single household residential units,
the decision is voluntary. For residential buildings with multiple housing units – the vast
majority of living arrangements in Turkey – a majority decision among the residents is
required in order to change the system to either individual or central heating with natural
gas.9

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
9

Since our unit of analysis is at the province level, we are unable to distinguish the private and public
health benefits associated with natural gas use. However, the analysis at the province level guards us
against the potential endogeneity of a household’s decision to switch to natural gas. Therefore, our
estimates provide the combined effect of natural gas on those who benefit from improved air quality both
privately and publicly.

9	  
	  
	  

III. Data and Descriptive Statistics
Data on Natural Gas Intensity in Turkey
Data on natural gas availability come from the Dogal Gaz Dergisi (the Turkish
Natural Gas Journal).10 The number of provinces with natural gas increased from 5 to 61
between 2001 and 2011 (see Figure 1).11 However, as shown in Figure 2, the rate of
utilization or the intensity of natural gas use has been gradual and is currently far from
complete. Note that there is considerable variation in the rate by which natural gas has
expanded across provinces. To illustrate, we present the rate of intensity of natural gas
expansion for six select provinces, including Istanbul, Izmir, Bursa, Gaziantep, Kocaeli,
and Erzurum in Figure 3. Note that the first four of these provinces are in the top ten with
respect to their populations, while the last two are medium sized provinces. As shown in
the figure, there is considerable variation across provinces both in terms of the timing of
adoption and the growth in the intensity of natural gas.
Time-variant Province Characteristics
We control for a vector of time-variant determinants of infant mortality in our
empirical models. These variables are measured at the province-year level and include
the number of hospitals and hospital beds per 100,000 persons, the percentage of
population with a high school degree, the percentage with a college degree, the number of
students per teacher in secondary schools, the number of motor vehicles per 1,000
persons, the unemployment rate, the number of physicians per 100,000 persons, an
indicator variable for whether the province has a Family Physician Program, and an
indicator variable for whether the political party affiliation of the elected mayor of the
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
10

See http://www.dogalgaz.com.tr/
Appendix Table 1 presents the list of provinces with natural gas infrastructure by 2011 along with the
year of adoption and natural gas intensity in that year.	  
11

10	  
	  
	  

central district of the associated province is the same as the political party governing
Turkey.12 We also control for income per capita, which is only available at the subregional level.13 Data on province populations are obtained from the Turkish Statistical
Institute (TurkStat) for years 2000 and 2007-2011 and from the Turkish Ministry of
Health between 2001 and 2006.14 Information on the Family Physician Program comes
from the Ministry of Health. The remaining control variables are obtained from the
TurkStat.
Table 1 shows the means and standard deviations for these characteristics for the
full sample as well as various sub-samples. The table reveals that the provinces with and
without natural gas differ from each other in a number of characteristics. For example,
provinces with natural gas are more likely to have a central district mayor who is
affiliated with the ruling party. This is not surprising in a country where the central
government maintains major control over resource allocation for local investment
projects. Provinces with access to natural gas also have higher number of motor vehicles,
per capita income, hospital beds and physicians, individuals with college education, and a
higher likelihood of having a family physician program initiated in the province by the
government. Again these differences suggest that natural gas penetration is more likely in
provinces that are wealthier, more urban, and with more educated populations. On the
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
12

We construct dummy variables that equal unity for observations with missing data on the explanatory
variables.
13
According to the Turkish Statistical Institute, Turkey is classified into 12 regions, 26 sub-regions, and 81
provinces. These regions and sub-regions are made up of clusters of provinces that are grouped together
based on geographical convenience and for statistical purposes. The Turkish Statistical Institute is the
official governmental agency, which gathers and processes data from a variety of different sources on
numerous topics ranging from agriculture to health. See http://www.turkstat.gov.tr for more information.
14
Since no Census was conducted between years 2001 and 2006, the province populations for the period
2001-2006 are based on extrapolations implemented by the Ministry of Health. Alternatively, we imputed
the population figures between 2001 and 2006 using province-specific growth rates. Using these values
produce results almost identical to those presented in this paper. These results are available from the
authors upon request.	  

11	  
	  
	  

other hand, there is no difference in unemployment rates between the two types of
provinces.
Infant Mortality Rate in Turkey
We obtained annual province-level infant mortality data from the TurkStat and
Turkish Census Bureau for the periods of 2001-2008 and 2009-2011, respectively.15 Our
analysis sample consists of 877 province-year observations between 2001 and 2011.16 As
shown in Table 1, the average infant mortality rate across all provinces and over the
period between 2001 and 2011 is 9.27. However, the average infant mortality rate is
higher among province-year observations with natural gas than those without natural gas.
Similarly, there is a sharp difference in the rate of infant mortality between provinces,
which gained access to natural gas and those, which never did during our analysis period.
Under-reporting in Infant Mortality Rate
It is widely recognized that official statistics on deaths, especially for infants, are
incomplete in most developing countries due to under-reporting (e.g., Greenstone and
Hanna, 2011; Gruber et al., 2014; Victora and Barros, 2001; Anthopolos and Becker,
2010; Becker et al., 1998; Anderson and Silver, 1986).17 Accordingly, there are usually
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
15

The province level mortality statistics between 2009 and 2011 were not available from the TurkStat at
the time this research was conducted. However, we were able to obtain data for these three years from the
Turkish Census Bureau. The data from the two sources are highly consistent. Moreover, year fixed effects
would largely account for differences in the data collection procedures between the two agencies to the
extent that such differences exist.
16
Fourteen province-year observations with missing information on infant mortality are dropped from the
analysis.
17
For example, Gruber et al. (2014) study the effects of a healthcare reform implemented in Thailand on
health care utilization and infant mortality. The infant mortality rates that they obtain from the Thailand
Ministry of Public Health exhibit large differences from those reported in the World Bank Development
Indicator Database. As they report in Table C1, the vital statistics registry estimates are lower than those of
the World Bank by a factor of about 2.5. In a recent paper examining the impact of environmental
regulations on infant mortality in India, Greenstone and Hanna (in press) report that the city-level infant
mortality data that they employ from Vital Statistics are about a third of the rate documented from state
level surveys. In the absence of data on infant mortality from Indonesia, Jayachandran (2009) imputes
deaths from “missing children” in the 2000 Census.

12	  
	  
	  

vast differences in the infant mortality rates reported by the national statistical offices of
individual countries and those released by international agencies such as the WHO and
United Nations. The statistics compiled by these agencies usually adjust for underreporting by combining information from various demographic surveys, census data, and
the official vital statistics registries, and make certain modeling assumptions in order to
reduce the impact of under-reporting (Gruber et al., 2014; Lopez et al., 2001). The underreporting in the official statistics is caused by several factors. For example, many deaths,
especially those that occur outside of a hospital, go unrecorded (Gruber et al., 2014;
Tangcharoensathien et al., 2006; Anthopolos and Becker, 2010). Under-reporting is
particularly common for home deliveries and in cases where the newborn dies only a very
short period after birth. In fact, it is not uncommon for midwives to announce deaths as
stillbirth rather than a live birth shortly after death out of respect to a grieving family
(Anthopolos and Becker, 2010). In countries like Turkey, the dead are usually buried
shortly (typically before sundown or within hours) after death in accordance with the
Islamic tradition, which may also exacerbate the under-registering of infant deaths. Note
that the under-reporting is mostly one-sided, i.e., there are far more unreported infant
deaths than unreported live births that survive the first year in life (Anthopolos and
Becker, 2010).
To illustrate the differences in data on infant mortality in Turkey across various
sources, we present the average annual mortality rates obtained from three different
agencies in Appendix Table 2. The first two columns report the average mortality rates
based on estimates from the WHO and the United Nations. The third column shows the
infant mortality rate obtained from the TurkStat. It is important to note that province level
13	  
	  
	  

data on infant mortality do not exist from the WHO and the United Nations. The
estimates from the WHO and United Nations rely on data from the TurkStat, summary of
birth histories conducted in the Turkish Censuses, and information from various waves of
the Turkish Demographic and Health Surveys (TDHS).18 Therefore, any difference
between these three estimates arises from a combination of the way each organization
incorporates information from these sources as well as their own adjustments for underreporting. While the national averages of infant mortality rate from the TurkStat are
lower than those from the two other sources in each year, the trends in the TurkStat and
the other two series are similar and the pairwise correlations are very high. In fact, the
pairwise correlations between TurkStat and the series from the WHO and the United
Nations are both 0.97. Furthermore, the measurement error (or under-reporting) in the
infant mortality rate data obtained from TurkStat is not a problem for our analysis as long
as these data are not correlated with the time of adoption and the rate of penetration of
natural gas by Turkish provinces. Even under a scenario where such correlations are
plausible, the province-specific linear and quadratic trends in addition to province fixed
effects included in our models would likely capture those correlations.
To illustrate the issue of measurement error more formally, suppose that the true
infant mortality rate is IMRpt*. Then the observed infant mortality rate can be expressed
as
IMRpt= (1- kpt )IMRpt*
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

	  Among these Turkish data sources, the TurkStat vital statistics are the only source which provides annual
infant mortality rate at the province level. The TDHS are conducted once every 5 years by the Institute of
Population Studies at the Hacettepe University in collaboration with the Turkish Ministry of Health. These
surveys are only representative at the national level, by urban and rural residence. Although the surveys
allow analyses for some of the survey topics for the 12 geographical regions of Turkey, they are
unavailable at the province level. Similarly, the Turkish Censuses are not available on an annual basis, and
it is not possible to derive province level representative infant mortality rates from them either.
18

14	  
	  
	  

where IMRpt*=Actual_Deathspt/Live_birthspt; IMRpt=Reported_Deathspt/Live_birthspt;
and kpt= Unreported_Deathspt/Actual_Deathspt. As long as kpt is uncorrelated with the
natural gas intensity, the estimate of the impact of natural gas utilization on infant
mortality would be unbiased. It is difficult to conceive of a plausible scenario wherein
such a correlation should exist. One argument could be that there might be a positive
correlation between the adoption of natural gas and the overall quality in the government
services in health care. A failure to account for such heterogeneity would then cause the
estimate of the impact of natural gas intensity on infant mortality to be biased upward.
However, if the improved quality of care in hospitals results in an increased proportion of
births delivered in hospitals rather than homes, then the extent of under-reporting in the
infant mortality should go down. In essence, under-reporting should be almost zero if all
births are delivered at hospitals. In that case, our estimate would be biased downward.
Note that, in our regressions, we control for the number of hospitals, hospital beds, and
physicians per capita at the province level as well as an indicator for whether the
province has adopted the Family Physician Program. These variables should capture the
quality of health care delivery services to a large extent. Also the provinces that adopt
natural gas are typically more urban and have a higher average income than others.
Therefore, it is plausible to assume that in these provinces, a smaller proportion of births
are delivered at homes as opposed to hospitals relative to the provinces with low-incomes
and greater share of populations living in rural areas. Furthermore, under-reporting tends
to be larger in poor and less urban provinces (Anthopolos and Becker, 2010), but these
are also the provinces that are less likely to have access to a natural gas infrastructure.19 It
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
19

In fact, the TurkStat vital statistics miss infant deaths from small villages and remote areas due to
reporting errors in death registries. The TurkStat birth statistics, however, cover the entire provinces

15	  
	  
	  

can also be argued that the improvements in the quality of health care services may
account for part of the reduction in infant mortality rate. Note that we further guard
against any bias from such omitted factors that may be correlated with both infant
mortality and the adoption and expansion of natural gas services across provinces by
controlling for province fixed effects and province-specific linear and quadratic time
trends in our models. In addition, we include region-by-year fixed effects in our most
comprehensive specification. As discussed below, our estimate of the impact of natural
gas intensity on infant mortality rate remains remarkably robust to controlling for
province-specific trends and region-by-year fixed effects. Similarly, it can also be argued
that natural gas penetration might have led to increased awareness in the public,
especially among pregnant women, of the harmful effects of air pollution. Then this
might have induced them to engage in avoidance behavior, which might have then
reduced their exposure to air pollution. Although any reduction in infant mortality in this
case can still be attributed to the treatment, the mechanisms would be different under this
scenario. In any case, province-specific linear and quadratic trends along with region-byyear fixed effects would likely control for these unobservable factors.

IV. Identification
It is useful to highlight the differences between provinces with and without a
natural gas infrastructure before we discuss our identification strategy further. To
illustrate these differences, we report results from several regressions in Tables 2A and
2B. Specifically, each cell in column (1) of Table 2A corresponds to an estimate from a
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
including small village and remote area births. Hence, it is not surprising that the infant mortality rates from
the TurkStat appear to be lower than those from other sources.	  

16	  
	  
	  

separate regression, where each of the time-varying province characteristic is regressed
on a binary indicator for whether a province has natural gas along with year fixed effects.
Not surprisingly, the estimates in column (1) support the argument made above, i.e.,
those provinces with and without natural gas exhibit differences on a wide range of
characteristics. However, accounting for permanent differences across provinces through
province fixed effects in column (2) mitigates many of these differences both statistically
and in magnitude. When we further add province-specific linear and quadratic trends and
region-by-year fixed effects in the subsequent three columns, we observe that none of the
characteristics considered in this analysis is associated with natural gas adoption at the
province level. We obtain a very similar pattern when we repeat the same analysis using
the natural gas intensity in Table 2B.
To gain further insights about the differences in observable characteristics
between provinces with and without a natural gas infrastructure, we next run regressions
of the binary indicator of natural gas infrastructure and the rate of natural gas subscribers
on jointly specified time-varying province characteristics. These results are shown in
Tables 3A and 3B. Again, many of the control variables are significantly associated with
the presence of a natural gas infrastructure or the natural gas intensity in column (1),
lending support to the notion that distribution of natural gas networks across provinces is
non-random and thus could reflect some of the observed and unobserved factors that
might also be correlated with infant mortality. However, all of these differences become
statistically insignificant and much smaller in magnitude once we account for province
fixed effects along with province-specific linear and quadratic trends and region-by-year
fixed effects through columns (2) and (5). This is also evidenced from the F-statistics and
17	  
	  
	  

the corresponding p-values reported at the bottom of the table, which underscore the
overall insignificance of all these characteristics once fixed effects and trends are
accounted for. We interpret these findings as strong evidence demonstrating that any
remaining variation in the binary natural gas indicator or natural gas intensity in column
(5) is plausibly exogenous to infant mortality.
A relevant question to consider is whether there could be other province level
policy changes that might be correlated with our treatment. We could not identify any
such policy that has been rolled out in conjunction with natural gas investments. It is
important to note that the central government has the ultimate authority for passing laws
and implementing policies related to energy and health in Turkey. Consequently, these
policies are either implemented at the national level (e.g., health insurance expansion) or
they start as a pilot program and then become effective nationwide.20 To account for the
possibility of differential investments by the central government at the provincial level,
we control for whether the central district mayor of the province is affiliated with the
governing political party. Additionally, we control for a full set of region-by-year fixed
effects, which should also capture some of these factors.
Note that our identification strategy does not require the levels in infant mortality
rates between provinces with and without natural gas to be equal prior to the adoption of
natural gas. Rather, it assumes that, in the absence of natural gas adoption, the rates of
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
20

It can also be argued natural gas adoption and intensity may influence migration decisions of households
between provinces without natural gas and those with natural gas. The internal migration decisions are
almost entirely determined by economic factors in Turkey and the flow of migration has been from rural to
urban provinces in recent decades. To the extent that families migrating into provinces with natural gas are
from low socio-economic status, our estimates would be a lower bound. Data on the proportion of migrants
by province are available from the TurkStat only for the period 2008-2011. We estimated models of
migration as a function of natural gas adoption and expansion along with other control variables. The
estimates on the two natural gas variables were both small and imprecisely estimated, suggesting that
migration decisions are unrelated to natural gas. These results are available from the authors upon request.

18	  
	  
	  

infant mortality could have trended similarly between the two types of provinces.
Although we cannot test this assumption directly, we further assess the credibility of our
research design by examining whether there are any systematic changes in infant
mortality prior to provinces gaining access to natural gas. This can be done using an
event study analysis, which would allow us to trace out the trend in the infant mortality rate
year-by-year for the periods leading up to and following access to a natural gas infrastructure.
In practice, we implement this by estimating a regression of the logarithm of infant

mortality rate on a set of indicators for the years to and from the year of adoption of
natural gas up to five years, along with province and year fixed effects. The estimates
from this analysis, which are shown in Figure 4A, suggest no evidence of systematic
changes in infant mortality in the years prior to gaining access to a natural gas
infrastructure. Therefore, it is unlikely that our results simply reflect continuation of preexisting trends. Next, we plot the logarithm of infant mortality rate against the measure of
natural gas intensity net of province and year fixed effects. As shown in Figure 4B, the
relationship between the infant mortality rate and natural gas intensity has the expected
negative sign once province and year fixed effects are accounted for. In addition to
province and year fixed effects, we also allow province-specific unobservables to trend
differently by controlling for province-specific linear and quadratic time trends in our
specifications. Therefore, conditional on the time-variant characteristics, fixed effects,
and provincial time trends, we are assessing whether provinces with a more rapid
penetration of natural gas have also experienced a more rapid decrease in infant mortality
than other provinces. Taken together, Figures 4A and 4B set the stage for our empirical
analysis, which is more formally described below.
19	  
	  
	  

V. Empirical Framework
If the widespread increase in the consumption of natural gas has indeed led to
improvements in infant mortality through reducing air pollution, then we would expect a
negative relationship between natural gas intensity and air pollution. In fact, there is
evidence to suggest that the increase in natural gas consumption has resulted in a
significant reduction in air pollution (Kaygusuz, 2007). Despite such anecdotal evidence,
we further motivate our main analysis by estimating a regression model for the impact of
the intensity of natural gas on a measure of air pollution, controlling for a set of province
characteristics along with province, year, and region-by-year fixed effects. Our air
pollution measure is particulate matter (PM10), which we obtained from the Turkish
Ministry of Health.21 The results from this regression are shown in Appendix Table 3.
The point estimate on the measure of natural gas intensity indicates that a one-percentage
point increase in the natural gas services subscription rate is associated with a statistically
significant 4 percent reduction in the level of particulate matter. This first stage analysis
also sets the stage for why natural gas intensity could actually matter for infant mortality.
In order to formally investigate the impact of provincial natural gas adoption on
infant mortality, we begin by a reduced form model expressed in the following form:22

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
21

Air pollution measure is the averages computed by the provincial meteorology centers. In calculating
annual averages, measurements are taken for a minimum of 21 days for each month for at least nine
months. Note that we have this measure only for the sub-period of 2002-2010 for an unbalanced panel.
However, majority of the missing observations on pollution variables come from the period prior to 2007.
In the end, we have 490 year and province observations on particulate matter. The descriptive statistics in
Table 1 indicate that the average levels of particulate matter are lower in provinces that have accessed to a
natural gas infrastructure at some point during our analysis period.
22
Note that equation (1) can be rewritten as log(IMRpt*)= Xpt βo + β1Any_Natural_Gaspt + µpt, where µpt=εpt
– log(1-kpt). Therefore, as long as kpt is uncorrelated with the natural gas indicator, the estimate of β1 would
be unbiased.

20	  
	  
	  

log(IMRpt) = Xpt βo + β1Any_Natural_Gaspt + εpt,

(1)

where IMRpt represents the infant mortality rate reported for province p and in year t.23
Xpt is a set of exogenous determinants of infant mortality described above. The variable,
Any_Natural_Gaspt, is a binary indicator for whether the province p has natural gas in
year t. The εpt is the error term. Equation (1) estimates the effect of a binary treatment,
which is also the most frequently employed approach in the relevant literature. The
coefficient β1 would measure any permanent shift in infant mortality rate associated with
the adoption of natural gas, independent of the intensity of natural gas utilization in a
province. It is important to note that once a province adopts natural gas, the process by
which its intensity increases within the province is dynamic, i.e. it evolves gradually over
time. However, a specification with a binary natural gas indicator would fail to
appropriately capture the dynamic nature of this diffusion process over time, leading to a
biased estimate of the actual treatment.24 This issue may be particularly important in this
case, where the intensity of treatment exposure changes considerably across provinces
and over time. Furthermore, policymakers may be interested in the effects of different
levels of natural gas intensity, which cannot be discovered by using a binary treatment
model. To resolve this issue, we pursue a specification that explicitly models the dynamic
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
23

It is common to use the log of infant mortality rate as opposed to the level in similar contexts (e.g.,
Murtin, in press; Ruhm, 2000; Tanaka, 2005; Farahani et al., 2009; Anand and Baernighausen, 2004; Flegg,
1982; Jamison et al., 2004). Those provinces in the treatment category that already have low rates of infant
mortality may experience only small improvements in their infant mortality rate in response to the adoption
of natural gas. This may be in contrast to provinces with high levels of infant mortality rate, which may
experience large swings in infant mortality. However, we also estimate our models using the level of infant
mortality rate as the outcome and the results from these models are similar to those presented here and are
available from the authors upon request.
24
As an example, consider the extreme case where every province has a natural gas infrastructure in place,
but nobody utilizes it as a source of fuel. Since our treatment indicator is defined at the province level, a
binary treatment model may fail to reveal the effect of actual utilization in this case, which should be zero.

21	  
	  
	  

nature of the treatment. In this specification we replace the binary indicator of any
natural gas in equation (1) with a continuous measure:

log(IMRpt) = Xpt βo + β1Natural_Gas_Intensitypt + εpt,

(2)

where Natural_Gas_Intensitypt represents the measure of natural gas intensity defined as
the number of natural gas service subscribers per 100 persons in province p and in year t.
The number of subscribers is the total number of household and business units with
access to natural gas. The coefficient β1 would then represent the impact of the rate of
natural gas intensity on infant mortality rate. However, the causal interpretation of the
coefficient β1 is complicated due to omitted variables that are likely to be correlated with
both the availability of natural gas infrastructure and infant mortality. For example, as
shown in Table 1, provinces with natural gas infrastructure are more likely to be urban,
industrial, and with more motor vehicles per capita. Therefore, these provinces may also
have higher levels of infant mortality despite gaining access to a natural gas
infrastructure. In order to control for the impact of these factors, we rely on the
longitudinal nature of our data and incorporate a series of fixed effects into equation (2):

log(IMRpt) = Xpt β0 + β1Natural_Gas_Intensitypt + ωp + λt + τpt + τ2pt + εpt,

(3)

where ωp is a set of province fixed effects that would capture any permanent differences
across provinces and λt is set of year fixed effects that would account for any unobserved
factors common to all provinces. It is important to note that if Natural Gas Intensity
22	  
	  
	  

properly captures the dynamic nature of the treatment, then the estimate of β1 should not
be sensitive to controlling for province-specific trends as there would be little variation
left for these trends to capture or any remaining variation would be uncorrelated with the
intensity measure. Despite our prediction, we estimate specifications that control for
province-specific linear and quadratic time trends as denoted by τpt and τ2pt in equation
(3). Finally, we further enrich the specification in equation (3) by controlling for regionby-year fixed effects that would account for any spillovers to neighboring provinces as
well as any time-variant differences in unobserved heterogeneity that are common to
provinces within a region.25

VI. Results
We begin by presenting the estimates of the impact of Any Natural Gas on the
logarithm of infant mortality rate in Table 4A. Column (1) presents the estimate for the
binary indicator of any natural gas adoption on infant mortality without any control
variables. Column (2) adds year fixed effects and column (3) incorporates both year and
province fixed effects that control for permanent differences across provinces. In columns
(4) and (5), we add province-specific linear and quadratic time trends, respectively, and
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
25

The heavier economic activity in certain regions like Marmara, which includes major urban and
industrial hubs like Istanbul, Bursa, and Kocaeli, may have spillover effects on all the other provinces
within that region. For example, Bursa and Istanbul are connected to each other through highly congested
routes that have to pass through Yalova, a smaller and less urban province within the same region.
Therefore, any air pollution, for example caused by the traffic congestion between Bursa and Istanbul, may
also contaminate the air in Yalova. Controlling for region-by-year fixed effects would mitigate concerns
about the aggregate impact of these factors. As mentioned previously, the capital expenditures for natural
gas network expansions are provided by the central government. Due to economies of scale, provinces
within a particular region may gain access to a natural gas infrastructure as a cluster or soon after each
other, though we do not see such a pattern in Appendix Table 1. It is also possible that households in
regions experiencing rapid economic growth may collectively advocate for increased natural gas
availability in their regions. Therefore, in addition to accounting for regional income shocks, controlling for
region specific time dummies would also account for factors such as the availability and expansions of
natural gas networks at the regional level.

23	  
	  
	  

in column (6) we control for time-varying province characteristics. Finally, in column (7)
we show estimates from a specification that also accounts for region-by-year fixed
effects. Standard errors are robust to any form of heteroscedasticity and clustered at the
province level to allow for correlation within a province (Bertrand et al., 2004).
The estimates in the first two columns of Table 4A are positive, suggesting that
natural gas infrastructure is positively correlated with infant mortality. This is consistent
with the earlier evidence that we presented, and suggests that provinces with and without
natural gas infrastructure differ in ways that are correlated with infant mortality. For
example, provinces with natural gas are more likely to be urban and industrial than
others. Since urbanization and industrialization are likely to be positively correlated with
infant mortality, failing to control for these differences would cause the estimate on any
natural gas indicator to be biased downward, and like in our case, to possibly to switch
sign. As expected, accounting for permanent province characteristics in column (3)
makes a dramatic impact on the estimate of the effect of any natural gas and causes its
sign to switch to negative. Specifically, once we control for province fixed effects, having
access to a natural gas infrastructure is associated with a 27.1 percent decrease in the
infant mortality rate. However, as we explained in the previous section, it is unlikely that
this estimate actually draws an accurate picture of a treatment whose dosage increases
gradually. In fact, it becomes small in size and statistically insignificant when we add
province-specific linear and quadratic time trends in columns (4) and (5). At first glance,
the finding that the estimate on the binary natural gas indicator is sensitive to the
inclusion of province-specific trends appears to be at odds with the notion that the timing
of the adoption of natural gas is exogenous.
24	  
	  
	  

However, the dynamic nature of the

treatment (i.e., gradual increase in the intensity of natural gas use) is unlikely to be
accounted for by a binary treatment model.26 Therefore, province-specific trends are
likely to capture not only the differences in pre-existing trends across provinces, but also
the differences in the diffusion of the natural gas intensity subsequent to the adoption of
natural gas.27 As a result, the coefficient on the any natural gas indicator in this
specification is likely to be a biased estimate of its counterfactual.
This takes us to our preferred specification, which replaces the binary indicator of
any natural gas with the continuous natural gas intensity measure. The results from the
dynamic response model are presented in Table 4B.28 Similar to the results presented in
Table 4A, the estimate on the natural gas intensity variable is still positive and
statistically significant in columns (1) and (2). However, once province fixed effects are
controlled for in column (3), the estimate switches sign and becomes negative in line with
our predictions. In the following two columns, we present estimates from specifications,
which successively add province-specific linear and quadratic trends. Consistent with our
predictions earlier, allowing for differential trends in the infant mortality rate across
provinces does not cause any appreciable change to the estimate on the impact of natural
gas intensity. According to the point estimate in column (5), a one-percentage point
increase in the natural gas intensity would lower the infant mortality rate by 4.1 percent.
If our identification strategy is credible, then the province fixed effects and trends
should capture all of the time-variant and -invariant factors correlated with both natural
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
26

We thank an anonymous referee for pointing this out.
Note that this problem is similar to the one in Wolfers (2006), who examines the impact of unilateral
divorce laws on divorce rates.
28
We also estimated weighted regressions using the mean population density and birth density as weights.
These estimations, shown in Appendix Table 4, did not cause any appreciable changes to the results
presented here.
27

25	  
	  
	  

gas intensity and infant mortality. Therefore, as indicated by Tables 2A through 3B,
adding time-variant characteristics of provinces should not cause any appreciable changes
to our estimates. As shown in column (6), this is indeed the case in our analysis. In
particular, controlling for a comprehensive set of time-varying differences across
provinces does not change the estimate on the impact of natural gas intensity on infant
mortality. In essence, once permanent differences across provinces are accounted for, the
natural gas intensity can be considered as a natural experiment. Finally, in column (7) we
present the results from a specification that also controls for region-by-year fixed effects
along with all the other variables included in the previous columns. Controlling for
region-by-year fixed effects is likely to help mitigate the impact of positive spillovers on
air quality enjoyed by provinces without natural gas that are bordered to provinces in the
treatment group as well as to account for any differences in governmental policies
implemented at the regional level, such as healthcare interventions and university
research hospitals that typically serve entire regions. As it turns out, controlling for
region-by-year fixed effects leaves the estimated coefficient on natural gas intensity
unaffected. In particular, the coefficient estimate presented in column (7) indicates that
the effect of natural gas intensity on the rate of infant mortality is 3.9 percent.
Next we conduct some back of the envelope calculations to put these estimates
into context. For instance, as shown in Table 1, the average natural gas intensity is 7.9 per
100 persons in province-year observations with a natural gas infrastructure. In 2011, there
were 8,714 infant deaths for 1,087,933 births in the provinces with a natural gas
infrastructure, resulting in an infant mortality rate of about 8 per 1,000 births. Holding the
number of births constant, this would suggest that there could be approximately 340
26	  
	  
	  

fewer infant deaths in these provinces in 2011 in response to a one-percentage point
increase in the natural gas intensity.
Robustness and Sensitivity Analyses
The results presented above could be driven by both a decrease in the numerator
(number of children who die in their first year) and an increase in the denominator (the
number of live births). For example, the infant mortality rate could go down due to an
increase in the denominator if the natural gas adoption is associated with an increase in
the overall quality of health care services. As explained previously, this is unlikely since
we control for the number of hospitals and hospital beds per capita along with the number
of physicians per capita and an indicator for whether the province implements a family
physician program. Furthermore, province level linear and quadratic trends should also
help gauge these effects. Another possibility is that the improvements in air quality might
lead to a reduction in the number of stillbirths and miscarriages, which would then result
in an increase in the number of live births. We test this hypothesis by estimating our
models with the logarithm of infant deaths as the dependent variable and the logarithm of
births as an additional control variable (Arceo-Gomez, Hanna, and Oliva, 2012). As
presented in Panel A of Table 5, performing this test yields estimates that are largely
consistent with those in Table 4B when province fixed effects, province-specific linear
and quadratic time trends and region-by-year fixed-effects are specified. Therefore, it is
unlikely that our results are driven by an increase in births. Next, we estimate models
using the logarithm of births as the outcome. As shown in Panel B of Table 5, the
estimates in specifications from columns (3) to (7) are all zero, suggesting that natural
gas adoption does not have an effect on the number of babies born.
27	  
	  
	  

Note that we use data from all 81 Turkish provinces in our analysis. Among these
provinces, 20 of them have never gained access to a natural gas infrastructure during the
period of our analysis. To test for the possibility that there is something fundamentally
different about these provinces that might be affecting our results, we estimate our
models excluding these provinces from the analysis. Results from the estimation of these
models are presented in Panel A of Table 6. The pattern obtained here is
indistinguishable from the one in Table 4B. Specifically, the estimate in our richest
specification shown in column (7) is -0.041, which is nearly identical to the one in Table
4B.
Next we assess whether our results are driven by provinces, which have always
had natural gas during the period of our analysis. In the first test, we estimate our models
by excluding Istanbul, which, with its 13.5 million citizens, accounts for over 18 percent
of Turkey’s total population.29 As shown in Panel B of Table 6, the results again remain
almost identical to those in Table 4B when we perform this exercise. In Panel C, we
repeat the same test by excluding, Ankara, Bursa, Eskisehir, Istanbul and Kocaeli, which
are the provinces that have always had access to natural gas during our analysis period.
Again, excluding these provinces from our analysis does not affect the estimate on the
natural gas intensity. Taken together, results presented in Table 6 suggest that the main

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
29

Istanbul is also one of the largest urban and busiest agglomerations in the world and responsible for over
a quarter of Turkey’s GDP. Concurrent with the expansion of natural gas infrastructure, Istanbul has
experienced a rapid transformation in a multitude of dimensions during the period of our analysis. For
example, it experienced a surge in the number of private hospitals, which doubled in numbers between
2000 and 2005. Although we control for a number of variables related to the capacity and quality of health
delivery services in our models, it can still be argued that there remain other related factors that might have
coincided with the expansion of natural gas services. One particular candidate is the mass-transit
underground railway network, which entered service in 2000 and has caused a major relief in traffic
congestion. Then the question is whether and to what extent the control variables and various fixed effects
in our models account for these developments in a potential outlier like Istanbul.

28	  
	  
	  

finding obtained in Table 4B is not driven by any systematic differences between
provinces with and without natural gas.
The specifications we discuss above assume that the natural gas intensity is
linearly related to the infant mortality rate. However, this does not have to be the case if,
for example, reductions in air pollution are more beneficial at higher levels of air
pollution than lower levels of pollution. Then any gains in infant mortality associated
with the intensity of natural gas use may be higher at the early stages of adoption to
natural gas than later stages. To assess the possibility of a non-linear relationship between
natural gas intensity and infant mortality rate, we estimate our main specification with
both linear and quadratic measures of natural gas intensity. This exercise does not change
any of the implications of the previously discussed results. Specifically, the estimates on
the linear and quadratic terms for natural gas intensity in the most comprehensive
specification (column 7) are -0.061 and 0.001, respectively, where only the former is
statistically significant at the 10 percent level. Given that the quadratic term is zero in
both economical and statistical terms, the causal relationship between natural gas
intensity and infant mortality rate is likely to be a linear one.
Note that our intensity of natural gas variable is defined as the number of
subscribers to natural gas services per 100 persons. It may be argued that it would be
more informative to produce estimates based on a measure of natural gas intensity using
the number of households in a given province and year. Unfortunately, the TurkStat
sources provide information on the province level household figures only for 2000 and
2011. Nevertheless, we generated proxy figures for the province level household numbers
for each of the 81 province for all other years assuming that the rate of growth for the
29	  
	  
	  

number of household is linear over time. Using these proxy figures, we then constructed a
measure of natural gas intensity per 100 households and estimated our main specification
with this new measure. Results from this exercise do not change any of the implications
presented above. More specifically, the estimate on the proxy measure of subscribers per
100 households is -0.011 (p=0.05), suggesting that a one-percent increase in the natural
gas intensity per 100 households would lead to a 1.1 percent decrease in infant mortality
rate. If there are approximately 3 to 4 persons per household, then the effect size of 1.1,
which is roughly a quarter of the magnitude of our main estimate, is sensible.
A closer look over Figures 1 and 2 reveals that province level natural gas
subscriptions rate exhibited a tenfold increase among the provinces with natural gas
between 2001 and 2011, and these increases mainly took place after 2005. Accordingly,
if we take 2001 as the reference year, the effect of natural gas intensity on the rate of
infant mortality should be relatively greater towards the end of the analysis period (e.g.,
2011) in comparison to a time when provinces had just started to adopt natural gas (i.e.,
2005). To explore whether this is the case, we re-estimate our models by using two data
points as the initial and end dates for each province for the periods 2001-05, 2001-07,
2001-09, and 2001-11, respectively. This implementation is similar to the long-difference
estimate used in several other studies (e.g., Acemoglu and Johnson, 2007) and would
allow us to further test whether our results are driven by the systematic differences
between provinces with and without natural gas. Specifically, if the long-difference
estimates between 2001 and the middle of the analysis period (i.e., 2005 or 2007) are
similar to the long-difference estimates between 2001 and the end of the analysis period
(i.e., 2009 or 2011), then it is possible that our results reflect a combination of factors that
30	  
	  
	  

make the two types of provinces different from each other in ways correlated with infant
mortality. In line with our prediction, the estimates on natural gas intensity are small (0.004 and -0.013) and neither are significant when we consider 2005 or 2007 as the end
points of the analysis. However, the estimate becomes larger and significant as we
approach towards the end of our analysis period. For example, if we consider 2009 and
2011 as our end points, the long-difference estimates on natural gas intensity are -0.044
and -0.049.

VII. Discussion and Conclusions
Industrialization and economic development have brought with it dramatic
improvements in living conditions of vast populations in developing countries through
higher incomes and better health care. However, these benefits have come at the
substantial cost of deterioration in environmental conditions and air quality, which
threatens some of the gains achieved by these countries. Furthermore, there are very few
viable policy options or enforcement mechanisms available to developed countries or
international environmental organizations that could induce developing countries to take
meaningful steps toward addressing environmental problems. One policy instrument
commonly used to control air pollution is regulations. However, there are serious
challenges to implementing regulations successfully, especially in developing countries,
due to weak governance and corruption problems. Furthermore, concerns over global
climate change are often sidelined in these countries due to a strong desire to maintain
robust economic growth. Under these circumstances, natural gas has emerged as an
increasingly attractive source of fuel and one that could help efforts to limit carbon
31	  
	  
	  

emissions globally without causing interruptions in the mounting energy needs of these
countries in the short run.
In this paper, we consider the impact of widespread expansion of natural gas
services for residential and commercial use on the rate of infant mortality in Turkey. To
identify this impact, we utilize the variation in the timing of deployment and intensity of
expansion of natural gas infrastructures across Turkish provinces between 2001 and
2011. Our results indicate that the expansion of natural gas services has led to a
significant reduction in the rate of infant mortality. The estimate from our most
comprehensive specification indicates that a one-percentage point increase in the rate of
subscriptions to natural gas services would cause the infant mortality rate to decrease by
3.9 percent.
The estimates from the first stage, i.e., the impact of natural gas intensity on
particulate matter, and the reduced form, i.e., the impact of natural gas intensity on the
rate of infant mortality, can be combined together to produce an instrumental variables
estimate of the structural relationship between air pollution and infant mortality. In
particular,

∂log(IMR)/∂PM10

can

be

rewritten

as

[∂log(IMR)/∂(Natural

Gas

Intensity)]/[∂PM10/∂(Natural Gas Intensity)]. As shown in Tables 4B and Appendix
Table 3, both the numerator and the denominator on the right-hand-side of this expression
are close to -0.04 suggesting that the elasticity estimate for the IMR with respect to PM10
is close to unity. It is important to note that the validity of the instrumental variables
estimate hinges on the assumption that the expansion of natural gas networks can only
affect infant mortality through its effect on air pollution once time-varying province
characteristics and fixed effects are controlled for. This assumption would be violated if
32	  
	  
	  

other factors exist, such as energy prices or other unmeasured air pollutants that might be
influenced by natural gas expansion. To the extent that these factors are not accounted
for by our controls, the IV estimate would be biased. Therefore, the IV estimate should be
viewed only as suggestive and caution must be exercised in its interpretation. Keeping
this limitation in mind, we next compare our elasticity estimate to those obtained in
several previous studies. For example, our estimate is particularly consistent with that of
Tanaka (2012), who reports an elasticity of 0.95 for particulate matter in a study of the
impact of air pollution on infant mortality in China. Focusing on the estimates derived
from the United State context, the elasticity estimates for particulate matter documented
by Chay and Greenstone (2003a), Currie, Neidell, and Schmieder (2009), and Currie and
Neidell (2005) are 0.285, -0.008, and 0.001, respectively.30 In a recent study focusing on
Mexico, Arceo-Gomez, Hanna, and Oliva (2012) find an elasticity of 0.42 for particulate
matter, which is smaller than our estimate, but larger than those generally reported for the
United States. To the extent that our estimate is larger than those reported by studies
using data from the United States and consistent with those obtained for China, and to
some extent, Mexico, the number of lives of infants saved due to improved air quality is
likely to be higher in the developing countries than it is in the developed countries.31
The results in this paper are especially useful in light of the ongoing public and
political debate about the future of fracking revolution that has recently started in the
United States and is now spreading elsewhere. Advocates argue that there may be real
environmental benefits to fracking because natural gas replaces dirty coal. As suggested
by our findings, the health benefits of widespread replacement of coal by natural gas can
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
30

These figures are obtained from Table 8 in Arceo-Gomes, Hanna, and Oliva (2012).
One exception is Knittel, Miller, and Sanders (2011), who find an effect corresponding to an elasticity of
1.88 in a study of the impact of air pollution on infant mortality in California.
31

33	  
	  
	  

indeed be nontrivial. However, fracking has also its sharp critiques, who worry about the
potential negative impacts of this practice on the environment. Until the environmental
consequences of fracking are fully assessed, the net effect of this practice on health will
remain ambiguous.

34	  
	  
	  

References
Acemoglu, D. and Johnson, S. (2007). ‘Disease and development: The effect of life
expectancy on economic growth’, Journal of Political Economy, vol. 115(6), pp. 925-85.
Acemoglu, D., Aghion, P., Bursztyn, L., and Hemous, D. (2012). ‘The Environment and
Directed Technical Change’, The American Economic Review, 102(1), pp. 131-166.
Anand, S. and Baernighausen, T. (2004). ‘Human resources and health outcomes: crosscountry econometric study’, Lancet, vol. 364, pp. 1603-9.
Anderson, B.A. and Silver, B.D. (1986). ‘Infant mortality in the Soviet Union: Regional
differences and measurement issues’, Population and Development Review, vol. 12(4),
pp. 705-38.
Anthopolos, R. and Becker, C.M. (2010). ‘Global infant mortality: Correcting for
undercounting’, World Development, vol. 38(4), pp. 467-81.
Aras, H. and Aras, N. (2005). ‘Eskişehir’de konutsal doğal gaz talebine ekonomik
göstergelerin ve dış ortam sıcaklığının etkileri’, Mühendis ve Makine Dergisi, vol.
46(540), pp. 20-7.
Arceo-Gomez, E. O., Hanna, R. and Oliva, P. (2012). ‘Does the effect of pollution on
infant mortality differ between developing and developed countries? Evidence from
Mexico City’, NBER Working Paper No.18349.
Becker, C.M., Bibosunova, D., Holmes, G. and Ibragimova, M. (1998). ‘Maternal care
vs. economic wealth and the health of newborns: Bishkek, Kyrgyz Republic and Kansas
City, USA’, World Development, vol. 26(11), pp. 2057-72.
Bertrand, M., Duflo, E.and Mullainathan, S. (2004). ‘How much should we trust
differences-in-differences estimates?’ Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 119(1), pp.
249-75.
Caulton, D., Shepson, B., Santoro, R., Sparks, J., Howarth, R., Ingraffea, A., Cambaliza,
M., Sweeney, C., Karion, A., Davis, K., Stirm, B., Montzka, S. and Miller, B. (2014).
‘Toward a better understanding and quantification of methane emissions from shale gas
development’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Science of the United States of
America, 111(17), 6237-6242.
Chay, K. and Greenstone, M. (2003a). ‘The Impact of air pollution on infant mortality:
Evidence from geographic variation in pollution shocks induced by a recession’,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 118, pp. 1121-67.
Chay, K. and Greenstone, M. (2003b). ‘Air quality, infant mortality, and the Clean Air
Act of 1970’, NBER Working Paper No. 10053.
35	  
	  
	  

Currie, J., Greenstone, M. and Moretti, E. (2011). ‘Superfund cleanups and infant health’,
American Economic Review, vol. 101(3), pp. 435-41.
Currie, J. and Neidell, M. (2005). ‘Air pollution and infant health: What can we learn
from California's recent experience?’ Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 120(3), pp.
1003-30.
Currie, J., Neidell, M. and Schmieder, J. F. (2009). ‘Air pollution and infant health:
Lessons from New Jersey’, Journal of Health Economics, vol. 28(3), pp. 688-703.
Currie, J. and Walker, R. (2011). ‘Traffic congestion and infant health: Evidence from
EZPass’, American Economic Journals-Applied Economics, vol. 3(1), pp. 65-90.
Dejmek, J., Solanský, I., Benes, I., Lenícek, J. and Srám, R. J. (2000). ‘The impact of
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and fine particles on pregnancy outcome’,
Environmental Health Perspectives, vol. 108(12), pp. 1159-64.
Farahani, M., Subramanian, S. and Canning, D. (2009). ‘The effect of changes in health
sector resources on infant mortality in the short-run and the long-run: A longitudinal
econometric analysis’, Social Science & Medicine, vol. 68(11), pp. 1918-25.
Finkel, M.L. (2011). ‘The rush to drill for natural gas: a public health cautionary tale’,
American Journal of Public Health, vol. 101(5), pp. 784-5.
Flegg, A.T. (1982). ‘Inequality of income, illiteracy and medical care as determinants of
infant mortality in underdeveloped countries’, Population Studies, vol. 36, pp. 441-58.
Greenstone, M. and Hanna, R. (in press). ‘Environmental regulations, air and water
pollution, and infant mortality in India.’ Forthcoming in American Economic Review
(also NBER Working Paper No.17210).
Gruber, J., Hendren, N. and Townsend, R.M. (2014). ‘The great equalizer: Health care
access and infant mortality in Thailand’, American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, vol. 6(1), pp. 91-107.
Ha, E.H., Hong, Y.C., Lee, B.E., Woo, B.H., Schwartz, J. and Christiani, D.C. (2001). ‘Is
air pollution a risk factor for low birth weight in Seoul?’, Epidemiology, vol. 12(6), pp.
643-8.
International Energy Agency. (2009). Natural Gas Information 2009. Paris: OECD/IEA
International Energy Agency. (2011). Natural Gas Information 2011. Paris: OECD/IEA.
International Energy Agency. (2012). Natural Gas Information 2012. Paris: OECD/IEA.
36	  
	  
	  

Jamison, D., Sandbu, M. and Wang, J. (2004). ‘Why Has Infant Mortality Decreased at
Such Different Rates in Different Countries?’, Disease Control Priorities Project.
Jayachandran, S. (2009). ‘Air quality and early-life mortality: evidence from Indonesia's
wildfires’, Journal of Human Resources, vol. 44(4), pp. 916-54.
Kaygusuz, K. (2007). ‘Energy use and air pollution issues in Turkey’, CLEAN–Soil, Air,
Water, 35(6), 539-547.
Knittel, C, Miller, D.L. and Sanders, N.J. (2011). ‘Caution, drivers! Children present:
Traffic, pollution, and infant Health’, NBER Working Paper No. 17222.
Krupp, F. (2014). ‘Don’t just drill baby. Drill carefully: How to making fracking safer for
the
environment’,
Foreign
Affairs,
May-June
issue.
Retrieved
from
http://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/141204/fred-krupp/dont-just-drill-baby-drillcarefully
Li, N., Sioutas, C., Cho, A., Schmitz, D., Misra, C., Sempf, J. and Nel, A. (2003).
‘Ultrafine particulate pollutants induce oxidative stress and mitochondrial damage’,
Environmental Health Perspectives, vol. 111(4), 455-60.
Lopez, A., Ahmad, O., Guillot, M., Inoue, M., Ferguson, B. and Salomon, J. (2001).
Health Systems Performance Assessment Peer Review Technical Documentation. IV
Outcomes: Population Health - Life tables for 191 countries for 2000: data, methods,
results. World Health Organization: Evidence and Information for Policy.
Maisonet, M., Correa, A., Misra, D. and Jaakkola, J.J.K. (2004). ‘A review of the
literature on the effects of ambient air pollution on fetal growth’, Environmental
Research, vol. 95(1), pp. 106-15.
Mash, R., Minnaar, J. and Mash, B. (2014). ‘Health and fracking: Should the medical
profession be concerned’, Medicine and the Environment, vol. 104(5), pp. 332-5.
Mitka, M. (2012). ‘Rigorous evidence slim for determining health risks from natural gas
fracking’, Journal of the American Medical Association, vol. 307(20), pp. 2135-6.
Morse, E. (2014). ‘Welcome to the revolution: Why shale is the next shale’, Foreign
Affairs,
May-June
issue.
Retrieved
from
http://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/141202/edward-l-morse/welcome-to-therevolution
Murtin, F. (Forthcoming). ‘Long-term Determinants of the Demographic Transition:
1870-2000’, Review of Economics and Statistics.

37	  
	  
	  

Paltsev, S., Jacoby, H.D., Reilly, J.M., Ejaz, Q.J., O’Sullivan, F., Morris, J., Rausch, S.,
Winchester, N. and Kragha, O. (2011). ‘The future of U.S. natural gas production, use,
and trade’, Energy Policy, vol. 38(9), pp. 5309-12.
Podesta, J.D. and Wirth, T.E. (2009). Natural Gas: A Bridge Fuel for the 21st Century.
Center for American Progress.
Ruhm, C. (2000). ‘Parental leave and child health’, Journal of Health Economics, vol.
19(6), pp. 931-960.
Siddiqui, A.R., Gold, E.B., Yang, X., Lee, K., Brown, K.H. and Bhutta, Z.A. (2008).
‘Prenatal exposure to wood fuel smoke and low birth weight’, Environmental Health
Perspectives, vol. 116(4), pp. 543-9.
Tanaka, Sakiko. (2005). ‘Parental leave and child health across OECD countries’,
Economic Journal, vol. 115(501), pp. F7-F28.
Tanaka, Shinsuke. (2012). ‘Environmental regulations on air pollution in China and their
impact on infant mortality’, Working Paper, Hiroshima University, Graduate School for
International Development and Cooperation (IDEC).
Tangcharoensathien, V., Faramnuayphol, P., Teokul, W., Bundhamcharoen, K. and
Wibulpholprasert, S. (2006). ‘A critical assessment of mortality statistics in Thailand:
potential for improvements’, Bulletin of the World Health Organization, vol. 84(3), pp.
233-8.
Victora, C.G. and Barros, F.C. (2001). ‘Infant mortality due to perinatal causes in Brazil:
trends, regional patterns and possible interventions’, Sao Paolo Medical Journal, vol.
191(1), pp. 33-42.
Wolfers, J. (2006). "Did Unilateral Divorce Laws Raise Divorce Rates? A Reconciliation
and New Results." American Economic Review, vol. 96(5), pages 1802-1820.

38	  
	  
	  

31 36
5

13

20

Number of Provinces

54

61

Figure 1: Number of Provinces with Natural Gas Infrastructure

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006
Year

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Note: There are 81 provinces in Turkey
Source: Natural Gas Journal

	  

Figure 2: The Number of Subscriptions to Natural Gas

6
4
0

2

Natural Gas Intensity

8

10

	  

2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Year

	  

Note: Natural Gas Intensity is defined as natural gas subscribers per 100 populations. The sample consists
of provinces with access to natural gas services for at least one year during the period of 2001-2011.
Source: Natural Gas Journal

39	  
	  
	  

Figure 3: Natural Gas Intensity in Select Provinces
Izmir

4
2

Natural Gas Intensity

25
20

0

10

15

Natural Gas Intensity

30

6

35

Istanbul

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2001

2011

year

2003

2007

2009

2011

year

	  

	  
	  

2005

	  

	  
	  

Bursa

1.5
0

10

.5

1

Natural Gas Intensity

25
20
15

Natural Gas Intensity

2

30

2.5

Gaziantep

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

year

2001

	  

	  
	  

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

year

	  

	  
	  

Erzurum

15
10

Natural Gas Intensity

6
4
0

5

2

Natural Gas Intensity

8

20

10

Kocaeli

2001

2003

2005

2007
year

	  

2009

2011

2001

	  

2005

2007
year

Source: Natural Gas Journal.

40	  
	  

2003

2009

2011

-1

-.5

0

.5

Figure 4A: Event Study Estimates of the Effect of Any Natural Gas on Log Infant Mortality Rate
	  

-5

-4

-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
Years Prior to and After Gaining Access to Natural Gas

4

5

	  

The figure displays coefficients and 95% confidence intervals. The reference category is one" "year prior to
gaining access to natural gas.

	  

-2

Log Infant Mortality Rate
-1
0
1

2

Figure 4B: Log Infant Mortality vs. Natural Gas Intensity,
Net of Province and Year Fixed Effects

-10

	  

-5

0
5
Natural Gas Intensity

15

	  

	  

41	  
	  

10

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
Variable

Infant Mortality per Thousand Births
Any Natural Gas
Natural Gas Intensity
Ever Had Natural Gas
Average Particulate Matter (µg/m3)
Hospitals Per-100 K Population
Hospital Beds Per-100 K Population
Physicians Per-100 K Population
Per-capita Regional GDP
Percent High School
Percent College
Students Per-Teacher
Unemployment Rate
Province Has Family Physician Program
Motor Vehicles Per capita
Governing Party
Population

(1)
ALL

9.148
(1.171)
0.336
(0.473)
2.648
(6.142)
0.762
(0.426)
66.194
(30.611)
2.063
(0.924)
214.041
(90.357)
125.472
(51.076)
7.770
(3.458)
16.163
(3.284)
6.676
(2.570)
16.913
(4.379)
10.263
(3.762)
0.281
(0.450)
161.443
(78.350)
0.609
(0.488)
884.199
(1460.947)

(2)
Any
Natural
Gas = 0
8.003
(1.114)
---

(3)
Any
Natural
Gas = 1
8.881***
(1.069)
---

(4)
Ever Had
Natural
Gas = 0
3.138
(1.685)
---

---

7.871
(8.435)
---

-----

(5)
Ever Had
Natural
Gas = 1
10.017 ***
(1.560)
0.442
(0.497)
3.476
(6.831)
---

70.611***
(24.739)
2.089
(0.767)
255.971***
(80.520)
143.210***
(55.300)
10.539***
(3.524)
17.019***
(3.096)
7.975***
(2.643)
15.914***
(2.949)
10.196
(3.067)
0.570***
(0.496)
195.424***
(62.680)
0.749***
(0.434)
1425.845***
(2310.550)

78.941
(37.151)
2.185
(1.158)
159.178
(76.415)
94.378
(23.170)
5.509
(2.399)
14.296
(3.094)
5.194
(2.121)
19.732
(6.099)
10.540
(4.383)
0.234
(0.425)
104.133
(87.458)
0.455
(0.499)
366.738
(237.456)

63.519***
(28.388)
2.025***
(0.835)
231.214***
(87.544)
135.426***
(53.535)
8.467***
(3.439)
16.744***
(3.123)
7.137***
(2.525)
16.031***
(3.212)
10.177
(3.547)
0.295*
(0.456)
179.285***
(65.876)
0.657***
(0.475)
1046.100***
(1635.670)

0.641
(0.480)
62.712
(34.188)
2.052
(0.982)
196.613
(88.541)
107.555
(39.063)
6.768
(2.835)
15.489
(3.274)
5.654
(1.987)
17.485
(4.929)
10.315
(4.232)
0.134
(0.341)
134.716
(79.156)
0.538
(0.499)
609.654
(540.491)

Observations
877
582
295
209
668
Notes: Standard Deviations are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate that mean is statistically different between the
sample in columns (2) and (3) or columns (4) and (5) at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

42	  
	  

Table 2A: The Estimates of Time-Varying Province Characteristics on Any Natural Gas
Dependent Variable
Hospitals Per 100K

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.269*

-0.028

-0.046

-0.105*

-0.103

(0.142)

(0.071)

(0.058)

(0.062)

(0.067)

Hospitals Beds Per 100K

46.234***

0.444

-0.524

-4.537

-2.566

(16.823)

(4.791)

(4.160)

(3.903)

(3.786)

Physicians Per 100K

32.635***

3.710*

-1.777

-0.957

-1.972

(9.753)

(2.062)

(2.618)

(2.691)

(2.834)

Percent High School

2.386***

0.438**

0.384

0.069

0.020

(0.612)

(0.175)

(0.245)

(0.213)

(0.170)

Percent College

1.861***

0.193

0.155

0.055

0.045

(0.487)

(0.163)

(0.154)

(0.160)

(0.134)

-1.937**

0.311

0.206

-0.117

0.072

(0.815)

(0.221)

(0.201)

(0.272)

(0.251)

-0.743

-0.654*

-0.080

-0.156

0.388

(0.594)

(0.371)

(0.324)

(0.348)

(0.361)

0.023

0.013

-0.044

-0.021

-0.024

Students Per Teacher
Unemployment Rate
Family Physician Program

(0.040)

(0.040)

(0.056)

(0.062)

(0.066)

0.481***

0.006

-0.004

-0.000

-0.001

(0.113)

(0.014)

(0.005)

(0.004)

(0.004)

0.164**

0.036

0.050

0.044

0.034

(0.065)

(0.064)

(0.083)

(0.057)

(0.062)

Year Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Province Fixed Effects

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Province-specific Linear Time Trends

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Province-specific Quadratic Time Trends

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Region-by-Year Fixed Effects

No

No

No

No

Yes

Log Vehicles PC
Governing Party
Controls For

Notes: Each cell corresponds to a separate regression, where the “dependent variable” is regressed on Any Natural
Gas conditional on control variables as indicated above. Robust standard errors, clustered at the province level, are in
parentheses. A *, **, or *** indicates significance at the 95%, 99%, or 99.9% levels, respectively. Sample sizes are
797 for Hospitals Per 100K, Hospitals Beds Per 100K, Students per Teacher, percent with college education, 400 for
Physicians Per 100K; 636 for Percent High School, Vehicles per Capita, and Unemployment Rate; and 877 for
Family Physician Program, and Governing Party Affiliation.

43	  
	  

Table 2B: The Estimates of Time-Varying Province Characteristics on Natural Gas Intensity
Dependent Variable
Hospitals Per 100K

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.022***

-0.005

-0.000

-0.007

-0.019

(0.008)

(0.009)

(0.013)

(0.014)

(0.015)

Hospitals Beds Per 100K

3.256**

-1.351**

-1.769*

0.887

0.746

(1.334)

(0.655)

(0.952)

(1.183)

(1.142)

Physicians Per 100K

3.572***

-0.651**

-0.294

0.200

0.399

(1.341)

(0.291)

(0.539)

(0.547)

(0.488)

Percent High School

0.231***

0.012

-0.072

-0.006

0.001

(0.037)

(0.016)

(0.044)

(0.036)

(0.026)

Percent College

0.184***

0.055***

0.012

0.022

0.035

(0.053)

(0.011)

(0.032)

(0.033)

(0.025)

-0.069

0.042*

0.130*

-0.002

-0.008

(0.053)

(0.023)

(0.065)

(0.029)

(0.032)

0.013

-0.066*

0.088

-0.009

-0.021

(0.033)

(0.036)

(0.066)

(0.066)

(0.064)

0.002

0.003

-0.012

-0.002

0.002

Students Per Teacher
Unemployment Rate
Family Physician Program
Log Vehicles PC
Governing Party
Controls For
Year Fixed Effects
Province Fixed Effects
Province-specific Linear Time Trends
Province-specific Quadratic Time Trends
Region-by-Year Fixed Effects

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.010)

(0.014)

(0.012)

0.022***

-0.003*

0.000

0.001

0.002

(0.005)

(0.002)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

0.005

-0.005

-0.013

0.003

0.008

(0.007)

(0.008)

(0.014)

(0.008)

(0.010)

Yes
No
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: Each cell corresponds to a separate regression, where the “dependent variable” is regressed on Natural Gas
Intensity conditional on control variables as indicated above. Robust standard errors, clustered at the province level,
are in parentheses. A *, **, or *** indicates significance at the 95%, 99%, or 99.9% levels, respectively. Sample sizes
are 797 for Hospitals Per 100K, Hospitals Beds Per 100K, Students per Teacher, percent with college education, 400
for Physicians Per 100K; 636 for Percent High School, Vehicles per Capita, and Unemployment Rate; and 877 for
Family Physician Program, and Governing Party Affiliation.

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

44	  
	  

Table 3A: The Estimates of Any Natural Gas on Jointly Specified Time-varying Observable
Province Characteristics
Variable
Hospitals Per-100 K

(1)
-0.078***
(0.027)
0.001
(0.000)
0.001
(0.001)
0.032**
(0.013)
-0.013
(0.018)
0.228
(0.137)
-0.014**
(0.007)
-0.061
(0.074)
0.210***
(0.060)
0.096**
(0.042)

(2)
0.016
(0.028)
-0.001
(0.000)
0.001
(0.001)
0.022*
(0.013)
-0.033
(0.026)
0.200*
(0.112)
-0.014**
(0.006)
-0.010
(0.062)
0.214***
(0.061)
0.010
(0.042)

(3)
-0.012
(0.021)
-0.000
(0.000)
0.001
(0.001)
0.019*
(0.011)
-0.010
(0.017)
0.122
(0.093)
-0.006
(0.006)
-0.049
(0.054)
-0.060
(0.059)
0.028
(0.040)

(4)
-0.009
(0.020)
-0.000
(0.000)
0.001
(0.001)
0.017
(0.012)
0.004
(0.018)
0.093
(0.123)
-0.004
(0.005)
-0.032
(0.050)
-0.080*
(0.045)
0.035
(0.039)

(5)
-0.021
(0.019)
0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.001)
0.004
(0.018)
-0.005
(0.025)
0.052
(0.142)
0.006
(0.009)
-0.030
(0.056)
-0.030
(0.068)
0.022
(0.039)

F-test of Joint Significance
P-value

7.53
0.00

3.17
0.00

1.13
0.34

1.07
0.39

0.46
0.92

Observations
Controls For
Year Fixed Effects
Province Fixed Effects
Province-specific Linear Time Trends
Province-specific Quadratic Time Trends
Region-by-Year Fixed Effects

877

877

877

877

877

Yes
No
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Hospital Beds Per-100 K
Physicians Per-100 K
Percent High School
Percent College
Log Students Per Teacher
Unemployment Rate
Family Doctor
Log MV Per 1000 People
Governing Party

Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered at the province level, are in parentheses. A *, **, or *** indicates significance
at the 95%, 99%, or 99.9% levels, respectively.

45	  
	  

Table 3B: The Estimates of Natural Gas Intensity on Jointly Specified Time-varying
Observable Province Characteristics
Variable
Hospitals Per-100 K

(1)
-0.735
(0.492)
0.005
(0.007)
0.018**
(0.009)
0.350
(0.293)
0.912
(0.621)
4.006
(3.040)
-0.047
(0.106)
-0.652
(1.105)
-0.129
(1.076)
0.738
(1.079)

(2)
0.578
(0.385)
-0.020***
(0.006)
0.010
(0.006)
0.235*
(0.137)
0.308
(0.243)
2.272**
(1.072)
-0.068
(0.046)
0.055
(0.482)
0.030
(0.438)
-0.176
(0.474)

(3)
0.018
(0.184)
-0.006*
(0.004)
0.001
(0.003)
-0.207**
(0.087)
0.432***
(0.125)
1.895**
(0.741)
0.010
(0.035)
-0.432
(0.376)
-1.115***
(0.417)
-0.278
(0.288)

(4)
-0.152
(0.209)
-0.003
(0.004)
0.000
(0.002)
-0.070
(0.045)
0.144
(0.097)
-0.783
(0.523)
0.028
(0.022)
-0.021
(0.284)
-0.038
(0.259)
0.074
(0.146)

(5)
-0.218
(0.256)
-0.003
(0.005)
0.000
(0.003)
-0.097
(0.094)
0.153
(0.118)
-0.524
(0.560)
0.038
(0.036)
0.095
(0.294)
0.507
(0.423)
0.192
(0.186)

F-test of Joint Significance
P-value

4.10
0.00

5.03
0.00

5.06
0.00

1.48
0.15

1.15
0.33

Observations
Controls For
Year Fixed Effects
Province Fixed Effects
Province-specific Linear Trends
Province-specific Quadratic Trends
Region-by-Year Fixed Effects

877

877

877

877

877

Yes
No
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Hospital Beds Per-100 K
Physicians Per-100 K
Percent High School
Percent College
Log Students Per Teacher
Unemployment Rate
Family Doctor
Log MV Per 1000 People
Governing Party

Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered at the province level, are in parentheses. A *, **, or *** indicates
significance at the 95%, 99%, or 99.9% levels, respectively.

46	  
	  

Table 4A: The Impact of Any Natural Gas on the Logarithm of Infant Mortality Rate
Variable
Any Natural Gas

(1)
0.490***
(0.105)

(2)
0.576***
(0.124)

Hospitals Per-100 K
Hospital Beds Per-100 K
Physicians Per-100 K
Log Per Capita Sub-regional GDP
Percent High School
Percent College
Log Students Per Teacher
Unemployment Rate
Family Doctor
Log MV Per 1000 People
Governing Party

(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
-0.271** -0.025 -0.032 -0.037
(0.113) (0.103) (0.113) (0.115)
0.001
(0.050)
-0.000
(0.001)
0.000
(0.001)
0.361
(0.233)
-0.016
(0.024)
0.022
(0.034)
-0.032
(0.348)
0.003
(0.015)
0.012
(0.075)
-0.162
(0.165)
-0.022
(0.066)

Observations
877
877
877
877
877
877
Controls For
Year Fixed Effects
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Province Fixed Effects
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Province-specific Linear Trends
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Province-specific Quadratic Trends
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Time-varying Province Characteristics
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Region-by-year Fixed Effects
No
No
No
No
No
No
Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered at the province level, are in parentheses. A *, **, or *** indicates
significance at the 90%, 95%, or 99% levels, respectively.

47	  
	  

(7)
-0.126
(0.115)
-0.008
(0.060)
0.000
(0.001)
0.000
(0.001)
0.142
(0.488)
0.012
(0.032)
-0.029
(0.040)
0.060
(0.374)
0.014
(0.018)
-0.026
(0.069)
0.225
(0.188)
-0.010
(0.067)
877
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Table 4B: The Impact of Natural Gas Intensity on the Logarithm of Infant Mortality Rate
Variable
Natural Gas Intensity

(1)
0.033***
(0.007)

(2)
0.031***
(0.007)

(3)
-0.046***
(0.009)

(4)
-0.042***
(0.015)

(5)
-0.041**
(0.017)

Hospitals Per-100 K
Hospital Beds Per-100 K
Physicians Per-100 K
Log Per Capita Sub-Regional GDP
Percent High School
Percent College
Log Students Per Teacher
Unemployment Rate
Family Doctor
Log MV Per 1000 People
Governing Party

Observations
877
877
877
877
Controls For
Year Fixed Effects
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Province Fixed Effects
No
No
Yes
Yes
Province-specific Linear Trends
No
No
No
Yes
Province-specific Quadratic Trends
No
No
No
No
Time-varying Province Characteristics
No
No
No
No
Region-by-year Fixed Effects
No
No
No
No
Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered at the province level, are in parentheses. A
significance at the 90%, 95%, or 99% levels, respectively.

48	  
	  
	  
	  

877

(6)
-0.041**
(0.017)
-0.006
(0.051)
-0.000
(0.001)
0.000
(0.001)
0.332
(0.231)
-0.019
(0.024)
0.028
(0.034)
-0.003
(0.015)
0.005
(0.015)
0.011
(0.073)
-0.149
(0.164)
-0.020
(0.067)

(7)
-0.039*
(0.021)
-0.016
(0.061)
0.000
(0.001)
0.000
(0.001)
0.188
(0.467)
0.008
(0.032)
-0.019
(0.040)
0.001
(0.015)
0.014
(0.018)
-0.018
(0.069)
0.227
(0.186)
-0.005
(0.069)

877

877

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
*, **, or *** indicates

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Table 5: The Impact of Natural Gas Intensity on Infant Deaths and Births
Panel A
Dependent Variable: Log Infant Deaths
Natural Gas Intensity
Log Births
Panel B
Dependent Variable: Log Infant Births
Natural Gas Intensity

Observations
Controls For
Year Fixed Effects
Province Fixed Effects
Province-specific Linear Trends
Province-specific Quadratic Trends
Time-varying Province Characteristics
Region-by-year Fixed Effects

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.032***
(0.009)
1.282***
(0.057)

0.002
(0.008)
1.362***
(0.051)

-0.049***
(0.011)
-0.107
(0.353)

-0.045**
(0.018)
1.716**
(0.668)

-0.050***
(0.016)
1.344*
(0.750)

-0.051***
(0.017)
1.100
(0.752)

-0.051***
(0.018)
1.017
(0.844)

0.046**
(0.019)

0.058***
(0.021)

0.007**
(0.003)

-0.000
(0.002)

0.001
(0.001)

0.001
(0.001)

0.001
(0.001)

877

877

877

877

877

877

877

No
No
No
No
No
No

Yes
No
No
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered at the province level, are in parentheses. A *, **, or *** indicates
significance at the 95%, 99%, or 99.9% levels, respectively.

49	  
	  
	  
	  

Table 6: The Impact of Natural Gas Intensity on the Logarithm of Infant Mortality Rate,
Robustness Analyses with Alternative Subsamples
Variable
Panel A: Natural Gas Sample
Natural Gas Intensity

Observations
Panel B: Istanbul Excluded
Natural Gas Intensity

Observations

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.020**
(0.008)

0.026***
(0.008)

-0.017*
(0.010)

-0.018
(0.016)

-0.041**
(0.017)

-0.040**
(0.018)

-0.041*
(0.022)

668

668

668

668

668

668

668

0.032***
(0.008)

0.030***
(0.009)

-0.045***
(0.009)

-0.043***
(0.015)

-0.041**
(0.017)

-0.042**
(0.018)

-0.040*
(0.021)

866

866

866

866

866

866

866

-0.046***
(0.016)

-0.043**
(0.018)

-0.045**
(0.019)

-0.045*
(0.024)

822

822

Panel C: Ankara, Bursa, Eskisehir, Istanbul, and Kocaeli Excluded
Natural Gas Intensity
0.019
0.001
-0.045***
(0.014)
(0.017)
(0.010)

Observations
822
822
822
822
Controls For
Year Fixed Effects
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Province Fixed Effects
No
No
Yes
Yes
Province-specific Linear Trends
No
No
No
Yes
Province-specific Quadratic Trends
No
No
No
No
Time-varying Province Characteristics
No
No
No
No
Region-by-year Fixed Effects
No
No
No
No
Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered at the province level, are in parentheses. A
significance at the 90%, 95%, or 99% levels, respectively.

50	  
	  
	  
	  

822

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
*, **, or *** indicates

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Appendix Table 1: Natural Gas Adoption Year and Natural Gas Intensity in 2011 for
Provinces with Natural Gas Infrastructure
Province

Adoption
Year

Adana

2010

Adiyaman

2010

Afyonkarahisar

Natural Gas
Intensity in 2011
0.540

Province

Adoption
Year

Natural Gas
Intensity in 2011
9.724

Karaman

2009

3.851

Kars

2009

2008

4.316

Kastamonu

2009

3.783

2006

11.067

Kayseri

2005

23.603

Amasya

2008

13.272

Kirikkale

2007

16.491

Ankara

1988

33.943

Kirklareli

2009

4.160

Antalya

2009

0.046

Kirsehir

2007

16.865

Balikesir

2005

17.334

Kocaeli/Izmit

1996

20.319

Bayburt

2009

10.918

Konya

2005

12.478

Bilecik

2007

26.038

Kutahya

2005

16.309

Bolu

2010

8.229

Malatya

2007

19.067

Burdur

2009

3.686

Manisa

2007

6.914

Bursa

1992

31.613

Mersin

2010

0.512

Canakkale

2007

12.565

Nevsehir

2009

6.696

Cankiri

2009

8.726

Nigde

2007

8.180

Corum

2005

14.606

Ordu

2009

2.515

Denizli

2007

12.404

Osmaniye

2011

0.473

Diyarbakir

2009

4.633

Rize

2009

10.310

Duzce

2006

16.089

Sakarya

2005

14.684

Edirne

2009

4.965

Samsun

2006

8.942

Elazig

2009

12.283

Sanliurfa

2008

3.069

Erzincan

2009

7.396

Sivas

2006

21.868

Erzurum

2005

8.884

Tekirdag

2005

10.523

Eskisehir

1996

38.569

Tokat

2009

3.631

Gaziantep

2008

2.262

Trabzon

2010

0.672

Hatay

2010

0.103

Usak

2006

9.910

Isparta

2009

5.141

Van

2008

1.838

1992

34.446

Yalova

2006

19.130

Izmir

2007

5.390

Yozgat

2007

8.685

Kahramanmaras

2007

4.097

Zonguldak

2006

9.346

Aksaray

Istanbul

1.153

9.944
Karabuk
2009
Notes: Provinces without natural gas infrastructure in 2011 are Sirnak, Mus, Hakkari, Aydin, Ardahan, Mugla,
Tunceli, Siirt, Batman, Gumushane, Sinop, Mardin, Kilis, Igdir, Artvin, Bingol, Giresun, Bartin, Bitlis, and Agri. In
Ankara, Bursa, Eskisehir, Istanbul, and Kocaeli natural gas infrastructure was developed prior to 2001. Natural gas
intensity is expressed in per hundred populations.

51	  
	  
	  
	  

Appendix Table 2: Infant Mortality Rate by Source
Turkish
World Health
United
Statistical
Organization
Nations
Year
Institute
2001
26.1
11.4
31
2002
24.2
10.8
29
2003
22.3
10.7
26
2004
20.5
9.5
24
2005
18.9
9.2
22
2006
17.4
8.9
20
2007
15.9
8.9
18
2008
14.7
8.9
16
2009
13.6
8
15
2010
12.5
7.8
14
2011
11.5
--7.9
Sources: Turkish Statistical Institute;
World Health Organization: Child Mortality Estimates;
United Nations: The State of the World’s Children.
Note: We do not have data on the infant mortality rate for 2011 from the
United Nations.

52	  
	  
	  
	  

Appendix Table 3: The Impact of Natural Gas Intensity on Log Particulate Matter
Natural Gas Intensity

-0.040***
(0.013)
-0.024
(0.100)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.293
(0.245)
-0.007
(0.023)
0.019
(0.033)
0.000
(0.019)
0.062
(0.066)
0.113
(0.163)
0.024
(0.048)

Hospitals Per-100 K
Hospital Beds Per-100 K
Physicians Per-100 K
Log Per Capita Sub-regional GDP
Percent High School
Percent College
Unemployment Rate
Family Doctor
Log MV Per 1000 People
Governing Party

First Stage F-test
P-value

10.27
0.00

Observations

490

Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered at the province level, are in parentheses. A *, **, or *** indicates
significance at the 90%, 95%, or 99% levels, respectively. The model also controls for province, year, and regionby-year fixed effects.

	  

53	  
	  
	  
	  

Appendix Table 4: The Impact of Any Natural Gas on the Logarithm of Infant Mortality

Rate, Population and Birth Density Weighted Regressions
(1)
Panel A: Mean Population Density Weighted Regressions
Natural Gas Intensity
Panel B: Mean Birth Density Weighted Regressions
Natural Gas Intensity

-0.031*
(0.016)
-0.030*
(0.016)

Observations
877
Controls For
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Province Fixed Effects
Yes
Region-by-year Fixed Effects
Yes
Province-specific Linear Trends
Yes
Province-specific Quadratic Trends
Yes
Time-varying Province Characteristics
Yes
Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered at the province level, are in parentheses. A *, **, or *** indicates
significance at the 90%, 95%, or 99% levels, respectively.

54	  
	  
	  
	  

