                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE MYSTIQUE SURROUNDING THE CENTRAL BANK'S BALANCE SHEET,
                     APPLIED TO THE EUROPEAN CRISIS

                                            Ricardo Reis

                                       Working Paper 18730
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18730


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2013




I am grateful to the euro-nomics group for motivating this work, to Robert Hall for many insightful
discussions, to Markus Brunnermeier, Anil Kashyap, and Mike Woodford for comments, and to a
grant from the Institute for New Economic Thinking for funding. Disclosure of outside compensated
activities is available at http://www.columbia.edu/~rr2572/disclosure.htm. This is an expanded version
of the paper with the same title appearing in the American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
in May of 2013. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Ricardo Reis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Mystique Surrounding the Central Bank's Balance Sheet, Applied to the European Crisis
Ricardo Reis
NBER Working Paper No. 18730
January 2013
JEL No. E58,F34

                                              ABSTRACT

In spite of the mystique behind a central bank's balance sheet, its resource constraint bounds the dividends
it can distribute by the present value of seignorage, which is a modest share of GDP. Moreover, the
statutes of the Federal Reserve or the ECB make it difficult for it to redistribute resources across regions.
In a simple model of sovereign default, where multiple equilibria arise if debt repudiation lowers fiscal
surpluses, the central bank may help to select one equilibrium. The central bank's main lever over
fundamentals is to raise inflation, but otherwise the balance sheet gives it little leeway.


Ricardo Reis
Department of Economics, MC 3308
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, Rm. 1022 IAB
New York NY 10027
and NBER
rreis@columbia.edu
   The New Oxford American Dictionary defines mystique as “a fascinating aura of mystery,
awe, and power surrounding someone or something”. This characterization applies to the
balance sheet of a central bank. It has fascinating liabilities, dominated by currency and

bank reserves, which are legal tender that cannot be converted into anything else than what
they already are. There is an aura of mystery around the central bank’s accounts, which
follow peculiar accounting principles like the Federal Reserve valuing its securities using face
value rather than market value, or the large TARGET2 claims from some members of the
Eurosystem on the others. The central bank is perceived with awe to have immense power
in part because it can fund unlimited purchases of any asset, and it is usually successful at

fixing one key price in an economy, whether it is the short-term rate or the exchange rate.
Some even argue that a country with its own central bank can never go through a sovereign
default, because it can always pay debts with newly-created reserves.
   This paper works through the resource constraint of a central bank to remove some of

this mystique. From an accounting perspective, it is difficult to keep track of the value of the
assets and liabilities in a central bank’s balance sheet. Not only are these assets and liabilities

peculiar, but there are also no accounting standards that naturally apply to a central bank,
which is neither a private corporation nor a conventional government agency. Yet, from an
economic perspective, a central bank is an agent with limited resources. Keeping track of the
sources and uses of these resources reveals what the central bank can and cannot achieve.
   The analysis applies to a generic central bank in an advanced economy, but for concrete-

ness I will refer to it as the Eurosystem or ECB, and to the euro as the currency. Each
section poses a question that is inspired by discussions of the ECB’s role during the recent
crisis. The main conclusion is that the central bank’s main power is to raise its inflation
target, but otherwise its balance sheet gives it little leeway to pursue other goals.




                                                2
1     Does a central bank have unlimited resources?

A central bank has two di↵erent types of liabilities. One of them is special because it gives
its holders a return below the market return, which I simplify to zero. There is demand
for these assets because they provide some other service, perhaps as a means of payment or

perhaps as safe collateral for other financial transactions. I use ht to denote the total amount
in euros of these special assets. In the Euro-area, their main component are the banknotes
in circulation.
    The other type of liability is just like any other financial asset and must therefore pay

the safe market return. One example are the trillions of dollars of excess overnight reserves
in the United States during the recent financial crisis. In some countries, the central bank
issues bonds of longer maturity and finds itself paying a market return. For the Eurosystem,
these liabilities also include required reserves, which pay the short-term overnight interest

rate by the statutes of the ECB. I denote their total amount by vt , and the safe promised
return they pay between t and t + 1 is it .
    On the side of assets, most of the times central banks hold a limited set of treasury

securities plus some foreign exchange reserves. During a financial crisis, the size and scope
of their assets significantly enlarges. Reis (2009) discussed the unconventional assets the

Federal Reserve chose to hold in 2007-09, while Reis (2011) solved for the optimal security
holdings when financial markets are segmented. For the Eurosystem, in 2012 these assets
include the many securities accepted for collateral in the refinancing operations of the ECB,
and especially the government bonds of the di↵erent countries of the Euro-area. I assume

there are J such assets, each earning a potentially stochastic return ijt+1 , and the central
                                                            P
bank holds ajt euros of each asset for a total amount at = j ajt . Among these J assets,
some may be short and others long-lived, some may be bonds and others loans, some may
be denominated in domestic and others in foreign currency.



                                               3
   Finally, the central bank pays a dividend to the treasury, which I denote by dt in real
terms. In most developed countries, this dividend is equal to net income, but there is some
variation in how this is calculated, especially on whether to use nominal or real returns, or

whether to mark assets to market or not. Hall and Reis (2012) discuss how di↵erent rules
a↵ect the solvency of the central bank and its independence from fiscal authorities. Here, I
study how large dt can be as a measure of the real resources generated by the central bank.
   Combining all of these elements, the resource constraint of the central bank is:

                                                        J
                                                        X
               ht+1 + vt+1 = ht + (1 + it )vt + at+1          (1 + ijt+1 )ajt + pt+1 dt+1       (1)
                                                        j=1


at all dates, where pt is the price level. This law of motion for the total liabilities of the
central bank shows that it must raise new funds, ht+1 + vt+1 , in order to: (i) pay for the
outstanding special liabilities and interest-bearing liabilities, ht + (1 + it )vt , (ii) expand the
balance sheet by buying new assets, at+1 in excess of the gross return on last period’s assets
PJ          j     j
  j=1 (1 + it+1 )at , and (iii) pay dividends of pt+1 dt+1 euros.

   What makes the vt+1 liabilities safe is the central bank standing ready to exchange them
on par for currency, which is part of ht+1 . This commitment also implies that the central
bank does not independently choose the composition of its liabilities. If agents suddenly

desire to exchange vt+1 for ht+1 or vice-versa, the central bank must accommodate this
desire. There is a common misconception that the central bank can just print banknotes,
raise ht+1 , and therefore fund an unlimited amount of resources paid out, dt+1 . This is not
correct, because ht+1 is not an exogenous variable. Rather, it is endogenously determined
because of the commitment to keep ht+1 on par with vt+1 .
   The central bank a↵ects ht+1 but through interest rates and inflation. Because monetary
policy a↵ects the safe nominal interest rate, it , it will a↵ect the relative demand for the
liability that pays interest, vt , and the one that does not, ht . Changes in interest rates


                                                 4
come with changes in expected inflation though, so the ability of the central bank to collect
interest is closely related to how closely it sticks to its inflation target.
   Moreover, there is a limit to the resources the central bank can generate in terms of

their real purchasing power. To see this, let st+1 = (ht+1                     ht )/pt+1 stand for the real
seignorage resources. Their value is the sum of the payo↵s weighted by their relative value
in di↵erent states of the world. This is determined by the real stochastic discount factor
(SDF) between dates t and t + 1, denoted by mt,t+1 . To value payo↵s at further dates, the
             Q
SDF is mt,T = T⌧ =t+1 m⌧ 1,⌧ . The value of asset holdings then satisfies the condition:

                                          "             J
                                                                         #
                                              mt,t+1 pt X
                                at = Et                   (1 + ijt+1 )ajt ,                             (2)
                                               pt+1 j=1


where E is the expectations operator. In turn, the safe rate of return is the inverse of the
value of an asset that pays o↵ A
                               C1 for sure next period:

                                                      ✓               ◆
                                         1                mt,t+1 pt
                                              = Et                        .                             (3)
                                       1 + it              pt+1

Note that both it and ijt+1 refer to payments made at t + 1, but they have di↵erent time-
subscripts because they are known at di↵erent dates.

   Multiplying by the SDF and taking expectations on both sides of equation (1) gives the

expected value of the resources generated by the central bank, where a hat denotes the real
value of asset holdings:


            Et (mt,t+1 dt+1 ) = Et (mt,t+1 st+1 ) + (ât      v̂t )   Et [mt,t+1 (ât+1   v̂t+1 )] .    (4)


   This expression shows that the central bank has two sources of resources. The first

source is expected seignorage generated by expanding the special liabilities of the central
bank. Because the central bank can use these funds to invest in assets that earn market

                                                      5
interest rates, it can create resources. From another perspective, these liabilities are special
because they provide a service to economy agents, for which the central bank will collect
some revenue.

   There is a strict limit to this revenue. The central bank is committed to satisfy the
demand for these special liabilities by exchanging them on par with its other liabilities.
There are many models of this demand, from the classic model of Cagan (1956) to the
modern approach of Lagos and Wright (2005). All of them predict that velocity, the ratio
of nominal expenditure to ht , increases with the nominal interest rate. Letting L(i) be the
inverse of velocity, so L0 (.)  0, seignorage revenue as a ratio of expenditures is:

                                                       L(it )
                                      L(it+1 )                ,                             (5)
                                                     1 + gt+1

where gt+1 is the growth rate of nominal expenditures. There are two relevant properties
of the function defined by this expression. First, the central bank can only increase it by

generating higher nominal interest rates or higher nominal expenditure growth. This is only
possible in a sustained way with higher inflation. Second, countless theoretical and empirical

studies have found that there is a maximum to this inflation tax. Over the past decade, the
average value of seignorage in the Euro-area has been 0.6% of GDP and it has never been
above 0.9%. Hilscher, Raviv and Reis (2013) estimate that the theoretical maximum is a
small multiple of the average. The central bank’s ability to generate seignorage revenues is

limited and depends on tolerating higher inflation.
   The second and third terms on the right-hand side of equation (4) show that the central
bank can also fund an increase in dividends by either selling assets or increasing its market
liabilities. When a central bank performs an open market operation, this does not happen.
It purchases assets from financial institutions by crediting their accounts at the central bank,
so the procedure by which the central bank raises at+1 involves an automatic expansion in


                                                 6
vt+1 . The value of at+1     vt+1 is unchanged.



2     Can the central bank be a source of significant rev-

      enues?

Besides open-market operations, there is a long list of unconventional policies that central
banks can pursue with their balance sheet. In terms of the resource constraint, there are
many possible combinations of changes in asset holdings and liabilities that can temporarily

raise dividends. It is more useful to focus on the total amount of resources the central bank

can generate over its potentially infinite horizon.
    Let Dt be the expected present value of future dividends, defined by the recursion:


                                   Dt = Et [mt,t+1 (dt+1 + Dt+1 )]                           (6)


and likewise for the expected present value of future seignorage St . Then, iterating the
resource constraint in equation (4) forward to infinity gives:


                           Dt = St + ât   v̂t    lim Et [mt,T (âT   v̂T )] .               (7)
                                                  T !1



    The last term on the right-hand side shows that an increase in dividends funded by extra
liabilities must be sustained by higher liabilities forever. For this to work, the private sector
must be willing to lend these resources to the central bank. There is controversy on whether
there is a bubble on the special liabilities, ht , or not. The vt though are, by definition,
central bank liabilities which private agents do not value beyond their return. The central
bank should not be able to run a Ponzi scheme on these liabilities because no private agent
would accept to be on the other side. Keeping fixed St , the liabilities of the central bank



                                                   7
must be backed by its assets at , so this no-Ponzi scheme condition is that the last term in
equation (7) is non-negative.
    This gives an upper bound on the resources the central bank can generate:


                                      Dt  St + ât     v̂t .                               (8)


The previous section discussed why seignorage revenues are bounded above. In turn, at vt is
an initial condition inherited by the central bank. Hilscher, Raviv and Reis (2013) empirically
estimate this upper bound finding modest values. Hall and Reis (2012) show that if the

central bank follows a real mark-to-market rule in calculating its net income and pays it

all every period, then at   vt is constant over time, so the central bank budget constraint
reduces to paying all of its seignorage as dividends.



3     Can the central bank redistribute resources across

      regions?

The Eurosystem pays dividends to many fiscal authorities. Equation (7) constrains the total
amount of dividends it can pay, but not how they are distributed. The central bank could,
in principle, send the whole of Dt to just one of its member states. For a small European
country, this could be well above 100% of its GDP.

    However, almost all central banks have very strict rules forbidding these redistributions.
In the United States, the Federal Reserve can only distribute dividends to the federal trea-
sury, not to the state treasuries. In the Euro-area, the Eurosystem’s dividends are distributed
according to a strict key that equally weights the country’s share in the total population and
GDP of the European Union. The central bank has no discretion on how to distribute Dt .
    The central bank could redistribute resources in an alternative way. While keeping at    vt


                                              8
unchanged, the central bank could hold more assets issued by one region and fewer assets
from the remaining regions. Likewise, it could borrow less from one region and borrow
more from others. Either of these actions would e↵ectively lend on net to that region, while

borrowing from the rest. Because the no-Ponzi scheme condition applies only to the central
bank’s total borrowing, in principle it could do this forever.
   Again though, this economically feasible operation is ruled out by the statutes of most
central banks. The Federal Reserve can only hold securities that are not federally-issued
or federally-backed in temporary and exceptional circumstances. In the Eurosystem, when
one financial institution moves its deposits from the central bank of one country to another,

the liabilities to the private sector of the first central bank fall, while the liabilities of the
second central bank rise. But, via the TARGET2 system, this transaction is recorded in the
Eurosystem as a liability of the first country to the second. The total liabilities vt of each
country are unchanged (see Whelan, 2012 for a step-by-step explanation of TARGET2.)

   Moreover, in the refinancing operations that account for most of the changes in its assets,
the ECB uses repo operations accepting any collateral from its acceptable list. Therefore, it
e↵ectively does not control the composition of at . If many borrowers appear at the ECB’s
auctions o↵ering as collateral securities from only one country, the composition of the ECB’s

assets will shift towards that country, and the ECB can do nothing to stop it.
   If the sovereign states that own the central bank wish to use its balance sheet to redis-
tribute resources, they can. But, in its normal operations, the members of the Eurosystem by
themselves cannot control the composition of vt or at , so they cannot redistribute resources
across regions.




                                                9
4       Can the central bank peg sovereign spreads?

During the financial crisis, the ECB went beyond its normal operations. Through its Secu-
rities Market Program, the ECB bought sovereign bonds issued by some of the countries in
the euro-area. The e↵ectiveness of these interventions is often judged in terms of their e↵ect

on sovereign bond yields (European Central Bank, 2011).
      Evidence and theory show that two countries that have their own currency can control
the spread between their nominal interest rates. Less appreciated is that, in principle, the
central bank can also peg the sovereign spread between two regions that share the same
currency. Imagine the central bank announces the following standing facility: it will stand

ready to buy and sell one sovereign bond in exchange for the other sovereign bond at a

target spread. The central bank can back this facility by raising or lowering its liabilities as
is necessary. To ensure no arbitrage, the market prices must move to this target spread.
      Even if the central bank can do it, pegging sovereign spreads comes with several unsavory
implications. Assume that the two sovereign bonds have a maturity of one period. One of

the bonds, of a center country, sells for 1/(1 + it ) and pays o↵ A
                                                                  C1 for sure at t + 1. The other
bond, of a periphery country, sells for 1/yt where yt is its promised yield, but can either pay
A
C1 next period, or instead c  1 to its private holders. The central bank wants to target a

value for the periphery yield of y ⇤ that is close to the yield on the center bond 1 + it .
      At date t, the nominal risk-neutral probability that the bond does not pay in full is ⇡.
The central bank holds bet       0 units of the periphery bond, while the private sector holds
bpt    0 units. I forbid short-selling, as often happens during financial crises. All agents trade
in the same market, so the private sector will force the following arbitrage condition:

                                         1 + it
                                 yt                 and   bpt   0,                           (9)
                                        1 ⇡ + ⇡c

with at least one equality.

                                                10
   The expression 1    ⇡ + ⇡c is smaller than 1 so the periphery bond must promise a higher
yield than the center bond, given the risk of default. If the target yield y ⇤ enforced by the
central banks’s standing facility is below this premium, then the private sector refuses to
hold any of the periphery bonds. All private investors appear at the central bank’s facility
program selling their bonds at the price 1/y ⇤ , which is higher than what they think the bonds
are worth. The central bank’s holdings bet rise to absorb the whole supply of the periphery
bond. While the central bank can do this, and so peg a yield spread, it would likely be
weary of becoming the sole market creditor of a region. Beyond its implications for the

central bank’s portfolio, this policy would also be an example of the redistributive policies
discussed in section 3. Buying and holding all of the periphery bonds forever would require
holding fewer bonds from the center, e↵ectively redistributing resources from the latter to
the former.
   Expression (9) shows that another way to lower the yield would be to lower ⇡. Recall that

⇡ is the risk-neutral probability, so it is the product of the objective probability, the SDF,

the nominal return, and the inverse of inflation, all in the state when the bonds does not pay.
If the central bank could lower the SDF in the default state of the world, it would lower ⇡
and so it could lower the yield, because it would make euros in the default state become less
valuable to private agents. Under the special assumptions of consumption-based asset pricing

with logarithmic time-separable utility in consumption, then ⇡ is inversely proportional to
expenditure growth, 1 + gt+1 , in the default state. The central bank could target a higher
growth rate of nominal income when there is a default, but this stimulus would likely come
with higher inflation. This policy works as much by making the periphery bonds more
attractive to private agents, as it does by making the center bonds less attractive.
   This leaves on way to target a yield y ⇤ , to target a payment in the default state, c⇤ ,
that is close to 1. To evaluate this possibility, the next section introduces a simple model of
sovereign default.


                                              11
5     Can the central bank prevent sovereign defaults?

The model rests on two pillars. The first is the budget constraint of the fiscal authorities in
the periphery. To simplify, assume that all uncertainty regarding defaults is resolved once
t + 1 arrives. That is, from t + 1 onwards, the government bonds always pay in full so their

yield is the safe interest rate. In the default state of the world, the budget constraint is:

                                                                 bpt+1 + bet+1
                        cbpt + ce bet = pt+1 ( dt+1 + ft+1 ) +                 .                   (10)
                                                                    1 + it+1

On the left-hand side are the payments on the bonds outstanding from last period. I allow
for the payment to the central bank ce to be di↵erent from what is paid on the market c. In
the first renegotiation of Greek debt, the ECB was senior relative to the private sector. On

the right-hand side are the government revenues: (i) the fixed share               of the central bank’s
dividends due to this country, (ii) its real fiscal primary surplus ft+1 , and (iii) the revenue
from selling new bonds.

    Iterating this equation forward, and not allowing the fiscal authority to run a Ponzi
scheme with its private creditors, the intertemporal budget constraint of the periphery fiscal
authority is:

                                                                   ✓                ◆
           cbpt                                        ce bet                  beT
                = ft+1 + Ft+1 + (dt+1 + Dt+1 )                + lim mt+1,T +1         ,            (11)
           pt+1                                        pt+1 T !1              pT +1

where Ft+1 is the expected present value of future primary surpluses. This is the equilibrium
equation that pins down c as a function of real fiscal surpluses and other variables under the
control of the central bank.

    The second pillar describes how fiscal surpluses are determined. The crucial assumption
is that ft+1 + Ft+1 =   (c) where     (.) is a weakly increasing function. Brunnermeier et al.
(2011) argue that at the center of the European debt crisis has been a diabolic loop caused


                                                12
by banks holding too much of their home country’s debt. A sovereign default makes domestic
banks insolvent and causes a domestic financial crisis, which lowers tax revenues if it causes
a recession, and raises public spending if it leads to a bailout of the financial sector. I will

also assume that     (.) is concave: the lower is the repayment on the sovereign bonds, the
greater is the damage done to the financial system and the larger the resulting fall in the
fiscal surplus.
     To analyze the model, start with the case where the central bank is not an active player.
This is the case when it keeps the price level on a target that I normalize to 1, when there
is no seignorage revenue to distribute, and when the central banks does not hold any of the

country’s bonds. The equilibrium condition for c in this case becomes:


                                          cbpt+1 = (c)                                       (12)


and is depicted in figure 1. The left-hand side of the equation gives the fiscal needs line, while
the right-hand side gives the means curve. I drew the figure assuming that the periphery is
going through a fiscal crisis,   (1) < bpt , so full repayment is not feasible using solely fiscal
revenues, but this is not essential to the discussion that follows. More important is the sign

of   (0), the fiscal surpluses if there is 100% debt repudiation.
     If the diabolic loop is weak, so there is a positive fiscal surplus with full repudiation,
 (0) > 0, then there is a unique equilibrium, depicted on the top panel. The periphery bond

almost pays in full. If instead the government default has a large impact on the financial
sector and on fiscal surpluses, so that    (0) < 0, there is a second equilibrium, depicted on
the bottom panel. A severe debt crisis, with low c and high sovereign yields, is possible
because it creates the fiscal shortfall that will confirm the large repudiation.
     This model of multiple equilibria is di↵erent, but related to, the classic model in Calvo
(1988) and the recent work by Corsetti and Dedola (2012). There, the fiscal authority is


                                               13
 p
b


            Means
                                            Unique equilibrium


                       Needs




0
                                                            1
                 repayment - c




bp


             Means

                            Needs

                     Multiple equilibrium


0
                                                            1




                 repayment - c

     Figure 1: Equilibrium Debt Repudiation


                      14
time inconsistent because ex ante it wants to commit to pay the debt in full, to lower the
yield on debt and so the repayment that is due, but ex post it wants to repudiate the debt in
order to avoid costly increases in fiscal surpluses Ft . In the model above, the fiscal authority
always wants to pay its debt but it cannot raise the fiscal surplus. In Jeanne (2012) and
Gourinchas and Jeanne (2012), the multiplicity arises because of roll-over risk on long-term
debt, whereas in the model above, all of the debt matures after one period. My model is

closer to matching the verbal description of the European debt crisis in De Grauwe (2011).
   Introduce now the central bank by going back to the general model in equation (11) to
see whether it has the tools to raise the equilibrium debt repayment, c. The first action it
could take to ameliorate the situation of the peripheral fiscal authority would be to raise

fiscal surpluses, ft+1 + Ft+1 , directly. This would shift the means curve upwards and could
potentially eliminate the bad equilibrium. By stimulating economic activity, central banks

are able to raise tax collection and lower benefits spending, but this would typically come
with higher inflation.

   Raising inflation would also shift the means curve upwards by raising the seignorage that
is distributed to the fiscal authorities. If (dt+1 + Dt+1 ) + (0) > 0, it could eliminate the
bad equilibrium. This mechanism is emphasized in Gourinchas and Jeanne (2012), and it

involves a trade-o↵ between eliminating default risk at the expense of inflation risk. As I
argued in section 1, there is an upper bound to how much seignorage the ECB can generate.
Moreover, the strict Eurosystem rules fix the share of these dividends that can be sent to
countries in crisis.
   Higher prices would also rotate the needs curve rightwards through a second mechanism.

Higher prices erode the real value of debt. This can never eliminate the bad equilibrium,
but it can raise repayment in the good equilibrium all the way to 1. There is no limit to
the size of this e↵ect, although the increase in prices must be unexpected, for otherwise its

e↵ect would be neutralized by higher yields paid when selling the debt.


                                               15
    The central bank could also increase the share of the stock of sovereign debt it holds,
raising bet and lowering bpt , to then write the debt o↵ by lowering ce . Alternatively, the central
bank could take the other side of a Ponzi scheme run by the government, raising beT . Either
of these actions involves a redistribution from the other regions, and so it is subject to the
limitations discussed in section 3.
    While all of these fundamental policies may have limited scope, if there is multiple equi-

libria, the central bank can perform another role. It can act as a coordinating device that
steers the economy to the high-repayment equilibrium. With its deep pockets and hard-
earned credibility, the central bank may well be the natural government agency to perform
this role. Designing a policy that robustly achieves this goal requires carefully considering

what information to reveal, how transparent to be, and how agents learn about the cen-

tral bank’s intentions (see Morris and Shin, 1998, and the large literature that followed).
Realistically, the central bank may only be able to gain some time.



6     The central bank’s lever: Raising the inflation tar-

      get.

Most of the results in this paper have relied on accounting relations and on ruling out ar-
bitrage possibilities so that there exists a stochastic discount factor. I considered several

di↵erent policy interventions by the central bank that could alleviate sovereign debt prob-
lems. For the most part, the answers were negative. The reality of the resource constraint
that every central bank faces, and the statutes of the ECB when it comes to redistributions,
either rule out or severely limit most fundamental policies that could generate resources. The
most promising role for the central bank may be as selecting the best of multiple equilibria,
even if only temporarily.
    There is an alternative policy, which has appeared in all of the sections so far: to allow

                                                16
inflation to rise above target. Higher inflation would raise seignorage revenues, part of
which would be distributed to the region in difficulties. Higher inflation would possibly raise
nominal GDP growth which might raise fiscal surpluses and lower asset values if there is a

default. Higher inflation would erode the value of the nominal debt, making full repayment
more likely. Ultimately, this is the most e↵ective lever at the disposal of a central bank to
generate resources. It also makes clear that, once the mystique of the balance sheet is taken
away, the choice facing a central bank during a crisis is a familiar one: to inflate or not.




                                              17
References

Brunnermeier,     Markus,     Luis Garicano,     Philip R. Lane,        Ricardo Reis
  Marco Pagano, Tano Santos, David Thesmar, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and
  Dimitri Vayanos. 2011. “European Safe Bonds.” euro-nomics.com.

Cagan, Phillip. 1956. “The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinflations.” In Studies in the
  Quantity Theory of Money. , ed. Milton Friedman, 25–117. The University of Chicago
  Press.

Calvo, Guillermo A. 1988. “Servicing the Public Debt: The Role of Expectations.” Amer-

  ican Economic Review, 78(4): 647–61.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, and Luca Dedola. 2012. “The Mystery of the Printing Press: Self-
  fulfilling Debt Crises and Monetary Sovereignty.” Cambridge University and ECB.

De Grauwe, Paul. 2011. “Managing a Fragile Eurozone.” CESifo Forum, 12(2): 40–45.

European Central Bank. 2011. “The ECBs Non-Standard Measures – Impact and

  Phasing-Out.” ECB Monthly Bulletin, 07-2011: 55–69.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Olivier Jeanne. 2012. “Global Safe Assets.” Bank for
  International Settlements Working Paper 399.

Hall, Robert E., and Ricardo Reis. 2012. “Controlling Inflation and Maintaining

  Central-Bank Solvency under New-Style Central Banking.” Hoover Institution, Stanford
  University, and Columbia University.

Hilscher, Jens, Alon Raviv, and Ricardo Reis. 2013. “Measuring the Market Value of

  Central Bank Capital.” Brandeis University and Columbia University.




                                          18
Jeanne, Olivier. 2012. “Fiscal Challenges to Monetary Dominance in the Euro Area: A
  Theoretical Perspective.” Banque de France Financial Stability Review, 16: 143–150.

Lagos, Ricardo, and Randall Wright. 2005. “A Unified Framework for Monetary Theory
  and Policy Analysis.” Journal of Political Economy, 113(3): 463–484.

Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin. 1998. “Unique Equilibrium in a Model of Self-
  Fulfilling Attacks.” American Economic Review, 88: 587–597.

Reis, Ricardo. 2009. “Interpreting the Unconventional U.S. Monetary Policy of 2007-09.”
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 40(Fall): 119–182.

Reis, Ricardo. 2011. “Where to Inject Liquidity: A General-Equilibrium Analysis of a
  Financial Crisis.” Columbia University.

Whelan, Karl. 2012. “TARGET2 and Central Bank Balance Sheets.” University College
  Dublin.




                                            19
