NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REALLOCATION AND TECHNOLOGY:
EVIDENCE FROM THE U.S. STEEL INDUSTRY
Allan Collard-Wexler
Jan De Loecker
Working Paper 18739
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18739
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2013

This project was funded by the Center for Economic Policy Studies (CEPS) at Princeton University
and the Center for Global Economy and Business (CGEB) at New York University. We would like
to thank Jun Wen for excellent research assistance, and Jonathan Fisher for conversations and help
with Census Data. We would like to thank Rob Clark, Liran Einav, Ariel Pakes, Kathryn Shaw, Chad
Syverson, Raluca Dragusanu, and seminar participants at many institutions. This paper uses restricted
data that was analyzed at the U.S. Census Bureau Research Data Center in New York City. Any opinions
and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views
of the U.S. Census Bureau or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All results have been reviewed
to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Allan Collard-Wexler and Jan De Loecker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Reallocation and Technology: Evidence from the U.S. Steel Industry
Allan Collard-Wexler and Jan De Loecker
NBER Working Paper No. 18739
January 2013
JEL No. L1,O3
ABSTRACT
We measure the impact of a drastic new technology for producing steel – the minimill – on the aggregate
productivity of U.S. steel producers, using unique plant-level data between 1963 and 2002. We find
that the sharp increase in the industry's productivity is linked to this new technology, and operates
through two distinct mechanisms. First, minimills displaced the older technology, called vertically
integrated production, and this reallocation of output was responsible for a third of the increase in
the industry's productivity. Second, increased competition, due to the expansion of minimills, drove
a substantial reallocation process within the group of vertically integrated producers, driving a resurgence
in their productivity, and consequently of the industry's productivity as a whole.
Allan Collard-Wexler
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street
KMC-7-80
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
wexler@nyu.edu
Jan De Loecker
Department of Economics
307 Fisher Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
jdeloeck@princeton.edu

Reallocation and Technology:
Evidence from the U.S. Steel Industry

∗

Allan Collard-Wexler and Jan De Loecker
NYU and NBER, and Princeton University, NBER and CEPR
First version February 2012, current version January 2013

Abstract
We measure the impact of a drastic new technology for producing steel – the minimill –
on the aggregate productivity of U.S. steel producers, using unique plant-level data between
1963 and 2002. We find that the sharp increase in the industry’s productivity is linked to
this new technology, and operates through two distinct mechanisms. First, minimills displaced
the older technology, called vertically integrated production, and this reallocation of output
was responsible for a third of the increase in the industry’s productivity. Second, increased
competition, due to the expansion of minimills, drove a substantial reallocation process within
the group of vertically integrated producers, driving a resurgence in their productivity, and
consequently of the industry’s productivity as a whole.

1

Introduction

Identifying the sources of productivity growth of firms, industries, and countries, has been a central
question for economic research. There remain, however, many empirical obstacles to credibly
identify the underlying sources of productivity growth. First, the measurement of productivity at
the producer level typically requires an estimate of the production function and, therefore, has to
confront both the endogeneity of inputs and unobserved prices for inputs and outputs. Second,
it is difficult to observe potential explanatory variables at the producer level, such as technology,
competition, and management practices.1 Finally, in order to establish causality, exogenous shifters
∗

This project was funded by the Center for Economic Policy Studies (CEPS) at Princeton University and the
Center for Global Economy and Business (CGEB) at New York University. We would like to thank Jun Wen for
excellent research assistance, and Jonathan Fisher for conversations and help with Census Data. We would like
to thank Rob Clark, Liran Einav, Ariel Pakes, Kathryn Shaw, Chad Syverson, Raluca Dragusanu, and seminar
participants at many institutions. This paper uses restricted data that was analyzed at the U.S. Census Bureau
Research Data Center in New York City. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no
confidential information is disclosed.
1
See Syverson (2011) for an excellent overview of the various potential determinants of productivity at both the
producer and industry level. Two prominent studies on the triggers of productivity growth are Schmitz (2005) and
Olley and Pakes (1996), who study the role of two such triggers: import competition in the iron ore market and
deregulation in the telecommunications market. Hortaçsu and Syverson (2004), Bloom, Eifert, Mahajan, McKenzie,
and Roberts (2011), and Jarmin, Klimek, and Miranda (2009) show that factors such as vertical integration, management, and large retail chains lead to systematic differences in productivity between plants and consequently, have
implications for aggregate industry performance.

1

of such variables are required in order to trace out their effects on productivity.
In this paper, we shed light on the role of a specific driver: the arrival of a new technology. We
evaluate the impact of a drastic technological change on aggregate productivity growth, while at the
same time controlling for potentially additional drivers of productivity growth such as international
competition, geography, and firm-level factors such as organization and management.
A recent literature has emphasized the distinction between the productivity effects that occur at
the producer level, and those realized by moving resources between producers – i.e., the reallocation
mechanism. Although it is well established, by now, at both a theoretical and empirical level that
the reallocation of resources across producers is important in explaining aggregate outcomes, it has
been very hard to identify the exact mechanisms behind it.2 In this paper, we focus on the role of
technology and associated changes in competition in driving reallocation.
We examine one particular industry, the U.S. steel sector, for which we have detailed producerlevel production and price data. Our setting is well suited to measuring the role of technological
change, since we directly observe the exogenous arrival of a new production process – the minimill
– at the plant level. In addition, we observe detailed output and input data, including physical
measures of inputs and outputs, as well as standard revenue and expenditure data, to obtain
measures of productivity and market power. These inputs and outputs are remarkably unchanging
over a forty year period, and the steel products shipped in the sixties are very similar to those
shipped in 2000. Thus, productivity growth in steel is almost uniquely driven by process innovation,
rather than through the introduction of new goods. The long panel, 1963-2002, of steel producers
allows us to study the long-run implications of increased competition, such as the (slow) entry and
exit process.
The U.S. steel industry shed about 75 percent of its workforce between 1962 to 2005, or about
400,000 employees. This dramatic fall in employment has far-reaching economic and social implications. For example, between 1950 to 2000, Pittsburg – which used to be the center of the U.S.
Steel Industry – dropped from the 10th largest city in the United States to the 52nd largest.
While employment in the Steel Sector fell by a factor of five, shipments of steel products in 2005
reached the same level of the early sixties.Thus output per worker has grown by a factor of five,
while total factor productivity (TFP) increased by 38 percent. Over the last three decades, this
makes the steel sector one the fastest growing industries among large manufacturing industries,
behind only the computer software and equipment industries. We highlight the special features
of the U.S. steel industry in Table 1, where we report the change in output, employment and
TFP over the period 1972-2002 for the U.S. steel sector and compare it to the mean and median
manufacturing sector’s experience.
Table 1 points out the unique feature of the steel industry: The period of impressive productivity
growth, 28 percent compared to the median of 3 percent, occurred while the sector contracted by
35 percent. The starkest difference is the drop in employment of 80 percent compared to a decline
2

For instance Melitz (2003), shows how trade liberalization impacts aggregate productivity through a reallocation
towards more-productive firms, while Foster, Haltiwanger, and Krizan (2001) and Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and
Scarpetta (2009) document the role of reallocation empirically, using firm-level data.

2

of 5 percent for the average sector.
We find that the main reason for the rapid productivity growth and the associated decline in
employment is neither a steady drop in steel consumption, nor a consequence of globalization. Nor
is it a displacement of production away from the midwest. The increase in productivity can be
directly linked to the introduction of a new production technology, the steel minimill. The minimill
displaced the older technology, called vertically integrated production, and this reallocation of
output was responsible for about a third of the increase in the industry’s total factor productivity.
In addition, minimills’ productivity steadily increased through a slow process of learning by doing.
We directly attribute almost half of the aggregate productivity growth to the entry of this new
technology.
However, the older technology was not entirely displaced. Instead, vertically integrated producers experienced a dramatic resurgence of productivity and, by 2002, are on average as productive
as minimills. This resurgence was not driven by improvements at integrated plants. Instead, lessproductive vertically integrated plants were driven out of the industry, and output was reallocated
to more-efficient producers. We find that the increased competition, due to the entry and expansion
of minimills, was directly responsible for this reallocation process among incumbents.
In addition to identifying the exact mechanisms underlying productivity growth, which are of
interest to a growing literature on reallocation and productivity dispersion, the steel industry is
also important in and of itself. Even today, it is one of the largest sectors in U.S. manufacturing:
In 2007, steel plants had shipments of over 100 billion dollars, of which half was value added.
Therefore, understanding the sources of productivity growth in this industry is of independent
interest.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we discuss the rich plant-level
data from the Census. In Section 3, we present five key facts that help guide the empirical analysis,
which we take up in Section 4. We discuss alternative explanations in Section 5 and conclude in
Section 6.

2

Data

We study the production of steel: plants engaged in the production of either carbon or alloy
steels.We rely on detailed Census micro data to investigate the mechanisms underlying the impressive productivity growth in the U.S. steel sector. Our analysis is based on plant-level production
data of U.S. steel mills from 1963 to 2002.
We use data provided by the Center for Economics Studies at the United States Census Bureau.
Our primary sources are the Census of Manufacturers (CMF), the Annual Survey of Manufacturers
(ASM), and the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD). We select plants engaged in the production
of steel, coded in either NAICS (North American Industrial Classification) code 33111, or SIC
(Standard Industrial Classification) code 3312. The CMF is sent to all steel mills every five years,
while the ASM is sent to about 50 percent of plants in non-Census years. However, the ASM

3

samples all plants with over 250 employees and, encompasses over 90% of the output of the steel
sector.
In addition, we collect data on the products produced at each plant using the product trailer
to the CMF and the ASM, and, collect the materials consumed by these plants from the material
trailer to the CMF.
We rely on our detailed micro data to break up steel mills into two technologies: Minimills
(MM, hereafter) and Vertical Integrated (VI, hereafter) Producers. VI production takes place
in two steps. The first stage takes place in a blast furnace, which combines coke, iron ore, and
limestone to produce pig iron and slag. The pig iron, along with oxygen and fuel, is then used
in a basic oxygen furnace (BOF) to produce steel.3 The steel products produced in either MM
or VI plants are shaped into sheets, bars, wire, and tube in rolling mills. These rolling mills are
frequently collocated with steel mills, but can also be freestanding units.
In contrast, MMs are identified primarily by the use of an electric arc furnace (EAF) to melt
down a combination of scrap steel and direct reduced iron. Because these mills have a far smaller
efficient scale, they are, on average, an order of magnitude smaller than vertically integrated producers. Historically EAFs were used to produce lower-quality steels, such as those used to make
steel bars, while virtually all steel sheet (needing higher-quality steel), was produced in BOFs.
However, since the mid-1980s, innovation in the EAFs has enabled them to produce certain types
of steel sheet products, as well.4
We classify plants into minimills, vertically integrated plants, and rolling mills using their
response to a specific questionnaire on steel mills attached to the 1997, 2002, and 2007 CMF. For
prior years, we use the material and products produced by each plant to identify MM and VI plants.
More detail on the classification of plants can be found in the Data Appendix. Table A.3 shows
summary statistics for the sample of MM and VI plants. The average VI plant had shipments of
647 million dollars, of which 47 percent is value added, while the average MM plant shipped 153
million dollars, of which 44 percent is value added.

3

Key Facts in the U.S. steel sector 1963-2002

In this section, we briefly go over some key facts of the U.S. steel sector. These facts will be
important to keep in mind when we analyze the sources of productivity growth.

3.1

Stagnant Shipments, Rising Productivity

From Table 1, we know that the productivity growth in the U.S. steel sector was one of the fastest
in manufacturing. To better understand this period of impressive productivity growth, we plot
total output next to labor and capital use in Figure 1. An important observation is that the
3
There were a few open-hearth furnaces in operation during the sample period. However, as of the late 1960s,
open-hearth plants account for only a very small portion of output, and the last open-hearth plant closed in 1991.
See Oster (1982) for more on the diffusion of BOF mills.
4
EAFs have a long history in steel making. However, before the 1960s, they primarily produced specialty steels.

4

period of productivity growth came about while the industry as a whole contracted severely: Steel
producers sold about 60 billion dollars in 1960 and, reached 100 billion dollars in shipments by the
early seventies. A decade later, only 40 billion dollars were shipped, or, put differently, the sector’s
shipments decreased by more than half.
Total employment, on the other hand, consistently decreased, even during the recovery of output
in the late eighties and throughout the nineties. The employment panel of Figure 1 shows that
total employment fell from 500,000 to 100,000 employees. This is one of the sharpest drops in
employment experienced by any sector in the U.S. economy. By 2000, the steel industry employed
a fifth of the number of workers that it did in 1960, while production of steel went from 130 million
tons in 1960 to 110 million tons in 2000. This implies that output per worker increased from 260 to
1100 tons.5 Total material use tracks output quite closely, while labor and capital fell continuously
over the entire period, which suggests that TFP had to increase to offset the sharp drop in labor
and capital.6

3.2

A New Production Technology: Minimills

The entry of minimills in steel production constituted a drastic change in the actual production
process of steel products. A natural question to ask is whether MM are any different than the
traditional VI steel producers. We rely on a descriptive OLS regression where we regress direct
measurable characteristics on an indicator variable, whether a plant is a vertically integrated producer. We consider a log specification such that the coefficient on the technology dummy directly
measures the percentage premium of VI plants.
Table A.2 lists the set of estimated coefficients, and confirms that vertically integrated producers
are, on average, four times bigger, as measured by the large coefficients on shipments, value added,
and inputs. For example, VI plants, on average, ship 144 percent more than MM. Moreover, VI
producers generate about 20 percent more shipments per worker, which suggests that they are more
productive. However, when we combine the coefficients on all three inputs (labor, materials and
capital) with the shipment premium, we see that total factor productivity (TFP) of MM is at least
as high as that of VI producers. We turn to a more precise comparison of TFP across technologies
in Section 4.
In addition to the average premium over the entire sample, we report time-specific coefficients.
Across all the various characteristics, the VI coefficient falls over time. Most notably, shipments per
worker were 23-percent higher for VI plants in 1963, but by 2002, there was no significant difference
between the two technologies in terms of labor productivity. This pattern suggests that, over time,
VI and MM producers became more alike, although VI producers still produce on a larger scale.
The coefficients on wages of six percent, shown in the last row of Table A.2, confirms the wellknown fact that VI producers, on average, pay higher wages. This is likely due to the impact of
5
Shipments of steel in tons are collected from various Iron and Steel Institute Annual Statistical Reports (American
Iron and Steel Institute, 2010).
6
For this aggregate analysis, we rely on the NBER’s five-factor TFP estimate. See Bartelsman, Becker, and Gray
(2000) for more detail.

5

unionization – minimill workers typically being non-unionized.7 It is interesting to note that the
wage gap between the technologies closes over time.
An important difference between MM and VI producers is the set of products they manufacture.
Figure 2 shows that in 1997 MMs accounted for 59 percent and 68 percent of shipments of steel
ingots and hot-rolled bar, but only 15 percent and 14 percent of hot and cold rolled sheet. MM
typically produce lower quality steel products, which are generally thicker products, while VI plants
produce higher quality products, which are usually sheet products. However, the product mix
accounted for by MM changed dramatically over the last 40 years. Figure 2 shows that, in 1977,
MMs produced 27 percent of steel ingots and 24 percent of hot-rolled bar. Between 1977 and 1982,
MMs increased their share of these products to 40 percent, and by 2002, 81 percent of hot-rolled
bar was produced by MMs. As stated above, in 1997, only 15 percent and 14 percent of hot and
cold rolled sheet are produced by MMs.8 Thus, the market share of MM in the higher-quality
product segments, sheet products, was rather stable up to 1997, after which their market shares
did increase substantially.

3.3

A Stable Product Mix over Time

We list the product mix of the steel industry in Table A.3. We break down steel into various
products: a) hot-rolled steel sheet (HRS) b) hot-rolled bar (HRB) c) cold-rolled sheet (CRS) d)
ingots and shapes e) pipe and tube (P&T) f) Wire g) cold-finished bars (CFB), and h) coke oven
and blast furnace products (Blast). Over 40 years, the product mix for steel has barely changed.
Hot-rolled sheet account for 23 percent of shipments in 1963 and 31 percent in 2002, and hot-rolled
bar account for 23 percent of shipments in 1963 and 22 percent in 2002.
The fact that the steel industry’s products have been unchanged is essential for our identification
of productivity growth, as the industry’s production process has changed far more than its products.

3.4

Heterogeneous Price Trends Across Products

While the product mix of steel producers has been relatively unchanged from 1963 to today, the
prices for these products have dropped considerably, which is unsurprising given the large increases
in TFP in the industry. Figure 6 presents the price indices for the four main products – hot and
cold rolled sheet, hot rolled bar and steel ingots – which, taken together, represent 80 percent of
shipments in 1997.9
Figure 6 shows that the prices of all steel products followed a very similar, and gradually
increasing, pattern up to 1980. But from 1982 to 2000, there is a 50-percent drop in the real price
7

See Hoerr (1988) – and in particular, page 16 – for evidence of the role of unionization on wages for VI and MM
producers.
8
Giarratani, Gruver, and Jackson (2007) discuss the entry of Minimills into the production of sheet products
around 1990.
9
We have taken care to deflate these price indices by the GDP deflator to show price trends for steel relative to
the rest of the economy.

6

of steel. This implies that, while shipments of steel in dollars dropped since 1980, the quantity
shipped has gradually increased since the mid-eighties (see Panel 1 of Figure 1).10
In addition, when we decompose these price trends further, we find that the prices of hot-rolled
bars and steel ingots have fallen faster than the prices for hot and cold rolled sheet. While sheet
steel is produced primarily by VI producers, prices for bar and ingot products fell by ten percent
more than those for sheet products in 1982-1984. This occurred precisely at the point at which
MM saw an increase of their market share of bar and ingot products.
In order to correctly identify the productivity effect of the arrival of the minimills, and their
associated increased competition, it will therefore be imperative to control for price differences
across plants and time.

3.5

Simultaneous Entry and Exit

From Figure 1, we know that the number of plants increased over time. In Table 2, we go a step
further, and show both the number of MM and VI plants that entered or exited, and as well as the
market share these plants represent. There was marked entry of new plants in the early eighties, a
period during which the industry as a whole was severely contracted.
The market share of plants entering from 1982 to 1992 was 20 percent, versus five percent in the
previous two decades, while the market share of exitors was 18 percent during this period. Most
entry in this period was due to minimills, and most exit was from vertically integrated producers.11
From these entry and exit statistics, we expect an important role for entry and exit in explaining
productivity growth.

4

Drivers of productivity growth

The previous section highlighted the difference in performance between MM and VI producers, and
suggests a large potential role for reallocation across these technologies in explaining productivity
growth. This paper is concerned with studying the productivity differences in detail and verify the
extent to which the entry of minimills contributed to the stark aggregate productivity growth in
the industry, and we proceed in two steps.
First, we start by presenting our empirical framework. Second, we rely on our productivity
estimates to verify the importance of reallocation, both across and within technology, in productivity growth. We consider both static and dynamic decompositions, which enables us to investigate
the importance of entry and exit in productivity growth. Finally, we relate a direct measure of
competition – markups – to the reallocation analysis by connecting markups to the analysis of
reallocation, which relates market shares to productivity.
10

Annual reports of the American Iron and Steel Institute (2010), where total tons of steel are recorded annually,
indicate that quantity produced increased by about thirty percent between 1982 and 2002.
11
This phenomenon, the speeding up of exit and entry during a downturn, has been documented by Bresnahan
and Raff (1991) in the motor vehicles industry during the Great Depression.

7

4.1

Productivity Differences Across Technology

Denote each technology – either MM or VI – as ψ ∈ {V I, M M }.12 A plant i at time t can produce
output Qijt of a given product j, using a technology ψ specific production technology:
Qijt = Fψ,t (Lijt , Mijt , Kijt ) exp(ωit ).

(1)

Our notation highlights that VI and MM producers rely on different technologies, which we allow
to vary over time. As is common in the literature, productivity ωit is modeled as a Hicks-neutral
term. Moreover, we assume that productivity is plant-specific.
4.1.1

Measurement

Recovering productivity using revenue and expenditure data requires that we correct for potential
price variation across plants and time, for both output and inputs. Below, we describe our procedure
briefly, and Appendix C provides more details.
In order to guarantee that we recover productivity, ωit , using plant/product revenue data, we
construct a plant-specific price (Pit ) . We assume that each product j is homogeneous, and we
directly observe each price Pjt in the product-level BLS price data. Furthermore, we follow the
literature and consider a Cobb-Douglas specification by type. We can, therefore, write equation
(1) as:
αm αk
Rijt = Lαijtl Mijt
Kijt exp(ωit )Pjt .

(2)

Since we are interested in recovering a measure of productivity at the plant level, we aggregate
product-level sales up to plant-level sales. A common restriction in these type of data is that we
do not directly observe the input use by product (see Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson 2008). We
allocate inputs across products using product-specific sales shares, sijt =
sijt Xit with X =

{L, M, K}.13

Rijt
Rit ,

such that Xijt ≡

After aggregating (2) to the plant level we obtain:

P

Rit
= Lαitl Mitαm Kitαk exp(ωit ).
s
P
j ijt jt

(3)

Although the focus in the literature has mostly been on the heterogeneity of output prices,
input price variation potentially plagues the measurement of productivity as well. The data on
intermediate input use, Mit , are potentially the most contaminated by input price variation, both
in the the time series, and in the cross-section, particularly between MM and VI plants. The
two technologies use vastly different intermediate inputs, or use inputs at very different intensities
12
Plants cannot change from one technology to another. In the steel industry, a plant never switches technology,
such as becoming a minimill. This is in contrast to the a setting of technology adoption. See Van Biesebroeck (2003)
for an empirical analysis of technology adoption in US car manufacturing.
13
As discussed in detail in Appendix C, this implies that we implicitly restrict markups to be common across
products within a plant. We are not interested in explaining within-plant markup differences across products, but
mainly aim to recover measures of plant-level productivity that are not contaminated by price variation across plants
and time.

8

and, therefore, we expect the relevant input price to vary substantially across plants of different
technologies.
We construct our input price deflators in a similar way as the output price deflator. First,
we need to distinguish between our three main input categories: labor, intermediate inputs and
capital. We directly observe labor Lit : hours worked at the plant-level. For capital, we rely on the
NBER capital deflator (Ptk ) to correct the capital stock series.
We construct an intermediate input price index Pnt for each intermediate input n, where
n = {Fuels, Electricity, Coal for Coke, Iron Ore, and Scrap Steel}, using either the NBER fuel
price deflator, or reported quantities and costs in the material trailer to the CMF (which allow
us to back out prices). We construct a plant-specific input price index (PitM ) using a weighted
average of these intermediate input specific prices, Pnt , where the shares are the share of an intermediate n in total intermediate input use. Deflated intermediate input use is, thus, given by
P ME
E
Mit = n P int
M , where Mint is the expenditure of plant i, at time t, on intermediate input n.
it

We present the time series pattern of our constructed input price index in Figure B.1. We
compare the publicly available NBER Material Price Index (NBER MPI) with our constructed
input price index. We compute the mean of the latter by technology and find that the NBER MPI
follows our price index closely. However, the aggregate input price index hides the heterogeneity
in input prices, in particular during the energy price spike in the late seventies and early eighties.
This is particularly important given our focus on correctly identifying productivity differences across
technology: We would overestimate the productivity premium for minimills. While input prices
were very similar around 1972, by 1982, integrated producers faced almost 20-percent-higher input
prices and this fact would artificially increase the productivity premium for minimills.
We estimate the production function using our constructed output and input price deflators
using:
q̃it = βl lit + βm mit + βk kit + ωit + it ,

(4)

where lower cases indicate logs of deflated variables when appropriate.14 We allow for unanticipated
shocks to production and measurement error in output and prices, as captured by it .15 In the next
section, we report the production function coefficients, and the corresponding minimill productivity
premium, if any, under various specifications.
4.1.2

Production function coefficients and technology premium

We start by considering a few baseline specifications for the standard Cobb-Douglas production
function. Table 3 presents estimates of the production function. Columns I, II and III show results
with output defined as sales deflated by an aggregate price deflator, while Columns IV through
14
15

E.g., q̃it = ln



P Rit
j sijt Pjt



and mit = ln

E
Mint
n Pnt

P



.

Formally the inclusion of it is compatible with the existence of measurement error and unanticipated shocks
in both revenue and price data. E.g. we observe revenue in the data and it relates to a firm’s measure as follows:
∗
Rit = Rit
exp(it ). The error term it thus captures, potentially, multiple iid error terms. The distinction is not
important for our analysis.

9

IX show estimates using plant-level output and input deflators. Columns III, VI and IX present
estimates using an investment control function approach as discussed in Ackerberg, Benkard, Berry,
and Pakes (2007). We underscore that it is important in this context to explicitly allow the
underlying demand and technology factors to vary with the technology type. More specifically, we
index the investment policy function, the exit rule and the productivity process with the technology
type indicator. Appendix C.1 provides more details on the estimation procedure. We compare our
results to a few baseline OLS estimates, listed in the other columns, to highlight the importance of
our corrections.
The production function coefficients, across all specifications, are stable and have reasonable
estimates of returns to scale and output elasticities. An important test for our purpose is to
check whether minimills and vertically integrated producers rely on different input factor shares.
In order to test this, we simply interact every coefficient with our technology type dummy and
run a F -test on the joint significance of the interacted coefficients. In doing so, we cannot reject
that both technologies produce under the same output elasticities of labor, materials, and capital.
At first, it might seem surprising that, for instance, the coefficient on materials does not vary
across technologies. However, note that this coefficient reflects the importance of the total use of
intermediate inputs in final production. Aggregating over the various intermediate inputs into Mit
masks the distinct inputs used in production, which differ tremendously by technology.16
Four main results emerge from this analysis. First, minimills are, on average, more productive,
as indicated by a negative coefficient on the VI dummy. Under specification I, minimills have a
three-percent-higher TFP than vertically integrated producers, but this is not statistically significant. This result is surprising, both since industry participants believe that minimills are more
productive, and since these plants show large increases in market share over the sample period.
Second, the TFP premium for minimills decreases over time as indicated by the positive coefficient of 0.3 percent on the technology-year. Although this coefficient is relatively small in
magnitude, one has to keep in mind that our sample covers 40 years, which implies that by the
end of our sample, the TFP premium for MM has disappeared. This will be important when we
compute our decompositions – i.e., we expect the impact of minimills in aggregate productivity
growth to be concentrated at the beginning of the sample.
Third, the results in Panel B demonstrate the importance of controlling for unobserved prices
in the revenue-generating production function (Panel A) and confirm the findings of De Loecker
(2011). In particular when we correct for plant-specific prices, we find that the minimill TFP
premium is twice as high, and becomes significant. The impact of including detailed price data
on the technology coefficient is as expected since we know from Figure 6 that VI plants are active
in the relatively higher-quality segments, where producer prices are higher. Therefore, when we
do not properly deflate the sales data, the productivity premium for minimills is dampened. The
results in column IX indicate that correcting for differences in input prices across plants and time, in
16

For instance, in 2002, Iron and Steel Scrap represented 42 percent of the coded material inputs for minimills, and
Coal for the production of Coke represented 15 percent of the coded material inputs for vertically integrated plants.

10

particular across technology, has the predicted effect: The magnitude of the minimill productivity
premium is somewhat lower, 6.3 percent versus 11 percent, but it is still highly significant and
substantial. The lower point estimate reflects the pattern of input prices in Figure B.1, that input
prices for VI producers were higher in the late seventies and early eighties.
The impact of our price corrections are as expected. To illustrate our results, we find it useful
to write out the potential bias induced by not deflating either output or inputs in light of our
productivity analysis. We refer the reader to De Loecker (2011) and De Loecker, Goldberg, Khandelwal, and Pavcnik (2012) for more details on the impact of unobserved output and input prices,
respectively. Using our production function, it is easy to show that, without deflating, the following
equation is estimated on the data (in fact, Panel A considers such a specification):
M
rit = βl lit + βk kit + βm mE
it + ωit + pit − βm pit + it .

(5)

This equation relates plant-level revenue (rit ) to (physical) labor, capital, and intermediate input use
that potentially still contains input price variation (mE
it ). In addition to unobserved productivity,
and a standard error term (), the production function also includes two price errors: (1) output
price and (2) intermediate input price. Two observations are important to make. First, we will
obtain biased production function coefficients since it is very likely that input use (both in physical
terms and in expenditure terms for materials) is correlated with output and input prices. Second,
the estimate for productivity is obtained using biased coefficients and will also include output and
input price variation. We would not correctly identify the productivity difference between minimills
and integrated plants without correcting for price variation, at both the input and output level.
Fourth, the selection and simultaneity biases understate the productivity advantages of minimills. Attenuation bias lowers the estimated returns to scale. Since VI plants are larger than
minimills, this will make VI plants look more productive than they really are. Likewise, simultaneity typically results in downward bias on the capital coefficient. Since VI plants are more
capital-intensive than minimills, this will again make VI plants appear more productive. When we
correct for the simultaneity and selection biases in Columns III and VI, using an investment control
function correction, the capital coefficient is twice as large. Moreover, the minimill TFP premium
doubles to an average effect of 11 percent, starting at 25 percent in 1963 but disappearing by 2002.
In all the subsequent analysis, we rely on estimates of productivity, ωit , from Column VI of Table
3. We also show all our main results using the various specifications discussed in Table 3.
Technology does not explain all the differences in productivity, as the standard deviation of ωit
is about 30 percent, while differences in technology account for an 11-percent gap in productivity.
Thus, there remain substantial productivity differences between producers, both within and across
technology types. This finding sits well with recent evidence on the dispersion of productivity
across producers in narrowly defined industries. See Syverson (2011) for a recent survey.

11

4.2

The Role of Reallocation

Following Olley and Pakes (1996), we consider industry-wide aggregate productivity as the market
share, denoted by sit , weighted average of productivity ωit . In particular, we rely on the following
P
definition of aggregate productivity: Ωt ≡ i sit ωit which is different from the unweighted average
P
of productivity ω it ≡ N1t i ωit .
4.2.1

Static Analysis: introducing a between-technology covariance

In recent work, Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta (2009) discuss the usefulness of the Olley
and Pakes decomposition methodology. They highlight that the positive covariance between firm
size and productivity is a robust prediction of recent models of producer-level heterogeneity (in
productivity), such as Melitz (2003). We follow the standard decomposition of this aggregate
productivity term (also referred to as the OP decomposition) into unweighted average productivity
and the covariance between productivity and market share.
Definition Olley-Pakes Decomposition
Ωt = ω t +

X

(ωit − ω t )(sit − st ) = ω t + ΓOP
t

(6)

i

where ΓOP
is the Olley-Pakes Covariance.
t
The same decomposition can be applied by technology type ψ – i.e., treating MM and VI
producers as if they belong to separate industries – and this decomposition will help us understand
whether average productivity of the different technology types evolved differently, and whether
there is any substantial reallocation across producers of the same vintage. We call this the within
P
decomposition. The market share of each technology is denoted s(ψ)t = i∈ψ sit . Likewise, the
type-specific aggregate productivity is Ωt (ψ), while the average productivity within a technology
type is ω̄t (ψ).
Definition Within-Technology Decomposition

Ωt =

X

st (ψ) ω t (ψ) +

ψ∈M M,V I

=

X


X

(ωit − ω t (ψ))(sit (ψ) − st (ψ))

i∈ψ

st (ψ) ω t (ψ) +

ΓOP
t (ψ)

(7)


.

ψ∈M M,V I

This within decomposition reflects both the change in the actual type-specific component, the
unweighted average and the covariance term, as well as the type-specific market share.
To measure the importance of reallocation of resources between technologies, we interact the
productivity index with the type-specific market share, st (ψ). We apply the same type of decomposition, but now the unit of observation is a type hence, one can think of two plants, an aggregate

12

minimill and an aggregate vertically integrated producer. This allows us to isolate the betweenP
type reallocation component in aggregate productivity. Denote Ωt = 12 ψ Ω(ψ)t the industry
productivity if minimills and vertically integrated producers had the same market share– i.e., the
unweighted average, we obtain:
Definition Between Technology Decomposition
Ωt = Ωt +

X

(st (ψ) − 1/2)(Ωt (ψ) − Ωt ) = Ωt + ΓB
t ,

(8)

ψ∈M M,V I

where ΓB
t is the between Covariance measuring the extent to which the resource reallocation towards
minimills contributed to the aggregate productivity for the entire industry. Notice that since the
average market share is always one half, when the market share of minimills equals the market
share of vertically integrated producers, the between covariance term ΓB
t is zero, regardless the
productivity difference between the two types.17
Finally, we can group the within-technology and between-technology decomposition together to
explain aggregate TFP:
Ωt =

1
2

X

B
[ω̄t (ψ) + ΓOP
t (ψ)] + Γt .

(9)

ψ∈M M,V I

Notice that equation (9) allows us to explain changes in productivity, through i) changes in the
average productivity of minimills and vertically integrated plants (ω̄t (ψ)); ii) changes in the covariance between output and productivity for both MM and VI plants (ΓOP
t (ψ)); or iii) reallocation
across technologies (ΓB
t ).
4.2.2

Static reallocation analysis: results

Table 4 shows the various cross-sectional decompositions of aggregate productivity – Olley-Pakes,
Between, and Within – looking at their change from 1963 to 2002.
Three important results emerge. First, the Olley-Pakes decomposition of aggregate productivity
across all plants shows, the average producer became 15.5 percent more-productive between 1963
and 2002. In addition, the reallocation towards more productive plants was an important process
in generating higher productivity, generating a 7.5-percent increase from 1963 to 2002. Thus,
aggregate productivity went up by 23 percent, of which one third was due to the reallocation
towards more-productive plants. This indicates that reshuffling of market shares across producers
was an important mechanism through which the industry realized productivity gains.
Second, we find a large role for the between-technology reallocation component (ΓB ). In 1963,
the between covariance is -6.6 percent, as the older vintage of VI plants had both lower productivity
and greater market share. The between covariance ΓB then became less negative as the minimills,
17

Given the substantial entry of minimills that typically entered on a smaller scale, and remain smaller, we can
expect the covariance term to be negative –i.e., the more-productive plants have a smaller market share. But we do
expect this covariance term to become less negative over time, as Figure 2 shows that minimills started with a very
small market share and gradually captured a larger part of the market.

13

who have a productivity premium, gradually increased their market share. Towards the end of the
sample period, minimills had about half of the market, which mechanically implies a zero between
reallocation component. This between reallocation of output from VI plants to MMs accounts for a
6.3-percent increase in productivity, 27 percent of the overall productivity growth of the industry.
The fact that the arrival of a new production technology can account for changes in the covariance
term is critical since this suggests an important role for technology in explaining the reallocation
that led to a sharp increase in productivity.
Third, drilling down to the technology type, we see that minimills increased their aggregate TFP
(Ω(M M )) by ten percent, while vertically integrated plants raised their aggregate TFP (Ω(V I))
by 24 percent. This “catching-up” of vertically integrated producers mirrors the results in Table
3: While vertically integrated producers were less productive than the minimills, by the end of the
sample period, they had almost completely caught up. Interestingly, the reason for this catch-up of
vertically integrated producers is not due to changes in the Olley-Pakes covariance term ΓOP
t (ψ),
whose contribution to productivity growth is 5.2 percent for minimills and 5.3 percent for vertically
integrated producers. Rather, it was the much higher increase in average plant productivity for
vertically integrated producers (ω it (V I)) of 18.3 percent, versus a ω it (M M ) of 4.8 percent for
minimills.
Our analysis so far points to a large impact of minimill entry on shaping overall industry
productivity. We find that about 48 percent of total aggregate productivity growth can directly be
attributed to minimills, with 27 percent due to reallocation away from the old technology and the
remaining 21 percent due to productivity improvements at minimill plants, which captures learning
by doing taking place at minimills.18
4.2.3

Dynamics: the role of entry and exit

The above decomposition masks the potential impact of entry and exit on aggregate productivity.
The average productivity term ω mixes changes in productivity inside plants, with changes in the
distribution of productivity due to entry and exit. A similar concern also affects the measured
covariance terms. We turn to this and consider a dynamic version of our decomposition. Let us
consider three distinct sets of producers for a given time window t − 1, t, where t is a ten-year
window: incumbents (A), entrants (B) and exiting plants (C).19 Using these sets, we can write
aggregate productivity growth, ∆Ωt , as:
X

sit−1 ∆ωit +

i∈A

|

X

∆sit ωit−1 +

i∈A

{z

}

Plant Improvement

|

X

∆sit ∆ωit +

i∈A

{z

Reallocation

18

X

sit ωit −

X

{z

|

i∈B

}

|

sit−1 ωit−1 .

(10)

i∈C

Entry

}

{z

Exit

}

We do not pursue an explicit analysis of the learning by doing effects at minimills, since our data do not contain
the level of detail needed for us to credibly infer this process. See Benkard (2000) for such an analysis and what type
of data are key to identifying learning by doing.
19
This decomposition has been suggested by Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh (1996) and has been used in other
empirical work by e.g. De Loecker and Konings (2006).

14

The first term is denoted Plant Improvement, the next two terms on are the Reallocation terms,
and the last two terms are the Entry and Exit components. The above decomposition directly
isolates the net-entry effect on aggregate productivity by verifying the importance of the last two
components in total productivity growth. Finally, to isolate the role of entry and exit for both
types of technology separately, we expand the above by computing equation (10) by technology
type ψ. When we refer to the total impact of reallocation, we group all terms except for the
plant-improvement component.
Table 5 presents the decomposition across all plants and by technology.The first row of Table
5 restates the 23-percent productivity growth in the U.S. steel sector, but far faster growth for
vertically integrated plants than for minimills.
Across the entire sample period, over which productivity increased by 23 percent productivity
growth, within plants accounted for a 10 percent increase in aggregate productivity (or a 43 percent
share), while reallocation and net entry are responsible for the remainder. Thus, the total share of
reallocation in aggregate productivity growth, including both the reallocation induced by marketshare reallocation across incumbents and the net-entry process, is two-thirds.
A clear picture emerges when we move to the decomposition by technology. The main driver of
productivity growth for minimills is the within component of 14.7 percent, capturing the technological change in minimills. This is suggestive of the substantial learning by doing that took place in
minimill production– in particular learning how to produce higher quality steel – over the sample
period. The reallocation component is negligible.
The same analysis of VI producers yields substantially different results: The plant improvement
component, of 10.2 percent, is smaller than that of minimills (14.7 percent), the net entry term of
3.9 percent is almost 19 percent of total productivity growth over the sample. Most noteworthy is
that the reallocation term of 11.8 percent is responsible for 48 percent of industry-wide productivity
growth.
In the last row of Table 5, we restate the distinct role of the net-entry process across technologies.
We present the productivity premium of entrants, compared to the set of exiting plants. Across the
entire sample period, VI entrants were 4.4 percent more productive than those VI plants that exited
the industry. New minimills, on the other hand, entered with no specific productivity advantage.
To summarize, we find a drastic difference in the role of reallocation between technologies.
The productivity growth of minimills is entirely due to common within-plant productivity growth,
whereas integrated producers’ productivity growth came from the reallocation of resources across
producers (67 percent). In the next section, we focus on the role of reallocation among vertically
integrated producers, which was instrumental for the productivity growth among producers relying
on the old technology, and consequently triggered productivity growth for the industry as a whole.

4.3

Catching up of the old technology

So far, we have shown that a substantial part of the industry’s productivity growth can be accounted for by the arrival of the new technology and its own technological progress, capturing
15

about half of the productivity growth in the industry. The entry of the new technology, however,
spurred a dramatic reallocation process in the incumbent technology leading to a sharp increase in
productivity– where the exit margin played a key role. It is, therefore, natural to ask how incumbents became more productive. From our various decompositions we already know that the exit of
inefficient producers was a key driver, in addition to the reallocation among existing producers.
To uncover the underlying mechanism, we incorporate the product space of the industry. We
know from Figure 6 that the market-share trajectories of minimills for, broadly speaking, two product categories – bar products and sheet products – were very different. Indeed, minimills took over
bar products, but not sheet products. Therefore we verify whether the substantial productivity
gains among (surviving) VI producers over our sample period were related to the product-market
competition – i.e., did VI producers of bar products exit, leaving only those VI producers specializing in sheet products? In other words: How important was the increased competition, due to
minimill entry, for incumbents’s productive efficiency?
The distinction between the two product groups is relevant to the extent that (1) there exists
a productivity difference among bar and sheet producers, and (2) survival is related to specialization.20 In order to verify whether this mechanism is important in the data, we first test whether
plants specializing in sheet products were, on average, more productive, than those specializing
in bar products. Subsequently, we ask whether the product specialization variable predicts plant
survival. We run both tests on the total sample of plants in our data, and on the subsample of
VI producers. In the latter, we compare plants of the same technology and verify whether product
specialization can explain the rapid productivity growth among the group of VI producers.
Table 6 estimates both a technology and sheet-specialization productivity premium for a number
of specifications, where sheet specialization refers to the share of a plant’s revenue accounted for
by sheet products.21 In Panel A, we consider all plants in the industry, and find a robust and
highly significant productivity advantage for plants specializing in sheet products, while controlling
for technology, and an exhaustive set of fixed effects. Even if we compare plants of the same
technology, within the same firm and state, in the same year, we find a 12 percent productivity
premium for plants that completely specialized in sheet. In Panel B, we focus on the VI producers,
and find a similar premium. These results, therefore, strongly suggest that the rapid productivity
growth of VI producers was due to the reallocation from bar to sheet producers. The latter is
consistent with the market-share trajectories presented in Figure 6, which showed MM taking over
bar products but not sheet products.
Taking the sheet productivity premium as given, we verify whether VI producers producing
primarily sheet products had a higher likelihood of survival. In Table 7, we present survival
20

A potential third component would be the change in product specialization at the plant level over time. However,
we find very little change in product specialization over time; and thus this mechanism cannot generate within-plant
productivity improvements. This finding sits well with our implicit assumption of plant-level productivity.
21
For all practical purposes, minimills do not produce sheet products. Moreover, there is little year-to-year variation
in the share of revenues accounted for by sheet products within a plant. This suggests that it is difficult to alter
the product mix at the plant level. Given the lack of within-plant variation in sheet specialization, regressions with
plant-level fixed effects will have little power to identify the productivity premia of sheet producers.

16

regressions, where we run an indicator of plant survival – whether a plant which was in active
in 1963, survived until 2002 – against plant technology and sheet specialization.22 In Panel A, we
consider all plants in the industry and find that the sheet specialization ratio variable has a strong
positive impact on a plant’s survival probability, holding fixed its technology. Indeed, a plant that
was fully specialized in sheet had a 31-percent-higher probability of surviving than a plant that
was fully specialized in bar. This is a very large effect, as plants have a 33-percent likelihood of
survival to begin with. Moreover, this effect is robust to controlling for the plant’s capital and
productivity– standard predictors of plant survival.23
The productivity difference between sheet and bar producers is only relevant to the extent that
it exists among integrated producers. In Panel B, we focus on VI producers and find a very similar
effect: VI producers specializing in sheet products in 1963 had a 31-percent-higher probability of
surviving to the year 2002. We note that predicting plant survival over a forty year period is a
very demanding task. Even when our sample size is reduced to 78 VI producers active in 1963,
we obtain a t-statistic of 1.6 on the sheet-specialization variable, while controlling for capital and
productivity.
Thus, the joint productivity and survival premium for sheet producers helps explain the overall
productivity growth of VI producers in the aftermath of minimill entry. Minimills increased competition in the bar market, leading to the exit of inefficient VI producers. As a consequence, the
set of remaining VI producers was more productive due to an increased concentration in the sheet
product market. This mechanism, therefore, manifests itself in substantially higher productivity of
VI producers and a dramatic drop of VI’s market share of bar products. In light of our decomposition results, presented in Tables 4 and 5, 34 percent of the industry’s productivity growth is due to
the reallocation process among VI producers, in which the specialization in sheet products seem to
have played a crucial role. To obtain the 34 percent contribution, we use the fact that 67 percent
of the VI productivity growth was due to reallocation (Table 5).
Finally, the only component we have not explained is the pure within-plant productivity growth
component for VI producers, which, according to our results in Table 5, accounts for only 13 percent
of aggregate TFP growth. This common shift of the production frontier for VI producers captures
the direct technological innovations in steel making at integrated plants due to active investments,
and improvements in technical efficiency. Put another way, it would be surprising if 40 years of
innovation in the engineering and management of vertically integrated plants had not manifested
itself in increased productivity. Still, this means that 87 percent of total productivity growth can
be attributed to the reallocation induced by minimill entry.
22
These results are robust to looking at survival from 1967, 1972 or even 1977, until 2002. Likewise, these results
are also robust to looking at survival until 1997 and 1992.
23
See Collard-Wexler (2009) and the references therein.

17

4.4

Market Power and Reallocation

The drop in demand for U.S. steel producers and the variation in the market-shares trajectories
across products point to drastic changes in competition. We argued that the entry of the minimill intensified competition for domestic steel producers, in particular for the bar segment of the
industry (see Section 4.3). In addition to this increased domestic competition, it is well known
that international competition intensified through a substantial increase of imports. The increased
competition is expected to affect a plant’s residual demand curve and, therefore, impact its ability to charge a price above marginal cost. The change in the residual demand elasticity, and its
associated markup response, are expected to affect the reallocation across producers, as well.
We rely on our empirical framework to (1) show that markups indeed decreased as competition
increased, and (2) show how lower markups are directly related to our measure of reallocation, the
covariance of productivity and a plant’s market share.
A nice feature of our approach is that we can generate measures of market power from our
estimates of the production function. We rely on our production function framework to recover
markups by technology type and plant. In order to obtain markups from the plant-level production
data, we follow the approach suggested by De Loecker and Warzynski (2012). Appendix C.2
presents the details of this approach. At the core of this approach lies the assumption that plants
minimize costs and that at least one input of production faces no adjustment costs.
The two main ingredients of computing markups are the output elasticity of intermediate inputs,
such as materials and energy, and the corresponding expenditure share of the input. The latter is
directly observed in the data, whereas the output elasticities are recovered after we estimate the
production function as discussed above.
We compute markups by technology as obtained from technology-specific aggregate expenditures on an intermediate input (Et (ψ)), materials in our case, and sales (Rt (ψ)) while relying on a
time-invariant Cobb-Douglas output elasticity of the intermediate input (βm ):
µt (ψ) = βm

Rt (ψ)
.
Et (ψ)

(11)

Under the commonly assumed Cobb-Douglas production function these markups are in fact the
correct technology-specific markups, with the markup by technology thought of as a weighted
average across plants where the weights are the expenditure share on materials of a given plant in
the total expenditures for plants of the same technology.24 Figure 4 plots the markup trajectory
over 40 years for both MM and VI plants. Markups have steadily decreased over time and are
consistent with the drop in prices and external measures of concentration reported for the steel
sector. Markups were, on average, higher for minimills, confirming the results from the augmented
production function estimation in Table 3, and this is as expected since they produce more efficiently
while competing in the same product market.
24

To see this, use ciψt =

Eit
Et (ψ)

in the share weighted markup expression for a type ψ, where ciψt is the share of an
P
P
Rt (ψ)
Rit
i∈ψ ciψt µit =
i∈ψ ciψt βm Eit = βm Et (ψ) .

individual plant in the type’s total: µt (ψ) =

18

Markups fell at the same time as the covariance between output and productivity increases.
Suppose that this fall in markups is due to a firms’ residual demand curve becoming more elastic.
In other words, markups fell because the product market for steel became more competitive. This
does not seem unlikely since there are far more steel producers in 2002 than 1963 competing over
a roughly similar market size.25
A more elastic residual demand curve will accentuate the relationship between productivity and
output. Furthermore, the increase in the residual demand curve for integrated firms is consistent
with the increased competition from minimills and a resulting decline in their market share. A
similar point is made, in the context of variable markups and trade liberalization, by Edmond,
Midrigan, and Xu (2012) and Mayer, Melitz, and Ottaviano (2011). Thus we expect the extent of
competition to be directly linked to reallocation, which is what we find in the data.

5

Alternative explanations and Robustness Analysis

In this section, we explore various alternatives that can potentially help explain the sharp increase
in productivity growth. It is important to note that these alternatives are not mutual exclusive.
The point of this section is not to argue that only technology was responsible for bringing about the
efficiency gains. We show that our main results are not affected by controlling for these alternative
explanations: Firm-level characteristics, geography, and international trade do not appear to play a
role in explaining either the differences in productivity between minimills and vertically integrated
producers, or the reallocation between these technologies.
Finally, we present the main results from our decomposition analysis using a variety of productivity estimates (as presented in Table 3). We discuss the robustness of our results, and highlight
the importance of our corrections in establishing a prominent role of technology in generating
aggregate productivity growth.

5.1

Management practices and ownership

Our analysis, thus far, has been focused on plants. To the extent that better plants are managed
by better firms, we are potentially attributing productivity differences across plants to technology,
where it might simply reflect that more-productive plants, regardless which technology they use,
are better-managed or belong to more efficiently organized firms. The potential role for firm-level
variables explaining productivity differences is, in particular, plausible given the recent findings of
Bloom and Van Reenen (2010). They present empirical evidence that measures of productivity,
like the one we use, are correlated with various management practices, reflecting human resource
(HR) practices and organizational design. Ichniowski, Shaw, and Prennushi (1997) find that better
HR practices lead to higher productivity using detailed product-line data. Their results confirm
recent theoretical models that stress the importance of complementarities among work practices.
25
Total production in 1965 was about 130 million, and by 2000 is about 112 million tons. Also see Figure 1 where
the value of production as well as the number of plants are presented

19

To check whether the minimill premium in our sample period was not driven by better-managed
firms, or any particular kind of firm-specific ownership structure, we compare minimills to VI plants
within the same firm and time period using by regressing productivity on technology, and a firmyear fixed effect. Table 8 presents these results. We start out in column I with a base premium of
ten percent. We find an almost identical productivity premium, of around ten percent, for minimills
when including a firm-time fixed effect (column II).
These results suggest that the minimill productivity premium was not driven by a particular
allocation of minimill plants to more-productive firms with, say, better management or human
resource (HR) practices. Moreover, our results do not contradict those presented by Ichniowski,
Shaw, and Prennushi (1997), who rely on a sample of 17 rolling mills collocated with vertically
integrated plants in the United States and, therefore, omit minimills from the analysis. Thus,
there is no information on the relative performance of minimills. In addition, they focus on rolling
operations, which we purposefully leave out.26
Finally, including firm fixed effects does not rule out an effect of management. If management
practices differ between plants at the same firm, and these intra-firm differences in management are
precisely aligned with the technology used in production, then we could still attribute management
effects to minimills. However, while we think that this story is very unlikely, it would take historical
plant-level data on management to rule it out, and, Census data during our sample period do not
track this type of information.27

5.2

Geography

Although steel production has historically been concentrated in a few regions in the U.S., there is
still considerable variation of activity across regions. In 2002, 63 percent of steel was produced in
the Midwest – i.e., Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Ohio, and Pennsylvania – while this figure was 75
percent in 1963. We check whether regional patterns influence our results by incorporating a full set
of state-year dummies, in a regression of productivity on our measure of technology. Table 8 shows
that the substantial minimill premium is largely unaffected when including state-time fixed effects.
This result reflects that minimills are, on average, 12.9 percent more productive than integrated
producers in the same state and year (column III). Furthermore, this result is robust with respect
to including technology-year interactions.
Finally, in column IV, we include a joint firm-state-year fixed effect and find that the technology premium is still strongly positive and significant, but with a point estimate of 25 percent.
This suggests that minimills are vastly more productive, even when we compare a minimill and a
vertically integrated plant owned by the same firm, and located in the same state. The results in
Table 8 indicate that the productivity premium for minimills is extremely robust, and is not an
26
The main reason to omit rolling mills is because the boundary between rolling operations and other steel shaping
operations, such as pipe making or other more artisanal iron work, is less clear. By focusing on the production of
molten steel, we obtain a sharper definition of the industry.
27
The new wave of economic Census will contain a Management and Organization Practices Survey (MOPS). See
World Management Survey and http://bhs.econ/census.gov/bhs/mops/ for more on this recent addition.

20

artifact of a particular selection mechanism at the firm or regional level, or an interplay of both.

5.3

International Trade

It is well documented that the U.S. steel sector has faced stronger competition from foreign producers over the course of the last four decades. However, for our purposes, the relevant question
is whether the mere increase in import competition could explain the rapid productivity growth in
the industry.
Table 9 lists the average productivity growth and import penetration ratio across the US manufacturing industries (4-digit SIC codes), and compares them with the steel industry. The upper
panel lists the absolute imports and shows that the steel sector’s imports did not increase nearly
as much as the modal manufacturing industry.
The bottom panel reports the import penetration ratio and highlights that international competition increased across all U.S. manufacturing industries, and that steel was no exception. However,
both in an unweighted and weighted sense, the change in international competition for U.S. steel
was lower than the average across all sectors of US manufacturing. Productivity growth in the steel
industry, as documented previously in Table 1, has been three times higher than the average. While
we see increased import competition for domestic steel producers, this, by itself, cannot explain the
exceptional improvements in productivity.
Using the statistical relationship between productivity growth and the change in the import
penetration ratio, over the period 1972-1996, we would predict only an eight percent productivity
growth for the steel industry.28 Put differently: The change in international competition can explain
at most one third of the productivity growth.
These types of estimates are further subject to various biases and measurement problems.
For instance, the Semiconductor industry experienced remarkable productivity growth, while its
import penetration ratio increased as well. However, the import surge was due to U.S. producers
outsourcing production while focusing on R&D and design in the U.S. affiliates. Identifying the
impact of foreign competition on industry performance is further complicated due to endogenous
changes in international competition, as well as to reversed causality from productivity growth to
international trade.
In this paper, we focus on a clean and directly measurable source of productivity growth: the
arrival of a new technology. The potential role of international trade in affecting productivity
growth indirectly is further weakened since the specific trajectory of imports, or any alternative
measure of international competition, is not aligned with the arrival of the new technology. We
do acknowledge, as shown in Table 9, that changes in international competition did most likely
28

We construct a matched production-trade database at the 4-digit SIC87 level using the NBER Manufacturing
Database and the U.S. Trade Database. We consider a simple long difference regression of TFP growth on the change
in the import penetration ratio. The estimated coefficients are used to predict the steel industry’s productivity
growth. Specifically, we run the following regression: ∆ΩI = γ0 + γ1 ∆IP RI + νI across the entire sample of 4-digit
SIC87 industries, where ∆ is the difference over the 1972-1996 period, and we weigh observations by the industry’s
share in total manufacturing production.

21

affect domestic producers by shifting in the residual demand for steel products. In this sense, the
increased competition introduced by minimills was reinforced, if anything, by competing over a
smaller market share, a mechanism we account for in our analysis of markups.
Finally, one might still worry that the effects of international competition were more pronounced
for integrated producers than for minimills, thereby affecting the interpretation of our results.
Therefore, we checked whether the measures of international competition, such as import shares,
differed across products. As discussed previously, minimills were mainly active in the bar segment,
especially in the period 1972-1996, where we observe good measures of international competition
(also see Figure 2). When we break down imports and exports by product, we find that imports
show a rise for bar products produced by minimills that is similar to that of sheet products, which
minimills do not produce.
In addition, since minimills were historically more concentrated in the midwest, while integrated
producers were active in coastal areas, we might worry that minimills were more insulated from
foreign competition due to substantial intranational shipping costs. However, in the previous
subsection we discussed the robust productivity advantage of minimills when controlling for regional
differences.

5.4

Importance of Corrections and Robustness

Tables 10 and 11 presents robustness checks on our main decompositions of aggregate productivity growth, both static and dynamic. For each of the productivity estimates obtained using the
specifications listed in Table 3, we produce the static and dynamic decompositions.
The first column of Tables 10 and 11 rely on productivity estimates obtained using the production function coefficients of specification VI in Table 3. We contrast these to results obtained
using productivity estimates obtained without correcting for unobserved price differences across
producers, and to results obtained without correcting for simultaneity and selection. To assess
the precision of our results, we include bootstrapped confidence intervals on the share of each
component for all decompositions.
5.4.1

Robustness

We find that our decompositions are qualitatively robust to alternative specifications of the production function. We find similar differences in the speed of productivity growth between technologies,
a far larger role for reallocation among the vertically integrated producers than among the minimills,
and a large role for the between covariance in productivity growth.
The various components of the decompositions use plant-level estimates of productivity, which
rely on estimated production function coefficients, and thus are also estimates. We use a block
bootstrap routine to produce confidence intervals of the shares of each component. The 95 percent
confidence intervals around the various shares are reasonably tight.29 For example the confidence
29

As far as we know, this is the first paper to produce confidence intervals around the components of the decomposition of (an industry’s) aggregate productivity, and we cannot compare our results to existing work.

22

interval around aggregate productivity growth is similar across all specifications.
5.4.2

Importance of Corrections

The results in Tables 10 and 11, also point out the importance of correcting for unobserved productivity and price errors when estimating the production function, to obtain the correct quantitative
effects of the entry of minimills on aggregate productivity. What is particularly sensitive to the
specification of the production function is the between decomposition. Indeed, the between component is 27 percent in Column VI (GMM and price correction), as opposed to 11 percent using OLS
productivity estimates in Column I (OLS). These differences are statistically significant as the confidence intervals for the between share do not overlap between these two columns. This is not too
surprising, as Table 3 showed that the minimill productivity premium was far larger in Column VI,
than in Column I. These difference in the estimated productivity advantages of minimills directly
spill over to the estimated magnitude of the between covariance. Further controlling for differences
in input price trends across plants does not change the results.
The role of entry and exit is altered by omitting to correct for price and productivity errors
in the production function. The impact of the exit process of integrated producers is cut in half
(from 19 to 8 percent between Column VI and I), while the within-plant minimill improvements
are underestimated (107 versus 79 percent from Column VI to I). These findings echo the results of
Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008): Correcting for variation in plant-level prices is crucial to
obtain reliable productivity measures, and more importantly, to measure the impact of entry and
exit, an important part of our reallocation mechanism, on aggregate productivity.
Summing up, if we incorrectly ignored price variation across producers, the endogeneity of
inputs and the non-random exit of plants in the data, we would underestimate the reallocation
mechanism by a factor of two. Our results suggest that the total effect of minimill entry on
industry-wide productivity growth was 87 percent. This share drops to about 72 percent when
ignoring unobserved price and productivity heterogeneity. However, although we find a much
larger magnitude, the role of technology is present when using uncorrected productivity estimates,
which adds to the robustness of the importance of our specific reallocation mechanism.

6

Conclusion

There is by now extensive evidence that reallocation of resources across producers substantially
impacts productivity growth. This paper is one of the first to provide a specific mechanism underlying such a reallocation: The entry of a new technology, and its associated increased competition,
were largely responsible for the massive productivity growth in the U.S. steel industry.
We provide evidence that technological change can, by itself, bring about a process of resource
reallocation over a long period of time and lead to substantial productivity growth for the industry
as a whole. We find that the introduction of a new production technology spurred productivity
growth through two channels.
23

First, the entry of minimills lead to a slow but steady drop in the market share of the incumbent
technology, the vertically integrated producers. As minimills were 11 percent more productive,
this movement of market share between technologies was responsible for a third of the industry’s
productivity growth. Second, while the new technology started out with a 25 percent productivity
premium, by the end of the sample, minimills and vertically integrated producers were very similar
in terms of efficiency. This catching-up process of the incumbents came about from a large within
reallocation of resources among vertically integrated plants.
The reallocation among vertically integrated plants was largely due the exit of inefficient producers active in the low-quality segment (bar products.) On the other hand, minimills’s productivity
increased gradually over time due to a shift in the production function for all minimill producers.
Although the first mimimill, producing at a commercial level, entered in the late fifties, the productivity effects were long-lasting and still affect the industry’s performance today. In fact, the
recent trend in market shares suggests that minimills started to enter the high-quality segment
of the industry – sheet products – and taking our results at face value would indicate that more
substantial productivity gains are expected.
Our results indicate that the arrival of new technologies can have a major impact on productive efficiency through increased competition and its associated reallocation of economic resources,
leading to an increase in the industry’s overall performance. It is critical to obtain measures of
plant-level performance and technology to identify this mechanism – i.e., without indicators of
technology at the plant-level, we would falsely attribute the productivity gains to other factors
correlated with aggregate productivity, such as international competition, geography, and a variety
of firm-level characteristics.

References
Ackerberg, D., L. Benkard, S. Berry, and A. Pakes (2007): “Econometric Tools for Analyzing Market Outcomes,” in Handbook of Econometrics, ed. by J. Heckman, and E. Leamer,
vol. 6a, chap. 63, pp. 4171–4276. Elsevier.
Ackerberg, D., G. Frazer, and K. Caves (2006): “Structural Estimation of Production
Function,” Working Paper UCLA.
American Iron and Steel Institute (2010): Annual Statistical Report of the American Iron
and Steel Institute. Washington D.C.
Bartelsman, E., R. Becker, and W. Gray (2000): “Nber-ces manufacturing industry
database,” Last accessed May, 25, 2006.
Bartelsman, E., J. Haltiwanger, and S. Scarpetta (2009): “Cross-country differences in
productivity: the role of allocation and selection,” Discussion paper, NBER Working Paper.
Benkard, C. (2000): “Learning and Forgetting: The Dynamics of Aircraft Production,” American
Economic Review, 90(4), 1034–1054.

24

Bernard, A., J. Jensen, and P. Schott (2006): “Survival of the best fit: Exposure to lowwage countries and the (uneven) growth of US manufacturing plants,” Journal of International
Economics, 68(1), 219–237.
Bloom, N., B. Eifert, A. Mahajan, D. McKenzie, and J. Roberts (2011): “Does management matter? Evidence from India,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bloom, N., and J. Van Reenen (2010): “Why do management practices differ across firms and
countries?,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, pp. 203–224.
Bresnahan, T. F., and D. M. G. Raff (1991): “Intra-Industry Heterogeneity and the Great Depression: The American Motor Vehicles Industry, 1929-1935,” The Journal of Economic History,
51(2), 317–331.
Collard-Wexler, A. (2009): “Productivity Dispersion and Plant Selection in the Ready-Mix
Concrete Industry,” Working Paper, New York University.
Crandall, R. (1981): The US steel industry in recurrent crisis: policy options in a competitive
world. Brookings Institution Press.
Davis, S. J., J. C. Haltiwanger, and S. Schuh (1996): Job creation and destruction. MIT
Press Cambridge, Mass.
De Loecker, J. (2011): “Product Differentiation, Multiproduct Firms, and Estimating the Impact
of Trade Liberalization on Productivity,” Econometrica, 79(5), 1407–1451.
De Loecker, J., P. Goldberg, A. Khandelwal, and N. Pavcnik (2012): “Prices, Markups
and Trade Reform,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
De Loecker, J., and J. Konings (2006): “Job reallocation and productivity growth in a postsocialist economy: Evidence from Slovenian manufacturing,” European Journal of Political Economy, 22(2), 388–408.
De Loecker, J., and F. Warzynski (2012): “Markups and firm-level export status,” American
Economic Review, 102(6), 2437–2471.
Edmond, C., V. Midrigan, and D. Xu (2012): “Competition, markups, and the gains from
international trade,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Krizan (2001): “Aggregate productivity growth. Lessons
from microeconomic evidence,” in New developments in productivity analysis. University of
Chicago Press.
Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson (2008): “Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and
Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?,” American Economic Review, 98(1), 394–
425.
Fruehan, R. (1998): The Making, Shaping and Treating of Steel - 11th Edition. AISE Steel
Foundation, Pittsburgh, USA.
Giarratani, F., G. Gruver, and R. Jackson (2007): “Clusters, agglomeration, and economic
development potential: empirical evidence based on the advent of slab casting by US steel minimills,” Economic Development Quarterly, 21(2), 148–164.
25

Hall, C. (1997): Steel phoenix: The fall and rise of the US steel industry. Palgrave Macmillan.
Hoerr, J. (1988): And the wolf finally came: The decline of the American steel industry. University
of Pittsburgh Press Pittsburgh.
Hortaçsu, A., and C. Syverson (2004): “Cementing Relationships: Vertical Integration, Foreclosure, Productivity, and Prices,” .
Ichniowski, C., K. Shaw, and G. Prennushi (1997): “The Effects of Human Resource Management Practices on Productivity: A Study of Steel Finishing Lines,” American Economic Review,
87(3), 291–313.
Jarmin, R., S. Klimek, and J. Miranda (2009): “The Role of Retail Chains: National, Regional
and Industry Results,” in Producer Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data, pp. 237–262.
University of Chicago Press.
Mayer, T., M. Melitz, and G. Ottaviano (2011): “Market size, competition, and the product
mix of exporters,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Melitz, M. (2003): “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
Productivity,” Econometrica, 71(6), 1695–1725.
Olley, G. S., and A. Pakes (1996): “The dynamics of productivity in the telecommunications
equipment industry,” Econometrica, 64(6), 35.
Oster, S. (1982): “The Diffusion of Innovation among Steel Firms: The Basic Oxygen Furnace,”
The Bell Journal of Economics, 13(1), pp. 45–56.
Rogers, R. (2009): An economic history of the American steel industry. Taylor & Francis.
Schmitz, J. (2005): “What determines productivity? Lessons from the dramatic recovery of
the US and Canadian iron ore industries following their early 1980s crisis,” Journal of Political
Economy, 113(3), 582–625.
Syverson, C. (2011): “What Determines Productivity?,” Journal of Economic Literature, 49(2),
326–65.
Van Biesebroeck, J. (2003): “Productivity dynamics with technology choice: An application to
automobile assembly,” The Review of Economic Studies, 70(1), 167–198.

26

TABLES AND FIGURES

Table 1: Relative Performance of the steel sector
Sector
Steel Sector
Mean Sector
Median Sector

∆ TFP
28%
7%
3%

∆ Shipments
-35%
60%
61%

∆ Labor
-80%
-5%
-1%

Source: NBER-CES Dataset for SIC Code 3312. Note: Only sectors over 10 billion dollars are
included. Changes computed between 1972-2002.

Table 2: Entry and Exit in U.S. steel
1963-1972
1973-1982
1983-1992
1993-2002

Entrant Market Share (Plants)
6 (29)
5 (49)
21 (55)
12 (30)

Exitor Market Share (Plants)
9 (D∗)
20 (20)
18 (47)
2 (41)

Minimills
1963-1972
1973-1982
1983-1992
1993-2002

Entrants
17
39
43
D∗

Exitors
D∗
0
26
17

Vertically Integrated
1963-1972
1973-1982
1983-1992
1993-2002

Entrants
12
10
12
D∗

Exitors
D∗
20
21
24

Note: D∗ cannot be disclosed due to the small number of observations. Numbers refer to the
revenue market share represented by exitors and entrants, while numbers in parenthesis refer to
the count of plants that enter or exit.

27

28

-0.080
(0.037)
-0.198
(0.074)
0.006
(0.003)

0.266
(0.024)
0.658
(0.031)
0.093
(0.020)

X

-0.062
(0.017)

0.326
(0.013)
0.632
(0.010)
0.054
(0.009)

X

-0.124
(0.031)
0.003
(0.001)

0.324
(0.010)
0.634
(0.011)
0.055
(0.009)

-0.111
(0.039)
-0.246
(0.077)
0.006
(0.003)

0.261
(0.036)
0.683
(0.038)
0.091
(0.020)

Panel B: Output Deflated
by Product Prices
IV
V
VI (GMM)

X

0.013
(0.012)

0.332
(0.027)
0.610
(0.034)
0.051
(0.034)

X

-0.012
(0.016)
0.000
(0.000)

0.327
(0.027)
0.631
(0.034)
0.050
(0.033)

-0.063
(0.024)
-0.076
(0.030)
0.001
(0.000)

0.264
(0.073)
0.673
(0.053)
0.086
(0.021)

Panel C: Output Deflated
by Product and Material Prices
VII
VIII
IX (GMM)

Note: GMM indicates that a two-stage investment control function procedure with a selection adjustment was used. More detail on this
procedure is provided in Appendix C.1. In Columns III and VI, the VI (alone) term is estimated by projecting estimating productivity
on an indicator for a vertically integrated plant, while the VI and VI × year term indicates the same projection with an additional year
interaction term. Standard errors are clustered at the plant-level to control for heteroskedasticity and serial correlation. For columns III,
VI and IX, this clustering is computed via block bootstrap, which, in addition, corrects for the multi-step nature of the GMM estimator.

X

X

Year FE

0.326
(0.013)
0.616
(0.011)
0.055
(0.009)

VI
× Year

-0.028
(0.017)

0.329
(0.013)
0.613
(0.011)
0.054
(0.009)

Panel A: Output Deflated
by Steel Price Index
I
II
III(GMM)

-0.098
(0.031)
0.003
(0.001)

VI

VI (alone)

Capital

Materials

Labor

Dep Variable

Table 3: Production Function Coefficients and Technology Premium

Table 4: Static Decompositions of Productivity Growth (Change 1963-2002)
Aggregate TFP ∆Ω
Olley-Pakes Decomposition:
Unweighted Average: ∆ω
Covariance: ∆ΓOP
Between Decomposition:
Unweighted Average: ∆Ω
Between Covariance: ∆ΓB

23.0%
15.5% (0.67)
7.5% (0.33)
16.8 % (0.73)
6.3 % (0.27)

Within Decomposition:
Aggregate TFP: ∆Ω(ψ)
Unweighted Average: ∆ω(ψ)
Within Covariance: ∆ΓOP (ψ)

Minimills
10.0%
4.8% (0.48)
5.2% (0.52)

Integrated
23.6%
18.3% (0.78)
5.3% (0.22)

Note: The share of each component in the total aggregate productivity growth is listed in parentheses.

Table 5: Dynamic Decomposition of Productivity Growth
Component
Total Change

All
23.0%

Plant Improvement

10.2%

Reallocation

10.6%

Net Entry

3.9%

Entry-Exit Premium

Minimill
10.0%
(0.21)
14.7%
(0.23)
-1.5%
(-0.1)
-0.8%
(0.0)

Integrated
23.6%
(0.52)
10.2%
(0.17)
11.8%
(0.25)
3.9%
(0.10)

0.0%

4.4%

Note: The share of each component in the total aggregate productivity growth is listed in parentheses. See equation (10) for definitions of various terms.

29

30
1498
301
0.041
32.428

X

I
-0.126
0.022

1498
301
0.104
16.086

X

1498
289
0.056
35.701

X

1498
914
0.022
6.575

X

Dependent
A: All Plants
III
IV
-0.167 -0.127
0.020
0.044
0.121
0.118
0.027
0.042

1498
129
0.056
6.042

X

657
124
0.077
6.460

X

657
175
0.022
10.585

X

657
353
0.014
4.295

X

657
124
0.060
3.686

X

X

657
540
0.021
2.455

X

Variable: Productivity ω
Panel B: Vertically Integrated
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
X
-0.295
0.087
0.119 0.099 0.128 0.122 0.165 0.127
0.068 0.046 0.039 0.059 0.106 0.081

Note: Standard Errors clustered by plant, but not corrected for the sampling error in constructed productivity. Sheet Specialization Ratio is the
share of revenues accounted for by sheet products (hot and cold rolled sheet).

Observations
Number of Fixed Effects
R2
F

Fixed Effects
Year
State-Year
Firm-Year
Firm-State-Year
Plant

Sheet Specialization
Ratio

Vertically Integrated

Panel
II
-0.138
0.026
0.101
0.038

Table 6: Sheet Productivity Premium

Table 7: Determinants of Exit

Vertically Integrated
Sheet Specialization Ratio
Log Capital (k)
Productivity (ω)

Observations
Log-Likelihood
χ2
Baseline Probability

Dependent Variable: Plant Exists in 2002
Panel A: All Plants Panel B: Vertically Integrated
I
II
III
IV
V
-0.36*** -0.39***
(0.09)
(0.08)
0.39**
0.36*
0.31*
0.31*
0.22
(0.14)
(0.14)
(0.13) (0.13)
(0.14)
0.02
0.20
0.33
(0.03)
(0.24)
(0.26)
0.04
0.06
(0.14)
(0.04)
128
-73.88
16.97
0.33

128
-73.69
17.35
0.32

78
-40.36
5.89
0.23

78
-40.02
6.58
0.23

78
-38.88
8.84
0.22

Note: Marginal Effects presented. Dependent variable is whether the plant has not exited by 2002
given it’s status in 1963. Very similar results are found with 1972 and 1977 as base years.

Table 9: International Competition: Comparing the Steel Sector to US Manufacturing
Period
% ∆ [72-02]

Year
1972
1996
Change
% Change

Change Total Imports
Steel Average
Median
4.1
66.1
23.7
Import Penetration Rate
Steel Average Weighted Average
0.099
0.066
0.055
0.180
0.220
0.157
0.081
0.154
0.102
81
233
85

Note: The average and weighted average are computed over all available 4-digit SIC87 industries using data
provided by the NBER Manufacturing Database (for shipment data) and Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2006)
(for import penetration data). The changes are computed by industry before taking averages. The import
penetration rate data is available only up to 1996. Weights are based on the industry’s share of shipments
in total manufacturing shipments as recorded in the NBER Manufacturing Database.

31

32
1498
301
0.093
16.962

X

1498
914
0.009
5.254

X

II
-0.098
0.043

1498
289
0.040
50.605

X

III
-0.129
0.018

1498
1291
0.042
8.994

X

IV
-0.253
0.084

1498
301
0.098
16.064

X

V
-0.184
0.040
0.004
0.002

1498
914
0.009
2.726

X

VI
-0.126
0.075
0.001
0.003

1498
289
0.045
28.525

X

VII
-0.203
0.035
0.004
0.001

1498
1291
0.050
5.410

X

VIII
-0.457
0.174
0.008
0.006

Note: The standard errors are clustered at the level of the plant. VI indicates Vertically Integrated plants.

Fixed Effect
Year
Year-Firm
State-Year
Firm-Year-State
Plant
Observations
Groups
R2
F

VI × Year

VI

I
-0.108
0.022

Table 8: Technology Premium: Robustness Checks

X
1498
301
0.065
9.146

X

0.002
0.001

IX

Table 10: Static Decompositions under Alternative Productivity Measures

GMM
Plant-Level Output Prices
Plant-Level Material Prices
Change in TFP (∆Ω)
Olley-Pakes
Unweighted Average (∆ω)
Covariance (∆ΓOP )
Between
Change in Ω
Change in Between Technology
Covariance (∆ΓB )
Within Technology
Minimills
Change in TFP
M)
(ratio to aggregate ∆Ω(M
)
∆Ω
Fraction from Unweighted Average
(∆ω(M M ))
Fraction from Covariance
(∆ΓOP (M M ))
Vertically Integrated
Change in TFP
I)
(ratio to aggregate ∆Ω(V
∆Ω )
Fraction from Unweighted Average
(∆ω(V I))
Fraction from Covariance
(∆ΓOP (V I))

VI
X
X

III
X

Specification in Table 3
IX
I
X
X
X

IV

VII

X

X
X

0.23

0.25

0.21

0.31

0.30

0.28

[0.17 0.28]

[0.19 0.29]

[0.16 0.26]

[0.26 0.35]

[0.26 0.35]

[0.23 0.33]

67%

74%

68%

74%

69%

69%

[0.57 0.75]

[0.66 0.81]

[0.58 0.76]

[0.69 0.78]

[0.63 0.73]

[0.62 0.73]

33%

26%

32%

26%

31%

32%

[0.25 0.44]

[0.19 0.34]

[0.24 0.43]

[0.22 0.31]

[0.27 0.37]

[0.27 0.38]

73%

78%

77%

89%

87%

90%

[0.63 0.80]

[0.69 0.83]

[0.69 0.84]

[0.85 0.92]

[0.82 0.90]

[0.86 0.94]

27%

22%

23%

11%

13%

10%

[0.20 0.37]

[0.17 0.31]

[0.16 0.31]

[0.08 0.15]

[0.10 0.18]

[0.06 0.14]

0.43

0.50

0.40

0.77

0.74

0.74

[0.19 0.60]

[0.29 0.64]

[0.18 0.60]

[0.64 0.87]

[0.61 0.85]

[0.59 0.85]

48%

71%

51%

70%

61%

62%

[-0.22 0.64]

[0.51 0.79]

[-0.06 0.68]

[0.64 0.76]

[0.52 0.68]

[0.53 0.69]

52%

29%

49%

30%

39%

38%

[0.36 1.22]

[0.21 0.49]

[0.33 1.06]

[0.24 0.36]

[0.32 0.48]

[0.31 0.47]

1.03

1.05

1.13

1.01

0.99

1.07

[0.96 1.10]

[0.99 1.13]

[1.05 1.24]

[0.96 1.07]

[0.94 1.04]

[1.01 1.14]

77%

85%

80%

82%

75%

76%

[0.68 0.88]

[0.78 0.94]

[0.71 0.89]

[0.77 0.87]

[0.69 0.81]

[0.70 0.82]

23%

15%

20%

18%

25%

24%

[0.12 0.33]

[0.06 0.22]

[0.11 0.29]

[0.13 0.24]

[0.19 0.31]

[0.18 0.30]

Note: GMM refers to the Olley-Pakes control function approach. Plant-level output prices refers to deflating revenue using product level prices indexes. Plant-level material prices refers to deflating material
inputs costs using material specific price indexes. Bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals using 10,000
replications shown in brackets, and these only include sampling error in the computation of productivity
ω.

33

Table 11: Dynamic Decompositions under Alternative Productivity Measures

GMM
Plant-Level Output Prices
Plant-Level Material Prices
Dynamic Decomposition
All
Plant Improvement
Reallocation
Entry-Exit

Minimills
Plant Improvement
Reallocation
Entry-Exit

Vertically Integrated
Plant Improvement
Reallocation
Entry-Exit

VI
X
X

III
X

Specification in Table 3
IX
I
X
X
X

IV

VII

X

X
X

34%

41%

40%

46%

41%

45%

[0.23 0.42]

[0.34 0.47]

[0.33 0.48]

[0.41 0.50]

[0.36 0.46]

[0.40 0.50]

47%

43%

46%

40%

42%

42%

[0.39 0.58]

[0.37 0.52]

[0.37 0.56]

[0.36 0.46]

[0.38 0.49]

[0.37 0.49]

19%

16%

14%

14%

16%

12%

[0.17 0.22]

[0.14 0.18]

[0.11 0.17]

[0.13 0.15]

[0.15 0.17]

[0.11 0.13]

107%

119%

130%

90%

79%

86%

[0.87 2.25]

[1.01 2.11]

[0.95 2.59]

[0.83 1.08]

[0.73 0.93]

[0.77 1.03]

-9%

-12%

-5%

-1%

4%

5%

[-0.75 0.03]

[-0.62 -0.04]

[-0.49 0.08]

[-0.12 0.04]

[-0.06 0.09]

[-0.03 0.12]

0%

-6%

-25%

11%

18%

8%

[-0.50 0.12]

[-0.50 0.04]

[-1.13 0.00]

[0.04 0.15]

[0.12 0.20]

[-0.02 0.14]

33%

39%

35%

43%

40%

40%

[0.20 0.43]

[0.29 0.47]

[0.25 0.45]

[0.36 0.48]

[0.32 0.46]

[0.33 0.46]

47%

46%

51%

49%

50%

54%

[0.35 0.62]

[0.34 0.58]

[0.38 0.63]

[0.43 0.56]

[0.44 0.58]

[0.47 0.61]

19%

15%

14%

8%

10%

6%

[0.14 0.26]

[0.11 0.21]

[0.09 0.19]

[0.06 0.11]

[0.08 0.13]

[0.05 0.09]

Note: GMM refers to the Olley-Pakes control function approach. Plant-level output prices refers to deflating revenue using product level prices indexes. Plant-level material prices refers to deflating material
inputs costs using material specific price indexes. Bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals using 10,000
replications shown in brackets, and these only include sampling error in the computation of productivity
ω.

34

100
80
60
40
20
0
1960

1970

1980

1990

500

100

400
300
200
100
0

2000

1960

1970

1980

1990

Year

80

120

60

100

Plants

Total Assets (in Billions of 1987$)

Year

40
20

Shipments (in Billions of 1987$)

Total Employment (in 000's)

Shipments (in Billions of 1987$)

Figure 1: Evolution of the Steel Industry, and Vertically Integrated Mills and Minimills

80
60

2000

40
20
0

80

1960

1970

60

0

Year

40
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

1960

1970

Year

1980

1990

2000

Year

Minimills
Vertically Integrated
All

Figure 2: Minimills Market share by Major Product.
80

Minimill Output Share

Minimill Output Share

80
60

40

20

60

40

20

0
1960

1970

1980

1990

1980

2000

year
0

1960 1970 1980 1990 2000

year

35

ingots
HRB
HRS
Steel ingots, and semifinished products
CRS
Hot rolled bars, plates and shapes
Hot rolled sheet and strip
Cold rolled sheet and strip

1990

Figure 3: Producer Output Price Index by Product Segment

PPI deflated by IPD

1.4

1.2

1

.8

.6
1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year
Steel Ingots and semifinished products
Hot rolled bars, plates and shapes
Hot rolled steel sheet and strip
Cold rolled steel sheet and strip

Note: Producer Price Index for Selected Steel Products deflated by GDP Deflator. Base year
1987=100. Source: BLS.

Figure 4: Market Share Weighted Markups
1.6

Markup

1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1960

1970

1980

Year
minimill
vi
Source: Own calculations using US Census data.

36

1990

2000

A
A.1

Data Appendix
Sample Selection

We pull all plants in the Census of Manufacturing, Annual Survey of Manufacturing and Longitudinal Business Database from 1963 to 2007 coded in either NAICS 33111 or SIC 3312 at some
point in their lives.
The Longitudinal Business Database has worse industry coding than the Census of Manufacturing, and taking its coding literally introduces a large number of non-steel mills into the sample.30
Therefore, we include a plant in the sample only if it has been coded in steel in either the CMF or
the ASM.

A.2

Coding Minimills, Vertically Integrated, and Rolling Plants

A primary issue in understanding the Steel industry is how to code plants as being minimills,
vertically integrated or rolling and processing plants. For references on the differences between
minimills and vertically integrated plants and the production process for steel, see Fruehan (1998)
p.1-12 and Crandall (1981) p.5-15.
The 2007, 2002 and 1997 Census of Manufacturing have a special inquiry questionnaire for the
steel industry (SI) appended to it. This questionnaire asks plants if they are considered a minimill
or not. Moreover, the SI also asks for plant hours in electric arc furnaces, blast furnaces, coke ovens,
and basic oxygen furnaces. If a plant reports plant hours in coke, blast, or basic oxygen furnace, we
flag this plant as a vertically integrated plant, since vertically integrated plants are defined by the
production process that first produces pig iron and slag, and then processes the result in a basic
oxygen furnace. If a plant reports being a minimill or if it reports hours in an electric arc furnace,
then we code this plant as a minimill.
Some vertically integrated plants occasionally have electric arc furnaces. Whenever a plant
report hours in an electric arc furnace and in a basic oxygen or blast furnace, we assign this plant
to the vertically integrated category. The reason is that the vertically integrated section of the
plant is usually far bigger than the electric furnace section.
Many plants do not report hours in any steel mill department, and do not report being minimills
either. We call these plants rolling mills or processors, as they do not produce steel per se, but
process steel products. For instance, a rolling mill might use steel ingots, blooms and billets (steel
shapes), and roll these into steel sheet. Alternatively, a mill might take steel rods and shape them
into steel screws.
For plants that were still in operation in 1997, or were built after 1997, the SI file is all we need
to identify the plant’s type. However, for plants that shut down pre-1997, we use the material and
product trailer to the Census of Manufacturing to classify them.
Minimills can be identified by their input use. Electric arc furnaces use a combination of scrap
steel and direct-reduced iron as inputs. Thus, if a plant uses any direct-reduced iron, we flag this
plant as a minimill. Likewise, if scrap steel represents more than 20 percent of a plant’s material
use, we flag this plant as a minimill.31
Vertically integrated plants can also be identified from their input use. If a plant uses “Coal for
Coke”, this is a good indication that a plant has a blast furnace. We flag rolling mills by their use
of “Steel Shapes and Forms” – steel ingots and so on that are shaped into steel products.
30

In particular, the Zip Business Patterns database, that uses the same underlying source as the LBD, has a large
number of entrants coded in NAICS 33111 from 1997 to 2002 that are not steel mills.
31
Basic oxygen furnaces at vertically integrated plants also can a take a small percent of scrap steel. For this
reason, we flag a plant as a minimill only if scrap steel is a large part of their inputs.

37

We also use the product trailer to categorize plants. If a plant produces “Coke Oven or Blast
Furnace Products”, we flag this plant as vertically integrated. In addition, if a plant produces “Cold
Rolled Sheet Steel” before 1980, we flag this plant as vertically integrated, as minimills only started
producing cold rolled sheets in the mid-80s. For references on the changing ability of minimills to
produce sheet products, see Rogers (2009) on page 162 and chapter 8 of Hall (1997).
Plants are not always consistently coded as either minimills, vertically integrated, or rolling mills
from one year to another. Thus, we classify a plant based on its history of such flags. Specifically,
a plant is vertically integrated if it is flagged as such at least 80 percent of the time. Likewise, a
plant is assigned to the minimill category if it is flagged as such at least 80 percent of the time.
Since vertically integrated plants, as their name suggests, are typically engaged in multiple
activities, such as having an electric arc furnace and a basic oxygen furnace, along with a rolling
mill, we first flag plants as vertically integrated or not, then flag the remaining plants as minimills.
Leftover plants are assigned to be rolling mills.

A.3

Coding Products

We use the product trailer of the Census Bureau to investigate the products produced by steel
producers. We categorize products into the following types which are responsible for 93 percent
of output not categorized as “other” or “unclassified” in 1997: Hot-Rolled Steel Bar: SIC 33124,
NAICS 3311117; Hot Rolled Sheet and Strip: SIC 33123, NAICS 3311115; Cold Rolled Sheet and
Strip: SIC 33127, SIC 33167, NAICS 3312211, NAICS 3312211D; Cold Finished Bars and Bar
Shapes: SIC 33128, SIC 33168, NAICS 3312213, NAICS 331111F; Steel Ingots and Semi-Finished
Shapes: SIC 33122, NAICS 3311113; Steel Wire: SIC 33125, SIC 33155, NAICS 3312225, NAICS
3311119; Steel Pipe and Tube: SIC 33170, SIC 33177, NAICS 3312100, NAICS 331111B.
The tables below provide summary statistics of our sample, and contrast the minimill producers to the traditional vertical integrated producers. We also provide more details on the various
products of the industry.

38

Table A.1: Summary Statistics for Minimills and Vertically Integrated Producers
Vertically Integrated
Mean Std. Dev. Observations
Shipments†
647
671
2,192
Value Added†
261
311
2,192
Cost of Materials†
343
369
2,192
Investment†
36
63
2,192
Assets†
690
860
1,525
Workers
3,062
3,721
2,192
Wage Per Hour
25
8
2,192
Minimills
Shipments†
Value Added†
Cost of Materials†
Investment†
Assets†
Workers
Wage Per Hour

Mean
153
61
85
7
103
633
25

Std. Dev.
178
80
112
17
139
750
9

Observations
2,687
2,687
2,687
2,687
1,705
2,687
2,687

Note: † In millions of 1997 dollars. The number of observations for total assets is smaller since
these are not part of the ASM after 1992.

39

Table A.2: Differences between Minimills and Vertically Integrated Plants
Plant-level characteristic
Premium for VI Plants
All 1963 1972 1982 1992 2002
Shipments

1.44 1.60 1.60 1.46 1.32 1.02
(0.08) (0.27) (0.25) (0.23) (0.23) (0.26)

Value Added

1.32 1.43 1.33 1.23 1.31 0.97
(0.09) (0.30) (0.26) (0.24) (0.25) (0.28)

Assets

1.68 2.11 1.88 1.88 1.46 1.17
(0.10) (0.32) (0.29) (0.27) (0.28) (0.31)

Cost of Materials

1.57 1.88 1.74 1.70 1.34 1.04
(0.08) (0.28) (0.25) (0.23) (0.24) (0.26)

Employment

1.24 1.37 1.30 1.32 1.20 0.97
(0.08) (0.26) (0.24) (0.22) (0.22) (0.25)

Shipment per worker

0.20 0.23 0.25 0.14 0.12 0.05
(0.03) (0.10) (0.09) (0.08) (0.08) (0.10)

Value Added per worker

0.08 0.06 0.03 -0.09 0.12 0.00
(0.04) (0.13) (0.11) (0.10) (0.11) (0.12)

Wage

0.06 0.04 0.07 0.14 0.00 0.07
(0.01) (0.05) (0.04) (0.04) (0.04) (0.04)

Note: Estimates display the log of the ratio of the mean for VI plants over the mean for MM plants.
Thus, 1.44 in the top left cell indicates that the average vertically integrated plant shipped 144
percent more than the average minimill or, equivalently, 4.2 times more, while a coefficient of 0
indicates that VI and MM plants have identical means. Year Controls included in each regression.
There are a total of 1499 observations in these regressions.

40

Table A.3: Production by Product
Year
1963
1967
1972
1977
1982
1987
1992
1997
2002

HRS
23
21
27
26
30
38
37
35
31

HRB
23
23
23
22
21
20
21
21
22

CRS
16
14
16
17
15
17
16
17
23

Ingots
13
13
10
10
8
8
8
7
7

P&T
7
7
6
8
11
5
5
6
6

Blast
5
5
5
7
5
3
4
4
2

CFB
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2

Wire
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
2

Other
9
14
9
8
9
7
7
7
6

Note: Fraction of Industry Output Accounted for by each product: Hot-rolled steel sheet (HRS), Hot-rolled
bar (HRB), Cold-rolled sheet (CRS), Ingots and shapes, Pipe and tube (P & T), Wire, Cold-finished bars
(CFB), and coke oven and blast furnace products (Blast), Steel Wire (Wire). The one product whose
shipments fall notably over this period is steel ingots and semi-finished shapes (SISS). However, SISS are
used primarily in rolling mills to produce steel sheet and bar. Since the mid 1990’s with the development of
slab casting technologies, steel has been directly shaped into sheets at the mill.

41

B

Output and Input Deflators

Recovering productivity using revenue and expenditure data requires that we correct for potential price variation across plants and time, for both output and inputs. Below, we describe our
procedure.

B.1

Output price deflator

In order to guarantee that we recover productivity, ωit , using plant/product revenue data we rely
on a plant-specific output deflator. We construct this deflator using product-level revenues at the
plant level (recorded in the census data) in combination with product-level price data (from the
BLS).32
To make sure that price variation – across plants and time – is fully controlled for, we assume
the following structure: Plants charge the same markup across all their products, while markups
can flexibly vary across plants and time. The heterogeneity in markups will naturally arise if plants
are heterogeneous in their underlying productivity.
Before we derive the exact price deflator, we state explicitly what we observe in the data:
revenues (Rijt ), input (Xit ) and prices (Pjt ).
We start out with the following production function:
Qijt = Xijt Ωit ,

(B.1)

where we are explicit about productivity only being plant-specific and not plant-product-specific.
The input bundle Xijt contains labor, intermediate inputs and capital, scaled by their corresponding
technology parameters, X = Lβl K βk M βm .
Now consider plant-level revenue, which is obtained by summing product-specific revenues, and
using the production function:
Rit =

X

Xijt Ωit Pjt .

(B.2)

j

To recover plant-level productivity from a regression of plant-level (deflated) revenues and input
use, we use:
Xijt ≡ sijt Xit
(B.3)
Plugging the last expression into the one for plant-level revenue, we get:
Rit = Ωit Xit

X

sijt Pjt

(B.4)

j

Up to sijt , which we will discuss below, everything is directly observable and, therefore, we can
recover productivity using standard estimation techniques using:
P

Rit
= Xit Ωit
j sijt Pjt

(B.5)

or in logs:
32

Specifically, we use the following BLS price series: PCU331111331111: Steel; PCU3311113311111: Coke oven and
blast furnace products; PCU3311113311113: Steel ingots and semifinished products; PCU3311113311115: Hot rolled
steel sheet and strip; PCU3311113311117: Hot rolled steel bars, plates, and structural shapes; PCU3311113311119:
Steel wire; PCU331111331111B: Steel pipe and tube; PCU331111331111D: Cold rolled steel sheet and strip and
PCU331111331111F: Cold finished steel bars.

42

rit − p̃it = βl lit + βk kit + βm mit + ωit + it ,

(B.6)

P

where p̃it ≡ j sijt Pjt is the plant-level output price deflator, and we use that the (log) input bundle
can be decomposed into labor and capital input, scaled by their corresponding output elasticity
β. The additional error term it captures measurement error in either revenue or prices, as well as
unanticipated shocks to output.
In order to take equation (B.6) to the data, we need to take a stand on the input allocation or
what sijt is. We use revenue shares:
Rijt
sijt = P
,
j Rijt

(B.7)

which we can directly compute in our data. The use of revenue shares restricts the markups to be
the same across the products of a, potentially, multi-product plant. To see this it is useful to use
the framework of De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) to recover markups and apply it to our setting.
The markup µijt is obtained using the FOC on input X of cost minimization:
µijt = β X

Rijt
.
X
Pit sijt Xit

(B.8)

Now, using equation (B.7), we get the following expression for markups:
µijt = β X

Rit
PitX Xit

(B.9)

which highlights that µijt = µit and ∀j ∈ Ji , with Ji the set of products produced by i.
Note that the reason we need to restrict markups across products within a plant to be constant,
is because we see aggregate input use only at the plant level.33 Finally, although we directly observe
revenues for all product-plant combinations, we only observe product specific prices and assume
away the variation across plants for a given product. In our empirical analysis, we rely on both the
aggregate price index and our constructed plant-specific price index.

B.2

Input price deflator

The construction of the input price deflator is very similar to that of the output price deflator.
There are, however, a few important differences. First, we need to distinguish between our three
main input categories: labor, intermediate inputs and capital. Second, for some of the inputs, we
observe plant-level input prices, that we can directly use to construct the deflator.
B.2.1

Labor and capital

We directly observe hours worked at the plant-level. We rely on the NBER capital deflator to
correct the capital stock series. The use of an aggregate deflator implies that we assume a common
user cost of capital across plants.
B.2.2

Intermediate inputs

The data on intermediate input use is potentially the most contaminated by input price variation,
both in the cross-section and in the time series and, in particular, across the two types: VI and
33

See De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) and De Loecker, Goldberg, Khandelwal, and Pavcnik (2012) for a detailed
discussion of the input allocation across products.

43

MM. As discussed in the main text, both technologies use vastly different intermediate inputs or use
inputs at very different intensities. Note that the share of all intermediate inputs is not significantly
different across types, but this masks the underlying heterogeneity. Due to the very different input
use, we are concerned that the aggregate deflator does not fully capture the input price differences
across plants and time.
We construct a plant-level intermediate input price deflator in the following way. We consider
n intermediate inputs where n={Fuel (F), Electricity (E), Coal for coke (C), iron ore (I), iron and
E ) and
scrap (S), Others (O)}. In the data we observe expenditures by intermediate input (Mint
n
prices for each input n (Pit ).
The plant-level intermediate input price deflator is constructed as follows:
PitM =

X

snit Ptn

(B.10)

n

ME
snit = P int E
n Mit
X
n
−1
Pt = N
Pitn .

(B.11)
(B.12)

i

In words, we compute the average price for a given input n, Ptn , and weigh this by the plant’s
input share snit . This structure still assumes a common input price for all plants for a given input n,
but it recognizes that the intensity can vary across plants. In practice we compute (B.12) for all but
the Fuel and Others categories. For those two, we directly rely on the NBER Fuel Price Deflator
and the aggregate input price deflator, respectively. The other categories are a combination of
various inputs for which we do not observe reliable input price data and, therefore, we decided
to rely on the aggregate
input
P
 price deflator. In terms of the log specification of the production
E
Mint
function mit = ln
n PM .
it
We plot our input price deflator, averaged by technology type, below and compare it to the
publicly available input price deflator – i.e., the NBER Material Price Index.

C

Measuring Productivity and Markups

We briefly discuss how we estimate productivity and recover markups using our plant-level panel
on production and prices. This discussion will follow the exposition of control function estimation
of productivity in Ackerberg, Frazer, and Caves (2006).

C.1

Productivity

We take equation (4) to the data and follow the standard in the literature, relying on a plant’s
optimal investment equation to control for unobserved productivity shocks. See De Loecker and
Warzynski (2012) for more details.
Specifically, the first stage of this procedure runs output q̃it on a flexible function of inputs
(lit , mit , kit ), an investment control function iit , as well as year-plant type controls. In other words:
q̃it = φψ,t (lit , mit , kit , iit ) + it .

(C.1)

And productivity is recovered as ωit = φ̂it − fψ,t (Lit , Mit , Kit ; β). A key component in the
estimation routine is the law of motion on productivity. In our baseline results, we stick to an
44

Figure B.1: Producer Input Price Index
1.4

1.2

1

.8

.6
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Year
NBER Material Index
VI Material Index
MM Material Index
Base Year 1987=1

Note: Material Price Index deflated by GDP Deflator. Base year 1987=100.
exogenous Markov process given by
ωit = gψ (ωit−1 , χ̂it ) + ξit .

(C.2)

Note that this evolution is allowed to vary for minimills and vertically integrated plants, as
we have seen in the OLS regressions that vertically integrated plants slowly catch up to minimills.
Moreover, we control for the selection effect due to the fact that we only observed productivity
conditionally on a plant remaining in the industry using the estimated propensity score of exiting
χ̂it . To the extent that vertically integrated plants are larger and thus, at an ex-ante level more
likely to remain in the industry, this will generate differential selection rules for minimills and
vertically integrated plants.
We recover estimates of the production function coefficients, β, by forming moments on this
productivity shock ξit . The identification of these coefficients relies on the rate at which inputs
adjust to these shocks. In particular, we allow both labor and capital to be dynamically chosen
inputs, whereby current values of capital (labor) do not react to current shocks to productivity
(ξit ). Plants do, however, adjust their intermediate input use (scrap, energy, other material inputs)
to the arrival of a productivity shock ξit .
The exact moments will depend on the functional form we select for f (.). For our main specifications, we rely on Cobb-Douglas production functions and use the following moments:



lit
E ξit (β)  mit−1  = 0.
(C.3)
kit
A recent literature (Ackerberg, Frazer, and Caves, 2006) has pointed out that the identification
of the variable input, the coefficient of βm in our case, relies on sufficient variation in plant-level
input prices. The coefficient on labor (capital) is identified using variation in adjustment cost and
relies on the fact that plants cannot immediately adjust their labor (capital) use to a productivity
shock. All our results are invariant to modifications of the timing assumptions discussed in the
45

main text. Our approach is flexible and can allow for a variety of production functions combined
with various assumptions on the variability of inputs, as well as the use of alternative proxies such
as intermediate inputs.

C.2

Estimating Markups

Our approach to recovering markups follows De Loecker and Warzynski (2012). In the rest of
this section, we briefly review the approach. In addition to the production function we introduced
before, we only have to assume that producers active in the market minimize costs. Let Vit denote
the vector of variable inputs used by the firm. We use the vector Kit to denote dynamic inputs of
production. Any input that faces adjustment costs will fall into this category; capital is an obvious
one, but our framework allows us to also include labor.
The associated Lagrangian function is:
L(Vit1 , ..., VitV , Kit , λit ) =

V
X

v

Pit V vit + rit Kit + λit (Qit − Qit (Vit1 , ..., VitV , Kit , ωit ))

(C.4)

v=1
v

where Pit and rit denote a firm’s input prices for a variable input v and dynamic inputs, respectively.
The first-order condition for any variable input free of adjustment costs is
∂Lf t
∂Qit (.)
v
= Pit − λit
= 0.
v
∂Vit
∂Vitv

(C.5)

∂Lit
where the marginal cost of production at a given level of output is λit , as ∂Q
= λit . Rearranging
it
Vit
terms and multiplying both sides by Qit , generates the following expression.

∂Qit (.) Vitv
1 Pitv Vitv
=
v
∂Vit Qit
λit Qit

(C.6)

Cost minimization implies that optimal inputv demand is realized when a firm equalizes the
Pit Vit
output elasticity of any variable input Vitv to λ1it Q
.
it
Pit
Define markup µit as µit ≡ λit .
As De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) show, the costminimization condition can be rearranged to write markup as:
v
v −1
µit = θit
(αit
) .

(C.7)

v denotes the output elasticity on an input V v and αv is the revenue share of variable input
where θit
it
PvV v
v, defined by PititQitit , which is data. This expression will form the basis for our approach: We obtain
the output elasticity from the estimation of a production function and only need to measure the
v =β .
share of an input’s expenditure in total sales. In particular, in our setting, θit
m
In our context, the output elasticities are obtained by relying on product-specific price deflators,
and potentially leave plant-level price variation left uncontrolled for. The latter is expected to bias
the output elasticity downward and, therefore, downward-bias the level of the markup. Under
a Cobb-Douglas production technology, this has no implications for the time-series pattern of
markups and on the comparison of markups across minimills and integrated producers – as long as
the output elasticity is fixed across types.

46

D

Deriving decompositions

We provide more details on how we derive the various decompositions introduced in the main text.
We start with the standard aggregate productivity definition:
X
Ωt =
sit ωit
(D.1)
i

where we define:
Rit
sit = P
Rit
Xi
Rt =
Rit

(D.2)
(D.3)

i

and Rit is plant-level total sales.

D.1

Standard OP

Olley and Pakes show that (D.1) can be written as:
Ωit = ω̄t +

X

(sit − s̄t )(ωit − ω̄t )
(D.4)

i

= ω̄t + ΓOP
t
with Nt the number of active plants at time t and:
X

ω̄t = N −1

ωit

(D.5)

sit

(D.6)

i

s̄t = N −1

X
i

D.2

Deriving the Between covariance

We show that aggregate productivity can be decomposed in a between technology covariance component and an average type-specific productivity component, which in itself is decomposed into
type-specific within and covariance terms.
Start from (D.1) and simply break up the sum into the two technology types, i.e. ψ =
{M M, V I}:
Ωt =

X

X

sit ωit +

i∈ψ=M M

= st (ψ = M M )

X
i∈ψ=M M

+ st (ψ = V I)

sit ωit

i∈ψ=V I

X
i∈ψ=V I

47

sit
ωit
st (ψ = M M )

sit
ωit
st (ψ = V I)

(D.7)

The second line multiplies
each term by the relevant total market share of the type
Pand divides
34
in the industry, i.e. st (ψ) = i∈ψ sit .
The last equation can now be rewritten as another weighted sum where we now sum over two
groups: minimills and intergrated producers:
Ωt =

X

st (ψ)Ωt (ψ)

(D.8)

X
X sit
sit (ψ)ωit
ωit =
st (ψ)

(D.9)

ψ

where
Ωt (ψ) =

i∈ψ

i∈ψ)

The second line uses that the market share of a plant in the total industry divided by the total
type-specific market share is equal to the plant’s market share in the type’s total sales (sit (ψ)).
Formally:
sit (ψ) =

sit
st (ψ)

(D.10)

After having transformed the aggregate productivity expression into (D.8), we can rely on
the same insight as OP and decompose aggregate productivity into a unweighted average and
a covariance component. By transforming the expression using type-specific market shares we
guarantee that the plant market shares sum to one; a necessary condition for the OP decomposition.
Applying the OP decomposition idea to (D.8) gives us:
Ωt = Ω̄t (ψ) +

X

(st (ψ) − 0.5)(Ωt (ψ) − Ω̄t (ψ))
(D.11)

ψ

= Ω̄t (ψ) +

D.3

ΓB
t

Within type decompositions

Starting from equation (D.11) we simply apply the OP decomposition by type ψ and use the fact
that we only have two technology types to obtain an expression for the average component:

Ω̄t (ψ) =

1X
(Ωt (ψ))
2
ψ

X
1X
=
(ω̄t (ψ) +
(sit (ψ) − s̄t (ψ))(ωit − ω̄t (ψ)))
2
ψ

=

(D.12)

i∈ψ

1X
(ω̄t (ψ) + ΓOP
t (ψ))
2
ψ

where we denote the average market share across a given type by s̄t (ψ) = Nψ−1
34

P

i∈ψ sit (ψ).

The OP-decomposition relies crucially on the property that the market shares sum to one. However, if we were
to simply P
split the summation across the two types,
we could not isolate the within covariance term. To see this,
P
note that ψ Ωt (ψ) 6= Ωt , due to the fact that ψ,i sit (ψ) > 1.

48

D.4

Total decomposition

To arrive at the expressions used in the main text we introduce Γt (ψ) to denote a covariance of a
given type and use superscripts B and OP to indicate whether the covariance is between or within
the type, respectively. This gives us the following total decomposition of aggregate productivity:
Ωt =

1X
B
[ω̄t (ψ) + ΓOP
t (ψ)] + Γt (ψ)
2

(D.13)

ψ

If there was no entry or exit we can then directly evaluate the share of each component by
tracking Ωt over time. We incorporate the turnover process by relying on dynamic decompositions
within a given type and can always scale the various subcomponents back to the decomposition
discussed above.

49

