NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A MODEL OF THE SAFE ASSET MECHANISM (SAM):
SAFETY TRAPS AND ECONOMIC POLICY
Ricardo J. Caballero
Emmanuel Farhi
Working Paper 18737
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18737
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2013

For useful comments, we thank Daron Acemoglu, Oliver Hart, Gary Gorton, Bengt Holmstrom, Narayana
Kocherlakota, Guillermo Ordonez, Ricardo Reis, Andrei Shleifer, Alp Simsek, Jeremy Stein, Kevin
Stiroh, and Ivan Werning. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Ricardo J. Caballero and Emmanuel Farhi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

A Model of the Safe Asset Mechanism (SAM): Safety Traps and Economic Policy
Ricardo J. Caballero and Emmanuel Farhi
NBER Working Paper No. 18737
January 2013, Revised August 2013
JEL No. E32,E4,E5,E52,E62,E63,F3,F33,F41,G01,G1,G28
ABSTRACT
The global economy has a chronic shortage of safe assets which lies behind many recent macroeconomic
imbalances. This paper provides a simple model of the Safe Asset Mechanism (SAM), its recessionary
safety traps, and its policy antidotes. Safety traps share many common features with conventional
liquidity traps, but also exhibit important differences, in particular with respect to their reaction to
policy packages. In general, policy-puts (such as QE1, LTRO, fiscal policy, etc.) that support future
bad states of the economy play a central role in the SAM environment, while policy-calls that support
the good states of the recovery (e.g., some aspects of forward guidance) are less powerful. Public debt
plays a central role in SAM as long as the government has spare fiscal capacity to back safe asset production.
Ricardo J. Caballero
MIT
Department of Economics
Room E52-373a
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
caball@mit.edu
Emmanuel Farhi
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
efarhi@harvard.edu

1

Introduction

One of the main structural features of the global economy in recent years is the apparent
shortage of safe assets (see, e.g., Caballero 2010 and references therein). This deﬁcit provided the macroeconomic force for the ﬁnancial engineering behind the subprime crisis, is a
paramount factor in determining the spike in funding costs when European economies switch
from the core to the periphery, and has put new constraints on the eﬀectiveness of monetary
and ﬁscal policy. However, while much has been written about the potential importance of
this scarcity, there is little formal understanding of how this shortage inﬂuences the macroeconomy and of what is the appropriate policy response. This paper’s main contribution is
to provide a simple model of the Safe Asset Mechanism (SAM) and its policy antidotes.
The central problem in SAM is one of “excess” demand for safe assets. This ﬁnancial
market problem spreads to the real economy through multiple channels. On the aggregate
supply side, corporations (including the ﬁnancial sector) trade less potential production for
safer revenue. On the aggregate demand side (the side we highlight), SAM is characterized
by the strong downward pressure it puts on safe interest rates. If there is a limit on how
much these rates can drop, a safety-trap emerges, akin to the Keynesian liquidity trap. In
this context, a recession restores equilibrium in asset markets by reducing the wealth of
safe-savers and hence their asset demand. Overall, SAM provides a parsimonious account
for symptoms also found in environments experiencing the combined eﬀect of a credit crunch
and a liquidity trap.
In SAM, as in the more conventional credit crunch mechanism, a wedge develops between
the risky and riskless rate. However, in SAM, it is the safe rate drop that drives this wedge,
and it is this rate that is the main sign of trouble. Although in practice both mechanisms
are likely to operate in conjunction, it is important to establish their diﬀerences as they do
not respond equally to diﬀerent policy packages.
Public debt plays a central role in SAM. The central concept here is that of ﬁscal capacity: How much public debt can the government credibly pledge to honor, should a major
macroeconomic shock take place in the future? The key issue is that the government owns
a disproportionate share of the capacity to create safe assets, and the private sector owns
too many risky assets. As long as the government has spare ﬁscal capacity to back safe
asset production, the government can increase the supply of safe assets by issuing public
debt. This reduces the root imbalance in the economy. We use this framework to analyze
the impact of diﬀerent policy options implemented recently in the U.S. and other developed
2

economies. In general, policy-puts (such as QE1 in the U.S., LTRO in Europe, ﬁscal policy,
etc.) that support future bad states of the economy play a central role in this environment,
while policy-calls that support the good states of the recovery (e.g., some aspects of forward
guidance) are less powerful.
Swapping risky private assets for safe public debt, which with some abuse of terminology
we refer to as Quantitative Easing (QE) type policies, and which encompass the recent QE1
in the U.S. and LTRO in Europe as well as many other lender of last resort central bank
interventions, have positive eﬀects on spreads and output. In contrast, swapping short-run
public debt for long-run public debt, which we refer to as Operation Twist (OT), and which
encompass the recent QE2 and QE3 in the U.S., can be counterproductive. The reason for
the latter is that long term public debt, by being a “bearish” asset that can be used to hedge
risky private assets, has a safe asset multiplier eﬀect that short term public debt lacks. That
is, long term public debt is not only a safe asset in itself, but also makes risky private assets
safer through portfolio eﬀects.1
Fiscal policy is the goods-markets side of public debt policy. Once ﬁscal capacity runs
out, that is, once the government’s ability to create safe assets runs out, short term ﬁscal
policy becomes less eﬀective. In contrast, credible long run ﬁscal consolidation becomes
powerful, as it relaxes the ﬁscal capacity constraint and allows the government to sustain
higher debt, thereby increasing the supply of assets and boosting the economy. While the
eﬃcacy of long run ﬁscal consolidation relies on its impact on the ability of the government
to increase the supply of safe assets, it is also possible for the government to successfully
stimulate the economy by reducing the demand for safe assets. Indeed, the government can
stimulate the economy by simply taxing away the wealth of the agents with the highest
demand for safe assets, and either rebating the proceeds to agents with a lower demand for
safe assets, or using them to increase government spending.
We also discuss the role of monetary policy commitments in a safety trap, and show
that they alleviate the shortage only if they support future bad states of nature (a policyput). The reason is, again, that in a SAM environment the main problem is the very low
equilibrium safe rate, not the large risk-spread. Commitments to low interest rates in future
good states (a policy call)—the way forward guidance type policies are usually discussed—
are ineﬀective precisely because they attempt risky assets revaluation rather than the safe
1

From SAM’s perspective, an interesting (and conceptually correct) argument often made in favor of OT
is that the policy itself enhances the bearish nature of long term debt by tightening the negative correlation
between long term debt and the state of the economy. Whether this eﬀect dominates the one we highlight
in the main text is uncertain at this time.

3

asset expansion that SAM requires. By contrast, commitments to low interest rates in future
bad states are eﬀective precisely because they increase the value of safe assets. However, it
is natural to question whether monetary authorities would have the ability to lower interest
rates in future bad states (they might coincide with another safety or liquidity trap). We
are therefore left with a somewhat skeptical view of forward guidance policies in a SAM
environment.2
The SAM environment resembles in many respects the Keynesian liquidity trap environment, but it also has important diﬀerences with it. We devote a section to highlight these
diﬀerences. For example, we show that QE type policies are more powerful in SAM than
in liquidity trap environments. In contrast, ﬁscal policy and forward guidance are more
eﬀective in the latter than in SAM.
Related literature. Our paper is related to several strands of literature. First and most
closely related is the literature that identiﬁes the shortage of safe assets as key macroeconomic
fact (see e.g. Caballero 2006 and 2010, Caballero and Krishnamurthy 2009, Bernanke et al
2011, Barclay’s 2012). Our paper provides a model that captures many of the key insights
in that literature and that allows us to study the main macroeconomic policy implications
of this environment more precisely.
Second, the literature on aggregate liquidity (see e.g. Woodford 1990 and Holmström
and Tirole 1998) analyzes the shortage of liquidity (stores of value). It has emphasized the
role of governments in providing (possibly contingent) stores of value that cannot be created
by the private sector. Our paper shares the idea that liquidity shortages are important
macroeconomic phenomena, and that the government has a special role in alleviating them.
However, it shifts the focus to a very speciﬁc form of liquidity—safe assets—and works out
its distinct and unique consequences.
Third, there is a literature that documents signiﬁcant deviations from the predictions
of standard asset-pricing models—patterns which can be thought of as reﬂecting moneylike convenience services—in the pricing of Treasury securities generally, and in the pricing
of short-term T-bills more speciﬁcally (Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen 2011, 2012,
Greenwood and Vayanos 2010, Duﬀee 1996, Gurkaynak, Sack and Wright 2006, Bansal and
Coleman 1996). Our model oﬀers a distinct interpretation of these stylized facts, where the
“specialness” of public debt is its safety during bad states of the economy.
2

Of course in practice SAM is only one of the many ills that aﬀect an economy in distress. Our policy
eﬀectiveness claims relate to the SAM dimension of the problem only.

4

Fourth, there is an emerging literature which emphasizes how the aforementioned premium creates incentives for private agents to rely heavily on short-term debt, even when
this creates systemic instabilities (Gorton and Metrick 2010, 2012, Gorton 2010, Stein 2012,
Woodford 2012, Gennaioli, Shleifer and Vishny 2012). Greenwood, Hanson and Stein (2012)
consider the role of the government in increasing the supply of short-term debt and aﬀecting
the premium. Gorton and Ordonez (2013) also consider this question but in the context of
a model with (asymmetric) information acquisition about collateral where the key characteristic of public debt that drives its premium is its information insensitivity. Our model
also considers how this premium aﬀects private agent’s balance sheets, but it oﬀers distinct
mechanisms for its source, and on how it aﬀects the economy and macroeconomic policy.
Fifth, there is the literature on liquidity traps (see e.g. Keynes 1936, Krugman 1998,
Eggertsson and Woodford 2003, Christiano, Eichenbaum and Rebelo 2011, Correia, Farhi,
Nicolini and Teles 2012, Werning 2012). This literature emphasizes that the binding zero
lower bound on nominal interest rates presents a challenge for macroeconomic stabilization.
In most models of the liquidity trap, the corresponding asset shortage arises from an exogenous increase in the propensity to save (a discount factor shock). Some recent models (see
e.g. Guerrieri and Lorenzoni 2011, and Eggertsson and Krugman 2012) provide deeper microfoundations and emphasize the role of tightened borrowing constraints in economies with
heterogeneous agents (borrowers and savers). Our model of a safety trap shares elements of
the Keynesian liquidity trap story. However, in our model the key interest rate is the safe
interest rate, and the root cause of safety traps is an acute safe asset shortage. This crucial
distinction has important policy implications.
Finally, our paper relates to an extensive literature, both policy and academic, on ﬁscal
sustainability and the consequences of current and future ﬁscal adjustments (see, e.g., Giavazzi and Pagano 1990, 1996, Alesina and Ardagna 1998, IMF 1996, Guihard et al 2007).
Our paper revisits some of the policy questions in this literature but highlights the government’s capacity to create safe assets at the margin, as the key concept to determine
the potential eﬀectiveness of further ﬁscal expansions as well as the beneﬁts of future ﬁscal
consolidations.3
3

Our paper is also related to a strand of literature on global imbalances. Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas
(2008a,b) developed the idea that global imbalances originated in the superior development of ﬁnancial markets in developed economies, and in particular the U.S. Global imbalances resulted from an asset imbalance.
Although we do not develop the open economy version of our model here, SAM implies a speciﬁc channel that
lies behind global imbalances: The latter were caused by the funding countries’ demand for ﬁnancial assets
in excess of their ability to produce them, but this gap is particularly acute for safe assets since emerging
markets have very limited institutional capability to produce them.

5

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our basic model and introduces the
key mechanism of a safety trap. Section 3 introduces public debt and considers the eﬀects of
balance sheet policies (QE and OT) and ﬁscal policies (redistributive policies, government
spending). Section 4 analyzes the role of forward guidance (monetary policy commitments).
Section 5 develops a version of a liquidity trap in the context of our model and explains the
similarities and diﬀerences with a safety trap. Section 6 concludes.

2

A Model of SAM

In this section we describe SAM without government intervention. When a shortage of safe
assets arises, interest rates need to drop to reduce the return on these assets and hence their
demand. However, if there is a lower bound for interest rates, then a safety trap emerges
and asset markets are cleared through a recession.

2.1

Basic Model

Setup. The basic model has exogenous output. The goal is to characterize demand and
supply of safe assets, and their impact on equilibrium returns.
Output is constant, X, unless a Poisson shock takes place, in which case it drops to
μX < X forever. We focus on the period before this shock takes place. The Poisson event
happens with hazard λ, and we simplify the notation by studying the limit as λ → 0.
Population has a perpetual-youth overlapping generations structure with death and birth
rates θ. Agents consume only when they die, which yields a simple aggregate consumption
function Ct = θWt , where Ct and Wt represent aggregate consumption and wealth, respectively. Note that equilibrium in goods markets pins down the equilibrium value of aggregate
wealth Wt at
X
W = .
θ
Next, we introduce two key ingredients of the model, one about asset demand, and one
about asset supply. On the asset demand side, there are two types of agents in the economy:
Neutral and (locally) Knightian. Neutral agents are risk-neutral. Knightian agents are
inﬁnitely risk averse (over short time intervals): between t and t + dt, when forming their
portfolio, they act as if the Poisson shock happens in the next inﬁnitesimal time interval

6

with probability one. The fraction of Neutrals in the population is 1 − α. The fraction of
Knightians is α. We denote the wealth of Neutral and Knightian agents by WtN and WtK
with
WtN + WtK = W.
On the asset supply side, we assume that a fraction δ of output X is pledgeable and
accrues as the total dividend of Lucas trees (each tree capitalizes a stream of δ units of
goods per period). The rest, (1 − δ) X, is distributed to newborns. The total value of assets
before the Poisson shock is V, and from ﬁnancial market equilibrium we have:
V =W =

X
.
θ

We assume that only a fraction ρ of these assets can be tranched to split the risky and
riskless component of returns. We denote by V μ and V r the supply of safe and risky assets
with
V = V μ + V r.
A safe asset is one whose value does not change when the Poisson event takes place. Thus,
we can ﬁnd V μ by solving backwards and noting that by construction a fraction ρ of the
total value of assets after an adverse Poisson shock is safe:
V μ = ρμ

X
.
θ

Risky assets (before the Poisson event) are worth the residual V − V μ :
V r = (1 − ρμ)

X
.
θ

Since Knightian agents only hold safe assets, their wealth holdings, WtK , must satisfy:
WtK ≤ V μ .
Let r, rK , and δ μ denote the (ex-ante) rate of return on risky assets, the rate of return on safe assets, and the dividend paid by safe assets, respectively. Then equilibrium is
characterized by the following equations:
rK V μ = δ μ X,

7

rV r = (δ − δ μ )X,
ẆtK = −θWtK + α (1 − δ) X + rK WtK ,
ẆtN = −θWtN + (1 − α) (1 − δ) X + rWtN ,
WtK + WtN = V μ + V r .
Two regimes. There are two regimes, depending on whether the constraint WtK ≤ V μ
is slack (unconstrained regime) or binding (constrained regime).
In the unconstrained regime, since Neutrals are the marginal holders of safe assets, safe
and risky rates must be equal. A few steps of algebra show that in this case:
δ μ = δρμ,
r = rK = δθ.
The interesting case for us is the constrained regime, which captures the safe asset shortage environment. In it, Knightians gobble up all safe assets and wish they had more, so
that:

X
.
θ
It is easy to verify that this regime holds (after possibly a transitional period) as long as
α > ρμ.4 The latter is the safe asset shortage condition, which we shall assume holds
henceforth. In this case we have:
W K = V μ = ρμ

δ μ = δρμ − (α − ρμ)(1 − δ) < δρμ,
rK = δθ − (1 − δ) θ

α − ρμ
< δθ,
ρμ

4

A delicate issue is the initial value of risky assets. It is possible for the value of risky assets (and hence
r
the fraction
total assets) to jump at date 0 and so we distinguish 0− and 0+ . We denote by β0μ− and β0−
of safe assets and risky assets initially owned by Knightians. The initial budget constrained of Knightians
implies
X
r
β0r− V0−
≤ (1 − β0μ− )ρμ ,
θ
and the absence of arbitrage for Neutrals requires that
V0r− ≤ V0r+ = (1 − ρμ)

8

X
.
θ

r = δθ + (1 − δ) θ

α − ρμ
> δθ.
1 − ρμ

It follows that in this region there is a safety premium
r − rK = (1 − δ) θ

α − ρμ
> 0.
ρμ (1 − ρμ)

The supply of safe assets is determined by the severity of the potential shock (μ) and
the ability of the economy to create safe assets (ρ). In fact ρ and μ enter the equilibrium
equations only through the suﬃcient statistic ρμ. Similarly, the demand for safe assets is
summarized by the fraction of Knightians (α). Together, these suﬃcient statistics determine
whether we are in the unconstrained regime (α ≤ ρμ) or in the constrained regime (α > ρμ).
Discussion. Our model features two forms of market incompleteness. The ﬁrst one is
tied to our overlapping generations structure. As a result, our environment is non-Ricardian
and asset supply (δ) matters. The second market incompleteness is that only a fraction of
trees (ρ) can be tranched.5 Tranching is desirable because it decomposes an asset into a safe
tranche which can be sold to Knightian agents and a risky tranche that can only be sold to
Neutral agents. Because agents cannot tranch assets at will, Modigliani-Miller fails in the
sense that in the constrained regime the value v t of a unit of tranched tree is higher than
that of an untranched tree v nt . This gap widens as the safe asset shortage (α − ρμ) worsens:
v t − v nt =

1−δ
1 α − ρμ
.
θ ρ 1 − ρμ − (1 − α) (1 − δ)

Up to now we have assumed production is exogenous and focused on the spread side of
SAM. But in reality production and demand decisions are also strongly inﬂuenced by risk
perceptions and the corresponding spreads. In the appendix (Section 7.1.2) we focus on a
supply side mechanism, while in the next section we turn to a demand mechanism.

2.2

Safety Trap

As the potential shock becomes more extreme (i.e., as μ drops), or the economy’s ability to
create safe assets is more impaired (ρ drops), the supply of safe assets shrinks (ρμ drops).
Equilibrium is restored by a decline in rK which lowers demand for safe assets. But what
5

A simple extension of our model allows us to think about pooling in addition to tranching. We refer the
reader to the appendix for this extension.

9

if there is a limit rK on how much rK can drop? In this section we address this issue and
show how an excess demand for safe assets can trigger a recession.
We develop our argument in two steps. In Section 2.2.1, we use a simple disequilibrium
framework to isolate the mechanics of the interaction between an aggregate demand determined output and a lower bound on safe rates. In Section 2.2.2 (which can be skipped if
persuaded by the ﬁrst step), we develop a New Keynesian model with a Cash In Advance
constraint that provides an example of the safety trap mechanism we describe in the ﬁrst
step. In that model, the lower bound rK is equal to zero and arises from the possibility of
arbitraging between money and other safe assets.6
2.2.1

The Mechanics of a Safety Trap

The extra restriction rK ≥ rK forces us to consider disequilibrium in some other market,
which we assume to be the goods market as this connects our discussion with standard
Keynesian demand arguments. We introduce a distinction between potential output X and
actual output ξX. When ξ < 1, output is below potential. We reinterpret endowments of
goods (1 − δ) X and dividends δX as endowments of a non-traded input (say labor) that
can be converted into output one-to-one. When ξ < 1, less of this input is converted into
output. This modelling strategy essentially sidesteps the labor market. In every period,
there is a goods market and an asset market. Dying old agents supply assets and demand
goods. Survivors and newborns demand assets and supply goods.
Let us work backwards and recall that after the negative Poisson shock hits (which never
literally happens in our model since λ → 0), uncertainty disappears and so does the safe
asset shortage. This means that actual and potential output coincide after the shocks and
6

Our general model allows for a general lower bound rK which can potentially be diﬀerent from zero
because we think that the restriction rK ≥ rK could also be interpreted as a stand-in for other mechanisms
than arbitrage with money. Indeed, very low interest rates may be problematic for a variety of reasons, ranging from distributional considerations (e.g., against retirees) to ﬁnancial markets ones. These considerations
could be another potential justiﬁcation for the lower bound rK . A possible modelling strategy would be to
introduce some discontinuity in Knightians preferences: They cannot survive or suﬀer a very large utility
loss with returns below rK (but they still strictly prefer to hold only riskless assets over risky assets when
the return on the former is rK ). There could also be a discontinuity on the supply side, stemming from
institutional and cost constraints on the intermediation sector (e.g., money markets may switch in mass to
gambling for resurrection once rates drop to suﬃciently low levels). Depending on the exact speciﬁcation,
there would either be no equilibrium with rK < rK or only very bad equilibria (from a welfare perspective).
Then either the monetary authority could be unable to set a nominal interest rate iK below rK or it would
choose not to.

10

therefore the value of safe assets (before the shock) is still given by
V μ = ρμ

X
.
θ

Note that, mechanically, this “disequilibrium” model is identical to the basic model but with
and X replaced by ξX. The requirement that rK = rK determines the
ρμ replaced by ρμ
ξ
severity of the recession ξ:
α − ρμ
ξ
K
r = δθ − (1 − δ) θ ρμ ,
ξ

yielding
ξ=

ρμ
< 1,
ρμ

where ρμ corresponds to the value of these combined parameters for which rK is the equilibrium safe interest rate (e.g., when rK = 0, ρμ = α(1 − δ)).7
Because the safe interest rate rK cannot adjust downwards, there is a recession. This
mechanism is akin to that of a liquidity trap. We call it a “safety trap”. A recession lowers
the absolute demand for safe assets while keeping the absolute supply of safe assets ﬁxed
and restores equilibrium. Figure 1 illustrates this mechanism, which we describe next.
The supply of safe assets is given by V μ = ρμ Xθ and the demand for safe assets is given
. Equilibrium in the safe asset market requires that W K = V μ , i.e.
by W K = α(1−δ)ξX
θ−r K
α (1 − δ) ξX
X
= ρμ .
K
θ−r
θ
Consider an unexpected (zero ex-ante probability) shock that lowers the supply of safe assets
(a reduction in ρμ). The mechanism by which equilibrium in the safe asset market is restored
has two parts. The ﬁrst part immediately reduces Knightian wealth W K to a lower level,
consistent with the lower supply for safe assets ρμ Xθ . The second part maintains Knightian
wealth W K at this lower level.
The ﬁrst part of the mechanism is as follows. The economy undergoes an immediate
wealth adjustment (the wealth of Knightians drops) through a round of trading between
7

The risky interest rate r is increasing in ξ, so that the deeper the recession, the lower is r:
r = δθ + (1 − δ) θ

11

α−
1−

ρμ
ξ
ρμ
ξ

.

Figure 1: Safety trap.

Recession caused by a decrease in the supply of safe assets. The safe asset supply curve shifts left (ρμ < ρμ),
the endogenous recession shifts the safe asset demand curve left (ξ < 1), and the safe interest rate remains
unchanged at r K .

Knightians and Neutrals born in previous periods. At impact, Knightians hold assets that
now carry some risk. They react by selling the risky part of their portfolio to Neutrals. This
shedding of risky assets catalyzes an instantaneous ﬁre sale whereby the price of risky assets
collapses before immediately recovering once risky assets have changed hands. Needless to
say, in reality this phase takes time, which we have removed to focus on the phase following
the initial turmoil.
The second part of the equilibrating mechanism diﬀers depending on whether the safe
interest rate rK is above or at the lower bound rK . If rK > rK , then a reduction in the safe
interest rate rK takes place. This reduction in the safe interest rate eﬀectively limits the
growth of Knightian wealth so that the safe asset market remains in equilibrium. If the safe
interest rate is against the lower bound rK = rK , then this reduction in the safe interest rate
cannot take place. With full capacity utilization and rK = rK , the growth rate of Knightian
wealth would be too high and an excess demand for safe assets would develop over time.
Instead, a recession takes place (a reduction in ξ) which reduces the income of Knightians
(newborns) and hence the growth of Knightian wealth.
12

Note that the recession drags down the whole economy, reducing not only the income
of Knightians, but also that of Neutrals (the dividends on risky assets and the income of
Neutrals newborns) and hence the wealth of Neutrals. Of course, the ﬂip side of this reduction
in Neutral wealth is a reduction in the value of risky assets, which occurs through a reduction
in dividends (and despite a decrease in the risky interest rate r). The reduction in Neutral
wealth in turn reduces demand in the goods market, thereby justifying the recession.8
A similar logic applies if we raise the share of Knightian agents α instead of reducing ρμ,
in which case the recession factor is

α
< 1.
α
This interpretation resembles the paradox of thrift. Combining both, asset supply and
ξ=

demand factors, we have that the severity of the recession is determined by the suﬃcient
according to the simple equation:
statistic ρμ
α
ξ=

α ρμ
.
ρμ α

Although our framework is not designed to discuss normative issues, in practice it seems
evident that a recession is a costly mechanism to restore equilibrium in safe asset markets.
We turn to policy options later in the paper.
2.2.2

A New Keynesian Cash-In-Advance Example

In this section we ﬂesh out an example whose equilibrium exhibits the safety trap feature
and mechanics described above. Again, we do it in two steps. The ﬁrst step consists of
making output demand determined and to associate real to nominal safe rates by adding
standard New Keynesian features.9 The second step adds money and its transaction role,
8

Note that the adjustment in Knightian wealth is the same whether the safe interest rate rK is or is not
at the lower bound rK . What is diﬀerent is the adjustment in Neutral wealth. In response to a negative
shock to the value of safe assets, Neutral wealth ends up at a lower level when the safe interest rate is against
the lower bound than when it can freely adjust downwards.
9
An alternative would have been to stick to disequilibrium theory. In the language of disequilibrium theory
(see e.g. Barro and Grossman 1971, Malinvaud 1977, Benassy 1986, as well as Hall 2011a,b, Kocherlakota
2012, and Korinek and Simsek 2013 for more recent applications), there is excess supply in the goods market
and excess demand in the asset market, and in particular an excess demand for safe assets. The gap between
the notional and eﬀective supply of goods and demand for assets can be formalized by supplementing the
budget constraints of surviving old agents and newborns with quantity constraints (the demand for goods,
and the supply of assets). The analysis then characterizes how a disequilibrium in the asset market spills
over to a disequilibrium in the goods markets. The advantage of the New Keynesian formulation over
a disequilibrium approach is that the economy is always in equilibrium, even if this equilibrium can be

13

which introduces a lower bound for safe rates and links the use of money as a store of value
(as opposed to transaction services) to the severity of the recession.
Demand determined output Let us incorporate the traditional ingredients of New Keynesian economics: imperfect competition, sticky prices and a monetary authority.
In this setting, in every period, non-traded inputs are used to produce diﬀerentiated
varieties of goods xk indexed by k ∈ [0, 1] where each variety is produced using a diﬀerent
variety of non-traded good also indexed by k ∈ [0, 1]. We index trees by i ∈ [0, δ], where each
tree i yields a dividend of X non traded goods. Similarly, we index newborns by j ∈ [δ, 1]
where each newborn j is endowed with X non-traded goods. Goods with indices k ∈ [0, δ]
are produced with the non-traded inputs from the dividends of trees indexed by k, and goods
with indices k ∈ [δ, 1] are produced with the non-traded inputs from the endowments of the
newborns indexed by k. Each variety is sold by a monopolistic ﬁrm. Firms post prices pk
in units of the numeraire. These diﬀerentiated varieties of goods are valued
by consumers
σ
 σ−1  σ−1
1
, and consumption
according to a standard Dixit-Stiglitz aggregator ξX = 0 xk σ dk
1

 1−σ
1
1
expenditure is P ξX = 0 pk xk dk where the price index is deﬁned as P = 0 p1−σ
dk
.
k
 pk −σ
The resulting demand for each variety is given by xk = P
ξX.
The prices of diﬀerent varieties are entirely ﬁxed (an extreme form of sticky prices) and
equal to each other pk = P . Firms accommodate demand at the posted price, and ﬁrm proﬁts
accrue to the agent owning and supplying the corresponding non-traded input. Without loss
of generality, we use the normalization P = 1. Note that because the prices of all varieties
are identical, the demand for all varieties is the same. Output is demand-determined, and as
a result, capacity utilization rate ξ is the same for all ﬁrms (the recession is economywide)
so that xk = ξX for all k.
Finally, a monetary authority sets a safe nominal interest rate iK . Because prices are
rigid, this determines the real interest rates rK = iK . The resulting model yields exactly the
same equations as those used in the previous section.
Money, the Zero Lower Bound and the Cashless Limit To justify a zero lower
rK ≥ rK with rK = 0, we introduce money into the model. We then deﬁne a cashless limit
(see e.g. Woodford 2003) and show that in that limit, the economy converges to our basic
ineﬃcient (with output below potential). This is why we choose to adopt it.

14

model.
We represent the demand for real money balances for transactional services using a Cash
In Advance constraint that stipulates that individuals with wealth wt and money holdings
mt can only consume min(wt , mεt ). When iK > 0, money is held only for transaction services.
When iK = 0 money is also held as a safe store of value, which competes with its transaction
services. This model has no equilibrium with iK < 0, because then money dominates other
safe assets. Hence there is a zero lower bound iK ≥ 0. The model becomes isomorphic to
our basic model in the cashless limit as ε → 0. We develop this setup next.
The demand for real money balances for transactional services is εWtK and εWtN for
Knightians and Neutrals respectively. We assume that the money supply is εM ε with M ε =
X
. When the Poisson shock hits, the government buys back part of the money stock so that
θ
the money supply is εM ε,μ with M ε,μ = μ Xθ . This ensures that money is adequate and
output is at potential after the Poisson shock. In order to ﬁnance this purchase, we let the
government issue short term debt, the principal of which is rolled over and the interest of
which is paid using a tax on the dividends of risky assets. Importantly, the ability to retire
the extra money after the Poisson shock requires the government to have the ﬁscal capacity
to raise these taxes, a key concept that we analyze at length in Section 3.
After the Poisson shock, the value V μ of the safe tranches of trees is a fraction ρ of the
total value of assets excluding money (trees and government debt). And we therefore have

θ

1 μ
V + εM ε,μ
ρ



i.e.
V μ = ρμ (1 − ε)

= μX,
X
.
θ

The equilibrium equations are now, denoting the real money supply as M = εM ε ,
rK V μ = δ μ ξX,
rV r = (δ − δ μ )ξX,
ẆtK = −θWtK + α (1 − δ) ξX + rK (1 − ε) WtK ,
ẆtN = −θWtN + (1 − α) (1 − δ) ξX + r (1 − ε) WtN ,
ε(WtK + WtN ) ≤ εM ε

with equality if rK > 0
15

WtK + εWtN ≤ V μ + εM ε ,
WtK + WtN = V μ + V r + εM ε ,
and the requirement that
rK ≥ 0.
When rK > 0, we always have ξ = 1 as long as money is adequate M ε = Xθ , which we
assume throughout.10 The interesting case for us is when rK = 0, for then ξ is determined
from equilibrium in the safe asset market, in which part of money is used for store of value.
At rK = 0 the supply for safe assets (safe tranches and money) is
ρμ (1 − ε)

X
+ εM ε
θ

The demand for safe assets (safe tranches and money) is


ε W K + W N + (1 − ε) W K
which can be written as:
ε

ξX
+ (1 − ε) W K .
θ

Replacing Knightian wealth W K = α (1 − δ) ξX
into this expression yields equilibrium outθ
put:
ε
M ε Xθ
ρμ + 1−ε
,
ξ= ε
+ α (1 − δ)
1−ε
which converges to the expression in the basic model in the cashless limit as ε → 0.11,12
We can have ξ < 1 even when rK > 0 if money is scarce M ε < X
θ . These eﬀects are standard in
Keynesian models and are not our focus here.
11
One interesting feature of this model is that there is an additional mechanism by which the recession
helps eliminate the excess demand for safe assets, by reducing the money balances held by Neutrals and
hence expanding the safe stores of value available to Knightians. In other words, as rates fall to zero, money
itself becomes indistinguishable from other safe assets; to the extent that money provides other important
services to the economy (e.g. transactional), its use for store of value can be contractionary (it is akin to an
upward shift in money demand)
12
If ε is small, money does not relax much the ﬁscal capacity of the government and hence its ability to
create safe assets: Issuing money while at the zero bound is equivalent to issuing short-term bonds, and both
are constrained by the long-term ﬁscal capacity of the government. Indeed, after the Poisson shock, then
the government must raise taxes to retire the additional money that it has issued before the Poisson shock.
Failing to do so requires accepting a reduction in safe interest rates after the Poissson shock and results in
an overstimulation of output—a form of forward guidance policy discussed in Section 4.
10

16

3

Balance Sheet and Fiscal Policies in SAM

Could government policy and instruments reduce the severity of the safety trap? In particular, could the government aﬀect the supply and demand for safe assets in productive
ways?
In this section we focus on the role of public debt and (central bank) balance sheet policies
as well as ﬁscal policies (redistribution, government spending), and postpone a discussion of
monetary policy to the next section. We argue that the government does have a role to play
but that its margin of action is constrained by its ﬁscal capacity.

3.1

Public Debt and Balance Sheet Policies

We start by introducing public debt and discussing the role of public purchases and sales of
such debt. To isolate the insights of this section we assume for now that private trees cannot
be tranched at all (ρ = 0), and hence cannot produce safe assets by themselves.
We ﬁrst introduce short-term public debt. We show that the if the government has spare
ﬁscal capacity, then it can increase the supply of public debt, and rebating the proceeds of
the issuance to private agents. This increases the supply of safe assets and stimulates the
economy.
We then study the impact of Quantitative Easing (QE) policies that swap trees for shortterm public debt. We should be clear that we are using the term QE with some liberality
to describe policies that swap risky assets for safe assets such as the recent QE1 in the U.S.,
LTRO in Europe, and many other lender of last resort central bank interventions. These
policies act to increase the supply of safe assets and therefore help reduce the safety premium.
If the economy is in a safety trap and output is below potential, they have a stimulating
eﬀect on output.
Next, we introduce long-term public debt and study Operation Twist (OT) policies that
swap long-term debt for short-term debt. These policies encompass the QE2 and QE3
policies undertaken in the U.S. In contrast to QE policies, we show that such policies can
backﬁre. Basically, replacing long term debt by short term debt reduces the supply of safe
assets. This happens despite the fact that short term debt is safe. The reason is that long
term debt has a multiplier eﬀect on safe asset creation which short term debt does not have:
Long term debt is a “bearish” asset that can be combined with risky private assets to create

17

safe assets. If the economy is in a safety trap so that output is below potential, OT policies
have a depressing eﬀect on output.
All these policies act on the supply of safe assets. If the government is not against its
future ﬁscal capacity constraint, issuing more public debt is eﬀective because it increases
the supply of safe assets. The same goes for QE. OT is detrimental because it reduces the
supply of safe assets.
3.1.1

Short-Term Public Debt and Fiscal Capacity

Introducing short-term public debt. The government taxes dividends, δX. The tax
rate is τ μ after the Poisson shock occurs, while the tax rate before the Poisson shock is set
to a value τ that satisﬁes the government ﬂow budget constraint. The government issues
a ﬁxed amount of risk-free bonds that capitalize future tax revenues and pays a variable
rate rtK . It is the latter feature that makes this debt “short-term,” since its value remains
constant over time as its coupons vary with the riskless rate. The proceeds of the sales of
these bonds are rebated lump-sum to agents at date 0. Hence in this model government debt
acts exactly like tranching, with τ μ playing the role of ρ.
Let the value of public debt be given by D, then we have
D = τ μμ

X
.
θ

The equilibrium is described by the following equations:
rK D = τ δX,
rV = δ (1 − τ ) X,
ẆtK = −θWtK + α (1 − δ) X + rK WtK ,
ẆtN = −θWtN + (1 − α) (1 − δ) X + rW N .
WtK + WtN = D + V,
WtK ≤ D and rK ≤ r.

18

At a steady state of the constrained regime we have
W K = D = τ μμ

X
,
θ

W N = V = (1 − τ μ μ)

X
θ

and
δτ = τ μ μ − α (1 − δ) ,
α − τ μμ
,
r = δθ − (1 − δ) θ
τ μμ
K

r = δθ + (1 − δ) θ

α − τ μμ
.
1 − τ μμ

The economy is in the constrained regime if and only if α > τ μ μ, which we assume. The
safety premium is then given by
r − rK = θ (1 − δ)

α − τ μμ
≥ 0.
τ μ μ (1 − τ μ μ)

In this model, the supply of safe assets comes entirely in the form of short-term public
debt. The supply of the latter is determined by a notion of ﬁscal capacity, as measured
by τ μ μ. The larger ﬁscal capacity, the more short-term debt the government can issue, the
larger the supply of safe assets and the lower the safety premium.
If the economy is in a safety trap where the safe interest rate is ﬁxed at rK and output
is below potential with ξ < 1, then in increasing public debt from D to D̂ > D stimulates
output, increasing ξ to ξˆ where
D̂
ξˆ = ξ > ξ.
D
Increasing the supply of public debt to D̂ requires the government to have spare ﬁscal
capacity, that is to have the ability to raise more taxes after the Poisson shock
τ̂ μ =

D̂ μ
τ > τ μ.
D

The government’s ability to expand this supply either because it has excess ﬁscal capacity
or because it can implicitly tranch assets in a way the private sector cannot, which gives it
a comparative advantage in the production of safe assets. This result does not require the
extreme assumption ρ = 0 that we have made solely to simplify the exposition. Indeed, the
comparative advantage of the government in the production of safe assets is present as long

19

as there are some limits to the tranching of private assets (ρ < 1). It is only when there are no
limits to the tranching of private assets (ρ = 1) that this comparative advantage disappears
and that the supply of public debt becomes irrelevant—a form of Ricardian equivalence.13
Fiscal capacity limits. In the rest of the paper, we investigate policy options for the
government when it is against its long-run ﬁscal capacity, with limited ability to increase
future taxes. For this reason, we ﬁx τ μ and treat it as a hard ﬁscal capacity constraint.
3.1.2

Quantitative Easing

We remind the reader that we are using the term QE with some abuse to encompass policies
that swap risky assets for safe assets such as QE1, LTRO, and many other lender of last
resort central bank interventions. We model QE as follows. The government purchases trees
and issues additional short-term debt. Let β̂ g be the fraction of the trees purchased by the
government. Let D̂ be the value of government debt and let τ̂ μ be the new value of taxes
after the Poisson shock (which must satisfy τ̂ μ ≤ τ μ ). We continue to assume that the stock
of short-term debt is unchanged before and after the Poisson shock. We have
D̂ = τ̂ μ (1 − β̂ g )μ

X
X
+ β̂ g μ .
θ
θ

As long as
τ̂ μ (1 − β̂ g ) + β̂ g > τ μ ,
the safe asset shortage is alleviated by this policy: rK increases, r decreases, and the safety
premium shrinks.
QE here works not so much by removing private assets from private balance sheets, but
13

This mechanism has some commonality with the idea in Holmström and Tirole (1998) that the government has a comparative advantage in providing liquidity. In their model this result arises from the
assumption that some agents (consumers in their model) lack commitment and hence cannot borrow because they cannot issue securities that pledge their future endowments. This can result in a scarcity of stores
of value. The government can alleviate this scarcity by issuing public debt and repaying this debt by taxing
consumers. The proceeds of the debt issuance can actually be rebated to consumers. At the aggregate level,
this essentially relaxes the borrowing constraint of consumers: They borrow indirectly through the government. The comparative advantage of the government in providing liquidity arises from its unique regalian
taxation power: It is essentially better than private lenders at collecting revenues from consumers. In the
case where consumers face no commitment problems in the securitization of their future income, there are
no borrowing constraints, public debt is irrelevant, Ricardian equivalence is recovered and the comparative
advantage of the government disappears. Hence the imperfect ability of consumers to securitize their future
income plays a similar role in the theory of Holmstrom and Tirole (1998) as the assumption of imperfect
tranchability in ours.

20

rather by injecting public assets into private balance sheets. In other words, QE works by
increasing the supply of safe assets. The government can expand this supply even when
it doesn’t have excess ﬁscal capacity because it can implicitly tranch assets in a way the
private sector cannot, which gives it a comparative advantage in safety transformation. The
key diﬀerence between QE and simply issuing more public debt is what the government
does with the proceeds from the debt issuance. In QE, the government uses the proceeds to
purchase private risky assets instead of simply rebating them to private agents. By doing
so, it is able to run up its debt without stretching its future ﬁscal capacity.
If the economy is in a safety trap where the safe interest rate is ﬁxed at rK and output
is below potential with ξ < 1, then QE acts by stimulating output, increasing it from ξ to ξˆ
where14,15
D̂
ξˆ = ξ > ξ.
D
3.1.3

Long-Term Public Debt and Operation Twist

We now analyze Operation Twist (OT) policies that swap long-term debt for short-term
debt. These policies encompass QE2 and QE3. To do so, we ﬁrst need to introduce longterm public debt into the model.
Introducing long-term public debt. The key aspect of long-term debt that we wish
to capture here is its bearish nature (i.e., its ability to generate capital gains during periods
of distress). In reality this feature stems from its ﬁxed coupons and the drop in safe rates
during contractions. While this drop holds in our model in the pre-Poisson phase when
14

In general, QE might require a transition phase where the government raises taxes before the Poisson
shock in order to gradually acquire those assets. The analysis in the main text assumes that this adjustment
has taken place and examines the consequences of the eventual buildup of such a portfolio. After this
portfolio buildup phase, taxes are actually lower at τ̂ determined by:
τ̂ = rK

1 τ μμ 1 g
1 τ μμ
− β̂ < τ = rK
.
δθ ξ
θ
δθ ξ

15

In certain circumstances, it is possible to design QE policies that do not require a buildup phase with
increased taxes before the Poisson shock, i.e. such that the debt issuance more than covers the asset
ˆ D̂
purchases. The condition is β̂ g ξ̂X
θ ≤ D̂ − D, where ξ = D ξ, which can be shown after some manipulation to
boil down to
τ̂ μ (1 − β̂ g ) + β̂ g − τ μ
τμ
μ.
ξ≤
τ̂ μ (1 − β̂ g ) + β̂ g
β̂ g
Hence if the economy is depressed enough, then it is possible to build up a QE portfolio without immediately
raising taxes, that stimulates output.

21

safety demand rises, it does not at the Poisson event since uncertainty is resolved once this
shock takes place. Rather than adding shocks within the post-Poisson phase—for example
a fall in interest rates induced by a deleveraging/increase in desired savings shock could be
roughly captured by a decrease in θ after the Poisson shock—we introduce the bearishness
of long term debt through a simple transfer mechanism.
Let us assume that after the Poisson shock, a fraction φ of tax revenues τ μ μδ is committed
to servicing long term debt Dlong , and the remaining fraction (1−φ) is committed to servicing
short term debt Dshort . Before the Poisson shock, we assume that tax revenues and debt
policy are adjusted as follows: First, the value of outstanding short term debt is the same
as after the Poisson shock (this is what makes it short term debt)
Dshort = (1 − φ)τ μ μ

X
.
θ

Second, the value of long term debt is kept at a level
Dlong = ψτ μ φμ

X
θ

below its value φμ Xθ after the Poisson shock, where ψ ∈ (0, 1). This is our simple mechanism
to introduce the macro insurance aspect of long term debt; the lower is ψ, the larger is the
macro insurance aspect of long term debt. The required tax rate τ before the Poisson shock
so that such a policy is feasible is deﬁned implicitly by
rK Dshort + rDlong = τ δX.
In this context the value of trees is
V = [1 − τ μ μ(1 − (1 − ψ)φ)]

X
θ

which is increasing in φ, the share of long term debt in public debt. This eﬀect is stronger,
the larger is the insurance aspect of long term debt (the lower is ψ). The reason is that
the presence of long term debt acts as a hedge for risky trees, and therefore allows the
transformation of risky assets into safe assets through portfolio construction.
Let x be the fraction of the trees that uses all the stock of long term debt to generate
safe assets. This fraction x is determined from the condition that the value of a safe asset

22

can not jump at the Poisson event:
x[1 − τ μ μ(1 − (1 − ψ)φ)]
i.e.

X
X
X
X
+ ψφτ μ μ = x(1 − τ μ )μ + φτ μ μ ,
θ
θ
θ
θ

φ(1 − ψ)τ μ μ
.
x=
1 − μ + φ(1 − ψ)τ μ μ

The total supply of safe assets is then given by
1 long
X
D
+ x(1 − τ μ )μ
ψ
θ
X
X
= τ μ μ + x(1 − τ μ )μ ,
θ
θ

V μ = Dshort +

which can be rewritten as
V μ = Γ(φ, ψ, μ, τ μ )τ μ μ
where
Γ(φ, ψ, μ, τ μ ) = 1 +

X
,
θ

φ(1 − ψ)(1 − τ μ )μ
≥ 1.
1 − μ + φ(1 − ψ)τ μ μ

The supply of risky assets is simply given by the residual
X
− V μ.
θ

Vr =

The safe and risky interest rates can be computed to be
rK = δθ − (1 − δ) θ
r = δθ + (1 − δ) θ

α − Γ(φ, ψ, μ, τ μ )τ μ μ
,
Γ(φ, ψ, μ, τ μ )τ μ μ

α − Γ(φ, ψ, μ, τ μ )τ μ μ
.
1 − Γ(φ, ψ, μ, τ μ )τ μ μ

Operation twist. Clearly r and rK are respectively decreasing and increasing in Γ, and
Γ is increasing in φ. Therefore r is decreasing in φ and rK is increasing in φ. If we interpret
OT as a shortening of public debt maturity held by the private sector, i.e. a lowering of φ,
we have that OT decreases rK and increases r. That is, replacing long term debt by short
term debt reduces the supply of safe assets. This happens despite the fact that short term
debt is safe. Long term debt is a bearish asset that can be combined with risky assets to
create safe assets, thus an expansion in long term debt not only creates the safe debt that is
intrinsic to backed public debt, but also creates a hedge that transforms some risky private
23

assets into safe assets. In contrast, short term debt does not have this additional hedging
eﬀect and only expands the supply of safe assets one for one.
If the economy is in a safety trap where the safe interest rate is ﬁxed at rK and output
is below potential with ξ < 1, then an OT policy that lowers φ to φ̂ < φ, further reduces ξ
to ξˆ where16
Γ(φ̂, ψ, μξ̂ , τ μ )
ξ < ξ.
ξˆ =
Γ(φ, ψ, μξ , τ μ )
A narrative often put forth by central bank oﬃcials to justify OT policies is the following:
Because asset markets are segmented, the central bank can increase the price of long-term
government bonds by purchasing such bonds; this also increases the incentives of ﬁrms to
invest because investment can be ﬁnanced with long-term private debt, which is a substitute
to long-term public debt and hence stimulates the economy. Our model challenges this
narrative: In a safety trap, OT is detrimental to output, and the mechanism trough which
OT operates is very diﬀerent. Of course in practice, both mechanisms might be operative,
and we think that it would be interesting to build models that features them both. At this
stage, our results should be interpreted as suggesting that there may be forces limiting the
eﬀectiveness of these policies.

3.2

Fiscal Policy in SAM

We identify two levers for ﬁscal policy in a SAM environment. The ﬁrst lever acts on the
demand for safe assets by taxing away the wealth of Knightians. The corresponding revenues
can either be redistributed to Neutrals (as explained in Section 3.2.1), or used to increase
government spending (as explained in Section 3.2.2). In both cases, such policies stimulate
the economy. The second lever acts on the supply of safe assets. The government’s ability
to supply safe assets is determined by its ﬁscal capacity. Once a country’s ﬁscal capacity is
used up, the only way for the government to increase its supply of safe assets is to engage
in credible future ﬁscal consolidation. This allows the government to sustain higher debt,
enhances the government’s ability to create safe assets, and therefore boosts the economy.
16

A similar result can be obtained in the endogenous tranching model, since output is an increasing
function of rK .

24

3.2.1

Redistributive Policies

Recall that the market equilibrium is restored by reducing the wealth of Knightians, either
by a drop in the return of the assets they hold, or through a recession. Policy can also
play that role. In this section, we consider the eﬀects of policies that redistribute income
and wealth away from Knightians and toward Neutrals. We show that in a safety trap,
such redistribution stimulates the economy. Importantly, that redistribution can be welfareneutral for Knightians once the expansionary eﬀect of the policy is taken into account.
We ﬁnd it most natural to consider a setup where labor income rather than capital
income is taxed, and we allow for diﬀerentiated labor income taxes between Knightians τ K
and Neutrals τ N . The average tax rate in the economy is
τ = τ K α + τ N (1 − α) .
We have
rK D = τ (1 − δ) X,
rV = δX,
D=
And we have:

X
(1 − δ) τ μ
μ .
μ
δ + (1 − δ) τ
θ



ẆtK = −θWtK + α (1 − δ) 1 − τ K X + rK WtK ,


ẆtN = −θWtN + (1 − α) (1 − δ) 1 − τ N X + rWtN ,
WtK = D,
WtN = V.

The equilibrium rates are:


rK = θ − α (1 − δ) 1 − τ K

r=

θ
(1−δ)τ μ
μ
δ+(1−δ)τ μ

θ
1+

(1−α)(1−δ)(1−τ N )
δ

,

.

Now suppose that the economy is in the constrained regime and in a safety trap where the
safe interest rate is at rK and the government is using all its debt capacity. In this scenario an
25

increase in taxes on Knightians τ K which is used to reduce taxes on Neutrals τ N stimulates
the economy pushing ξ to ξˆ where
1−τ
> ξ.
ξˆ = ξ
1 − τ̂ K
K

This is because such redistributive policy reduces the demand for safe assets (without aﬀecting the supply for safe assets).
One remarkable property of this policy is that even though the tax rate on Knightians is
increased, Knightians are not worse oﬀ. In fact, Knightians are exactly as well oﬀ. Indeed,
the safe interest rate is unchanged at rK and the income of Knightian newborns is also




ˆ = α (1 − δ) 1 − τ K ξX. For Neutrals, the eﬀects are
unchanged at α (1 − δ) 1 − τ̂ K ξX
ˆ −
more complex. Overall, the consumption of Neutrals increases from ξX − θD to ξX
θD in every period, but this eﬀect is unequally distributed among agents. The income
of Neutral newborns increases in every period, and so does the initial value of the assets
held by Newborns at the moment when the policy change is implemented. However, the
interest rate r decreases. As a result, Newborns who live for a long time before consuming
end up consuming less, while Newborns who live for a short time before consuming end up
consuming more. Without putting more structure on preferences, the eﬀects of the welfare
of Neutrals are ambiguous. One possibility is to assess the welfare of Neutrals using a
discounted expected consumption metric with discount factor β ∈ (0, 1). Then Neutrals are
better oﬀ as long as β is low enough.17
3.2.2

Short-Term Fiscal Stimulus and Long-Term Fiscal Consolidation

We now introduce government spending into the model. We assume that the government
spends a fraction G of output X in every period until the Poisson shock hits, and a fraction
17

Interestingly, because the tax change stimulates the economy, the reduction in tax rate on Neutrals is
larger (the tax increase on Knigthian increases the tax base). Indeed using
τ̂ ξˆ = τ ξ,
we ﬁnd



τ N − τ̂ N (1 − α) (1 − δ) =


1−

ξ
ξˆ





τ K α (1 − δ) + τ N (1 − α) (1 − δ) + τ̂ K − τ K α (1 − δ) .

The second term on the right-hand side represents the reduction in the tax on Knightians at constant
output. The ﬁrst term on the right-hand-side represents the extra reduction in the tax on Knightians made
possible by the associated increase in output.

26

Gμ of output μX after it. We index by τ d the tax revenues allocated to paying the interest
on debt and by τ̂ the total tax revenues, so that τ̂ − τ d is devoted to ﬁnancing the ﬂow of
government expenditures. Finally, and for expository simplicity, we assume in the ﬁrst part
of this section that only dividends are taxed. We consider the case where labor income is
taxed in the second part of the section. With these changes, the new equations in the system
are:
rK D = τ d δX,
rV = δ (1 − τ̂ ) X,
GX = (τ̂ − τ d )δX,
D=

τ μ δ − Gμ X (1 − Gμ )
.
μ
δ − Gμ
θ

And we still have:
ẆtK = −θWtK + α (1 − δ) X + rK WtK ,
ẆtN = −θWtN + (1 − α) (1 − δ) X + rWtN ,
WtK = D,
WtN = V.
The new equilibrium rates are:
rK = δθ − θ (1 − δ)

α
τ μ δ−Gμ
μ
δ−Gμ

1
−1 ,
1 − Gμ

⎛
⎜
r = δθ + θ (1 − δ) ⎝1 −

⎞
1−α
μ δ−Gμ
1 − τ δ−G
μ μ
(1 − G) +

1
τ μ δ−Gμ
μ
δ−Gμ
τ μ δ−Gμ
1− δ−Gμ μ

(Gμ − G)

⎟
⎠.

and the system is in the constrained regime (which we assume) if and only if
τ μ δ−Gμ

α 1 − δ−Gμ μ
>
μ δ−Gμ
1 − α τ δ−G
1+
μ μ

1
Gμ −G
μ δ−Gμ
1−Gμ
1− τ δ−G
μ
μ
1

.

Now suppose the economy is in a safety trap where the safe interest rate is at rK and the
government is using all its debt capacity. In this scenario, a ﬁscal expansion in G is powerless

27

in stimulating output because it aﬀects neither the demand nor the supply of safe assets, and
hence leaves the safe interest rate rK unaﬀected. Instead, this form of government policy
only aﬀects the safety spread and interest rate r.
By contrast, a credible decrease of Gμ to Ĝμ < Gμ stimulates output pushing ξ to ξˆ
where
 μ μ

1 − Ĝμ τ δ−δ−ĜĜμ
ξˆ = ξ
μ δ−Gμ > ξ.
(1 − Gμ ) τ δ−G
μ
The reason is that for a given ﬁscal capacity, lower future government spending frees up ﬁscal
resources and allows the government to sustain higher (safe) public debt. If the government
utilizes this increased capacity in the short run, it increases the supply of safe assets, thereby
alleviating their shortage. As far as government spending is concerned, our model prescribes
delayed ﬁscal consolidations as a remedy to safety traps.
This conclusion has both similarities and diﬀerences with the conventional policy recommendation. Indeed, proponents of ﬁscal stimulus in recessions typically favor a two-pronged
approach combining short term ﬁscal stimulus for Keynesian reasons with long-term ﬁscal
restraint to avoid generating doubts about ﬁscal sustainability. The short-term stimulus is
the central piece of the argument, and long-run ﬁscal responsibility is added for robustness,
almost as an afterthought. Our model identiﬁes the same levers but reverses the pecking
order by making long-run ﬁscal consolidation the key policy instrument since in its absence
the government may not be able to create the safe debt that is in short supply.18
These stark conclusions depend partly on the maintained assumption that government
spending is ﬁnanced by taxes rather than by issuing debt (because the government is against
its future ﬁscal capacity to that τ μ cannot be increased), and that the taxes are levied on
capital income (dividends). To illustrate this point, we consider two alternative scenario:
one in which the increase in government spending is accompanied by a buildup in public
debt (which requires an increase in τ μ ), and one in which taxes are levied on labor income.
18

This analysis also separates SAM, which emphasizes the eﬀect of safe asset supply, from Keynesian or
New Keynesian liquidity trap economics which emphasizes the role of aggregate demand. The Keynesian
view of liquidity trap argues in favor of short term ﬁscal stimulus, which is presumed to be especially eﬀective
at the zero lower bound because of the absence of crowding out eﬀects through higher interest rates. The New
Keynesian view emphasizes the role of inﬂation: Fiscal multipliers are large at the zero lower bound because
government spending creates inﬂation and hence lowers real interest rates. (Christiano, Eichnbaum and
Rebelo 2011); backloaded ﬁscal stimulus leads to more bang for the buck because it leads to more cumulated
inﬂation (Farhi and Werning 2012). In contrast to the Keynesian view, and somewhat in line with the New
Keynesian view, our mechanism works through long run ﬁscal adjustments. Although in contrast to both
the Keynesian and New Keynesian views, it works through reductions in future government spending.

28

Short-term stimulus accompanied by a public debt buildup. Here we depart
momentarily from our maintained assumption that τ μ is ﬁxed because the government is
against its future ﬁscal capacity constraint. We consider what happens when the government
has enough spare future ﬁscal capacity to ﬁnance part of the increase in government spending
from G to Ĝ by a buildup in debt, which in turn requires an increase in τ μ to τ̂ μ > τ μ . In a
safety trap when the interest rate is at rK , this stimulates output, increasing ξ to ξˆ where
τ̂ δ − G
ξˆ = ξ μ
> ξ.
τ δ − Gμ
μ

μ

It is important to note that the government could have increased its public debt without
increasing government spending, rebating the entire proceeds of the debt issuance to private
agents instead, with the same stimulative beneﬁts for the economy. In other words, what
really matters is that there be an increase in public debt, which boosts the supply of safe
assets, not the increase in government spending per se.
Short-term stimulus and long-term ﬁscal consolidation with taxes on labor
income. Here we assume that government spending is ﬁnanced by taxes on labor income
as in Section 3.2.1. This matters because our environment is non-Ricardian, and so the
distribution of taxes is important. The system is now:
rK D = τ d (1 − δ)X,
rV = δX,
GX = (τ̂ − τ d ) (1 − δ) X,
X (1 − Gμ )
(1 − δ) τ μ − Gμ
.
μ
D=
δ + (1 − δ) τ μ − Gμ
θ
And we have:
ẆtK = −θWtK + α (1 − δ) (1 − τ̂ ) X + rK WtK ,
ẆtN = −θWtN + (1 − α) (1 − δ) (1 − τ̂ ) X + rWtN ,
WtK = D,
WtN = V.

29

The equilibrium rates are:
rK = θ − α (1 − δ) (1 − τ̂ )

r=

θ
(1−δ)τ μ −Gμ
μ (1
δ+(1−δ)τ μ −Gμ

θ
1+

(1−α)(1−δ)(1−τ̂ )
δ

− Gμ )

,

.

Now assume that the economy is in the constrained regime and in a safety trap where the
safe interest rate is at rK and the government is using all its debt capacity. In this scenario
a ﬁscal expansion in G ﬁnanced by an increase in labor taxes stimulates output pushing ξ
to ξˆ where
G
1 − 1−δ
> ξ.
ξˆ = ξ
Ĝ
1 − 1−δ
A ﬁscal stimulus ﬁnanced by a tax on labor income is successful at stimulating output. This
is a contrast with the case where the increase in government spending is ﬁnanced by a tax
on capital income (dividends). This is because contrary to taxes on capital income, taxes
on labor income reduce the demand for safe assets by reducing the income of Knightian
newborns.
The conclusion that a credible decrease of Gμ to Ĝμ < Gμ stimulates output remains valid
when labor income rather than capital income is taxed. Indeed, such a ﬁscal consolidation
pushes ξ to ξˆ where ξˆ is given by exactly the same formula as when capital income is taxed:
ξˆ = ξ

 μ μ

1 − Ĝμ τ δ−δ−ĜĜμ
μ

δ−G
(1 − Gμ ) τ δ−G
μ

μ

> ξ.

Self-fulﬁlling debt crises. In the appendix (Section 7.1.3), we discuss the potential for
self-fulﬁlling safe debt crises, in which case the value of ﬁscal consolidation is exacerbated.
This captures the instabilities that have characterized the so called periphery economies
of the Eurozone: Given the importance of ﬁscal capacity in the production of safe assets,
and the centrality of the latter in determining equilibrium output in a SAM environment,
an economy that is near its ﬁscal limits is susceptible to runs on its public debt and to
destabilizing feedback loops.

30

4

Forward Guidance

In the next section we will contrast safety and liquidity traps. But before doing so we discuss
the eﬀectiveness of forward guidance type policies (commitments to low future interest rates)
within the context of SAM. These policies are usually advocated in the context of standard
New-Keynesian liquidity trap models. They involve committing to keeping interest rates low
once the economy recovers. Indeed in Section 5, we modify our model to capture a liquidity
trap and show that such policies increase asset values, boost demand through a wealth eﬀect,
and hence stimulate the economy.
By contrast, we show that such commitments are ineﬀective at stimulating output in a
safety trap since they are powerless at increasing the value of safe assets and hence alleviating
the safe asset shortage. Instead, they simultaneously increase the future value of risky assets
and the risky interest rate, leaving the current value of risky assets unchanged. As a result,
aggregate demand and output remain unchanged. In a safety trap, policy commitments that
work support future bad states. This is a higher level of requirements than in the standard
New-Keynesian liquidity-trap mechanism where any future wealth increase has the potential
to stimulate the economy. Indeed, it is natural to question whether monetary authorities
would have the ability to lower interest rates in future bad states, since they might coincide
with yet another safety or liquidity trap.
We illustrate these points with an example of forward guidance policy that would work
in a New-Keynesian liquidity trap environment but not in SAM. Since public debt is not key
to our main concern here, we temporarily revert to the model of Section 2 where there are
only private assets, and focus on the New Keynesian version with rigid prices.
We introduce two extensions to that model. First, we introduce the possibility of another
independent Poisson shock, which raises output to γX > X and removes the possibility of
the bad shock. It occurs with nonzero intensity λG . We refer to this shock as the good
shock, in contrast to the bad Poisson shock that concerns Knightians in our main analysis.
Second, we allow agents to produce ζ > 1 units of output per unit of input. However, we
imagine that there is a large utility loss from doing so.
This model works like that in Section 2. It features the possibility of a safety trap, indeed
ξ is determined by the exact same equation. The only diﬀerence is in the (risky) interest
rate r. The interest rate r is now determined by the following set of equations (and λG only

31

enters the last of these equations):
V r = (ξ − ρμ)
V μ = ρμ

X
,
θ

X
,
θ

rK V μ = δ μ X,
rV r = ξδX − δ μ X + λG (γ − ξ)
This yields
r=

X
.
θ

ξδθ − rK ρμ + λG (γ − ξ)
.
ξ − ρμ

In New-Keynesian models of the liquidity trap (see e.g. Krugman 1998, Eggertsson and
Woodford 2003, and Werning 2012), committing to keep the interest rate low in the future
once the economy recovers (after the good Poisson shock) stimulates the economy—a policy
often referred to as forward guidance. The latter works by creating a boom in the future,
which raises current demand through a combination of a wealth eﬀect (higher income in the
future) and substitution eﬀect (lower real interest rates because of inﬂation). Our model
shuts down the latter mechanism, and the former is ineﬀective since what matters is the
perceived wealth of Knightians, not that of Neutrals.
In our model a commitment to low interest rates after the good Poisson shock only
increases the value of risky assets. Consider the following policy: Suppose that the good
Poisson shock occurs at τ . After the good Poisson shock, the central bank stimulates the
economy by setting the interest rate it below the natural interest rate δθ until τ + T , at
which point it reverts to setting the nominal interest rate equal to the natural interest rate
i = δθ. For t > τ + T , output is equal to potential so that ζt = 1. For τ ≤ t ≤ t + T, output
is above potential, and capacity utilization satisﬁes a simple diﬀerential equation
ζ̇t
= it − δθ ≤ 0,
ζt
with terminal condition
ζτ +T = 1.
The solution is
ζt = e

 τ +T
t

(δθ−is )ds

32

.

By lowering interest rates, the central bank creates a temporary boom after the Poisson
shock. This boom boosts the value of risky assets immediately after the good Poisson shock
from
X
γ
θ
to
X
X
γζτ > γ .
θ
θ
Let us now work backwards to understand the eﬀects of this policy before the good Poisson
shock, while the economy is in a safety trap. The only eﬀect of this policy is to increase the
interest rate r during the safety trap to
r=

ξδθ − rK ρμ + λG (γζτ − ξ)
.
ξ − ρμ

This increase in the interest rate is such that the value of risky assets (and hence the wealth
of Neutrals) is unchanged, despite the fact that their value after a good Poisson shock has
increased. Importantly, the increase in r is orthogonal to the safe-asset shortage problem.
Since the policy leaves the supply of safe assets unchanged, it does not expand output, which
remains depressed by exactly the same factor ξ.
There is one caveat to this conclusion. We have assumed that prices are entirely rigid.
If prices could adjust gradually over time, then forward guidance could regain some kick:
A commitment to lower interest rates after the good Poisson shock could increase inﬂation
while the economy is in a safety trap. Under the interpretation of the model where the lower
bound rK arises because of the possibility of arbitrage between money and bonds (the zero
lower bound), this would lower the safe interest rate rK and mitigate the recession. However,
under the interpretation that the lower bound rK arises from the inability of Knightians to
survive lower real interest rates (or only at a high utility cost), then our negative conclusion
on the eﬀects of standard forward guidance policy remains.19
SAM is addressed more directly by committing to provide support during bad rather than
good times, as we now explain.20 What would work in a safety trap would be a commitment
to lower interest it rates after the bad Poisson shock. By setting the nominal interest rate it
19

The same comments apply to the unconventional tax policies considered by Correia, Farhi, Nicolini and
Teles (2012), which here could simply take the form of an increasing path of sales taxes—say through a sales
tax holiday—which would create inﬂation in consumer prices and hence reduce rK .
20
The OMT (outright monetary transactions) program established by the ECB in late 2012 is one such
policy, and it had an immediate impact on the Eurozone risk perception.

33

below the natural interest rate δθ after the bad Poisson shock, monetary authorities stimulate
the economy and inﬂate the value of safe assets to
V̂ μ = ρμ
where
ζτ = e

 τ +T
τ

ζτ
X,
θ

(δθ−is )ds

.

This mitigates the recession in the safety trap by raising ξ to ξζτ > ξ (the analysis is almost
identical to that of a monetary stimulus after the good Poisson shock explained above).21,22
However it is natural to question whether monetary authorities would have the ability
to lower interest rates in that state. If indeed the bad state happens to coincide with yet
another safety or liquidity trap, monetary authorities could ﬁnd themselves unable to deliver
a lower interest rate. Perhaps a more realistic policy option would be a commitment by the
authorities to buy up safe assets at an inﬂated price after the Poisson shocks—a form of
government (central bank?) put. A commitment to buy up safe private assets at an inﬂated
value σρμ Xθ > ρμ Xθ would mitigate the recession and increase the value of ξ to ξˆ where
ξˆ = σξ > ξ.
It could be carried out by monetary authorities but it does require spare ﬁscal capacity (in
the form of taxes or seigniorage).23 This kind of public insurance policy has a crucial role to
play in SAM.24
21

Note we could just as well have used the model with public debt. The central banker’s put works by
increasing both the public and private sectors’ ability to provide safe assets.
22
Just like in New Keynesian models of the liquidity trap, and to the extent that they are possible at
all, these forms of policy commitments raise time-consistency issues: Their eﬃcacy hinges on the ability of
monetary authorities to carry out credible commitments.
23
Using the model of Section 3.1.3,we could also interpret (1 − ψ) as a government put. The lower is ψ,
the higher is the government’s commitment to support Knightian’s portfolio should the Poisson event take
place.
24
See, e.g., Caballero and Kurlat (2010) for a proposal to increase the resilience of the ﬁnancial system in
a SAM environment. Also, see Brunnermeir et al (2012) for a related proposal in the context of the current
Euro crisis.

34

5

Safety Traps versus Liquidity Traps

The SAM environment and its safety trap shares many features in common with the Keynesian liquidity trap, however there are also important diﬀerences between them. In this section
we highlight some of these diﬀerences by comparing the impact of several macroeconomic
policies in these environments.
We consider the following simple model of a liquidity trap. It is a version of our model
where the economy is in the unconstrained regime so that r = rK (which means the distinction between risky and riskless assets is irrelevant). We add one ingredient: the possibility of
the bad shock is λ > 0 rather than λ = 0. This is necessary for interest rates r to reach zero.
Interest rates r cannot go below zero because of the zero lower bound on nominal interest
rates.
As long as the zero bound is not binding we have
r = δθ − λ (1 − μ) > 0.
When the zero bound r = 0 binds, the economy enters a recession (ξ < 1) where ξ is
determined by the requirement that r = 0:


μ
,
0 = δθ − λ 1 −
ξ
i.e.
ξ=

μ
.
1 − δθ
λ

The recession originates from a scarcity of assets (stores of value). It is more severe, the
worse is the expected bad shock (the lower is μ), the more likely is the bad shock (the higher
λ), the higher the propensity to save (the lower θ), and the lower is the ability of the economy
to create assets that capitalize future income (the lower is δ).
We can use this model to examine the eﬀects of the same policies that we have considered
in the context of the safety trap: balance sheet policies (QE and OT), ﬁscal policy (redistribution and government spending), and monetary policy commitments (forward guidance).

35

5.1
5.1.1

Balance Sheet Policies and Fiscal Policy
Public Debt, QE and OT

We start with public debt, QE and OT. We introduce public debt in the model exactly
as in Sections 3.1.2 and 3.1.3. The key point is that public debt issuances, QE and OT
have no eﬀect at all on the recession ξ in the liquidity trap model. This precise irrelevance
result relies on our assumption that dividends are taxed while the endowment of newborns
(wages) is not. As a result, public debt issuances, QE and OT simply reshuﬄe the fraction of
dividends that accrues to private asset holders and the fraction of dividends that is absorbed
by taxes to pay interest on debt of various maturities. This assumption essentially renders
our framework Ricardian, despite the fact that we have overlapping generations of agents.25
These conclusions about the irrelevance of QE and OT in liquidity traps must be contrasted
with those reached in Sections 3.1.2 and 3.1.3 in safety traps. The eﬀects of QE and OT in
safety traps rely entirely on the (assumed) superior ability of the government to address a
form of market incompleteness—the diﬃculty to isolate safe from risky assets.
5.1.2

Redistributive Policies

As long as the economy remains in the unconstrained regime, redistributing income or wealth
away from Knightians towards Neutrals has no eﬀect on the level of economic activity.
Indeed, the relative wealth of Knigthian and Neutrals is irrelevant. As a result, and in
contrast with the case of a safety trap, redistributive policies of the kind considered in
Section 3.2.1 are powerless at simulating output in a liquidity trap.
There are versions of liquidity trap models where, like in our model, redistributive policies
have stimulative eﬀects (see e.g. Guerrieri and Lorenzoni 2011, Eggertsson and Krugman
2012). However, the relevant dimension of redistribution is diﬀerent: The key is redistribution from high propensity to save agents to low propensity to save agents. By contrast,
in our model, the key is redistribution from agents with high propensities to save with safe
assets to agents with low propensities to save with safe assets.
25

If we allowed the endowments of newborns to be taxed, then public debt issuances, QE and OT could
have some non-Ricardian eﬀects, depending on exactly how these taxes are levied, and hence aﬀect economic
activity in a liquidity trap.

36

5.1.3

Fiscal Stimulus

Finally, we consider the eﬀects of ﬁscal stimulus (government spending paid for by taxes on
dividends) in a liquidity trap as in Section 3.2.2. The value of assets must be
θ (V + D) = (1 − G) ξX,
which can be combined with the asset pricing equation to yield
r (V + D) = (δ − G) ξX − λ (ξ (1 − G) − μ (1 − Gμ ))

X
,
θ

implying that the interest rate is
r=

(δ − G) ξθ − λ (ξ (1 − G) − μ (1 − Gμ ))
.
(1 − G) ξ

If the zero bound is binding so that r = 0 and ξ < 1, we have
ξ=

μ (1 − Gμ )
.

θ
1 − δθ
−
G
1
−
λ
λ

As long as λθ < 1, an increase in G increases ξ (output). This can be understood through
the eﬀects of this policy on the natural interest rate (in the ﬂexible price economy). On the
one hand, an increase in G reduces private wealth and asset values, and hence moderates the
drop in asset values that occurs if the bad shock occurs. This increases the natural interest
rate. On the other hand, an increase in G is ﬁnanced by taxes on dividends, which reduces
the natural interest rate. The parameter λθ indexes the relative strength of the second eﬀect
vs. the ﬁrst eﬀect. When λθ < 1, the ﬁrst eﬀect dominates. Because the interest rate is stuck
at zero, the increase in G reduces the gap between the actual and natural interest rates and
mitigates the recession.26
The important point for us here is that the potential expansionary eﬀect of short-term
ﬁscal stimulus (ﬁnanced by taxes on capital income) is in contrast with our safety trap result
in Section 3.2.2, where we found that such policy was powerless at stimulating output once
26

Once again, one channel (the inﬂation channel) through which government spending stimulates output
in traditional New Keynesian models of the liquidity trap is absent in our model. Fiscal multipliers are large
at the zero lower bound because government spending creates inﬂation and hence lowers real interest rates.

37

the government is unable to produce additional safe assets.27
Conversely, just as in Section 3.2.2, long-run ﬁscal consolidation (a reduction in Gμ ) also
stimulates output. The long-term reduction in government spending increases asset values
and increases private current spending through a wealth eﬀect. It works to reduce the asset
shortage that is at the root of the liquidity trap.

5.2

Forward Guidance

We now turn to monetary policy commitments. To do so, we introduce the possibility of
a good shock as in Section 4. The Poisson shock now has intensity λ̂. When the Poisson
shock hits, output increases to γX with γ > 1 with probability λG = π λ̂, and decreases to
μX with μ < 1 with probability λ = (1 − π) λ̂. In a liquidity trap r = 0, the recession is
now determined by




γ
μ
G
−λ 1−
,
0 = δθ − λ 1 −
ξ
ξ
i.e.
ξ=

λ
μ
λ+λG

λG
γ
λ+λG
.
δθ
λ+λG

+

1−

Consider the following policy: Suppose that the good Poisson shock occurs at τ . After
the good Poisson shock, the central bank stimulates the economy by setting the interest rate
it below the natural interest rate δθ until τ + T , at which point it reverts to setting the
nominal interest rate equal to the natural interest rate i = δθ. For t > τ + T , output is
equal to potential so that ζt = 1. For τ ≤ t ≤ t + T, output is above potential, and capacity
utilization satisﬁes a simple diﬀerential equation
ζ̇t
= it − δθ ≤ 0,
ζt
with terminal condition
ζτ +T = 1.
The solution is
ζt = e

 τ +T
t

(δθ−is )ds

27

.

Because the environment is not Ricardian, it matters whether government spending is ﬁnanced through
taxes or capital or labor income. Just like in safety traps, with taxes on labor income, short-run ﬁscal
stimulus is more eﬀective. This is because the associated tax increase works to reduce the demand for assets
(labor income taxes) instead of decreasing the supply of assets (capital income taxes).

38

By lowering interest rates, the central bank creates a temporary boom after the good Poisson
shock. This boom boosts the value of risky assets immediately after the good Poisson shock
from
X
γ
θ
to
X
X
γζτ > γ .
θ
θ
This policy alleviates the recession while the economy is in a liquidity trap, pushing ξ to ξˆ
where

λ

G
ξˆ = ξ λ+λλ

λG
ζ γ
λ+λG τ
λG
+ λ+λG γ

μ+

λ+λG

μ

> ξ.

Basically, committing to low interest rates after the good Poisson shock increases the value
of assets while the economy is in the liquidity trap. This wealth eﬀect increases demand and
mitigates the recession. Forward guidance works by alleviating the asset shortage that is at
the root of the recession.28
Forward guidance trades oﬀ a future boom against a mitigation of the current recession
and hence raises time-consistency issues. Because of the utility loss that comes with the
boom, monetary authorities might be tempted to renege on their commitment to keep interest
rates low when time comes to deliver on this promise. Nevertheless, our main point here
is that the eﬀectiveness of forward guidance in liquidity traps is to be contrasted with its
relative ineﬀectiveness in safety traps.

6

Final Remarks

Our model illustrates the essence of SAM and its implications for standard macroeconomic
policy tools, but it leaves untouched critical considerations for the dynamics of the world
economy in the medium term.
Given the faster growth of safe-asset-consumer economies than that of safe-asset-producer
economies, absent major ﬁnancial innovations, SAM is only likely to get worse over time.
Aside from temporary cyclical recoveries in spreads and output, it is our conjecture that SAM
28

We should emphasize that one channel through which forward guidance works in traditional New Keynesian models of the liquidity trap—reducing real interest rates by creating inﬂation—is absent from this
model because we have assumed that prices are rigid. Instead, forward guidance works entirely through a
wealth eﬀect by boosting asset values, wealth, and hence spending.

39

will remain as a structural drag, lowering safe rates, increasing safety spreads, straining the
ﬁnancial system, and weakening the eﬀectiveness of conventional monetary policy.
There is signiﬁcant incentive to produce major ﬁnancial innovations to address the safety
gap, which can be a source of concern in itself, as the ﬁnancial system capacity to extract
safe tranches from risky assets is likely to get stretched along lines similar to those behind
the subprime crisis. However, it is important to recognize that this is a chronic structural
and macroeconomic problem that does not get remedied, but only reallocated, with standard
regulatory pressure (which may have merits on its own). Instead, what is needed is publicprivate cooperation in increasing the eﬃciency of production of safe assets, as well as policies
that reduce the demand for such assets.
What are these policies? What are the political limits on pre-paid “bailout” agreements
and cross-country insurance arrangements that may be needed to reduce the SAM problem?
What are the intergenerational transfers that SAM requires and, are these acceptable, especially for current retirees? Will SAM lead to widespread “gambling for resurrection” type
mechanisms from those institutions and corporations whose implicit liabilities are inconsistent with depressed safe rates of return? How much of the adjustment will take place on the
supply side of the economy via reduced entrepreneurial risk taking? We are just beginning
to comprehend the implications of SAM for macroeconomic policy and politics, but it is
already apparent that these are broad and signiﬁcant.

40

References
[1] Acharya, Viral V. and Philipp Schnabl. 2009. “Do Global Banks Spread Global Imbalances? The Case of Asset-Backed Commercial Paper During the Financial Crisis
of 2007–09,” Paper presented at the 10th Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference,
International Monetary Fund. November.
[2] Bansal, Ravi and John W. Coleman, 1996, “A Monetary Explanation of the Equity
Premium, Term Premium, and Risk-Free Rate Puzzles,” Journal of Political Economy,
University of Chicago Press, vol. 104(6), pp. 1135-71, December.
[3] Barro, Robert .J and Herschel I. Grossman, 1971, “A General Disequilibrium Model of
Income and Employment,” American Economic Review, 61(1), pp. 82-93, March.
[4] Bénassy, Jean-Pascal, 1986, “Macroeconomics: An Introduction to the Non-Walrasian
Approach,” Academic Press, Orlando.
[5] Bernanke, Ben, Carol Bertaut, Laurie Ponder DeMarco, and Steven Kamin, 2011. “International Capital Flows and the Returns to Safe Assets in the United States, 20032007,” International Finance Discussion Paper 1014, Federal Reserve.
[6] Caballero, Ricardo J., 2006. “On the Macroeconomics of Asset Shortages.” In The
Role of Money: Money and Monetary Policy in the Twenty-First Century The Fourth
European Central Banking Conference 9-10 November, Andreas Beyer and Lucrezia
Reichlin, editors, pp. 272-283.
[7] Caballero, Ricardo J., 2009. “The ‘Other’ Imbalance and the Financial Crisis,” Paolo
Baﬃ Lecture, Bank of Italy.
[8] Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, 2008a, “Financial Crash, Commodity Prices, and Global Imbalances.” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, Fall, pp. 1-55.
[9] Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, 2008b, “An
Equilibrium Model of ”Global Imbalances” and Low Interest Rates.” American Economic Review, 98(1), pp. 358-393.
[10] Caballero, Ricardo J. and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2009, “Global Imbalances and Financial Fragility,” American Economic Review, May.

41

[11] Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, 2011, “When Is the
Government Spending Multiplier Large?,” Journal of Political Economy, 119(1), pp.
78-121.
[12] Correia, Isabel, Emmanuel Farhi, Juan-Pablo Nicolini and Pedro Teles, “Unconventional
Fiscal Policy at the Zero Bound,” forthcoming in the American Economic Review.
[13] Coval, Joshua D., Jakub W. Jurek and Erik Staﬀord. 2009, “The Economics of Structured Finance,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 23, No. 1, Winter.
[14] Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Paul Krugman, 2012, “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity
Trap: A Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3), pp.
1469-1513.
[15] Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford, 2003, “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates
and Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, pp. 139-211.
[16] Farhi, Emmanuel, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, and Helene Rey, “Reforming the International Monetary System,” CEPR ereport, Setpember 2011.
[17] Farhi, Emmanuel, and Ivan Werning, 2012, “Fiscal Multipliers: Liquidity Traps and
Currency Unions,” NBER working paper 18381.
[18] Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 2011. “Neglected Risks, Financial
Innovation, and Financial Fragility,” forthcoming in the Journal of Financial Economics.
[19] Gorton, Gary B., 2010, “Slapped by the Invisible Hand: The Panic of 2007,” Oxford
University Press.
[20] Gorton, Gary B. and Andrew Metrick, 2012, “Securitized Banking and the Run on
Repo,” Journal of Financial Economics 104, 425-451.
[21] Gorton, Gary B. and Andrew Metrick, 2010, “Haircuts,” Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Louis, Review 92(6).
[22] Gorton, Gary B. and Guillermo Ordoñez, 2013, “The Supply and Demand for Safe
Assets,” NBER working paper 18732.
[23] Gorton, Gary B., and Nicholas Souleles. 2006. “Special Purpose Vehicles and Securitization,” in The Risks of Financial Institutions, edited by Rene Stulz and Mark Carey.
University of Chicago Press.
42

[24] Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Hélène Rey. 2007. “From World Banker to World Venture
Capitalist: US External Adjustment and The Exorbitant Privilege,” in Richard Clarida,
editor, G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, The University
of Chicago Press, pp. 11-55.
[25] Greenwood, Robin, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2010, “Price Pressure in the Government
Bond Market,” American Economic Review, 100(2), pp. 585-90, May.
[26] Greenwood, Robin, Sam Hanson, and Jeremy Stein, 2012, “A Comparative-Advantage
Approach to Government Debt Maturity”, mimeo, Harvard.
[27] Guerrieri, Veronica, and Guido Lorenzoni, 2011, “Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings,
and the Liquidity Trap,” NBER working paper 17583.
[28] Gurkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright, 2007, “The U.S. Treasury
yield curve: 1961 to the present,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Elsevier, 54(8), pp.
2291-2304, November.
[29] Hall, Robert E., 2011a, “The Long Slump,” American Economic Review, 101, pp. 431469.
[30] Hall, Robert E., 2011b, “Clashing Theories of Unemployment,” mimeo, Hoover Institution and Stanford University.
[31] Holmström, Bengt and Jean Tirole, 1998, “Private and Public Supply of Liquidity,”
Journal of Political Economy, 106(1), pp. 1-40.
[32] Keynes, John M, 1936, “The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money,”
Macmilan.
[33] Kocherlakota, Narayana, 2012, “Incomplete Labor Markets,” mimeo, Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis.
[34] Korinek, Anton and Alp Simsek, 2013, “Liquidity Traps and Excessive Leverage”,
mimeo, MIT.
[35] Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2011, “The Eﬀects of Quantitative Easing on Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy,” Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity.

43

[36] Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012, “The Aggregate Demand
for Treasury Debt,” Journal of Political Economy, 120:2, pp. 233-267
[37] Krugman, Paul R., 1998, “It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity
Trap,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 29(2), pp. 137-206.
[38] Malinvaud, Edmond. 1977, “Theory of Unemployment Reconsidered,” Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
[39] Obstfeld, Maury, 2011, “International Liquidity: The Fiscal Dimension,” Monetary and
Economic Studies, pp. 33-48, November.
[40] Stein, Jeremy C., 2012, “Monetary Policy as Financial-Stability Regulation,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 127(1), pp. 57-95.
[41] Werning, Ivan, 2012, “Managing a Liquidity Trap: Monetary and Fiscal Policy,” MIT
mimeo.
[42] Woodford, Michael, 1990, “Public Debt as Private Liquidity,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 80, pp. 382-88, May.
[43] Woodford, Michael, 2003, “Interest and Prices,” Princeton University Press.

44

7

Appendix

7.1
7.1.1

Extensions
Extension of the Model with Pooling

Assume that agents cannot by themselves diversify their portfolios. Otherwise the issue of
pooling becomes irrelevant. The reason could be that they do not have the expertise to do
this. Alternatively, there could be some indivisibilities in assets (in other words vertical—as
opposed to horizontal—tranching is not perfect, vertical tranches cannot be too thin), that
could arise from a desire to minimize structuration/issuance/transaction costs.
To introduce a role for pooling, we imagine that trees have idiosyncratic risk. The
dividend of each tree follows the process: On top of the macro Poisson shock, there is a
sectoral shock ε that hits the dividend of the tree if the macro Poisson shock occurs. Hence
the dividend is 1 if there is no Poisson shock and εμ if a Poisson shock has occurred, where
ε is idiosyncratic to a sector. The shock ε has mean 1 and the lower bound of its support
is ε < 1. There is a continuum of sectors. Assets from diﬀerent sectors can be pooled.
The ﬁnancial sector has the ability to pool assets from a mass γ of diﬀerent sectors. The
rest 1 − γ of the sectors cannot be pooled. Only a fraction ρ̂ of the assets that can be
pooled can be tranched, and only a fraction ρ̃ of the assets that cannot be pooled can be
tranched. The model is then isomorphic to the model with an imperfect ability to tranch
with ρ = ρ̂γ + ρ̃ (1 − γ) ε.
7.1.2

Flight to Safety and Output Loss

Up to now we have assumed production is exogenous and focused on the spread side of SAM.
But in reality production and demand decisions are also strongly inﬂuenced by risk perceptions and the corresponding spreads. In this section we focus on a supply side mechanism,
while in the main text, we focus on demand.
Corporations undertake a host of risk-reducing measures, such as cash preservation and
productive investment postponement, despite the impact of these measures on expected
revenue.29 We capture this ﬂight to safety aspect of SAM by adding a simple tradeoﬀ
between risk and return in production. We assume that tranching a tree into a safe part
29

During risk-oﬀ episodes, corporations often try to replicate bond-like payouts from their equity by
implementing equity buy-back policies and predictable dividend distribution streams.

45

and a risky part consumes resources (which in reality could be thought of as the resources
consumed by a sophisticated ﬁnancial system). In particular, a tranchable tree generates a
lower dividend δ̂ < δ.30 Of course the advantage of tranching is that the safe part can be
sold at a high price.
We denote by ρ̃ ∈ (0, 1) the fraction of trees that are tranched in equilibrium. It is easier
to change variables and deﬁne
ρ̃ δ̂
δ
.
ρ≡
1 − ρ̃ 1 − δδ̂
We exploit the monotonic (increasing) mapping between ρ and ρ̃ and work directly with ρ,
for the analysis becomes analogous to the baseline model with this endogenous value of ρ.
We now turn to its determination.
In order for the equilibrium that we have characterized to be valid, it must be the case
that the value of an untranched tree
v nt =

1
θ1−

δ
(1−α)(1−δ)
1−ρμ

is the same as that of a tranched tree
⎡
vt =

μ δ̂ ⎣
1+
θδ

α(1−δ)
ρμ

1−


⎤
− 1 − μδ
⎦.

(1−α)(1−δ)
1−ρμ

A necessary and suﬃcient condition for this is
δ̂
α − ρμ
δ
δ
=
.
1−δ
1 − δδ̂ ρ (1 − ρμ)

The left-hand side of the equation is constant. The right-hand side of the equation is decreasing in ρ with a value of ∞ at ρ = 0 and of
features ρ > 0, and satisﬁes ρ < 1 as long as

δ
1−δ

>

δ̂
δ

α−μ
1− δ̂δ 1−μ

at ρ = 1. The solution always

δ̂
δ

α−μ 31
.
1− δ̂δ 1−μ

30

For simplicity, we assume that the decision to pay the production cost does not change the fraction of
the output of a tree which is capitalized. In other words, each tranched tree yields an output δ̂δ , a fraction

δ of which is a capitalized dividend of δ̂ = δ δ̂δ .
31
Note that we can have a corner solutions at ρ = 1 where the value of an untranched tree is less than the
value of a tranched tree.

46

The solution ρ is decreasing in μ and increasing in α. The eﬀect of μ directly impacts
the attractiveness of tranching, independently of its eﬀect on the safety premium. The eﬀect
of α is entirely driven by the safety premium: The higher α, the higher the safety premium,
the more agents ﬂy to safety.
In summary, SAM aﬀects production because in the absence of eﬀective tranching mechanisms to satisfy demand for safe assets, production is distorted toward generating more safe
assets and increase valuations. Safety rather than revenue maximization is what ﬁnancial
markets demand.
7.1.3

Safe Asset Status and Self-Fulﬁlling Debt Crises

Safe asset status is fragile. The safe asset status of a country’s debt relies on the assurance
that debt will be repaid should a Poisson shock occur. A country that has issued shortterm debt up to its ﬁscal capacity constraint might ﬁnd itself subject to a self-fulﬁlling
debt crisis. This situation can lead to doubts about the ability of the government to repay
its debts after the Poisson shock. These doubts jeopardize the country’s safe asset status
immediately, which can force it into a partial default.
We assume that the country is a small open economy facing world interest rates r and rK
with r > rK , and rμ , before and after the Poisson shock, respectively (the shock is assumed
to be global). The country is up against its ﬁscal capacity constraint. Now imagine that
when the Poisson shock hits, agents start questioning the ability of the government to repay
its debt, triggering a self-fulﬁlling debt crisis exactly along the lines of Calvo (1988). More
precisely, agents anticipate that a ﬂow ω of debt will be repudiated per unit of time, and
therefore require an interest rate rμ + ω on the government’s debt. Moreover, we assume
that a default generates extra ﬁscal cost α per unit of repudiated debt.32 The only level of
debt which is consistent with these expectations is
δτ̄ μ μX
.
rμ + αω
The higher ω, the lower the level of debt. Note the importance of the assumption that the
country is up against its ﬁscal capacity so that τ μ = τ̄ μ cannot be increased. If instead we
D=

32

For example, these could be legal costs. Whether the corresponding resources are dissipated or appropriated by a class of agents (lawyers) is not important in this section.

47

have
D=

δτ̄ μ μX
δτ μ μX
<
,
rμ
rμ

then any ω such that
(rμ + ω) D ≤ δτ̄ μ μX,
i.e.
ω ≤ ω̄ where ω̄ = δ (τ̄ μ − τ μ ) μX
cannot be an equilibrium: The government has enough ﬁscal room to weather an (out
of equilibrium) adverse expectation shift up to ω̄ by simply increasing taxes, where ω̄ is
increasing in ﬁscal slack τ̄ μ − τ μ . In a sense, having ﬁscal slack restricts the possibility of
self-fulﬁlling debt crises. As long as we are ready to impose some upper bound ω max on
the adverse expectation shift ω that we consider, a country with enough ﬁscal slack so that
ω̄ > ω max will be completely immune to these crises.
We can now ask what happens before the Poisson shock, when expectations about the
ability of the government to repay its debt should a Poisson shock occur suddenly shift. We
start in a situation where agents anticipate ω = 0 with
D̄ =

δτ̄ μ μX
rμ

and taxes τ are
τ δX = rK D̄.
μ

μX
, debt immediately
Expectations suddenly shift to a situation where ω > 0. Since D̄ > rδτ̄μ +αω
loses its safe asset status and the government must now pay an interest rate r on its debt.
Indeed the government budget constraint becomes

Ḋt = rDt − τt δX
with
D0 = D̄.
What happens next depends on the ability or willingness of the government to adjust taxes
τt . The dynamics we have characterized are valid as long as taxes τt cannot be raised fast
enough so that rDt > τt δX for some time, but can eventually be increased enough to stabilize
debt. However it might be impossible for the country to raise enough taxes once it faces an
interest rate of r instead of rK . For example, it could be that the country cannot raise more
48

taxes than τ because it is against its ﬁscal capacity τ = τ̄ even before the Poisson shock
hits. In that case, an immediate partial default (haircut) must occur in order to restore ﬁscal
balance.
Our model features multiple equilibria. Once agents start questioning the safe asset status
of a country (in a way that is entirely self-fulﬁlling), interest rates on debt rise, triggering
a gradual buildup in debt followed by a ﬁscal adjustment in the form of a tax increase or a
partial default.
This analysis leads to a potential narrative for the recent ﬁscal experience of some europeriphery countries. These countries were forced by the various ﬁscal costs associated with
the recession—loss in ﬁscal revenues, government stimulus and bank bailouts—against their
ﬁscal capacity. This jeopardized their safe asset status. From safe asset producers, they suddenly became risky asset producers, facing higher interest rates. This ampliﬁcation mechanism contributed to producing an unsustainable ﬁscal situation.

7.2
7.2.1

Proofs
Proofs for Section 2.1

The goods market clearing condition is
W =

X
.
θ

The ﬁnancial market clearing condition is
W = V.
If we are in the unconstrained regime, then we have rt = rtK , and summing up the wealth
evolution equations
ẆtK = −θWtK + α (1 − δ) X + rtK WtK ,
ẆtN = −θWtN + (1 − α) (1 − δ) X + rt WtN ,
we ﬁnd
rt = δθ.

49

If we are in the constrained regime, then
WtK = V μ = ρμ

X
,
θ

which can be combined with the wealth evolution equation for Knightians
ẆtK = −θWtK + α (1 − δ) X + rtK WtK ,
to get


rtK

= δθ − (1 − δ) θ

α − ρμ
ρμ


.

We can then use the asset pricing equation for safe assets
rtK V μ = δtμ X,
to get
δtμ = δρμ − (α − ρμ)(1 − δ).
Similarly we can use the fact that
WtN = V − V μ = (1 − ρμ)

X
,
θ

combined with the wealth accumulation equation for Neutrals
ẆtN = −θWtN + (1 − α) (1 − δ) X + rt WtN ,
to get
rt = δθ + (1 − δ) θ

α − ρμ
.
1 − ρμ

We can verify that we have r > rK if and only if α > ρμ.
If this condition is veriﬁed, then the economy always converges to the constrained region
in the long run. If it is violated, then the economy is always in the unconstrained regime
and the wealth of Knightians and Neutrals converges to
K
=α
W∞

X
X
< ρμ = V μ ,
θ
θ

N
W∞
= (1 − α)

50

X
.
θ

7.2.2

Proofs for Section 3.2.2

We have
rK D = τ d δX,
rV = δ (1 − τ̂ ) X,
ẆtK = −θWtK + α (1 − δ) X + rK WtK ,
ẆtN = −θWtN + (1 − α) (1 − δ) X + rWtN ,
GX = (τ̂ − τ d )δX,
D=

τ μ δ − Gμ X(1 − Gμ )
,
μ
δ − Gμ
θ
WtK = D,
WtN = V.

This implies

X (1 − G)
,
D+V =
θ


X (1 − G) τ μ δ − Gμ X (Gμ − G)
τ μ δ − Gμ
X (1 − G) τ μ δ − Gμ X(1 − Gμ )
−
=
1
−
+
,
μ
μ
μ
V =
θ
δ − Gμ
θ
δ − Gμ
θ
δ − Gμ
θ


θ − rK D = α (1 − δ) X,
(θ − r) V = (1 − α) (1 − δ) X,

and hence
rK = θ − θ (1 − δ)
r = θ − θ (1 − δ)

α
τ μ δ−Gμ
μ
δ−Gμ

1−α
μ δ−Gμ
1 − τ δ−G
μ μ
(1 − G) +

1
1 − Gμ
1
τ μ δ−Gμ
μ
δ−Gμ
τ μ δ−Gμ
1− δ−Gμ μ

(Gμ − G)

We are in the constrained regime if and only if
τ μ δ−Gμ

1 − Gμ
α 1 − δ−Gμ μ
>
,
μ δ−Gμ
τ μ δ−Gμ
μ
1 − α τ δ−G
δ−Gμ
μ
μ μ
(1 − G) + 1− τ μ δ−Gμ μ (G − G)
δ−Gμ

51

.

i.e.

τ μ δ−Gμ

α 1 − δ−Gμ μ
>
μ δ−Gμ
1 − α τ δ−G
1+
μ μ

52

1
Gμ −G
1
μ δ−Gμ
μ
1− τ δ−G
μ μ 1−G

.

