                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE SUPPLY AND DEMAND FOR SAFE ASSETS

                                          Gary B. Gorton
                                         Guillermo Ordoñez

                                        Working Paper 18732
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18732


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2013




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Gary B. Gorton and Guillermo Ordoñez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Supply and Demand for Safe Assets
Gary B. Gorton and Guillermo Ordoñez
NBER Working Paper No. 18732
January 2013, Revised April 2020
JEL No. E0,E02,E2,E3,E32,E4,E41,G01,G12,G2

                                             ABSTRACT

Safe assets are demanded to smooth consumption across states (both intertemporally and in cross-section).
Some of these assets are supplied publicly (government bonds) and some are created and supplied
privately (such as mortgagebacked securities and asset-backed securities). Private assets are created
endogenously when the supply of government bonds is low. Private assets are used as collateral and
come in heterogeneous quality. Financial fragility is the probability that a large amount of private
assets are examined, some are found to be of low quality and then some firms cannot get loans. We
characterize the government’s optimal supply of government bonds when considering their effects
on the creation of private assets and on economy-wide fragility. We show that monetary and macroprudential
policies cannot be run in isolation. When there are too many private assets the government should
operate a Bond Exchange Facility that exchanges private assets for public safe assets.


Gary B. Gorton
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
Gary.Gorton@yale.edu

Guillermo Ordoñez
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Economics
428 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
ordonez@econ.upenn.edu
1    Introduction

Safe assets play an essential role in the economy. A safe asset is an asset whose real
value does not fluctuate in response to different shocks. In other words, the level
of consumption that holding a safe asset allows is insulated from potential shocks.
In this paper we explore the reasons that safe assets are demanded and we explore
the central bank’s role in their provision. We show that monetary policy cannot be
separated from macroprudential policy.

The demand for safe assets comes from two needs: agents wanting to smooth con-
sumption: over time, inter-temporal consumption smoothing and in cross-section across
states of nature. For instance, lenders want to equalize consumption over different
realizations of productivity, and so a safe asset is demanded as collateral. The supply
of safe assets comes from two sources: public and private. Public safe assets are gov-
ernment bonds, promises that the government can make by relying on its taxation
power. Private safe assets (such as real estate, mortgage-backed securities, etc) take
the form of promises that private agents can make by transforming non-pledgeable
and perishable goods into non-perishable and pledgeable assets. As private safe as-
sets may be of heterogeneous quality, their safety (the stability of their real value)
depends on information about such quality not being revealed. Thus, private assets
are safe as long as they are information-insensitive.

Issues surrounding safe assets have become increasingly pressing since the trans-
formation of the financial system from a retail-based banking system to a wholesale
banking system, starting in the late 1970s. Gorton, Lewellen, and Metrick (2010) show
that as a percentage of the total privately-produced safe debt, demand deposits have
fallen from about 80% in the 1950’s to 31% now. In contrast, short-term money market
instruments rose from 11% to 21% and AAA asset-backed and mortgage-backed se-
curities rose from zero to 18%. More generally, the “shadow banking system,” which
is the sum of mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities and money-like debt in-
struments, grew from 11% to 38%, getting larger in levels than demand deposits. This
transformation seems to be permanent.

In this new financial landscape, U.S. Treasuries are more important than previously.
Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012 and 2015) show that Treasuries have a
convenience yield, arising from their safety property. Gorton, Lewellen, and Metrick
(2010), Xie (2012), and Sunderam (2015) show that the private sector produces more

                                          1
private safe assets when the supply of Treasuries declines. Private safe assets, how-
ever, are not perfect substitutes for public safe assets in terms of safety, as information
about their heterogeneous quality can be produced, increasing the likelihood of a fi-
nancial crisis. This creates a challenge for policies that affect the supply of Treasuries
without considering their effect on financial stability. This is clearly the case for the
central bank, which uses open market operations to exchange one kind of money,
Treasuries, for another kind of money, cash (numeraire in our setting). As we do not
address fiscal policy in this paper, we use the terms ”central bank” and ”government”
interchangeably.

The central bank faces a problem when, by implementing a monetary policy, it wants
to reduce the supply of Treasuries but does not want to trigger information acqui-
sition about the quality of private collateral, that may trigger a financial crisis as
information-insensitive collateral becomes information-sensitive (as in Dang, Gorton,
and Holmström (2013)). In this setting, macroprudential policy cannot be separated
from monetary policy, contrary to the existing literature, e.g., see Svensson (2018)
and Bernanke (2018). The central bank needs another tool. It needs to be able to swap
Treasuries for private safe assets in order to cope with two goals.

To build these ideas and identify the role of each element, we proceed in steps. We
first explore the roles for safe assets assuming that only the government supplies
them by issuing government bonds. We show that the government may face a trade-
off: providing bonds to serve as collateral in a given period may distort consumption
smoothing across periods. We solve the constrained planner’s problem and charac-
terize the optimal amount of bonds that the government should provide to optimize
this trade-off. We show that, if the market for bonds is competitive, the optimum is
implemented when the return on bonds is zero. This implies that the convenience
yield (here, the departure from zero returns) is a good signal that the government
can exploit to guide potential mistakes in the supply of bonds. Intuitively, returns on
bonds are positive when there is an abundance of bonds (then the government needs
to compensate agents to hold those bonds) and reducing the supply would improve
intertemporal consumption smoothing. In contrast, if returns are negative (a positive
convenience yield) when there is scarcity of bonds. In this case, increasing the supply
would optimally provide more collateral.

We then introduce the possibility that agents create private safe assets. At a cost,
agents can transform non-pledgeable and perishable goods into pledgeable and non-

                                            2
perishable assets. Pledgeability allows the private asset to be used as collateral and
share consumption across agents in a given period. Non-perishability allows the pri-
vate asset to be used to move consumption across periods and smooth consumption
over time. The possibility of creating private assets optimally reduces the need for
the government to provide public safe assets.

But, in contrast to government bonds, private assets can potentially be of hetero-
geneous quality. This is relevant because information about such quality in credit
markets introduces dispersion in investment scale (this is, ex-ante risk). Better col-
lateral can support a larger loan. The possibility of a sudden change in information
production about private collateral in credit markets introduces systemic risk; invest-
ment projects based on loans against bad collateral may not be undertaken. Pro-
duction crashes. In other words, information-insensitive collateral (no information
is produced) is more beneficial than information-sensitive collateral (information is
produced), and a crisis happens when there is a change in regime from the first case
to the second, as in Gorton and Ordonez (2014 and 2018).

We study the incentives that lenders have to investigate private collateral. We show
that information acquisition is more likely the scarcer are government bonds relative
to the needs for collateral to finance investment, the lower the average quality of pri-
vate assets and the lower the quality of investments. This shows the interconnection
between public and private assets. When public assets are abundant, there is both less
use of private assets and less incentives to acquire information about their quality.

We study the dynamics of our environment and make two points. First, we show con-
ditions under which monetary policy cannot be considered in isolation from macro-
prudential policy. The constrained optimum specifies an optimal amount of govern-
ment bonds that implements the right combination of intertemporal smoothing and
collateral, while discouraging information acquisition about private collateral. Conven-
tional monetary policies that exchanges bonds for cash (numeraire) is just one tool,
and may not be able to achieve both goals at the same time. If this is not possible, the
government needs a new tool to be able to exchange government bonds for private
assets. The new policy tool we discuss here is not like quantitative easing, which ex-
changes cash for government bonds. Rather the new tool is like the Term Securities
Lending Facility (which the Fed opened during the Financial Crisis) which allowed
for the exchange of private safe assets for government bonds (not cash); see Fleming,
Hrung, and Keane (2009). We will call this new tool the ”Bond Exchange Facility”

                                           3
(BEF), with a plausible implementation as discussed in Gorton and Ordonez (2020).
Conventional monetary policy can implement optimal intertemporal smoothing, but
the BEF is needed to guarantee that information production about private collateral
is avoided.

Second, a transitory shock that reduces the supply of public bonds available as col-
lateral, induces an increase in the production of private collateral, increasing the in-
centives to acquire information and financial fragility, as information acquisition of a
large volume of private assets suddenly reduces output and welfare, a crisis.1 Only
the BEF can prove effective to rapidly take private collateral ”out of circulation”,
hence reducing fragility without distorting consumption smoothing.

There is a large literature on the role that government safe assets play in supply-
ing private agents with collateral or liquidity. In different circumstances, govern-
ment debt can relieve constraints on the private economy. Examples of this line of
research include Woodford (1990), Aiyagari and McGrattan (1998), Holmström and
Tirole (1998), and more recently Angeletos, Collard, and Dellas (2016) and Azzimonti
and Yared (2019). In contrast to this literature, we focus on the financial stability
considerations that arise when private agents produce private safe assets of hetero-
geneous quality in response to a dearth of public safe assets. The likelihood of a
financial crisis is increasing in the ratio of private safe assets to public safe assets.
This complicates what would otherwise be the government’s optimal policy.

The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 we introduce the basic model with no in-
formation frictions. We show the two sources of demand for safe assets: consumption
smoothing and collateral. We also show the two sources of supply: public bonds and
privately-produced safe assets. In Section 3 we introduce information frictions. We
show that the privately-produced safe assets are only ”safe” as long as no information
is produced about their quality. In Section 4 we extend the model to an overlapping
generations model and characterize the steady states. In this setting we show the
potential need for the BEF to exchange government bonds for privately-produced
safe assets and we explore the effects of an unexpected negative supply shock fo the
supply of government bonds. Section 5 concludes.
   1
     The global savings glut is an example of such a reduction in the supply of government bonds. See,
e.g., Bernanke (2005).




                                                  4
2     Two Period Model Without Information Frictions

In this section we introduce the two sources of demand for safe assets (consumption
smoothing and collateral and the two sources of supply (public and private). First, as
a benchmark, we consider a simple setting with public supply (government bonds)
and a single role (consumption smoothing). Then, we add the second role (collateral)
and show that a government that fails to acknowledge this role may err in differ-
ent ways in the provision of bonds, depending on the policy misspecification. Such
mistakes can be avoided if the government uses information about the convenience
yield to guide their bond policy. Finally, we introduce assets that can be produced
privately and that are in competition with government bonds. Private assets can also
serve both roles. Here we show that this possibility changes the optimal provision of
bonds as a function of how costly it is to produce private assets and how well they
can serve as collateral.



2.1   Optimal Bond Policy when Bonds are not Collateral

Assume households live for two periods in an endowment economy. Endowment in
the first period is Y1 and endowment in the second period is Y2 . The consumption of
numeraire good gives households utility U (C), which is separable, strictly concave
and that satisfies the Inada conditions. The discount between periods is β.

Unconstrained Optimum: The planner’s problem (which is the same as the house-
hold problem when it can move resources freely across periods) is

                                max U (C1 ) + βU (C2 )
                                C1 ,C2


subject to
                                  C 1 + C 2 ≤ Y1 + Y2

which is simply characterized by the Euler equation

                                  U 0 (C1 ) = βU 0 (C2 )




                                            5
Assuming U (C) = log C, for instance, the solution is just given by

                                  Y1 + Y2
                           C1 =                    and          C2 = βC1
                                   1+β

So the planner would perfectly smooth consumption if it has the technology to trans-
fer resources across periods.

Equilibrium and Optimal Implementation: Imagine now households cannot trans-
fer resources across periods but the government has access to a storage technology
that can do it. This “time machine” technology is just a shortcut to endow the gov-
ernment with a taxation technology in a more involved setting with different groups
(other groups) in which Ricardian Equivalence does not hold.

Ricardian Equivalence might not hold for instance in an overlapping generations en-
vironment in which every generation has Y1 > 0 and Y2 = 0. The government could
tax the young to give to the old (without altruism considerations that may recover the
equivalence (see Barro (1974)).2 The way to implement this policy would be to sell
bonds to the young and pay them when old with tax revenue from the next young
generation. We explore this possibility later in the paper.

Another example in which this “time machine” technology redistributes wealth across
periods is by having two coexisting types of households, one with complete access to
credit markets, and the other (the one we model here) without access. The govern-
ment could tax the group with access and give to the group without access to credit.
The effect of incomplete markets on the failure of the Ricardian Equivalence has been
explored by Aiyagari (1994) and Heathcote (2005) among others.

Finally, a third reason often used to contest Ricardian Equivalence is the distortionary
effects of taxation (see Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987) and McGrattan (1994)). Here we
show a very reduced-form version of this logic. To operate this “time machine” the
government can offer to sell (or buy) Treasury bonds B in the first period at a price
P , which can be positive (buy) or negative (sell).

Consider agents buying bonds. If the government’s promise in the second period ex-
ceeds what the government collects in the first period (this is B > P B), the difference
has to be raised by taxing second-period households’ endowments, Y2 . We assume
   2
     Several empirical studies (Altonji, Hayashi, and Kotlikoff (1992, 1996 and 1997)) find that house-
holds are not altruistically-linked in a way consistent with Ricardian Equivalence.


                                                  6
that taxing endowments is distortionary, as it destroys χ units of endowment per unit
of tax. Furthermore, in case the government promises in the second period less than
collected in the first (this is B < P B), we assume the extra resources are “thrown into
the ocean”.

The household problem in this economy becomes

                                 max U (C1 ) + βU (C2 )
                                C1 ,C2 ,B


subject to

                        C 1 + P B ≤ Y1
                             C 2 ≤ Y2 + B − T
                              T = (1 + χ) max{0, (1 − P )B}.

Plugging taxes into the second-period households’ budget constraint, the maximiza-
tion problem becomes:

                               C 1 + P B ≤ Y1
                                        C2 ≤ Y2 + Bm.

with the distortion formally defined as

                           m = min{1, 1 − (1 + χ)(1 − P )}.                          (1)


The Euler equation is
                                 P U 0 (C1 ) = βmU 0 (C2 )

and the unconstrained optimum is implemented when P = m, which implies P = 1.

To fix ideas, from the Euler equation and the resource constraints we can obtain the
demand for Treasury bonds. Take the log case, as before,

                                                                         P
                     1          m                                 βY1 − m  Y2
             P            =β                    =⇒           B=               ,
                 Y1 − P B    Y2 + Bm                               (1 + β)P

decreasing in the price P . Notice that the social planner wants to choose the supply



                                            7
                                P
of bonds BS such that           m
                                     = 1, this is,

                                                        βY1 − Y2
                                                BS∗ =            ,                     (2)
                                                         (1 + β)

where the optimal supply of bonds increases with Y1 and decreases with Y2 . If βY1 >
Y2 the government would like to sell bonds in the first period (in exchange for nu-
meraire) to implement the unconstrained optimum by reducing the consumption of
households in the first period and increasing it in the second period. If βY1 < Y2 the
government would like to buy bonds from households in the first period to imple-
ment the unconstrained optimum, this time by increasing consumption in the first
period with resources coming from the second period (or from another unmodelled
group in the same period).
                                                      P         P
Notice that if bonds are abundant and P < 1, then m       = P −χ(1−P )
                                                                       > 1,3 which implies
that the government has to distort consumption in the second period with taxes, forc-
ing it to also inefficiently reduce consumption in the first period. At the other extreme,
                                        P
if bonds are scarce, and P > 1, then m    = P1 > 1, which implies that the government
extracts more in the first period than what it can deliver in the second period, wasting
resources and reducing consumption excessively. Notice also that, in the case where
taxation is not distortionary (this is χ = 0), m = 1 and any price P ≤ 1 is consistent
with optimal implementation, a version of Ricardian Equivalence in our setting.
                                                                   1
Relation with Monetary Policy: The planner’s optimal P ≡ 1+r          = 1 can be imple-
mented by a monetary authority that uses Treasury bonds to conduct open market
operations and sets 1 + r = 1 (a Friedman rule, given our assumption that creating
bonds is costless for the government). If the central bank expects Y2 to be very low
with respect to Y1 it would like to increase the interest rate to “cool down” the econ-
omy by reducing consumption and aggregate demand. An increase of interest rates is
the same as reducing the price of government bonds. Alternatively the central bank
could sell Treasury bonds (increase BS ) in exchange for money (numeraire) (an in-
crease in 1 + r). The opposite happens when Y2 is expected to be large relative to Y1
and the central bank would like to reduce rates, by buying Treasury bonds, to “stim-
ulate” the economy by increasing consumption and aggregate demand. The amount
of bonds given in equation (2) is what implements the optimal level of consumption
in the economy.
  3               P             P
      When χ >   1−P   , then   m   < 0, which also distorts consumption.


                                                         8
Convenience Yield: Notice that a shortage of Treasuries introduces a convenience
yield for government bonds. From market clearing, when B = BS :

                                              βY1
                                  P =                  .
                                        (1 + β)BS + Y2

As the supply of Treasuries, BS , decreases, its price increases. Taking the optimal
price as 1, the convenience yield can be written as P − 1, or

                                         (βY1 − Y2 ) − (1 + β)BS
                        CY ≡ P − 1 =                             .                      (3)
                                             (1 + β)BS + Y2

The convenience yield is zero only when BS = BS∗ from equation (2), and the optimal
amount of bonds is provided to perfectly smooth consumption.



2.2   Optimal Bond Policy with Bonds as Collateral

Now we extend the endowment setting to include production with credit needs.
More specifically, a fraction x of households have an investment opportunity at the
beginning of the second period, after the endowment Y2 is obtained but before con-
sumption takes place. This investment opportunity transforms l unit of endowment
good per household into Alα units of endowment good. The rest of the households
1 − x do not have any investment opportunities. Whether a household is productive
or not is realized at the beginning of the second period.

The unconstrained optimal scale of production for each productive household is given
                                 1
by maxl [Alα − l], or l∗ = [αA] 1−α . To simplify the cases in terms of feasibility, in what
follows, we assume that Y2 < l∗ < Yx2 . In other words, the endowment of each house-
hold is not enough to finance production at optimal scale, but the endowments of all
households is sufficient.

Constrained Optimum: Now, we solve for the constrained optimum, in which the
planner still possesses the technology to transfer resources across periods, but can-
not impose a transfer between productive and unproductive agents within the sec-
ond period. This implies that, i) projects can only be operated by productive agents
with own endowments (either current or saved from the first period) and ii) there is
no cross-insurance of consumption between productive and non-productive agents.


                                             9
This constrained problem is then:

                          max             U (C1 ) + β[xU (Cp,2 ) + (1 − x)U (Cnp,2 )]
                     C1 ,Cp,2 ,Cnp,2 ,l


subject to

                                      C1 + Cp,2 ≤ Y1 + Y2 + Yb2
                                             C1 + Cnp,2 ≤ Y1 + Y2
                                                   Yb2 = [Alα − l]
                                               l ≤ Y2 + (Y1 − C1 ).

Denoting by µ the Lagrange multiplier of this last, credit constraint, the first order
conditions are:

                                   {C1 } : U 0 (C1 ) = λp,2 + λnp,2 + µ
                                 {Cp,2 } : βxU 0 (Cp,2 ) = λp,2
                               {Cnp,2 } : β(1 − x)U 0 (Cnp,2 ) = λnp,2
                                      {l} : λp,2 (αAlα−1 − 1) = µ

Defining the marginal return of the project as

                                              R(l) = αAlα−1 − 1,

with R(l) > 0 and R0 (l) < 0 in equilibrium, and R(l∗ ) = 0. Combining these condi-
tions
                       U 0 (C1 ) − βE(U 0 (C2 )) = βxU 0 (Cp,2 )R(l).           (4)

This equation highlights the main trade-off that the planner faces given that he is con-
strained from moving resources between agents with different investment opportu-
nities. The planner equalizes the intertemporal smoothing distortions (the difference
between U 0 (C1 ) and βE(U 0 (C2 ))) with the increase in extra second period’s production
obtained by moving resources to the second period (x productive agents will be able
to produce an extra numeraire R(l), which they value at βU 0 (Cp,2 ) at the margin).4
   If there are enough resources such that the planner implements l∗ , then R(l∗ ) = 0 and the planner
   4

does not need to introduce intertemporal distortions.




                                                       10
Intuitively, when there are no productive opportunities, the planner would simply
equalize marginal utilities in both periods (as in the previous setting). When invest-
ment opportunities exist, however, there is an extra gain from moving resources to
the second period to sustain investment that is restricted by second-period endow-
ments. This leads the planner to distort consumption smoothing by consuming less
in the first period in order to be able to produce and consume more in the second
period.

Equilibrium and Optimum Implementation: Now we consider an equilibrium in
which the government would like to implement the planner’s allocation by providing
government bonds in the first period.

To capture the credit friction that prevents agents with different investment opportu-
nities from exchanging numeraire in the second period, and even though the output
of investment is deterministic, we assume that such output is non-pledgeable. We
assume, however, that government bonds are pledgeable (households can abscond
with numeraire but not with government bonds). Hence, productive agents can bor-
row numeraire from non-productive agents using bonds as collateral in order to over-
come the credit friction.

The household problem in the first period, knowing that in the second period it may
become a productive agent with probability x, is:

                       max              U (C1 ) + β[xU (Cp,2 ) + (1 − x)U (Cnp,2 )]
                 C1 ,Cp,2 ,Cnp,2 ,l,B


subject to

                                                C 1 + P B ≤ Y1
                                        Cp,2   ≤ Y2 + Bm + Yb2
                                               Cnp,2 ≤ Y2 + Bm
                                                 Yb2 = [Alα − l]
                                                  l ≤ Y2 + Bm.

where m is the bond consumption after taxation distortions from equation (1). The




                                                      11
first-order conditions are

                             {C1 } : U 0 (C1 ) = λ
                          {Cp,2 } : βxU 0 (Cp,2 ) = λp,2
                         {Cnp,2 } : β(1 − x)U 0 (Cp,2 ) = λnp,2
                              {l} : λp,2 (αAlα−1 − 1) = µ
                             {B} : P λ − (λp,2 + λnp,2 )m = µm.

Combining these conditions we obtain the condition that determines the demand for
bonds in equilibrium,

                      P U 0 (C1 ) − βmE(U 0 (C2 )) = βmxU 0 (Cp,2 )R(l).            (5)

The constrained optimum can be implemented if and only if P = m = 1. To obtain
the supply of government bonds that implements such a price, we need to equalize
the supply with the demand of bonds from equation (5) at P = 1.

To compare with the initial benchmark, take the case of log utilities, such that equa-
tion (5) becomes
                                       
      1               x           1−x               x
P          −βm              α
                              +           = βm             (αA(Y2 +Bm)α−1 −1)
  Y1 − P B       A(Y2 + Bm)     Y2 + Bm        A(Y2 + Bm)α
                                                         
                              1              xα     1−x
                        P          = βm          +
                          Y1 − P B        Y2 + Bm Y2 + Bm

or, defining βb ≡ β(1 − x(1 − α)) < β

                       1            m                             b 1 − P Y2
                                                                  βY     m
               P            = βb                  =⇒        B=               .      (6)
                   Y1 − P B      Y2 + Bm                           (1 + β)P
                                                                        b

The extra use of bonds as collateral raises production in the second period and in-
duces a reduction of the second period’s marginal utility of consumption. Hence, the
use of bonds as collateral acts as an effective reduction of households’ patience be-
cause it increases consumption in the future. That is, compared to the setting in which
bonds are not used as collateral there is a marginally lower demand for bonds, and
the optimum is implemented by choosing the supply of bonds BS such that P = 1.


                                             12
This is
                          b 1 − Y2
                          βY
                  BS∗ =                 with βb = β(1 − x(1 − α)).
                           (1 + β)
                                b

This seems counterintuitive. If bonds are more valuable, why is the demand for them
lower? Consider the case in which there is a demand for bonds, and now bonds
suddenly allow for an increase in consumption in the second period by even more.
In such a case, households would rather reduce the demand for bond a bit to move
some of that extra consumption from the second to the first period.

Misspecified Policies: We can compare the optimal level of bonds when the gov-
ernment acknowledges their use as collateral vis-a-vis policies that do not consider
bonds as collateral. There are several ways in which the government may misspecify
its bond policy.

A pessimistic misspecification is one in which the government believes that bonds cannot
be used as collateral to finance projects, and that production in the second period can
only be sustained by second period endowments. Then the government believes that
the demand for bonds is given by
                                                        
                           1                x      1−x
                     P          = βm            +          .
                       Y1 − P B        AY2α + Bm Y2 + Bm

As the government expects a lower consumption in the second period than the con-
sumption households really expect from using bonds as collateral, the right-hand side
(expected marginal utility in the second period) is higher than that from the correctly
specified demand function (6). This implies that the government expects a higher de-
mand for bonds, and trying to implement a price P = 1 it would supply more bonds
than optimal, inducing indeed an excess supply. Forcing the bond market to clear at
P < 1, introduces inefficiencies by forcing the government to resort to distortionary
                                   P
taxation in the second period (as m  > 1).

An optimistic misspecification policy is one in which the government believes that bonds
are not needed as collateral to finance the project. In other words, the government be-
lieves that output of the project is pledgeable and then the optimal production Yb2∗
can be implemented without using collateral. Then the government believes that the




                                          13
demand for bonds is given by
                                     "                   #
                           1                x      1−x
                     P          = βm            +          .
                       Y1 − P B        Yb2∗ + Bm Y2 + Bm

As the government expects higher consumption in the second period than the con-
sumption households really expect from being subject to credit frictions, the right-
hand side (expected marginal utility in the second period) is lower than that deter-
mined by the correctly specified demand function (6). This implies that the govern-
ment expects a lower demand for bonds, and tries to implement a price of P = 1
by supplying fewer bonds than is optimal, inducing an excess demand and P > 1
(a positive convenience yield) and also a misallocation of resources as some will be
“thrown to the ocean”.

As can be seen, the price of government bonds is informative about the government’s
misspecification in terms of the importance of bonds as collateral. It is also infor-
mative about the degree of financial frictions (or the degree of pledgeablity of the
project’s outcome) in the economy, as the production would range between AY2α and
Yb2∗ . In short, the convenience yield depends on the gap between the government’s
perception about the use of collateral in the economy, and the real use of collateral in
the economy.



2.3   Optimal Bond Policy with Production of Private Assets

We have previously assumed that only government bonds provide a vehicle to move
consumption intertemporally and to act as pledgeable promises to sustain credit and
production in the economy. Here, we add that agents can produce a private asset that
can also move consumption intertemporally and that can also be used as collateral,
but only partially (a unit of private asset sustains φ units of collateral). We assume
that, using first period endowment, households can produce Z private assets at a
cost of Z γ in terms of numeraire, where γ > 1. First, we compute the planner’s
problem and then we discuss the policy implementation in this extended setting in
which households can generate their own “time machine” and pledgeable assets.

Constrained Optimum: We solve for a planner’s optimum when the planner cannot
impose a transfer of resources between productive and non-productive agents, but


                                          14
has a technology to create assets that transfer resources intertemporally. This con-
strained problem is:


                       max              U (C1 ) + β[xU (Cp,2 ) + (1 − x)U (Cnp,2 )]
                 C1 ,Cp,2 ,Cnp,2 ,l,Z

subject to

                           C1 + Cp,2 + Z γ ≤ Y1 + Y2 + Z + Yb2
                                 C1 + Cnp,2 + Z γ ≤ Y1 + Y2 + Z
                                                  Yb2 = [Alα − l]
                                  l ≤ Y2 + (Y1 − C1 − Z γ ) + φZ.

First order conditions are

                   {C1 } : U 0 (C1 ) = λp,2 + λnp,2 + µ
                 {Cp,2 } : βxU 0 (Cp,2 ) = λp,2
                {Cnp,2 } : β(1 − x)U 0 (Cnp,2 ) = λnp,2
                      {l} : λp,2 (αAlα−1 − 1) = µ
                    {Z} : (λp,2 + λnp,2 )(γZ γ−1 − 1) + µ.γZ γ−1 = φµ

Combining these conditions, the planner’s optimal choice on how to allocate con-
sumption across periods is given by

                          U 0 (C1 ) − βE(U 0 (C2 )) = βxU 0 (Cp,2 )R(l),              (7)

and the planner’s optimal choice of asset production is given by:

                     γZ γ−1 U 0 (C1 ) − βE(U 0 (C2 )) = βxφU 0 (Cp,2 )R(l)            (8)


Equations (7) and (8) characterize the optimal choice for the planner between delay-
ing consumption and generating assets. Both alternatives smooth consumption in-
tertemporally and increase collateral and production in the second period. Equation
(7) is the already discussed trade-off of delaying consumption. The benefit is having
more resources to invest in the second period (weighted by the expected return of the
project evaluated at the marginal utility of consumption in the second period). The

                                                    15
cost is distorting consumption (measured by the difference between marginal utili-
ties across periods). Equation (8) displays a similar trade-off of producing assets. The
benefit is also that there are more resources to invest in the second period, but scaled
down by φ < 1. The cost is that consumption is distorted (measured by the differ-
ence between marginal utilities across periods) but with a marginal cost in terms of
numeraire in the first period of γZ γ−1 .

Notice that as the marginal benefit of assets is smaller than those of delaying con-
sumption (a superior collateral), in equilibrium γZ γ−1 < 1, and there is less pro-
duction of assets in the economy than there would be the case of the absence of
using bonds and assets as collateral. Further, as the difference between delaying
consumption and assets is given by φ, in a situation in which φ (for some reason)
declines exogenously, there is lower than optimal production of assets, not only to
smooth consumption (given that the lower production in the second period implies
that E(U 0 (C2 )) rises) but also to replace assets as collateral.

Combining these two equations gives us the combination between delayed consump-
tion and production of assets that the planner would like to achieve to smooth con-
sumption and increase production. Subtracting (8) from (7), the constrained optimal
Z ∗ satisfies
                          ∗ γ−1               xβU 0 (Cp,2 )R(l)
                      γ(Z )     = 1 − (1 − φ)                   .                (9)
                                                 U 0 (C1 )

Implementation: Now we solve for the equilibrium and for the implementation of
the constrained optimal amount of government bonds. The households’ problem is:

                       max               U (C1 ) + β[xU (Cp,2 ) + (1 − x)U (Cnp,2 )]
                C1 ,Cp,2 ,Cnp,2 ,l,B,Z


subject to

                                           C 1 + P B + Z γ ≤ Y1
                                  Cp,2    ≤ Y2 + Bm + Z + Yb2
                                          Cnp,2 ≤ Y2 + Bm + Z
                                                 Yb2 = [Alα − l]
                                             l ≤ Y2 + Bm + φZ




                                                    16
The first order conditions are

                           {C1 } : U 0 (C1 ) = λ
                         {Cp,2 } : βxU 0 (Cp,2 ) = λp,2
                        {Cnp,2 } : β(1 − x)U 0 (Cp,2 ) = λnp,2
                             {l} : λp,2 (αAlα−1 − 1) = µ
                           {B} : P λ − m(λp,2 + λnp,2 ) = µm
                           {Z} : γZ γ−1 λ − λp,2 − λnp,2 = µφ.

From the first order condition for bonds,

                     P U 0 (C1 ) − βmE(U 0 (C2 )) = βmxU 0 (Cp,2 )R(l)            (10)

and from the first order condition for private assets,

                    γZ γ−1 U 0 (C1 ) − βE(U 0 (C2 )) = βxφU 0 (Cp,2 )R(l).        (11)

From conditions (10) and (11), the equilibrium production of private assets is:

                                       P           xβU 0 (Cp,2 )R(l)
                       γ(Z eq )γ−1 =     − (1 − φ)                   .            (12)
                                       m              U 0 (C1 )

Notice that even when the agents have the possibility of buying bonds to smooth
consumption and to use as collateral, they would still produce some private assets
since their production function is convex, and the marginal cost of production is zero
at Z = 0. Agents’ production of private assets is increasing in P and, comparing with
equation (9), it is clear that the optimal implementation requires P = m = 1.

Just for comparison purposes with previous subsections assume log preferences and
φ = 1 (with φ < 1 there is no closed-form solution of the optimal bond supply, but
the logic remains). The demand for bonds is given by:

                                      x(1 + αAlα−1 − 1)
                                                                          
                1                                                1−x
      P                     = βm                           +
        Y1 − P B − (Z eq )γ        Y2 + Bm + Z eq + Alα − l Y2 + Bm + Z eq




                                              17
                                                                    h            1
                                                                              i γ−1
                                                                         P
where l = Y2 + Bm + Z eq , and from equation (12), Z eq =               γm
                                                                                      . Then,

                                                         h           γ
                                                                  i γ−1
                               b 1−   P                       P
                               βY       Y
                                      m 2
                                            − (βb + γ)       γm
                          B=                                              ,
                                          (1 + β)P
                                               b

where, as in the previous section, βb = β(1−x(1−α)). The demand for bonds decreases
with the bonds’ price, and it is higher without a technology that creates private assets.

The optimum is implemented with P = m = 1, which can be done by providing
bonds BS∗ such that,
                                                   γ
                                              h i γ−1
                                               1
                            βY1 − Y2 − (β + γ) γ
                            b           b
                      BS∗ =                           ,
                                     (1 + β)
                                          b
which is lower than the supply of bonds needed in the absence of private assets.



3     Two Period Model With Information Frictions

Now we assume that private assets come in two qualities, which determine their
effective value κZ. The quality can be good (with κG > 0) with probability p̄ or
bad (with κB = 0), otherwise, with p̄κG = 1. We also assume that collateral and
consumption depends on the expected quality of the asset, which we will endogenize
later using an overlapping generation structure.



3.1   The Role of Information

In what follows we compare two informational alternatives, with and without infor-
mation about private assets, and show that the economy’s welfare is higher when
information is not revealed.

When information about private assets’ quality never gets revealed the expected
quality of private assets is p̄κG = 1, and this situation is exactly the same as in the
previous section, with allocations characterized by equations (10) and (11).

When information gets revealed at the beginning of the second period, there are two
sources of risk. One is the “productivity shock” (also present above and which we

                                            18
assumed non-insurable). This shock determines whether the agent has access to an
investment opportunity or not, which we denote by i ∈ {p, np}, with qp = x and
Ybnp,2 = 0. The other, which is a new source of risk that is introduced by information
revelation, is a “private collateral shock” that determines whether the private asset is
good or bad, which we denote by j ∈ {G, B}, with qG = p̄ and ZB = 0.

Using this, more general, notation the households’ problem can be written as:
                                                                X
                               max             U (C1 ) + β             qi qj U (Cij,2 )
                          C1 ,Cij,2 ,lj ,B,Z
                                                                 i,j


subject to

                 C 1 + P B + Z γ ≤ Y1
                             Cij,2 ≤ Y2 + Bm + κj Z + Ybij,2                                      ∀i, j
                             Ybpj,2 = Aljα − lj
                                               

                                 lj ≤ Y2 + Bm + φκj Z                                             ∀j.

The first order conditions are:

                        {C1 } : U 0 (C1 ) = λ
                      {Cij,2 } : βqi qj U 0 (Cij,2 ) = λij,2
                        {lj } : λpj,2 (αAljα−1 − 1) = µj
                                         X              X
                        {B} : P λ − m         λij,2 = m   µj
                                                    i,j                       j
                                                      X                       X
                         {Z} : γZ γ−1 λ −                       κj λij,2 =             φκj µj .
                                                          i,j                      j


Notice that i,j λij,2 = βE(U 0 (Cij,2 )). There is more risk than in the case with a single
             P

collateral type as the return on the project, Rj ≡ (αAljα−1 − 1) is stochastic.

The demand for bonds equalizes their cost and benefits,
                                                                        X
                  P U 0 (C1 ) − βmE(U 0 (Cij,2 )) = βmx                           qj U 0 (Cpj,2 )Rj ,     (13)
                                                                          j




                                                     19
which is also the case for creation of private assets,
                                                              X
               γZ γ−1 U 0 (C1 ) − βE(κj U 0 (Cij,2 )) = βxφ       qj κj U 0 (Cpj,2 )Rj .   (14)
                                                              j



Notice that the benefits of private assets are smaller than the benefits of government
bonds for two reasons. First, the heterogeneity in the quality of private assets reduces
their value for intertemporal smoothing as it introduces more risk in the second pe-
riod (i.e., βE(κj U 0 (Cij,2 )) < βE(U 0 (Cij,2 )). Second, private assets are worse collateral
(not only because of φ < 1) but also because of the extra risk generated by their het-
erogeneity (this is, j qj κj U 0 (Cpj,2 )Rj < j qj U 0 (Cpj,2 )Rj ).
                       P                          P

There are three messages that arise from comparing these different information envi-
ronments. First, fixing the amounts of bonds and private assets in the economy, wel-
fare is lower with information simply because agents face higher utility uncertainty.
Second, from comparing no information-equations (10) and (11) with information-
equations (13) and (14), the benefits of bonds and private assets increase when in-
formation isnot revealed. This comes from applying Jensen’s inequality, given risk
aversion (concavity of the utility function) and decreasing marginal returns (concav-
ity of the production function). Formally, E(U 0 (Cij,2 )R(Zj )) > U 0 (ECij,2 )R(EZj ).

Finally, information increases the benefits of bonds more than it increases the benefits
of private assets. This comes from comparing information-equations (13) with (14).
The reason is that private assets are scarcer in states of the world in which they are
more valuable, both because they provide low consumption andmake poor collateral
and then low production. More formally, E(U 0 (Cij,2 )R(Zj )) > E(κj U 0 (Cij,2 )R(Zj )).

Once accounting for this distortion in the creation of bonds and private assets, there
is a second reason why information reduces welfare: higher investments in bonds
and private assets in the first period distorts the allocation of resources, reducing
excessively the consumption in the first period to partly compensate for the higher
risk in the second.

This comparison highlights the pervasive role of information about heterogeneous
collateral in credit markets. If there is no information, all productive agents obtain
a loan for a collateral of expected value κ bG Z = Z. If there is information, some
productive agents would obtain a larger loan based on collateral κG Z (potentially
having excessive collateral once the loan implements the optimal scale l∗ ) while some

                                               20
others would not get to produce. With risk aversion and decreasing marginal returns
this risk reduces welfare, intuitively because information destroys the cross-insurance
that ignorance can provide. In other words, ignorance transforms assets into “safe
collateral,” which is beneficial in terms of total consumption in the economy.



3.2   Information Acquisition

Now we add two extensions to the previous setting, so we can study the conditions
under which the economy will be in the first situation (with information revealed
before lending takes place) or the second situation (with information revealed after
production happens).

In contrast to the previous setting, in which the project outcome was assumed deter-
ministic, now we want to study the possibility that a lender (a non-productive agent
in our setting) ends up with the asset in case of default, and as such may want to
privately acquire information about its quality. First, we assume the project fails with
probability d. Second, we assume that a lender can acquire information about the
quality of a private asset at the beginning of the second period, at a utility cost of ψ.

We have to be more explicit now about the credit protocol. We assume there is ran-
dom matching between a lender and a borrower and that x > 1/2, such that the
borrower has all the bargaining power. The possibility of default not only adds an-
other source of risk for the borrower (who is the residual claimant on the project, as
the borrower keeps the surplus) but also exposes the lender to the risk of receiving
private collateral of low quality in the case of default.

In a match between agents, negotiating a loan of size l, the part that is not covered by
bonds and needs to be covered by private assets is l−Y2 −Bm. Assuming the borrower
has private asset of perceived quality pb , then the expected value of his private asset
                                                                             2 −Bm
is pb κG Z. This implies that the borrower has to finance a fraction f = l−Y
                                                                           pb κG Z
                                                                                   ≤ 1 of
the asset to get a loan l. Naturally, f = 1 as long as R(l) > 0 in equilibrium (there is
not enough collateral in the economy to reach l∗ ).

The larger the loan, or the less likely the asset is of good quality, the larger is the
fraction of private assets that the borrower puts at stake when obtaining credit. This
is relevant because, in principle, the higher the lender’s exposure to the borrower’s
private asset, the higher is the incentive to acquire information about that asset.

                                           21
Under what conditions can the information-insensitivity of collateral (superior in
terms of welfare) be sustained in equilibrium? This happens when the lender’s ex-
pected utility from acquiring information (net of the cost) is larger than the lender’s
utility from not acquiring information. This is, when,

                                   I            U
                              EU (Cnp,2 ) − U (Cnp,2 ) ≤ ψ.

In the evaluation of these utilities, note that consumption in the absence of informa-
tion production is:
                                  U
                               Cnp,2  = Y2 + Bm + pl κG Z

where pl is the quality of the private asset owned by the lender, and the lender always
recovers the loan at the end of the period. In other words, the lender breaks even and
consumes as if there were no loan at all.

In case of acquiring information about the collateral posted by the borrower, the
lender does not lend in case the collateral is bad quality (with probability 1 − pb )
and lends in case the collateral is good quality (with probability pb ), and obtains the
repayment specified in the “information-insensitive loan contract” in case the project
succeeds (this is with probability 1 − d), as information acquisition was assumed pri-
                                                                U
vate knowledge. In this case, consumption is the same as Cnp      2
                                                                    . Then, the only po-
tential gain from information accrues when the lender finds out the collateral is good
quality, signs the presumed information-insensitive contract and the project fails. In
this case, with probability dpb the lender obtains

                 I
                Cnp,2 = Y2 + Bm + pl κG Z − l + Y2 + Bm + f κG Z
                       = Y2 + Bm + pl κG Z + f (1 − pb )κG Z
                                             (1 − pb )
                       = Y2 + Bm + pl κG Z +           (l − Y2 − Bm).
                                                 pb


Then, no information is a sustainable equilibrium if and only if

                                      I            U
                             dpb [U (Cnp,2 ) − U (Cnp,2 )] ≤ ψ.                     (15)


Note that if agents were risk neutral this condition would boil down to subtracting



                                            22
 U          I
Cnp,2 from Cnp,2 and the condition would become

                                           ψ
                                  l≤              + Y2 + Bm,
                                       d(1 − pb )

which are similar to the conditions in Gorton and Ordonez (2014 and 2018), but con-
sidering the use of government bonds and own funds in obtaining the loan.

The next proposition shows comparative statics for information acquisition.

Proposition 1 The incentives to acquire information about private assets used as collateral
increase with the size of the loan sustained by private collateral (l given B) and decrease with
the amount of bonds used as collateral (B given l). The incentives also increase with the
probability of default (d) and decrease with the probability the asset is of good quality (pb ) and
with the cost of information production (ψ).

Proof Denote the net incentives to acquire information as

                                           I            U
                              Π = dpb [U (Cnp,2 ) − U (Cnp,2 )] − ψ

Then
                                 ∂Π
                                    = d(1 − pb )U 0 (Cnp,2
                                                      I
                                                           )>0
                                 ∂l
and
             ∂Π
                  = dmpb [U 0 (Cnp,2
                                I
                                     ) − U 0 (Cnp,2
                                               U
                                                    )] − dm(1 − pb )U 0 (Cnp,2
                                                                          I
                                                                               ) < 0.
             ∂B
There are two reasons why the incentives to acquire information decrease with B.
The first argument shows that, fixing the use of collateral (that is, fixing l − Y2 − Bm),
the lender is “relatively richer” and has fewer incentives to explore such collateral.
The second argument shows that, fixing the size of the loan (i.e., fixing l), the use of
private collateral declines and as such so do the incentives to explore it.

                              ∂Π           I            U
                                 = pb [U (Cnp,2 ) − U (Cnp,2 )] > 0
                              ∂d

                                         ∂Π
                                            = −1 < 0
                                         ∂ψ
Finally,
               ∂Π                                d
                           I
                   = d[U (Cnp,2         U
                                ) − U (Cnp,2 )] − U 0 (Cnp,2
                                                        I
                                                             )(l − Y2 − B) < 0
               ∂pb                               pb

                                                23
The sign is trivial when agents are risk-neutral. For more general utility functions,
define C + ≡ (1−p
                pb
                   b)                                                       I
                      (l − Y2 − B) the difference in consumption (this is, Cnp,2    U
                                                                                 − Cnp,2 ),
                 +
and divide by C ,

         ∂Π
         ∂pb
                         U
                    [U (Cnp,2 + C + ) − U (Cnp,2
                                            U
                                                 )]   d U 0 (Cnp,2
                                                              U
                                                                   + C +)
               =d                                   −                     (l − Y2 − B).
         C+                      C+                   pb       C+

Taking the limit as C + goes to 0,

                  ∂Π
                  ∂pb                        d                     dpb
            lim         = dU 0 (Cnp,2
                                 U
                                      )−          U 0 (Cnp,2
                                                        U
                                                             )=−        U 0 (Cnp,2
                                                                              U
                                                                                   ) < 0.
           C + →0 C +                      1 − pb                1 − pb

                                                                                            Q.E.D.

This proposition shows that a heavy use of bonds to sustain a given loan size discour-
ages lenders from acquiring information about private collateral. To see this, notice
that the incentives to acquire information increase in dpb and (1−p
                                                                 pb
                                                                    b)
                                                                       (l − Y2 − Bm). It
also shows that in case that the government does not implement the first best by sup-
plying excessive bonds, m < 1 and an increase in taxation distortions (this is, and
increase in χ) also increases fragility.

Even though it is clear that a higher default probability, d, increases the incentives
to acquire information, the effect of pb is a bit more intricate. While an increase in
pb increases the likelihood of finding private collateral of good quality, it reduces the
value of doing it. The second effect always dominates, at least locally for general
utility functions.



4    Dynamics in OLG and the Bond Exchange Facility

Above we used a two-period model to highlight the importance of keeping track of
convenience yields to design policies that involve the supply of government bonds.
This is particularly relevant when agents can privately create imperfect private sub-
stitutes that are fragile in that information about their heterogeneous quality may be
suddenly generated. Having fewer bonds increases the reliance on private assets and
induces inefficient information production about their quality.

Here we propose an overlapping-generation (OLG) extension to follow the dynamics
of private asset creation in response to government bond changes. We highlight two

                                                  24
messages. First, the optimal policy in steady state may require combining conven-
tional and unconventional (BEF) policies. Second, a transitory decline in government
bonds (that may be driven by external demands, or by other federal government con-
siderations) may have long-term consequences in terms of financial fragility, which
again can be corrected by resorting to the use of a BEF.


4.1    Environment

Each generation lives for two periods. In each calendar period t ∈ {0, 1, ....} there
coexists a young generation and an old one. An agent is born young at date t with
endowment Y1 units of numeraire. At the beginning of the period she invests in pri-
vate assets, which now we denote as a flow zt that adds to the stock Zt . Then the
agent buys a one-period maturity bond, Bt . At the end of its youth the agent ran-
domly matches with an old individual, who sells their private asset at its perceived
fundamental value pκG (1 − δ)Zt , where δ is the depreciation rate of private assets, in-
dependent of their quality, and p is the probability that such particular asset is good.
The buyer’s previous investment, zt , inherits the quality of the asset purchased.5

To fix ideas about the investment quality, consider the following example. At the
beginning of their youth, agents invest in infrastructure zt and at the end of their
youth they buy a depreciated building of size (1 − δ)Zt that is located on a specific
acre of land. The total size of the building will then be Zt+1 = (1 − δ)Zt + zt . The acre
where the building is located can be of good quality (in the sense that it boosts the
value of the building by κG ) or bad quality (the land is in such a bad location that the
value of the whole building on that acre is 0). In this sense the investment of an agent
inherits the quality of the asset he buys.

During the transition from period t to t + 1, a fraction 1 − λ of land (the foundations of
the building in the previous example) experiences an idiosyncratic shock that resets
the quality, which can be good with probability p̄. This implies that there is depreci-
ation of information about the quality of an asset at a rate 1 − λ (in case information
is not replenished in the economy). Note that the actual amounts of good and bad
quality assets do not change.
   5
    The particular timing in which young households first invest and buy bonds and then buy assets
imply that investments and portfolios are not conditional on the quality of traded assets. Reversing the
timing (first buying the assets and then investing and buying bonds) would just introduce additional
sources of heterogeneity across agents but would not affect aggregate results and dynamics.

                                                  25
This process generates three possible beliefs about the quality of private assets, p = 0
(the asset is known to be bad), p = 1 (the asset is known to be good) and p = p̄ (the
asset is of unknown quality). We denote a crisis to be a situation in which a large
fraction of assets of unknown quality are investigated (and their quality discovered)
before credit is negotiated. More generally, the possible beliefs about purchased as-
sets are k ∈ {0, p̄, 1}, which can transition to j ∈ {0, p̄, 1} when traded, according to
the process of idiosyncratic shocks between periods and information acquisition in
credit markets.

When the agent gets old, he receives an endowment of Y2 and draws a productivity
(whether he has an investment opportunity or not). Each productive old agent bor-
rows funds from an unproductive old agent using his bonds and private assets as
collateral. When used to obtain credit the value of the private asset is Zbt+1 = pκG Zt+1 ,
where Zt+1 = (1 − δ)Zt + zt and p is either p̄ if quality is unknown, 0 if known to be
bad or 1 if known to be good.

At the end of the period, project outcomes are realized, loan contracts are fulfilled,
and the old agents redeem their bonds and sell their private asset at the price deter-
mined by information (or lack thereof) about the private asset during the credit stage.
Furthermore, we allow all agents to obtain an additional endowment for consump-
tion at the end of the period, X. As will become clear, without this extra consumption,
and given that the project can fail, no productive agent would borrow up to the con-
straint for fear of defaulting and consuming 0. In other words, the Inada conditions
would prevent collateral constraints from binding. We will go on to assume that X is
large enough such that the borrowers would like to use all his available assets at the
beginning of the period as collateral.

In this extended setting, the government can access resources from future genera-
tions. Since we assume one-period bonds, if at the calendar period t − 1 the govern-
ment promises a generation Bt−1 when old and sells those bonds at a price Pt−1 < 1,
the extra resources are obtained from the next generation, which then will have a
lower endowment when young of Y1 − (1 − Pt−1 )Bt−1 .

We define as the welfare criterion consumption smoothing over the lifetime of each
generation and not across generations. Also, as we have discussed, acquisition of in-
formation about private assets introduces additional sources of risk and then welfare
is maximized when there is no information.


                                            26
4.2   Characterization

The problem of an individual born in calendar period t depends on the stock of capital
accumulated in the economy up to t. In contrast to previous cases, here in case of
being productive, the agent suffers the additional risk of project failure. We denote
As ∈ {A, 0} with s ∈ {success, f ailure} and P r(f ailure) = d.

                                                   X                           X
                            max                        qk U (Ck,1t ) + β               qi qj qs U (Cijs,2t+1 )
                Ck,1t ,Cijs,2t+1 ,lj,t+1 ,Bt ,zt
                                                   k                           i,j,s

subject to

               Ck,1t + ztγ + Pt Bt + pk κG (1 − δ)Zt ≤ Y1 − (1 − Pt−1 )Bt−1
                                Cijs,2t+1 ≤ Y2 + Bt + Zbj,t+1 + Ybijs,2t+1 + X
                                                               Zbj,t+1 = pj κG [(1 − δ)Zt + zt ]
                                                                Ybpjs,2t+1 = As lα − lj,t+1
                                                                                            
                                                                                        j,t+1

                                                                   lj,t+1 ≤ Y2 + Bt + φZbj,t+1 .


First order conditions are

                {Ck,1t } : qk U 0 (Ck,1t ) = λk,t
             {Cijs,2t+1 } : βqi qj qs U 0 (Cijs,2t+1 ) = λijs,2t+1
                            X
                                                   α−1
                {lj,t+1 } :      λpjs,2t+1 (αAs lj,t+1   − 1) = µj,t+1
                                    s
                                        X              X                       X
                   {Bt } : Pt                λk,t −            λijs,2t+1 =             µj,t+1
                                        k              i,j,s                    j
                                            X                  X                            X
                    {zt } :       γztγ−1           λk,t −              pj κG λijs,2t+1 =            φpj κG .µj,t+1
                                              k                i,j,s                            j



Notice that, beyond the explicit reference to the calendar period, the first-order con-
ditions are the same as those that characterize the solution in the two-period model
with heterogeneous private collateral and probability of default. As we discussed, we
assume throughout that collateral constraints bind, or µj,t+1 > 0, which implies that

                                                                     f ailure
                               (1 − d)U 0 (Cpj,2t+1
                                            success
                                                    )Rj,t+1 > dU 0 (Cpj,2t+1  )


                                                                27
which is just a technical condition on the size of X (should be large enough).

The demand for bonds is characterized by,

       Pt Ek,t (U 0 (Ck,1t )) = βEijs,t+1 (U 0 (Cijs,2t+1 )) + βqp Ejs,t+1 [U 0 (Cpjs,2t+1 )Rjs,t+1 ],   (16)

                     α−1
where Rjs,t+1 = αAs lj,t+1 − 1 is the realized return of the project.

The creation of private assets is characterized by,

γztγ−1 Ek,t (U 0 (Ck,1t )) = βEijs,t+1 (pj κG U 0 (Cijs,2t+1 ))+βqp φEjs,t+1 [pj κG U 0 (Cpjs,2t+1 )Rjs,t+1 ].
                                                                                                       (17)

The main difference between the two-period setting and this overlapping generation
structure is given by the links across periods. There are three links. The first is given
by the law of motion of the volume of private assets in the economy. This link, of course,
would be eliminated by assuming δ = 1 (all private assets have to be created every
period). The second link is given by the evolution of the belief distribution about private
assets quality, which is driven both by information acquisition in credit markets and
by the process of idiosyncratic shocks. This link would be eliminated by assuming
λ = 0 (this is all private assets are good with probability p̄ every period).6 The third
link is the one imposed by the government budget constraint and depends on the
government’s bond policy. This link would be eliminated if Pt = 1 in all t, which is
indeed the case under the implementation of the optimum, as we explain next.

In what follows we characterize the steady state of this economy. Then we discuss
the effect of policy shocks and departures on financial stability.



4.3      Steady State

Assume a constant provision of bonds, BSS . In steady state we can eliminate the
calendar period notation. From bonds condition (16),

                    P Ek (U 0 (Ck,1 )) = βEijs (U 0 (Cijs,2 )) + βqp Ejs [U 0 (Cpjs,2 )Rjs ],
   6
    Another, minor, difference between this setting and the two-period one is that agents buy some
private assets. Since the matching seller is of random quality, consumption in the first period is also
stochastic.



                                                       28
and from investment condition (17),

       γz γ−1 Ek (U 0 (Ck, 1)) = βEijs (pj κG U 0 (Cijs,2 )) + βqp φEjs [pj κG U 0 (Cpjs,2 )Rjs ].


In steady state the volume of private assets should be constant, this is

                           (1 − δ)Z + z = Z             =⇒          z = δZ

and the distribution of the quality of private assets is also constant. With regard to
a steady state, there are two possibilities. The first possibility is that, in steady state,
there is no information acquisition about collateral of uncertain quality p̄. Then

                                   k = j = p̄        with prob. 1.

This information-insensitive steady state is the same as the two-period model with known
quality (as p̄κG = 1), as characterized by equations (10) and (11).

The second possibility is that, in steady state, there is information acquisition about
collateral of uncertain quality p̄. Then
                                        
                                        1        with prob. p̄
                              k=j=
                                        0        with prob. 1 − p̄.

This information-sensitive steady state displays idiosyncratic risk, which reduces the
value of both bonds and private assets.

Whether the steady state is information-sensitive or information-insensitive depends
on whether condition (15) fails or not, for an asset of perceived quality p̄. From Propo-
sition 1, the information-insensitive steady state is more likely when there are more
bonds in the economy, both because lenders are wealthier in the second period (there
is less utility value of information) and because borrowers rely less on private collat-
eral (there is less at stake from acquiring information). Similarly, such a steady state
is more likely the better is collateral on average (high p̄), the more likely the project
succeeds (low d) and the higher is the examination cost of private assets (high ψ).




                                                   29
4.4   Conventional Policy and the Bond Exchange Facility

From an ex-ante perspective, a planner’s optimal implementation would require im-
plementation of P = 1. In this case, we have assumed away the distortionary effect
of taxes, which is endogenous. When P < 1, there is a reduction of endowment
for all generations in the first period, which increases Ek (U 0 (Ck,1 )) and lowers bonds
available in the economy to be used as collateral. The distortionary tax then enters
endogenously by the use of bonds as collateral, breaking the Ricardian Equivalence.

Also from an ex-ante perspective, the planner wants to supply enough bonds to limit
the use of private assets as collateral and to relax information acquisition pressures.
These two goals, however, may not be implementable jointly: the government should
supply enough bonds for markets to clear at P = 1, while at the same time not induc-
ing production and use of private assets to trigger information acquisition.

More specifically, when the government only has access to conventional policy of pro-
viding bonds in exchange for numeraire, achieving both goals imply that BS∗ is such
that
                     U 0 (C1 ) = βEi (U 0 (C2 )) + βqp Es [U 0 (Cps,2 )Rs ]      (18)

and
                                      I            U
                              dp̄[U (Cnp,2 ) − U (Cnp,2 )] ≤ ψ                       (19)

when consumption is evaluated at P = 1.

As we discussed, the second condition is guaranteed when BS is large enough. A
large supply of bonds, however, may drive P below 1. If the government reduces the
supply of bonds to avoid triggering information acquisition (inequality (19) becomes
an equality) and still there is an excess supply (this is equation (18) only holds when
P < 1), the conditions become inconsistent and the government is not able to both
implement optimal consumption smoothing and discourage information acquisition.

The main reason for this result is that bonds are supplied in exchange for numeraire
in the first period (open market operations), so providing more bonds as collateral
relaxes pressures for information production at the cost of reducing numeraire to
consume in the first period (as C1 = Y1 − P B − z γ − (1 − δ)Z). A possibility to achieve
both goals is to use a Bond Exchange Facility, offering agents the opportunity to bor-
row a government bond in exchange for private assets. In this case the government


                                            30
can both provide bonds to sustain no information acquisition in the second period,
without reducing consumption in the first period.


Proposition 2 When the quality of private collateral is good enough, conventional policy
is enough to implement the constrained optimum. When the quality of private collateral
declines, the government may need to resort to using BEF (unconventional policy) to fulfill
both financial stability and consumption smoothing goals.



4.5    Shocks to the supply or demand of bonds

Assume the economy is in a steady state such that P = 1 and there is no information
acquisition in credit markets. In this section we analyze how the economy fares when,
at period t, BSS temporarily declines to B  b (for instance because the central bank re-
duces interest rates in response to a recession or because there are foreign shocks that
increase the foreign demand for bonds, making them scarcer domestically).

On impact, this transitory negative shock to the supply of bonds implies that Pt > 1
on impact, and that the consumption of the young compared to steady state increases
(this is C1t > C1 ).7 As the production of private assets took place in period t by the
time the shock to the supply of bonds happens, there is a reduction in the wealth
available to the old in t + 1 (less available bonds to consume in t + 1). This implies
that, not only are there fewer assets to sustain credit in the next period (a credit crunch
because there are fewer bonds available), but there is also an increase in the incentives
to acquire information about private collateral, potentially inducing a crisis. Recall
that information is not acquired as long as

                                        I            U
                                dp̄[U (Cnp,2 ) − U (Cnp,2 )] ≤ ψ

where
                                     U
                                    Cnp,2 = Y2 + B
                                                 b + ZSS

                             I
                            Cnp,2        b + ZSS + (1 − p̄) ZSS
                                  = Y2 + B
                                                      p̄
   7
   For simplicity we maintain the assumption that the extra resources the government obtains from
P > 1 are thrown to the ocean and then do not affect future generations’ consumption.




                                               31
This inequality is less likely to hold in steady state, as t + 1 lenders are relatively
poorer and the potential gains of investigating private collateral are larger in terms of
marginal utility.

To see this, assume log utility:

                    ∂[U I − U U ]         1           1
                                  =             −           <0
                        ∂B          Y2 + B + Z/p Y2 + B + Z

This is a pure wealth effect. Lenders are more afraid of providing loans.

In period t + 1, if the scarcity of bonds continues, young agents react by producing
more private assets than in steady state. This is because the scarcity of bonds distorts
consumption smoothing, increasing youth consumption and reducing old wealth and
consumption. This induces the young at t + 1 to move consumption from young to
old by producing private assets. Then Zt+1 > ZSS , and then lt+2 > lt+1 .

The higher supply of private assets has the double effect of increasing credit and the
wealth of lenders in period t + 2, compared to period t + 1. With log preferences

                   ∂[U I − U U ]          1             1
                                 =                −           >0
                        ∂Z         p(Y2 + B + Z/p) Y2 + B + Z

Even though at t + 2 lenders are wealthier than in t + 1, and then less interested in
acquiring information about private collateral, there is also more use of private assets
as collateral. The second effect dominates. Hence, when bonds at t and t + 1 are
scarce, fragility is larger on impact (at t + 1), but even larger subsequently (at t + 2).
If the new, lower, level of government bonds is permanent, the economy moves to a
new steady state with fewer bonds, more private assets and more fragility. Whether
the new steady state is information-sensitive or insensitive depends on parameters
and the extent of bond supply scarcity.

If, at a later period T , bonds suddenly return to the original steady state level (the
source of the shock disappears, for instance), the economy takes time to return to the
original level of fragility. The reason is that the economy has accumulated a relatively
large volume of private assets, which takes time to depreciate. This implies that a
transitory shock to the supply of bond can have long lasting consequences in terms
of fragility through the accumulation of private collateral.

In this instance, the use of BEF, by taking private assets “out of circulation” and re-

                                           32
placing them with bonds as collateral, also has the important role of speeding up the
transition of the economy to a less fragile environment once the transitory shock has
concluded. The optimal design of a BEF is discussed in Gorton and Ordonez (2020).



5    Conclusion

Economic agents demand safe assets to smooth consumption across periods and to
use as collateral, which smooths lenders’ consumption across states in a given period.
The main difference between public and private safe assets is that the latter come in
heterogeneous quality. Here we show that information about individual assets’ qual-
ity may reduce their safety and make them less useful for smoothing consumption
across states. When information acquisition is a choice, there are conditions (notably
the volume of public safe assets) under which such information is not produced and
private assets are indeed safe assets. Those conditions, however, may change if a
large volume of private assets’ qualities gets examined, a crisis.

We have explored the optimal supply of public safe assets needed to accommodate
the demand when considering their effects on the creation of private assets and on
information production about these assets. The government should strive to maintain
intertemporal consumption smoothing and provide enough collateral to avoid too
much private asset creation and, possibly, information production about those private
assets.

Monetary policy and macroprudential policy, however, cannot be conducted in iso-
lation. Open market operations exchange cash (numeraire) for government bonds.
Monetary policy may require taking government bonds out of the economy (to re-
duce interest rates, for instance). But if this policy generates a scarcity of government
bonds as collateral, the private sector reacts by creating more private safe assets. Pri-
vate safe asset creation, however, increases the fragility of the financial system (the
likelihood of a financial crisis). The goals of facilitating consumption smoothing while
minimizing the likelihood of a financial crisis are two goals that may be mutually ex-
clusive when the average quality of private assets is low. In this circumstance the
government should also rely on the use of a Bond Exchange Facility that contempo-
raneously exchanges private assets for government bonds (in a repo-type operation).



                                           33
References
Aiyagari, Rao, and Ellen McGrattan. 1998. “The Optimum Quantity of Debt.” Journal
   of Monetary Economics 42:447–469.
Aiyagari, S. Rao. 1994. “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving.” Quar-
   terly Journal of Economics 109 (3): 659–84.
Altonji, Joseph, Fumio Hayashi, and Laurence Kotlikoff. 1992. “Is the Extended
   Family Altruistically Linked? Direct Tests Using Micro Data.” American Economic
   Review 82:1177–1198.
      . 1996. “Risk-Sharing between and within Families.” Econometrica 64:261–294.
       . 1997. “Parental Altruism and Inter Vivos Transfers: Theory and Evidence.”
   Journal of Political Economy 105:1121–1166.
Angeletos, George-Marios, Fabrice Collard, and Harris Dellas. 2016. “Public Debt
  as Private Liquidity: Optimal Policy.” MIT Working Paper.
Auerbach, Alan, and Lawrence Kotlikoff. 1987. Dynamic Fiscal Policy. Cambridge
  University Press.
Azzimonti, Marina, and Pierre Yared. 2019. “The optimal public and private provi-
  sion of safe assets.” Journal of Monetary Economics 102:126–144.
Barro, Robert. 1974. “Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?” Journal of Political Econ-
   omy 82:1095–1117.
Bernanke, Ben. 2005. “The Global Savings Glut and the U.S. Current Account De-
   fiicit.” The Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economists, Richmond
   VA.
       . 2018. “Should Monetary Policy Take into Account Risks to Financial Stabil-
   ity?” speech in London, May 20,2014.
Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, and Bengt Holmström. 2013. “Ignorance, Debt and
  Financial Crises.” Working Paper , Yale University.
Fleming, Michael, Warren Hrung, and Frank Keane. 2009. “The Term Securities
   Lending Facility: Origin, Design, and Effects.” New York Federal Reserve Current
   Issues, vol. 15.
Gorton, Gary, Stefan Lewellen, and Andrew Metrick. 2010. “The Safe Asset Share.”
  American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 102:101–106.
Gorton, Gary, and Guillermo Ordonez. 2014. “Collateral Crises.” American Economic
  Review 104 (2): 343–378.
       . 2018. “Good Booms, Bad Booms.” Journal of the European Economic Asso-
   ciation. Forthcoming.
      . 2020. “Fighting Crises with Secrecy.” AEJ: Macroeconomics. Forthcoming.


                                       34
Heathcote, Jonathan. 2005. “Fiscal Policy with Heterogeneous Agents and Incom-
  plete Markets.” Review of Economic Studies 72:161–188.
Holmström, Bengt, and Jean Tirole. 1998. “Private and Public Supply of Liquidity.”
  Journal of Political Economy 106:1–40.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2012. “The Aggregate De-
   mand for Treasury Debt.” Journal of Political Economy 120:233–267.
       . 2015. “The Impact of Treasury Supply on Financial Sector Lending.” Journal
   of Financial Economics 118:571–600.
McGrattan, Ellen. 1994. “The Macroeconomic Effects of Distortionary Taxation.”
  Journal of Monetary Economics 33:573–601.
Sunderam, Adi. 2015. “Money Creation and the Shadow Banking System.” Review
   of Financial Studies 28:939–977.
Svensson, Lars E. O. 2018. “Monetary Policy and Macrorpudential Policy: Different
   and Separate?” Canadian Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Woodford, Michael. 1990. “Public Debt as Private Liquidity.” American Ecoomic
  Review 80:382–388.
Xie, Lei. 2012. “The Seasons of Money: ABS/MBS Issuance and the Convenience
   Yield.” Working Paper, Yale University.




                                       35
