                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     BANK REGULATION AND SUPERVISION IN 180 COUNTRIES FROM 1999 TO
                                2011

                                          James R. Barth
                                         Gerard Caprio, Jr.
                                           Ross Levine

                                       Working Paper 18733
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18733


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2013




James R. Barth is Lowder Eminent Scholar in Finance at Auburn University, Senior Finance Fellow
at the Milken Institute, and Fellow at the Wharton Financial Institutions Center. Gerard Caprio, Jr.
is the William Brough Professor of Economics and Chair of the Center for Development Economics
at Williams College. Ross Levine is the Willis H. Booth Chair in Banking and Finance at Haas School
of Business, University of California at Berkeley, Senior Fellow at the Milken Institute and Research
Associate at the NBER. The authors gratefully acknowledge the painstakingly thorough assistance
provided by Nan (Annie) Zhang, Research Assistant at the Milken Institute. This paper benefited from
the support of the Milken Institute and the World Bank. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by James R. Barth, Gerard Caprio, Jr., and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Bank Regulation and Supervision in 180 Countries from 1999 to 2011
James R. Barth, Gerard Caprio, Jr., and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 18733
January 2013
JEL No. G21,G28,O5

                                              ABSTRACT

In this paper and the associated online database, we provide new data and measures of bank regulatory
and supervisory policies in 180 countries from 1999 to 2011. The data include and the measures are
based upon responses to hundreds of questions, including information on permissible bank activities,
capital requirements, the powers of official supervisory agencies, information disclosure requirements,
external governance mechanisms, deposit insurance, barriers to entry, and loan provisioning. The dataset
also provides information on the organization of regulatory agencies and the size, structure, and performance
of banking systems. Since the underlying surveys are large and complex, we construct summary indices
of key bank regulatory and supervisory policies to facilitate cross-country comparisons and analyses
of changes in banking policies over time.


James R. Barth                                        Ross Levine
Auburn University                                     Haas School of Business
393 Lauder Business Building                          University of California at Berkeley
Auburn, Alabama 36849                                 545 Student Services Building, #1900 (F685)
barthjr@auburn.edu                                    Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
                                                      and NBER
Gerard Caprio, Jr.                                    Ross_levine@haas.berkeley.edu
Department of Economics
Williams College
Williamstown, MA 01267
gerard.caprio@Williams.edu
                                                        1
I. Introduction

        Motivating an investigation of bank regulation and supervision is easy. One can point to

the global banking crisis of 2007-2009, the banking problems still plaguing many European

countries in 2013, and the more than 100 systemic banking crises that have devastated

economies around the world since 1970. All these crises reflect, at least partially, defects in bank

regulation and supervision.1 One can also point to research showing that banks matter for human

welfare beyond periodic crises. Banks influence economic growth, poverty, entrepreneurship,

labor market conditions, and the economic opportunities available to people.2 Thus, examining

the type and impact of bank regulatory and supervisory policies in countries is a critical area of

inquiry.

        The problem, however, is that measuring bank regulation and supervision around the

world is hard. Hundreds of laws and regulations, emanating from different parts of national and

local governments, define policies regarding bank capital standards, the entry requirements of

new domestic and foreign banks, bank ownership restrictions, and loan provisioning guidelines.

Numerous pages of regulations in most countries delineate the permitted activities of banks and

provide shape and substance to deposit insurance schemes and the nature and timing of the

information that banks must disclose to regulators and the public. And, extensive statutes define

the powers of regulatory and supervisory officials over banks — and the limits of those powers.

There are daunting challenges associated with acquiring data on all of the laws, regulations, and

practices that apply to banks in countries and then aggregating this information into useful

statistics that capture different and important aspects of regulatory regimes. This helps explain

why the systematic collection of data on bank regulatory and supervisory policies is only in its


1
  On documenting systemic crises, see Laeven and Valencia (2008). On the linkages between recent banking stresses
and policy defects, see Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2012).
2
  The literature on finance, growth, poverty, and the distribution of economic opportunities is quite large, and is
reviewed by Levine (2006) and Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (2010).
                                              2
nascent stages. Yet, without sound measures of banking policies across countries and over time,

researchers will be correspondingly constrained in assessing which policies work best to promote

well-functioning banking systems, and in proposing socially beneficial reforms to banking

policies in need of improvement.

        In this paper, we offer a new database on bank regulation and supervision for more than

180 countries, covering the period from 1999 through 2011. Although we do not assess the

impact of banking sector policies on banks or the broader economy, we do seek to contribute to

research on the design and implementation of policies by providing useful measures of bank

regulation and supervision. As reportedly argued by the great scientist Lord Kelvin in the 19th

century, “[I]f you cannot measure it, you cannot improve it.”3

        Our database builds on four surveys sponsored by the World Bank. About sixteen years

ago, the World Bank asked us to assemble the first cross-country database on bank regulation

and supervision. With guidance a n d h e l p from bank supervisors, financial economists, and

World Bank staff, we developed and implemented an extensive survey. 4 We had bank

regulatory officials complete the survey—and often had several officials from the same

country complete the survey in order to verify the consistency of responses. Survey I

covered 118 countries, included over 300 questions, and was mostly completed in

1999. 5 For the second survey, we extended and revised the questionnaire based on input

from World Bank staff, country officials, and academics. The World Bank released

Survey II in 2003, which provides information on bank regulatory and supervisory

policies in 2002. Survey II includes information from 151 counties covering over 400

questions. Survey III was posted on the World Bank’s website in the summer of 2007,


3
  Available at http://zapatopi.net/kelvin/quotes/
4
  We sometimes use the term “regulation” to describe a wide-array of banking policies and compliance mechanisms.
5
  The responses to the survey were received in 1998 through 2000, but the majority of the answers refer to policies
in the year 1999.
                                           3
and it provides information on banking policies in 2006 for 142 countries. In these first

three surveys, we were extensively involved in writing the questionnaire, implementing

the survey, and assembling the data. For Survey IV, we played a less prominent role in

managing the survey. 6 Specifically, we helped the World Bank conduct a major revision

of the questionnaire, but we did not implement the survey. Released in 2012, Survey IV

provides information on banking policies in 125 countries for 2011. Overall, the

surveys cover 180 countries, although the number varies from one survey to the next as

already indicated.

        The dataset that we make available online differs from the survey responses

posted by the World Bank in two key regards. 7 First, we devote considerable effort to

identifying and resolving inconsistencies and missing values by reviewing each of the

four surveys individually and by considering the time-series of answers for each

country. For example, there are cases when a country provides the same information

about a technical regulatory rule in Surveys I, II, and IV, but provides a different

answer for Survey III, or a country provides the same answers in Surveys I, III, and IV,

but gives a different response for Survey II. In such cases, we examine country

documents and websites to assess whether there is any reason for such odd changes and

reversals in policies to assess whether this represents a coding mistake or an actual

change in policy. As another example, for each missing data entry, we reviewed

6
  More specifically, the survey was coordinated by the World Bank's María Soledad Martínez Pería and Martin
Cihak, with input from numerous bank regulation experts both inside and outside the World Bank. PKF (U.K.) and
Auxilium helped with compiling and following up on the survey responses. The survey was financed in part with
support from the U.K. Department for International Development (DFID).
7
  Our dataset is posted at http://faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/ross_levine/Regulation.htm.
The World Bank posts the data from survey IV at
http://econ.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTDEC/EXTGLOBALFINREPORT/0,,contentMDK:23267421
~pagePK:64168182~piPK:64168060~theSitePK:8816097,00.html.
The World Bank posts the data for earlier years at
http://econ.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTDEC/EXTRESEARCH/0,,contentMDK:20345037~pagePK:
64214825~piPK:64214943~theSitePK:469382,00.html.
                                           4
national publications and contacted national regulatory officials in an effort to complete

the dataset to a greater degree. Although we are certain that the resultant dataset is less

than perfect, we believe this review process has yielded a more comprehensive and

accurate set of data.

       The second, and perhaps more important, dimension along which our data differs

from the survey responses posted by the World Bank involves the construction of

indexes. For each of the four surveys, we provide summary indexes of major categories

of bank regulatory and supervisory policies. This is crucial because of the size of the

surveys. There are hundreds of questions in each survey, many with sub-questions and

sub-components of those sub-questions. As a result, there are limitations to formulating

sound impressions about either cross-country differences in policies or cross-time

changes in policies from the raw survey data. Consequently, besides providing the

answers to all the individual survey questions, we aggregate the responses to individual

questions into indexes that summarize notable aspects of bank regulation and

supervision. We construct indexes of policies on capital, ownership, the activities of

banks, the entry of new banks, the powers of supervisors, the ability of private investors

to monitor bank behavior and to govern banks, deposit insurance features, loan

classification and provisioning practices, and many other areas of bank regulation and

supervision. The result of this effort is the construction of more than 50 indexes. We

provide a detailed description of the construction of the indexes in the online dataset.

       The dataset also provides information on the organization of regulatory agencies

and the size and structure of the overall banking system. We document whether there is

a single regulator or multiple regulators and whether countries authorize their central

banks to play a key role in bank supervision. We also document the size of each
                                          5
country’s banking system, the concentration of the system, and the role of government

owned and foreign owned banks and how these characteristics have changed over time.

The dataset, therefore, facilitates analyses of the relationships among the organization

of national banking authorities, the details of financial regulation and supervision, and

the size and structure of the banking system. Moreover, researchers can easily combine

these data with other datasets to explore the factors that explain banking sector policies,

and the consequences of those policies for a variety of outcomes.

       Besides describing the data, this paper provides a wealth of cross-country and

cross-time comparisons. We analyze changes in bank regulatory and supervisory

practices over time, examine the degree to which banking policies have converged

across countries, and document how the organization of bank regulatory authorities and

the size and structure of the banking system differ around the world. Although there is

some convergence along some dimensions of bank regulation, there remains substantial

heterogeneity in policies, organization, and structure.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II provides an

overview of the survey. Section III discusses the indices of bank regulatory and

supervisory policies regarding permissible bank activities, capital requirements , the

powers of the official supervisory entities, transparency, private monitoring, and

external governance of banks, deposit insurance schemes, barriers to entry, loan

provisioning. Section III also examines the extent to which bank regulations and

supervisory practices have been converging across countries during the tumultuous

period since 1999. Section IV concludes.



II. An Overview of the Survey Data
                                           6
       The extensive database on bank regulation and supervision (presented in the online

dataset http://faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/ross_levine/Regulation.htm) is based on four surveys

conducted by the World Bank. Appendix table 1 contains the entire list of questions from Survey

IV, while the online dataset contains the questions for each of the four surveys. As noted above,

the surveys pose questions on a wide array of bank regulatory and supervisory policies. These

include: entry into commercial banking, ownership of bank restrictions, capital standards,

allowable activities for banks, external auditing requirements, governance of banks, liquidity and

diversification requirements, deposit protection schemes, asset classification and provisioning

practices, accounting and information disclosure requirements, supervisory powers associated for

dealing with banks in financial duress, and the structure, mandate, staffing, and procedures of

supervisory agencies. In addition, some information is available on the characteristics of banking

systems, and Survey IV obtains new information on efforts designed to enable regulators to

better address issues of systemic risk and consumer protection regulations in banking.

       The surveys cover a broad cross-section of countries. Figure 1 illustrates the countries

that responded to the various surveys, and Appendix table 2 provides detailed information on

those that responded to each of the surveys. Appendix table 3 lists the countries that responded to

Survey IV, sorting them by region and per capita GDP levels. It is clear that coverage is fairly

good, with countries represented from all parts of the world and all levels of income. The fewest

number of countries responding are in the lower income category with small populations. For the

four surveys, 118 countries responded to Survey I, 151 countries responded to Survey II and 143

countries responded to both Surveys III and IV. Of these countries, 73 of them responded to all

four surveys. Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001, 2006, and 2008) assess the results of Survey I

through III, while Martinez-Peria and Cihak (2012) discuss some of the data from Survey IV.
                                              7
         Before defining and reviewing the bank regulation and supervision data, we begin in

Table 1 by documenting cross-country differences in key banking system indicators, using

Survey IV for illustrative purposes. As shown, Table 1 provides information on banking system

size, the number of banks, the proportion of banking assets in government owned banks (where a

bank is considered government owned if 50 percent or more of the shares are controlled by the

government), the proportion of banking assets in foreign owned banks, the number of official

bank supervisors per bank in the country, and the percent of the ten largest banks in a country

that are rated by one of the major international ratings agencies.

         For many of the banking system indicators depicted in Table 1, the range of variation is

impressive. Some examples will illustrate this point. Luxemburg has the highest ratio of bank

assets-to-GDP at a striking 1,942 percent, while Iraq has the lowest ratio at 18 percent.8 These

figures are not surprising given that Luxemburg is a very small country with internationally

active banks, whereas Iraq is still recovering from a recent war. The share of bank assets that is

foreign owned ranges from a high of 100 percent in several offshore financial centers to 0

percent in Ethiopia. In the case of government ownership of bank assets, the share ranges from 0

percent for several countries to 74 percent in India (China did not respond to this question, but

available information indicates the figure exceeds 90 percent. In the 2007 survey China did

respond and reported the share was slightly less than 70 percent, but this only captured the four

big state owned banks. The figure exceeds 90 percent even earlier if one includes all state or

government owned banks). Banking density also seems to vary to an astonishing degree, though

much less so once one removes offshore banking centers, such as the Cayman Islands, the Isle of


8
  One problem that arises when comparing bank assets across countries is that different countries may use different
accounting standards. As appendix table 7 shows, most countries use International Financial Reporting Standards
(IFRS), while only 6 use U.S. GAAP. When one converts U.S. bank assets from U.S. GAAP to IFRS, total bank
assets increase by roughly $5 trillion in 2012, which is largely due to measuring derivatives on a gross rather than
net basis (see Barth and Prabha, 2012). The biggest effect that different accounting standards will have in measuring
a country’s bank assets is likely to be in the United States, and even then concentrated at the biggest banks, which
account for the bulk of all derivatives.
                                           8
Man, and Seychelles. The median number of banks per 100,000 people is 0.4, with the lowest

figure being 0.01 for India. Large banks control a substantial share of bank assets, with the

median share of the top five banks being 73 percent, and yet although most or all big banks are

audited by international (so it is hoped, more arms-length) firms, in a distressing number of cases

no large banks are so audited, such as in Botswana and Iceland.

       Besides providing a snapshot of the structure of banking systems in 2011, the data also

illustrate the evolution of banking systems since 1999. As shown in Figure 2, many countries

have experienced rapid growth in the ratio of bank assets to GDP from Survey I (1999) to Survey

IV (2011). Figure 2 provides information on all countries for which there are data for both

Surveys I and IV. In Figure 2, we graph all countries with greater than 1 percent growth from

Survey I to Survey IV in the left panel and all countries with less than -1 percent growth in the

right panel. In 44 countries the ratio increased, while it decreased in 8 countries. Figure 3 shows

the maximum ratio of bank assets to GDP for each country across all four surveys and the survey

when this maximum occurred. It is also seen in the figure that most of countries reported the

highest ratio in Survey IV.

       Bank concentration and ownership have also changed materially. We again illustrate

changes in concentration and ownership between Survey I and Survey IV for all countries that

have information for both surveys. Figure 4’s right panel shows that some countries have

experienced sharp reductions in bank concentration, which is measured by the share of assets in

the five largest banks. Most of the countries that experienced these pronounced reductions in

concentration have small financial systems. Figure 4’s left panel shows even more countries

experienced notable increases in concentration, including Germany, Malaysia, Turkey, Spain,

Italy, Brazil, Chile, Australia, South Korea, Canada, and the United States. Across all countries

that provided data on bank concentration for Survey I and Survey IV, the average level of bank
                                              9
concentration was 66 percent in Survey I and 70 percent in Survey IV, indicating a 4 percentage

point increase in average bank concentration.

       In many countries, state ownership of banks also changed appreciably between Survey I

and Survey IV, where state ownership is defined as the proportion of banking assets in

government owned banks (where a bank is considered government owned if 50 percent or more

of system’s assets are owned by the government). Figure 5 shows that a substantial number of

countries experienced large decreases in state ownership, especially in such big countries as

Germany, India, and Russia, where state ownership was particularly large in 1999. As with all of

the figures, we include those countries with data in both Survey I and Survey IV. A number of

countries also reported large increases in the share of bank assets controlled by state owned

banks. The most striking case is the United Kingdom with an increasing share amounting to 26

percent in 2010, due to the bailout of the Royal Bank of Scotland in 2008, while the

corresponding share was 0 percent in the first survey. For those countries with data on state

ownership of banks for both Survey I and Survey IV, the average percentage of total bank assets

in state owned banks was 21 percent in 1999 and 15 percent in 2011.

       One of the most significant changes, and one that has greatly complicated the world of

bank regulation and supervision, is the dramatic increase in the share of total bank assets in

foreign owned banks, as shown in Figure 6. The share of total bank assets in foreign owned

banks is defined as the proportion of banking assets in foreign owned banks, where a bank is

considered foreign owned if 50 percent or more of system’s assets are foreign owned. From

Survey I to Survey IV, 76 percent of the countries experienced an increase in the share of bank

assets in foreign owned banks. Across all countries that provided data for both surveys, the

average percentage of bank assets in foreign owned banks was 47 percent in 2011, up from 29
                                              10
percent in 1999.     This substantial increase emphasizes the importance of cross-country

coordination in the resolution of big banks that operate globally.

       Beyond these general characteristics of banking systems, there are also cross-country

differences in the organization of bank regulatory and supervisory institutions. Tables 2-4

provide information on whether countries have single or multiple supervisory authorities for

commercial banks, whether the bank supervisor is in the central bank or a separate agency (or

both, in the case of multiple supervisors), and whether there is a single financial supervisor for

the entire financial system, respectively. Table 2 shows that the vast majority of countries have a

single bank supervisory authority: 126 countries have a single bank supervisory authority, while

only ten have multiple authorities, including the United States.

       Table 3 provides information on whether the central bank is a bank supervisory authority.

It is seen that in 89 countries the central bank is the only such authority. In contrast, in 38

countries the central bank is not a supervisory authority at all. The remaining 9 countries that

provide information indicate that the central bank is one among multiple supervisors, with the

United States being one of these countries.

       Since banks are not the only financial firms, information was also requested as to whether

a country has a single financial supervisory authority or multiple authorities. Table 4 provides

information on the scope of coverage by financial supervisory authorities in countries. In 101

countries there are multiple authorities covering the financial sector, while in 25 countries there

is a single authority covering the entire financial sector. Most of the countries with a single

authority are relatively small in terms of both population and GDP.



III. Aggregating the Data: The Art and Science of Forming Indices
                                             11
       There are formidable conceptual challenges to aggregating the information contained in

the answers to detailed questions from the surveys into meaningful and usable measures of bank

regulatory and supervisory practices. While fully aware of the challenges, we have formulated a

set of indexes with the goals of measuring major features of each country’s regulatory and

supervisory regime and gauging how these features have evolved over time. Table 5 shows a full

list of variables in the dataset with the definition, quantification, and specific questions for each

variable.

       In the paper, we describe some of the indexes and provide some cross-country and time-

series comparisons. In the online data file, we show precisely how each aggregate index is

constructed from the individual components of the survey. We also organize the data file, so that

it is easy for researchers to construct their own indexes from the individual responses.



III. A. Scope of Bank Activities and Financial Conglomerate Variables

       National regulators license banks and specify permissible activities. Countries may

restrict banks to a narrow range of activities, or allow them to engage in a broad array. Since the

scope of activities helps define what is meant by a “bank” and since the scope of permissible

activities differs across countries, banks are not the same across countries. Furthermore, bank

regulations define the extent to which banks and nonbanks may combine to form financial (i.e.,

bank and nonbank financial) or mixed (i.e., bank and nonbank nonfinancial) conglomerates.

       From the survey questions, we construct indexes of the degree to which national

regulations restrict banks from engaging in (1) securities activities, (2) insurance activities, and

(3) real estate activities. More specifically, securities activities refers to securities underwriting,

brokering, dealing, and all aspects of the mutual fund industry. Insurance activities involve

insurance underwriting and selling. And real estate activities refer to real estate investment,
                                          12
development, and management. The index values for securities, insurance, and real estate range

from 1 to 4, where larger values indicate more restrictions on banks performing each activity. In

particular, 4 signifies prohibited, 3 indicates that there are tight restrictions on the provision of

the activity, 2 means that the activity is permitted but with some limits, and 1 signals that the

activity is permitted.

        For each of these three bank activity indexes, Figure 7 provides information on the

distribution of countries by the degree of restrictiveness for Survey I and Survey IV. The data

file contains this information by country for all four surveys. The figure shows that securities

activities are the least restricted of the bank activities, while real estate activities are the most

restricted. Focusing on Survey IV, only 9 of 124 countries actually prohibit banks from engaging

in securities activities. In contrast, 42 countries prohibit them from engaging in real estate

activities. With respect to insurance, 19 countries prohibit banks from engaging in this type of

activity. Guyana and Uganda are the only countries that completely prohibit banks from

engaging in all three activities (securities, insurance, and real estate). However, 12 other

countries either completely prohibit or put specific some restrictions on all of these activities.

        As illustrated, there is great cross-country variability in the degree to which countries

restrict banks from engaging in different activities. The regulatory notion of a bank, therefore,

differs markedly across countries — and, this definition changes over time within the same

country, which is also illustrated in Figure 7. For example, Kosovo, Moldova, Slovakia, United

Arab Emirates and Uruguay prohibit insurance and real estate activities but allow unrestricted

securities activities, while three countries grant banks unrestricted securities, insurance, and real

estate powers – Hong Kong, Jersey and Switzerland. All of these countries, moreover, have a

single bank supervisory authority.
                                             13
       We also constructed two indexes of the degree to which national regulations (1) restrict

banks from owning nonfinancial firms and (2) restrict nonfinancial firms from owning banks.

These particular regulations are quite important and, needless to say, controversial. Figure 7

shows that the degree of overall financial conglomerates restrictiveness displays substantial

variation across countries. Based on Survey IV, bank ownership of nonfinancial firms is more

restricted than nonfinancial firm ownership of banks. About 30 percent of the countries prohibit

bank ownership of nonfinancial firms, whereas only one of 124 countries prohibits ownership of

banks by nonfinancial firms. Fifteen percent of the countries, including the U.S., restrict the

mixing of banking and commerce.

       Comparing Survey IV to Survey I, Figure 7 shows that there was a substantial increase in

the number of countries prohibiting bank ownership of nonfinancial firms, an increase to 38 from

8. The opposite is the case for prohibiting banks from engaging in insurance activities, with a

decrease to 19 countries from 40. There was not much of a change with respect to regulatory

restrictions for the other variables in the figure over the thirteen year period from Survey I to

Survey IV. Overall, it seems that most countries allow some co-mingling of bank and non-

financial firms.

       We also construct an index of the overall restrictions on bank activities that measures the

extent to which a bank can both engage in securities, insurance, and real estate activities and own

nonfinancial firms. We include restrictions on banks owning nonfinancial firms in this overall

index of because regulations on the extent to which banks may own nonfinancial firms affects

the ability of a bank to diversify revenue streams and is therefore similar in some ways to the

regulatory restrictions on other activities. Based on four of the indexes defined above, this index

of overall restrictions on bank activities can potentially range from 4 to 16, with higher numbers

indicating greater restrictiveness.
                                             14
       Figure 8 provides information on the change in the index of overall restrictions on bank

activities from Survey I to Survey IV. Positive numbers indicate an increase in restrictions. As

with many features of bank regulation and supervision, there is great cross-country

heterogeneity. Of the countries in the figure, 43 of them increased restrictions and 36 countries

decreased restrictions. In the case of another 18 countries there was no change. The country that

increased restrictions the most was Seychelles, while the country that decreased restrictions the

most was Romania. For those countries with data used to construct index of overall restrictions

on bank activities for both Survey I and Survey IV, the average index value goes from 7.4 down

to 7.2, which means that on average countries decreased overall restrictions from 1999 to 2011.

       We also examine whether countries tightened or eased the overall restrictions on bank

activities following the global financial crisis. This is done by comparing the index values for

Survey III and IV. Table 6 shows that 80 percent of the countries tightened such restrictions

following the crisis.




III. B. Capital Regulations

       Capital regulations represent a mainstay of banking sector policies around the world.

Many rules and policies determine the precise amount and nature of capital that banks must hold.

In terms of the amount of capital, this is typically characterized in terms of the ratio of capital to

total banks assets. In terms of the nature of capital, there are policies concerning the definition of

capital beyond cash or government securities, the definition and valuation of bank assets, and

whether the regulatory and supervisory authorities verify the sources of capital.

       We construct indexes of the stringency of bank capital regulations that measure the

amount of capital banks must hold and the stringency of regulations on the nature and source of

regulatory capital. It is composed of the answers from specific survey questions: (1) Is the
                                               15
capital-asset ratio risk weighted in line with the Basle I guidelines? (2) Does the minimum

capital-asset ratio vary as a function of an individual bank’s credit risk? (3) Does the minimum

capital-asset ratio vary as a function of market risk? (4) Before minimum capital adequacy is

determined, which of the following are deducted from the book value of capital? Market value of

loan losses not realized in accounting books? Unrealized losses in securities portfolios? Or

unrealized foreign exchange losses? (5) What fraction of revaluation gains is allowed as part of

capital? (6) Are the sources of funds to be used as capital verified by the regulatory/supervisory

authorities? (7) Can the initial disbursement or subsequent injections of capital be done with

assets other than cash or government securities? and (8) Can initial disbursement of capital be

done with borrowed funds? Larger values of this index of bank capital regulation indicate more

stringent capital regulation. The maximum possible value is 10, while the minimum possible

value is 0. Figure 9 indicates the change in the index of bank capital regulations from Surveys I

to IV, where positive numbers indicate an increase in restrictions on bank capital. Of the 107

countries, 65 increased the stringency of capital regulation, 28 decreased them, and 14 made no

changes.

        Since Survey IV covers the period after the emergence of the global financial crisis and

the introduction of Basel III, we compare capital regulation before and after the crisis by

examining the change in the capital regulatory restrictions index from Survey III to Survey IV.

Table 7 shows that 79 percent of the countries increased the stringency of their capital

regulations following the crisis, including the United States. Note, however, that at least up to the

time of the latest survey, Austria, Mexico and the United Kingdom had reduced the stringency of

their capital regulations in the aftermath of the crisis.



III. C. Official Supervisory Power
                                            16
       An important aspect of supervision is whether the supervisory authorities possess the

power to obtain information from banks and take an assortment of actions to change the behavior

of banks based on the assessments of the official supervisory authority. In some cases, the

authorities might even be required to take corrective action to address a problem, and in other

cases the authorities may have the discretionary power to act as they see fit. Courts, moreover,

may intervene in some instances and thereby limit, delay or even reverse actions taken by the

supervisory authorities, but in other cases, the courts have less power over the regulatory and

supervisory agencies.

       We construct an index of official supervisory power to measure the degree to which the

country’s bank supervisory agency has the authority to take specific actions. It is composed of

the answers from specific survey questions: (1) Does the supervisory agency have the right to

meet with external auditors about banks? (2) Are auditors required to communicate directly to

the supervisory agency about elicit activities, fraud, or insider abuse? (3) Can supervisors take

legal action against external auditors for negligence? (4) Can the supervisory authority force a

bank to change its internal organizational structure? (5) Are off-balance sheet items disclosed to

supervisors? (6) Can the supervisory agency order the bank’s directors or management to

constitute provisions to cover actual or potential losses? (7) Can the supervisory agency suspend

the directors’ decision to distribute (a) dividends, (b) bonuses, and (c) management fees? (8) Can

the supervisory agency supersede the rights of bank shareholders and declare a bank insolvent?

(9) Can the supervisory agency suspend some or all ownership rights? (10) Can the supervisory

agency (a) supersede shareholder rights, (b) remove and replace management, and (c) remove

and replace directors? The official supervisory index has a maximum value of 14 and a minimum

value of 0, where larger numbers indicate greater power.
                                                17
        Figure 10 indicates the change in the index of official supervisory powers from Surveys I

to IV, where positive numbers indicate an increase in such powers. On balance, slightly more

countries weakened the powers of their official supervisory agencies than strengthened those

powers. A number of countries indicated no change, including the United States. One might

think that whether a country weakens or strengthens official supervisory powers would be

important for helping predict whether banks would operate safely and soundly. However, an

increase in supervisory power was not found to be helpful in promoting bank development,

performance, or stability in our earlier work (Barth, Caprio, and Levine, 2006). Indeed, we found

that in countries with weak democratic institutions, official supervisory power was associated

with increased corruption in the lending process with no corresponding beneficial effects on

stability.

        To determine whether countries tightened increased or decreased official supervisory

powers following the global financial crisis, we compare the index values for Survey III and IV.

Somewhat surprisingly, Table 8 shows that 45 percent of the countries decreased such powers.

        The surveys also provide information on whether supervisory authorities must report as

well as take mandatory actions when they identify infractions of prudential regulations. Table 9

provides information in this regard. It is interesting that 127 countries indicate that infractions

must be reported when found, while in only 11 countries is this not the case. The number of

countries that require mandatory actions to be taken when infractions are found is 105, while 33

countries do not require mandatory actions. Israel is a country that neither requires the reporting

of infractions nor mandatory actions when they are found. The United Kingdom and the United

States both require the reporting of infractions, but of these two countries, only the United States

requires mandatory actions. The table also provides information on whether supervisors are
                                               18
legally liable for their actions. Only 23 countries report that this is the case, whereas in 118

countries supervisors are not held liable.



III. D. Private Monitoring and External Governance

III. D. 1 Private Monitoring

       Regulatory and supervisory policies can also shape the incentives and ability of private

investors to monitor and exert effective governance over banks. For example, the degree to

which supervisory agencies require banks to obtain certified audits and/or ratings from

international-rating agencies and disseminate accurate, comprehensive and consolidated

information on the full range of their activities and risk-management procedures may influence

the quality of private sector scrutiny of banks. To the extent that national regulatory and

supervisory authorities make bank directors legally liable if information is erroneous or

misleading might similarly influence the quality of information provided by banks to private

investors and hence the ability of those investors to monitor and govern banks. And, the

incentives of private investor to obtain and process information and then exert governance over

bank executives will surely be shaped by the degree to which countries have either credibly

demonstrated that they will not bailout investors of failed banks or indicated their willingness to

protect those investors. Thus, private monitoring is not simply an absence of regulations and

supervision. Official supervisory policies also shape private monitoring by forcing information

disclosure and defining the liability and hence incentives of private investors.

       We construct an index of private monitoring to examine the degree to which regulatory

and supervisory policies encourage the private monitoring of banks that builds on an array of

individual questions contained in the survey. Specifically, the private monitoring index is

composed of information on (1) whether bank directors and officials are legally liable for the
                                             19
accuracy of information disclosed to the public, (2) whether banks must publish consolidated

accounts, (3) whether banks must be audited by certified international auditors, (4) whether 100

percent of the largest 10 banks are rated by international rating agencies, (5) whether off-balance

sheet items are disclosed to the public, (6) whether banks must disclose their risk management

procedures to the public, (7) whether accrued, though unpaid interest/principal, enter the income

statement while the loan is still non-performing, (8) whether subordinated debt is allowable as

part of capital, and (9) whether there is no explicit deposit insurance system and no insurance

was paid the last time a bank failed. Thus, the maximum value of the private monitoring index is

12 and the minimum value is 0, where larger values indicate greater regulatory empowerment of

the monitoring of banks by private investors.

       Figure 11 indicates the change in the index of private monitoring from Survey I to IV.

Positive values in this figure indicate that private monitoring strengthened over time, while

negative values signify a reduction in the degree to which official policies support the monitoring

of banks by private investors. As shown, there is great diversity in terms of whether regulations

associated with private monitoring have strengthened or weakened. Once again, relatively small

countries such as the Philippines, Finland and Tajikistan were generally those that reduced

private monitoring to the greatest degree, while comparatively large countries like France, India

and the United States increased it the most. On average, there was a slight increase in private

monitoring, such that average value of the private monitoring index was 7.7 in 1999 and it was

7.9 in 2011.

       To determine whether countries increased or decreased private monitoring powers

following the global financial crisis, we compare the index values for Survey III and IV. Table

10 shows that about half of the countries increased such powers, with the other half decreased
                                             20
the extent to which official regulatory and supervisory policies encourage and facilitate the

monitoring of banks by private investors.



III. D. 2 External Governance

       Building on the Private Monitoring index, we construct a broader index of the degree to

which regulations facilitate external governance by debt and equity holders. The index is

composed of the answers from specific survey questions: (1) Is an audit by a professional

external auditor required for all commercial banks in your jurisdiction? (2) Are specific

requirements for the extent or nature of the audit spelled out? (3) Are auditors licensed or

certified? (4) Do supervisors get a copy of the auditor’s report? (5) Does the supervisory agency

have the right to meet with external auditors to discuss their report without the approval of the

bank? (6) Are auditors required by law to communicate directly to the supervisory agency any

presumed involvement of bank directors or senior managers in illicit activities, fraud, or insider

abuse? (7) Can supervisors take legal action against external auditors for negligence? (8) Does

accrued, though unpaid, interest/principal enter the income statement while the loan is still

performing? (9) Are financial institutions required to produce consolidated accounts covering all

bank and any non-bank financial subsidiaries? (10) Are off-balance sheet items disclosed to the

public? (11) Must banks disclose their risk management procedures to the public? (12) Are bank

directors legally liable if information disclosed is erroneous or misleading? (13) Does accrued,

though unpaid, interest/principal enter the income statement while the loan is still non-

performing? (14) Are accounting practices for banks in accordance with International

Accounting Standards (IAS)? (15) Are accounting practices for banks in accordance with U.S.

Generally Accepted Accounting Standards (GAAS)? (16) Is subordinated debt allowable as part

of capital? (17) Is subordinated debt required as part of capital? (18) Do regulations require
                                           21
credit ratings for commercial banks? (19) What percentage of the top ten banks is rated by

international credit rating agencies (e.g., Moody's, Standard and Poor’s)? and (20) How many of

the top ten banks are rated by domestic credit rating agencies? The values of the external

governance index range from 0 to 19, with higher values indicating a great degree of external

governance.

       Figure 12 indicates the change in the index of external governance from Survey I to IV,

where the positive values indicate an increase of external governance. Of the 42 countries

providing data for both Survey I and Survey IV, 37 tightened external governance, 3 (Malaysia,

Panama, and Fiji) eased it, and 2 (Argentina and Finland) made no changes. On average, the

index values increased from 12.6 in 1999 to 15.3 in 2011.We then examine how counties

changed their external governance following the recent banking crisis. Table 11 shows

information of countries with data available for both Survey I and IV. Of 33 countries, 22

tightened external governance, and 11 eased it from 1999 to 2011.



III. E. Explicit Deposit Insurance Schemes

       Policies associated with insuring the deposits of banks may also shape the performance of

banking systems. Countries often adopt deposit insurance to prevent bank runs. When depositors

attempt to withdraw their funds all at once, some illiquid but solvent individual banks may be

forced into insolvency and there is also the potential for contagious bank runs on otherwise

healthy banks. Thus, many countries enact deposit insurance schemes to reduce the probability

of systemic crises. But, deposit insurance can encourage excessive risk-taking by banks by

reducing the incentives of depositors to monitor bank executives and curtail excessive risk

taking. Thus, the precise design of deposit insurance schemes, including coverage limits, scope
                                          22
of coverage, whether coinsurance is a feature, sources of funding, premia structure, and

management and membership requirements, may materially shape bank and depositor behavior.

        We construct an index of deposit insurer power to measure each country’s deposit

insurance regime and to trace its evolution from 1999 to 2011. In particular, the deposit

insurance index is composed of the following individual questions from the surveys: (1) Does the

deposit insurance agency/fund administrator have the bank intervention authority as part of its

mandate? (2) Does the deposit insurance authority by itself have the legal power to cancel or

revoke deposit insurance for any participating bank? (3) Can the deposit insurance agency/fund

take legal action for violations against laws, regulations, and bylaws (of the deposit insurance

agency) against bank directors or other bank officials? and (4) Has the deposit insurance

agency/fund ever taken legal action for violations against laws, regulations, and bylaws (of the

deposit insurance agency) against bank directors or other bank officials? The values of the

deposit insurance index range from 0 to 4, with higher values indicating more power.

        Figure 13 indicates the change in the index of deposit insurance from Surveys I to IV.

The positive numbers indicate an increase of deposit insurance power. There are 75 countries

providing data for both Surveys I and IV. Of these countries, 22 increased the power and 18

decrease it, while 35 countries made no changes. On average, there was a very slight increase in

deposit insurance power, such that the average value of the index was 1.06 in 1999 and 1.08 in

2011.

        As Table 12 shows, 98 of the 143 countries responding to Survey IV had established a

deposit insurance protection system for banks. Such schemes are most common among high-

income countries and least common among low-income countries. The table also shows that

there are a number of differences in (1) whether participation by banks is compulsory and (2) the

scope of coverage. Of the countries providing data, 95 require domestic banks to participate,
                                           23
while 86 (62) also require foreign bank subsidiaries (foreign bank branches) to participate.

Roughly three-fourths of the countries provide coverage for foreign currency deposits but at the

same time exclude interbank deposits. The most common type of deposit insurance coverage is

per depositor per institution rather than per depositor or per depositor account.

       We next examine how countries changed their deposit insurance regimes following the

recent banking crisis. Since Survey III provides information just before the global financial crisis

and Survey IV provides similar information right after the crisis fully emerged, we provide

information on whether or not changes were made in the coverage provided by the deposit

insurance system in selected advanced countries. All these countries suffered a banking crisis,

which makes it useful to determine whether any important changes were made in their deposit

insurance schemes. Table 13 shows that four countries that reported that they had a formal

coinsurance feature as part of their deposit insurance schemes prior to the global financial crisis

eliminated this feature in 2011. In addition, two countries that had not had deposit insurance fees

based on some assessment of risk made a switch to include them from Survey III to Survey IV,

while one country did the reverse.

       An additional point that should be made before concluding this section is the resolution

of insolvent banks. To the extent that a bank is a subsidiary of a holding company, an issue that

arises is whether the deposit insurance supervisory authority or other regulatory authority is able

to seize the holding company or just a subsidiary bank. In the United States, the regulatory

authorities have been only able to seize and resolve subsidiary banks, not the parent holding

companies, until the passage of the Dodd-Frank Act in 2010. In this case, insolvent banks were

seized and resolved by the regulatory authorities, while the parent holding companies were

handled by bankruptcy courts. Information provided by Survey IV indicates that in 73 countries
                                           24
the insolvency framework is the same for holding companies and banks, but different in 59

countries.



III. F. Restrictions on Entry into Banking

       The degree of competition in banking depends importantly on entry barriers. Regulators

in most countries do not allow just anyone to enter the banking system, but rather screen entrants

to better assure they are “fit and proper.” By imposing the fairly basic requirements identified

above before a banking license is accepted or rejected, those allowed to enter may be of higher

quality and thereby enhance the overall performance of the banking industry.

       We construct an entry into banking index to measure each country’s requirements of

entering into banking and to trace its evolution from 1999 to 2011. In particular, this index is

based on whether or not the following information is required of applicants for a banking license:

(1) Draft by-laws; (2) Intended organizational chart; (3) Financial projections for first three

years; (4) Financial information on main potential shareholders; (5) Background/experience of

future directors; (6) Background/experience of future managers; (7) Sources of funds to be used

to capitalize the new bank; and (8) Market differentiation intended for the new bank. The values

of the index of entry into banking range from 0 to 8, with higher values indicating greater

stringency.

       Figure 14 identifies the change in the index of entry into banking from Survey I to IV.

The selected countries are the ones providing data both for Survey I and IV. Among the 136

countries, 35 countries increased the entry into banking requirements, 16 decreased the

requirements, and 85 countries did not make changes. On average, there was a slight increase in

entry into banking requirements, such that the average value of the index was 7.5 in 1999 and it

was 7.8 in 2011.
                                                25


III. G. Additional information

       Clearly, the number of questions asked in all four surveys is far too large to provide an

adequate discussion of all of them in this paper. Indeed, it took over 100 pages in our book

(Barth, Caprio, and Levine, 2006, Chapter 3) that focused only on Survey I to describe the data.

The online dataset that we make available, however, provides details on each question in each

survey, the formulas for constructing each of the indexes discussed above, and all of the

information on several other indexes of bank regulation and supervision. Thus, this paper

provides an introduction to the online dataset, but is not a complete description of every aspect of

these data.

       To provide additional summary information on Survey IV and advertise the enormous

heterogeneity of bank regulatory and supervisory policies across countries, Appendix Tables 4

and 5 and Table 14 give the values of key regulatory and supervisory policies for different cuts

of the data. The minimum and maximum values in Appendix Table 4 are useful because they

help indicate whether an item is measured as an index, in days, as a percentage or as a pure

number. This table shows that there is substantial variation in the values of the different items

across the various countries, with the number of countries providing information also indicated.

Appendix Table 5 provides the average values for the same items included in the Appendix

Table 4 with the countries grouped into different categories based on income level, development

status and whether or not an offshore center. Table 14 further advertises the lack of uniformity in

various regulations and supervisory practices in countries around the world.



III. H. Some new information in Survey IV

       Survey IV contains all the questions in the three earlier surveys that are necessary to

construct the indices discussed earlier as well as other indices discussed more fully in Barth,
                                           26
Caprio, and Levine (2006) and provided in the online dataset. In addition, the latest survey

includes some new and important questions that were asked due to the global financial crisis. In

particular, given the concern over systemic risk, questions are added to determine what countries

are doing in an effort designed to better assess systemic risk within the banking sector. Of 133

countries, 90 of them indicate that they have a specialized department dealing with financial

stability and systemic supervision, while the remaining 43 reported they do not have such a

department. Countries in which these departments exist include Austria, Belgium, France,

Greece, Ireland, the Netherlands, Spain, and the United Kingdom. Denmark, Switzerland and the

United States report not having established a specialized department dealing with financial

stability and systemic supervision.

       Figure 15 shows the factors that countries consider in assessing systemic risk within the

banking sector. The factor that regulators in the most countries consider is bank capital ratios

(113), while the least mentioned factor is stock market prices (46). Countries that report that all

of the factors are considered include Austria, Iceland, the Netherlands, Portugal, the United

Kingdom and the United States. These are advanced countries that suffered a banking crisis.

Some other advanced economies that suffered a banking crisis, like France, Germany and

Ireland, do not indicate that they consider any of the factors indicated in the figure.

       There are still other new questions asked in Survey IV that are important, especially

given the most recent global financial crisis. Some of the questions as well as the number of

countries responding and their collective answers are reported in Table 15. These questions focus

on external auditors, remuneration or compensation, insolvency framework for bank holding

companies and banks, stress tests, counter-cyclical regulations, and the supervision of the

systemic institutions verses non-systemic ones. Once again, there is in most cases a substantial

divergence from uniformity in the answers. Focusing on just the advanced countries listed in
                                          27
Table 12, Austria, Germany, and Switzerland report that supervisors delegate part of their

supervisory tasks to external auditors, whereas France, Spain, the United Kingdom and the

United States do not. All of these advanced countries report that remuneration or compensation

is evaluated as part of the supervisory process to ensure that they do not lead to excessive risk

taking, with the exception of Belgium as regards the board of directors. The same countries,

moreover, all report that they conduct stress tests and do so at the bank level. Six of the 16

countries extend the tests to the system-wide level. The last item to be mentioned here is whether

countries impose any restrictions or limits on the size of banks to address the issue of systemic

risk. Of the 63 countries providing information, only 11 report such size restrictions or limits,

including Iceland and Ireland.

       The last new piece of information that is provided in Survey IV is the statutory corporate

tax rate on domestic bank income. Figure 16 shows the substantial variance in tax rates among

the countries, which range from a low of 0 to a high of 45 percent. Guyana reports the highest

tax rate, while six other countries report that there is no tax imposed on domestic bank income.

As regards the United States, it reports the fifth highest tax rate, with 108 countries reporting

lower tax rates.



III. I. Convergence

       Since Survey I in 1999, national regulatory authorities around the world have met at

various international institutions and conferences. Thus, it is natural to assess whether bank

regulatory and supervisory practices have converged across countries. Though there are many

ways to assess convergence, Table 16 provides some simple summary statistics.

       Table 16 provides information on the degree to which the major bank regulatory survey

indexes that we constructed have tended to converge from Survey I (1999) to Survey IV (2011).
                                             28
We provide information on (i) Overall restrictions on bank activities, (ii) Entry into banking

requirements, (iii) Bank capital regulations, (iv) Official supervisory powers, (v) Private

monitoring, and (vi) External governance. For each index, we only include countries for which

we have data for Survey I and IV. We provide two types of measures of convergence. First, we

simply provide the normalized standard deviation in Survey I and Survey IV for each index.

Second, we assess the number of countries that are x% different from the median value, where x

equals 10%, 25%, 30%, and 50%.

       Although for a few of the indexes, the data suggest material convergence, Table 15 does

not suggest broad-based convergence of bank regulatory and supervisory practices. In particular,

the indexes (i) Entry into banking requirements, (ii) Bank capital regulations, and (iii) External

governance exhibit notable convergence in that there is less divergence across countries in

Survey IV than there is in Survey I. Such convergence is less noticeable in the other regulatory

and supervisory indexes. Overall, as of 2011, there is greater cross-country divergence in bank

regulation and supervision.




IV. Conclusions

       In this paper and the associated online database, we provide a new database on bank

regulatory and supervisory policies in 180 countries that covers the period from 1999 through

2011. This database builds directly on four World Bank surveys of bank regulation and

supervision around the world. The database that we offer differs from the underlying survey data

in two key respects: we address many inconsistencies and missing observations in the core

survey responses and we construct a range of indexes to provide information on key banking

policies. Providing the indexes is crucial for comparing bank regulatory and supervisory policies

across countries and for assessing how these policies change over time because the underlying
                                          29
surveys are enormous and complex. The surveys include hundreds of questions, such that it is

difficult to form impressions of banking sector policies by examining these individual questions

one by one. Thus, we construct summary indexes from the individual questions to measure key

features of the regulatory and supervisory approaches to what banks can do, capital standards,

the powers of official supervisory agencies, regulations on the entry of new banks, the degree to

which the authorities encourage the monitoring of banks by private investors, the nature of the

deposit insurance regime, and an assortment of other policies towards banks.

There is substantial heterogeneity of bank regulatory and supervisory policies across countries.

And, although there has been some convergence over the last dozen years for some types of

banking sector policies, bank regulatory and supervisory policies remain impressively diverse in

2011. This diversity in regulatory regimes provides enormous scope for research examining both

the causes of these policy differences and the impacts of banking policies on the performance of

banks, and the associated ramifications for the overall financial sector and real economy.
                                             30
References

Barth, James R., Gerard Caprio, Jr. and Ross Levine, 2001. “Bank Regulation and Supervision:
        A New Database,” in Robert Litan and Richard Herring, eds., Brookings-Wharton Papers
        on Financial Services.

__________________________________________, 2004. “Bank Regulation and Supervision:
      What Works Best,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, Vol. 12, April, pp. 205-248.

________________________________________, 2006. Rethinking Bank Regulation: Till
      Angels Govern, New York: Cambridge University Press.

_________________________________________, 2008. Bank Regulations are Changing: For
      Better or Worse?” Comparative Economic Studies, December, 50(4), 537-563.

_______________________________________, 2012. Guardians              of   Finance:   Making
      Regulators Work for Us, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Barth, James R., Apanard (Penny) Prabha, 2012. “Breaking (Banks) Up is Hard to Do: New
        Perspective on Too Big To Fail” Wharton Financial Institutions Center Working Paper
        12-16. Available at http://fic.wharton.upenn.edu/fic/papers/12/12-16.pdf

Cihak, Martin, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, Maria Soledad, Martinez Peria, and Amin Mohseni-
       Cheraghlou, 2012. “Bank Regulation and Supervision of Banks Around the World: A
       Crisis Update.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 6286.

Laeven, Luc, Fabian Valencia, 2008. “Systemic Banking Crises: A New Database,” IMF
      Working Paper, No. 224.
                          31

Figure 1: Countries participating in the World Bank Surveys
                                                                             32

                                                              Figure 2: Total bank assets / GDP

           Countries with increasing ratios from Survey I to IV                            Countries with decreasing ratios from Survey I to IV

       Tajikistan
           Ghana                                                                        Argentina
             Peru
         Mexico
      Guatemala
       Botswana
          Nigeria
          Tonga                                                                            Oman
        Moldova
         Gambia
        Romania
     El Salvador
           Nepal
          Poland                                                                         Jamaica
          Russia
            India
  United States
          Brazil
           Chile                                                                        Morocco
     Korea, Rep.
       Mauritius
         Kuwait
       Thailand
        Germany
        Vanuatu                                                                       Philippines
   South Africa
        Slovenia
           Israel
         Canada
       Malaysia
            Italy                                                                       Indonesia
  New Zealand
         Greece
       Denmark
      Venezuela
       Portugal                                                                     Macao, China
       Belgium
         France
          Spain
   Netherlands
   Switzerland
United Kingdom                                                                           Panama
        Cyprus
         Malta
       -100%        100%        300%         500%           700%      900%                -100%      100%       300%        500%       700%       900%
                     Survey I           Survey IV minus I                                               Survey IV         Survey I minus IV
                                                        33
                      Figure 3: Highest total bank assets / GDP ratio based on Surveys I-IV


                                                                                                         6,500%
                Guernsey (II)
             Luxembourg (II)                                                                             3,300%
                    Malta (IV)                                                                           814%
                  Cyprus (IV)
              Singapore (IV)
       United Kingdom (IV)
             Switzerland (III)
                  Ireland (III)
                  Iceland (III)
             Netherlands (III)
                Belgium (III)
                   Panama (I)
                    Spain (IV)
                   France (IV)
                 Austria (IV)
                Lebanon (III)
                Portugal (IV)
           Macao, China (II)
                 Taiwan (IV)
                 Finland (IV)
               Denmark (IV)
               Mauritius (III)
                   Jordan (III)
                  Greece (IV)
                                                                     Survey with highest ratios for
           New Zealand (IV)                                                   countries
                      Italy (IV)
               Malaysia (IV)
                 Canada (IV)                                                    Survey I: 6
                Australia (III)
  Virgin Islands, British (III)                                                 Survey II: 8
               Seychelles (II)                                                 Survey III: 19
                    Israel (IV)
                 Vanuatu (II)                                                  Survey IV: 49
                Slovenia (IV)
                 Estonia (IV)
           South Africa (IV)
                 Thailand (II)
               Germany (IV)
                    Egypt (III)
                 Kuwait (IV)
                 Croatia (IV)
                   Latvia (III)
            Korea, Rep. (IV)
                    Chile (IV)
                Bulgaria (IV)
                   Brazil (IV)
                Hungary (IV)
                 Guyana (III)
                 Slovakia (II)
               Philippines (I)
                  Morocco (I)
               Lithuania (IV)
           United States (IV)
                     India (IV)
   Trinidad and Tobago (IV)
                 Belarus (IV)
                   Russia (IV)
                  Poland (IV)
               Honduras (IV)
             El Salvador (III)
                      Oman (I)
             Bangladesh (IV)
                Romania (IV)
               Sri Lanka (III)
Bosnia and Herzegovina (IV)
                Moldova (IV)
              Kazakstan (III)
                  Bhutan (III)
                   Bolivia (II)
                 Lesotho (IV)
                      Kenya (I)
                Argentina (I)
                 Nigeria (IV)
               Botswana (IV)
              Guatemala (IV)
                Armenia (IV)
                 Burundi (III)
                 Mexico (IV)
                      Peru (IV)
                   Ghana (III)
       Kyrgyz Republic (IV)
              Tajikistan (IV)

                                   0%   100%   200%   300%    400%      500%       600%         700%   800%
                                                                                    34

                                                  Figure 4: Percentage of assets accounted for by 5 largest banks


                Countries with increasing ratios from Survey I to IV                                      Countries with decreasing ratios from Survey I to IV

        Germany
    Luxembourg                                                                                  Austria
    United States                                                                                 India
         Panama                                                                              Guernsey
     Philippines                                                                              Armenia
      Argentina
                                                                                               Nigeria
Kyrgyz Republic
                                                                                                 Nepal
        Malaysia
         Turkey                                                                                 Poland
           Spain                                                                             Romania
             Italy                                                                              Kenya
    Switzerland                                                                               Bulgaria
      Honduras
          Brazil                                                                              Slovenia
    Kazakhstan                                                                              Venezuela
       Slovakia                                                                            Bangladesh
           Chile                                                                             Moldova
         Croatia
Bosnia and                                                                               Macao, China
Herzegovina                                                                                  Thailand
       Australia
         Greece                                                                                  China
       Gibraltar                                                                          Puerto Rico
     Guatemala                                                                                   Qatar
    Korea, Rep.                                                                                 Ghana
        Malawi                                                                                  Russia
       Denmark
                                                                                                Cyprus
         Belarus
    El Salvador                                                                           Netherlands
         Canada                                                                              Lithuania
            Peru                                                                             Mauritius
       Belgium                                                                            New Zealand
  Liechtenstein                                                                               Burundi
     Seychelles
           Israel                                                                              Estonia
        Jamaica                                                                                Finland
Trinidad and Tobago                                                                              Malta
         Guyana                                                                                Gambia
         Lesotho                                                                             Botswana
                   10%   20%   30%    40%   50%    60%   70%    80%    90%   100%                     10%    20%    30%   40%   50%    60%   70%      80%   90%   100%
                           Survey I         Survey IV minus I
                                                                                                                   Survey IV      Survey I minus IV
                                                                                 35

                                                   Figure 5: Percentage of total bank assets government owned


                   Countries with increasing ratios from Survey I to IV                                  Countries with decreasing ratios from Survey I to IV

 South Africa                                                                            Honduras
    Denmark                                                                           Macao, China
   Mauritius                                                                                    Peru
                                                                                            Armenia
 New Zealand                                                                                 Cyprus
    Hungary                                                                             El Salvador
Virgin Islands,                                                                          Guatemala
    British                                                                                 Panama
        Kenya
                                                                                             Greece
  Luxembourg                                                                                Nigeria
     Guernsey                                                                                  Italy
    Botswana                                                                               Bulgaria
       Austria                                                                              Guyana
                                                                                            Finland
     Moldova                                                                                Mexico
   Philippines                                                                             Slovakia
        Tonga                                                                          Korea,and
                                                                                      Bosnia   Rep.
      Vanuatu                                                                         Herzegovina
                                                                                          Thailand
  Netherlands                                                                               Turkey
    Tajikistan                                                                             Croatia
  Switzerland                                                                               Ghana
   Puerto Rico                                                                            Germany
                                                                                           Taiwan
         Chile                                                                                Qatar
    Kyrgyz
   Republic                                                                                 Poland
     Portugal                                                                            Indonesia
   Kazakhstan                                                                            Lithuania
Trinidad and                                                                               Malawi
   Tobago                                                                                  Lesotho
        Nepal                                                                                Brazil
    United                                                                                 Jamaica
   Kingdom                                                                                  Bhutan
 Liechtenstein
                                                                                           Burundi
    Venezuela                                                                               Iceland
    Argentina                                                                                Russia
     Slovenia                                                                           Bangladesh
    Sri Lanka                                                                             Romania
                                                                                          Maldives
      Belarus                                                                                India
                  0%   10%    20%    30%     40%     50%       60%   70%   80%                      0%    10%    20%    30%    40%     50%    60%    70%    80%
                        Survey I           Survey IV minus I                                              Survey IV           Survey I minus IV
                                                                                             36

                                                              Figure 6: Percentage of total bank assets foreign owned


                     Countries with increasing ratios from Survey I to IV                                    Countries with decreasing ratios from Survey I to IV
    Liechtenstein
           Nigeria
        Tajikistan                                                                                   Thailand
      Bangladesh
             India
      Guatemala                                                                                         Spain
         Germany
     Switzerland
          Burundi                                                                                  Philippines
           Turkey
      Kazakhstan
            Brazil                                                                                      Qatar
           Austria
              Italy
            Russia                                                                                   Australia
            Greece
         Malaysia
          Portugal                                                                                     Bhutan
           Belarus
         Slovenia
           Malawi                                                                                 Puerto Rico
        Indonesia
           Cyprus
             Chile                                                                                  Venezuela
         Moldova
 Kyrgyz  Republic
  Trinidad  and
    Tobago Peru                                                                                         Nepal
        Honduras
          Guyana
        Maldives                                                                                    Argentina
           Poland
          Panama
         Armenia                                                                                       Ghana
       Mauritius
       Seychelles
       Singapore                                                                                  Luxembourg
          Finland
     Korea, Rep.
         Gambia                                                                                      Botswana
        Bulgaria
        Hungary
        Romania                                                                                   New Zealand
          Mexico
            Malta
          Croatia                                                                                     Gibraltar
Bosnia and Herzegovina
     El Salvador
        Slovakia                                                                                        Tonga
         Jamaica
         Lesotho
         Estonia                                                                                     Guernsey
   Macao, China
   Cayman Islands
                         0%   10%   20%   30%   40%     50%   60%   70%   80%   90%   100%                       0%   10%   20%   30%   40%    50%   60%   70%    80%   90%   100%

                                    Survey I          Survey IV minus I                                                     Survey IV         Survey I minus IV
                                                                                       37

                Figure 7: Regulatory restrictions on bank activities and the mixing of banking and commerce:
        Percentage distribution of 126 countries in Survey I and 124 countries in Survey IV by degree of restrictiveness



                                                Unrestricted                       Permitted              Restricted                 Prohibited


                                                  40                                           38                                              44                            4
                      I
Nonfinancial firm
    ownership of
                     IV             16                                                  67                                                             40                        1
           banks

                     I             14                                       45                                                      59                                   8
Bank ownership of
nonfinancial firms
                     IV             15                   24                                          47                                                 38


                      I              18                  20                                    40                                                 48
       Real estate
                     IV                 19                             29                                 34                                           42


                      I        10                                      49                                      27                                       40
       Insurance
                     IV        7                                                  68                                                      30                        19


                      I                                      58                                                           43                                 19              6
        Securities
                     IV                                           62                                                           39                            14          9

                          0%              10%          20%                  30%         40%         50%             60%             70%        80%                90%        100%
                                                                38
Figure 8: Change in the index of overall restrictions on bank activities: Surveys I to IV



                                                                                 Seychelles


                                                                                 Guyana, Moldova, Nepal, Tonga

                                                                                 Bosnia and Herzegovina, Korea Rep.,
                                                                                 Luxembourg, New Zealand, Poland,
                                                                                 Slovakia, Venezuela
                                                                                 Argentina, Botswana, Cayman Islands,
                                                                                 Cyprus, France, India, Jordan, Macao China,
                                                                                 Panama, Thailand

                                                                                 Banglades, Canada, Croatia, Denmark,
                                                                                 Estonia, Maldives, Singapore, Taiwan


                                                                                 Urugu

                                                                                 Armenia, Chile, Guernsey, Israel, Malta, Nigeria,
                                                                                 Qatar, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Tajikistan, Trinidad
                                                                                 and Tobago, United States
             Australia, Austria, China, Finland, Greece, Guatemala, Italy,
               Kenya, Kosovo, Latvia, Lebanon, Lithuania, Nertherland,
                    Nicaragua, Peru, Philippines, Spain, United Kingdom

                         Ecuador, Gamibia, Ghana, Ireland, Mauritius,
                            Oman, Portugal, Russia, Samoa (Western),
                              Slovenia, Switzerland, Turkey, Vanuatu

                                    Bahrain, Burundi, Egypt, Gibraltar,
                                       Liechtenstein, Malawi, Morocco

                            Belgium, Bhutan, Bulgaria, Hungary,
                                    Indonesia, Mexico, Namibia

                                          Iceland, Jamaica, Kuwait,
                                               Virgin Islands British

                                  Belarus, Brazil, Puerto Rico

                                                         El Salvador


                                                            Romania


     -8          -6                 -4                 -2                    0                  2                 4                     6


                         Less restricted                                                  More restricted
                                                                    39
              Figure 9: Change in the index of bank capital regulations: Surveys I to IV


                                                                                                                                      Venezuela
                                                                                                                                      Turkey
                                                                                                                                      Bangladesh
                                                                                                                                Cyprus
                                                                                                                          Trinidad and Tobago
                                                                                                                          Thailand
                                                                                                                          Malawi
                                                                                                                          Latvia
                                                                                                                          Indonesia
                                                                                                                          El Salvador
                                                                                                                          Egypt
                                                                                                                          Bahrain
                                                                                                            Taiwan
                                                                                                            Romania
                                                                                                            Philippines
                                                                                                            Moldova
                                                                                                            Guyana
                                                                                                            Croatia
                                                                                                            Bulgaria
                                                                                                       Cayman Islands
                                                                                                Virgin Islands, British
                                                                                                Peru
                                                                                                Lithuania
                                                                                                Kuwait
                                                                                                Korea, Rep.
                                                                                                Kenya
                                                                                                Israel
                                                                                                India
                                                                                                Iceland
                                                                                                Fiji
                                                                                                Botswana
                                                                                                Bhutan
                                                                                          Vanuatu
                                                                                    United States
                                                                                    Tonga
                                                                                    Tajikistan
                                                                                    Switzerland
                                                                                    Samoa (Western)
                                                                                    Panama
                                                                                    Oman
                                                                                    Netherlands
                                                                                    Namibia
                                                                                    Maldives
                                                                                    Kyrgyz Republic
                                                                                    Jamaica
                                                                                    Italy
                                                                                    Honduras
                                                                                    Guatemala
                                                                                    Greece
                                                                                    Germany
                                                                                    Gambia
                                                                                    France
                                                                                    Canada
                                                                                    Belarus
                                                                                    Australia
                                                                               Burundi
                                                                         Singapore
                                                                         Qatar
                                                                         Poland
                                                                         Morocco
                                                                         Malaysia
                                                                         Macao, China
                                                                         Lebanon
                                                                         Jordan
                                                                         Ireland
                                                                         Chile
                                                                Slovakia
                                                                Seychelles
                                                                Russia
                                                                Nepal
                                                                Mauritius
                                                                Malta
                                                                Luxembourg
                                                                Lesotho
                                                                Guernsey
                                                                Finland
                                                                Estonia
                                                                Ecuador
                                                                Brazil
                                                                Armenia
                                                    Togo
                                                 Senegal
                                                   Niger
                                                    Mali
                                          Guinea-Bissau
                                            Côte d'Ivoire
                                           Burkina Faso
                                                   Benin
                                                Spain
                                             Slovenia
                                             Portugal
                                               Nigeria
                                         New Zealand
                                         Liechtenstein
                                                Ghana
                             Bosnia and Herzegovina
                                             Belgium
                                Sri Lanka
                            South Africa
                              Puerto Rico
                              Isle of Man
                                 Gibraltar
                                 Denmark
                     Hungary
                    Argentina
United Kingdom
       Mexico
        Austria

   -6               -4                     -2               0                    2                      4                        6                 8

                    Less stringent                                                          More stringent
                                                                                        40
          Figure 10: Change in the index of official supervisory powers: Surveys I to IV


                                                                                                                                                                             Seychelles
                                                                                                                                                             Trinidad and Tobago
                                                                                                                                                              Italy
                                                                                                                                                              Iceland
                                                                                                                                                     Mauritius
                                                                                                                                                     Jordan
                                                                                                                                            Canada
                                                                                                                                         Belarus
                                                                                                                                     Singapore
                                                                                                                                   Thailand
                                                                                                                                   Guyana
                                                                                                                                   Chile
                                                                                                                           Taiwan
                                                                                                                           Romania
                                                                                                                           Netherlands
                                                                                                                          Moldova
                                                                                                                           Malawi
                                                                                                                           Kyrgyz Republic
                                                                                                                           France
                                                                                                                           Denmark
                                                                                                                       Liechtenstein
                                                                                                                    Mexico
                                                                                                                    Virgin Islands, British
                                                                                                                    Latvia
                                                                                                                   Gambia
                                                                                                                 South Africa
                                                                                                                 Peru
                                                                                                                 Nepal
                                                                                                                 Lithuania
                                                                                                                 India
                                                                                                                 Burundi
                                                                                                                China
                                                                                                        Venezuela
                                                                                                        Turkey
                                                                                                        Malta
                                                                                                        Macao, China
                                                                                                        Indonesia
                                                                                                        Germany
                                                                                                        Estonia
                                                                                                        Croatia
                                                                                                        Bhutan
                                                                                                 Israel
                                                                                               Puerto Rico
                                                                                             Vanuatu
                                                                                             Uruguay
                                                                                             United States
                                                                                             Uganda
                                                                                             Tonga
                                                                                             Tanzania
                                                                                             Sri Lanka
                                                                                             Spain
                                                                                             Slovenia
                                                                                             Slovakia
                                                                                             Poland
                                                                                             Philippines
                                                                                             Oman
                                                                                             Namibia
                                                                                             Maldives
                                                                                             Madagascar
                                                                                             Luxembourg
                                                                                             Kuwait
                                                                                             Kosovo
                                                                                             Kenya
                                                                                             Guatemala
                                                                                             Ghana
                                                                                             Cook Islands
                                                                                             Cayman Islands
                                                                                             Belize
                                                                                             Bangladesh
                                                                                             Australia
                                                                              Nigeria
                                                                      Portugal
                                                                    Suriname
                                                                       Russia
                                                                     Panama
                                                                     Pakistan
                                                                   Nicaragua
                                                                New Zealand
                                                                     Lesotho
                                                                     Jamaica
                                                                     Hungary
                                                                    Honduras
                                                                          Fiji
                                                                       Egypt
                                                                     Bulgaria
                                                                       Brazil
                                                    Bosnia and Herzegovina
                                                                     Belgium
                                                                      Austria
                                                            Mozambique
                                                             Isle of Man
                                                             Norway
                                                                Togo
                                                             Senegal
                                                           Malaysia
                                                         Zimbabwe
                                                        Switzerland
                                                        Korea, Rep.
                                                              Jersey
                                                          Guernsey
                                                             Greece
                                                        El Salvador
                                               Dominican Republic
                                                          Argentina
                                                           Ukraine
                                            Hong Kong, China
                                                       Niger
                                                        Mali
                                               Côte d'Ivoire
                                              Burkina Faso
                                                      Benin
                                                   Ireland
                                                   Finland
                                                   Cyprus
                                                  Bahrain
                                                  Armenia
                                      Samoa (Western)
                                                 Angola
                                      Guinea-Bissau
                                      Tajikistan
                                           Qatar
                                        Gibraltar
                                        Ecuador
                                    Morocco
                   United Arab Emirates
                                Tunisia
                              Paraguay
                               Lebanon
                              Colombia
                              Botswana
      Kazakhstan

-10          -8                 -6                 -4                -2                  0                  2                  4                6                 8              10

                                   Less power                                                                               Greater power
                                                           41
Figure 11: Change in the index of private monitoring from Surveys I to IV



                                                                                                                         India
                                                                                                                         France
                                                                                                                    Belarus
                                                                                                         United States
                                                                                                          Seychelles
                                                                                                          Mexico
                                                                                                          Ghana
                                                                                                          Bangladesh
                                                                                           Trinidad and Tobago
                                                                                           Slovakia
                                                                                           Maldives
                                                                                           Malawi
                                                                                           Italy
                                                                                           Ireland
                                                                                           Indonesia
                                                                                           Greece
                                                                                           Cyprus
                                                                                           Chile
                                                                                           Austria
                                                                             Turkey
                                                                             Thailand
                                                                             Spain
                                                                             South Africa
                                                                             Russia
                                                                             Romania
                                                                             Poland
                                                                             Netherlands
                                                                             Lesotho
                                                                             Kenya
                                                                             Jamaica
                                                                             Iceland
                                                                             Hungary
                                                                             Germany
                                                                             China
                                                                             Cayman Islands
                                                                             Belgium
                                                               Venezuela
                                                               Vanuatu
                                                               United Kingdom
                                                               Taiwan
                                                               Switzerland
                                                               Sri Lanka
                                                               Singapore
                                                               Peru
                                                               Morocco
                                                               Moldova
                                                               Luxembourg
                                                               Lithuania
                                                               Liechtenstein
                                                               Jordan
                                                               Israel
                                                               Honduras
                                                               Guyana
                                                               Gambia
                                                               Bulgaria
                                                               Botswana
                                                               Bahrain
                                                               Argentina
                            Virgin Islands, British
                                            Tonga
                                          Slovenia
                                             Qatar
                                           Panama
                                     New Zealand
                                          Namibia
                                         Mauritius
                                    Macao, China
                                         Lebanon
                                            Latvia
                                  Kyrgyz Republic
                                        Guatemala
                                            Egypt
                                         Denmark
                                           Canada
                                            Brazil
                                           Bhutan
                                            Belize
                                          Armenia
                         Suriname
                          Portugal
                            Oman
                             Malta
                          Malaysia
                         Guernsey
                          Gibraltar
                       El Salvador
         Bosnia and Herzegovina
                          Australia
                     Burundi
              Tajikistan
       Philippines
           Finland

  -4               -3              -2                 -1   0             1             2              3              4            5

                 Less empowerment                                            Greater empowerment
                                                42
Figure 12: Change in the index of external governance from Surveys I to IV




                                                                                                Italy

                                                                               Guatemala   Seychelles
                                                                               Chile
                                                                              Malawi
                                                                    Armenia
                                                                   Nigeria
                                                                  Indonesia
                                                             United States
                                                             Lithuania
                                                           Netherlands
                                                     Spain
                                                     South Africa
                                                     Singapore
                                                     Peru
                                                     Macao, China
                                                     Luxembourg
                                                     Liechtenstein
                                                     Jamaica
                                                     Iceland
                                                     Cyprus
                                                     Belgium
                                                     Austria
                                                  Ireland
                                           Uruguay
                                           Pakistan
                                           New Zealand
                                           Estonia
                                           Egypt
                                           Botswana
                                           Australia
                                  United Kingdom
                                  Moldova
                                  Honduras
                                  Croatia
                                Bulgaria
                          Hong Kong, China
                         Finland
                         Argentina
              Fiji
    Panama
   Malaysia

   -2         -1     0         1         2        3        4         5        6      7      8



Less governance                Greater governance
                                                                 43
              Figure 13: Change in the index of deposit insurance from Surveys I to IV



                                                                                                                                   Croatia
                                                                                                                      Jamaica
                                                                                                                      Belgium
                                                                                                                      Bangladesh
                                                                                                                Kenya
                                                                                                         United Kingdom
                                                                                                         Turkey
                                                                                                 Zimbabwe
                                                                                                 Uganda
                                                                                                 Thailand
                                                                                                 Tanzania
                                                                                                 Norway
                                                                                                 Morocco
                                                                                                 Mexico
                                                                                                 Malta
                                                                                                 Luxembourg
                                                                                                 Latvia
                                                                                                 Ireland
                                                                                                 Argentina
                                                                                        France
                                                                                  Malaysia
                                                                                  Chile
                                                                          United States
                                                                          Trinidad and Tobago
                                                                          Switzerland
                                                                          Sri Lanka
                                                                          Spain
                                                                          Slovakia
                                                                          Singapore
                                                                          Romania
                                                                          Puerto Rico
                                                                          Portugal
                                                                          Poland
                                                                          Netherlands
                                                                          Moldova
                                                                          Lithuania
                                                                          Lebanon
                                                                          Jordan
                                                                          Isle of Man
                                                                          India
                                                                          Hong Kong, China
                                                                          Honduras
                                                                          Greece
                                                                          Gibraltar
                                                                          Finland
                                                                          Estonia
                                                                          El Salvador
                                                                          Ecuador
                                                                          Denmark
                                                                          Colombia
                                                                          Canada
                                                                          Bulgaria
                                                                          Brazil
                                                                          Belarus
                                                                          Bahrain
                                                                          Austria
                                                                          Armenia
                                                      Ukraine
                                                       Russia
                                                   Korea, Rep.
                                                     Germany
                                                       Nigeria
                                    Philippines
                                      Indonesia
                                     Guatemala
                                  Cyprus
               Venezuela
                Slovenia
                     Peru
            Liechtenstein
                     Italy
                  Iceland
                Hungary
  Bosnia and Herzegovina
Oman

      -3                     -2                   -1                  0                     1                     2                    3
                                  Less power                                          More power
                                                         44
Figure 14: Change in the index of entry into banking requirements: Surveys I to IV



                                                                                                                  Finland
                                                                                                      Chile
                                                                                        Germany
                                                                          Kuwait
                                                              Trinidad and Tobago
                                                              Seychelles
                                                              Puerto Rico
                                                              Macao, China
                                                              Israel
                                                              India
                                                              France
                                                              Egypt
                                                              Burundi
                                                              Argentina
                                                  United States
                                                  Turkey
                                                  Philippines
                                                  Pakistan
                                                  New Zealand
                                                  Maldives
                                                  Malaysia
                                                  Ireland
                                                  Indonesia
                                                  Iceland
                                                  Hungary
                                                  Guyana
                                                  Guernsey
                                                  Gibraltar
                                                  Gambia
                                                  El Salvador
                                                  China
                                                  Cayman Islands
                                                  Bangladesh
                                                  Armenia
                                          Hong Kong, China
                        Korea, Rep.
                     Jersey
                Tanzania
           South Africa
                 Norway
                  Malawi
           Liechtenstein
             Isle of Man
                  Greece
               Botswana
             Bosnia  and
            Herzegovina
                 Belgium
                  Belarus
                  Austria
                  Qatar
     Croatia
-3          -2           -1           0         1          2          3             4             5           6             7


                     Less power                                 More power
                                                            45

                             Figure 15: Bank supervisory criteria for assessing systemic risk
                                    (Number of countries reporting yes for each factor)




                         Bank capital ratios                                                                              113

                       Bank liquidity ratios                                                                        104

Sectoral composition of bank loan portfolios                                                                     101

                      Growth in bank credit                                                                    100

           Bank non-performing loan ratios                                                                     99

                    Bank profitability ratios                                                             93

                   Bank provisioning ratios                                                               92

                       Bank leverage ratios                                                          84

                       FX position of banks                                                     79

                             Housing prices                               48

                        Stock market prices                              46

                                                0      20          40          60          80              100             120
                                                                                     46
                            Figure 16: Statutory corporate tax rate on domestic bank income


 Virgin Islands, British
     Vanuatu
     Estonia
     Cayman Islands
     Belize
     Bahrain
                                 Serbia
                                 Paraguay
                                 Kyrgyz Republic
                                 Jersey
                                 Isle of Man
                                 Cyprus
                                 Bulgaria
                                 Bosnia and Herzegovina
                                           Liechtenstein
                                           Ireland
                                                     Palestinian Territory
                                                     Mauritius
                                                     Lithuania
                                                     Lebanon
                                                     Latvia
                                                     Iraq
                                                     Germany
                                                           Hong Kong, China
                                                              Singapore
                                                              Chile
                                                                  Iceland
                                                                      Slovakia
                                                                      Poland
                                                                      Hungary
                                                                          Turkey
                                                                          Taiwan
                                                                          Slovenia
                                                                          Russia
                                                                          Egypt
                                                                          Croatia
                                                                          Armenia
                                                                              Luxembourg
                                                                                  Gibraltar
                                                                                     Madagascar
                                                                                          Greece
                                                                                          Belarus
                                                                                              Zimbabwe
                                                                                              Ukraine
                                                                                              Trinidad and Tobago
                                                                                              Tonga
                                                                                              Syria
                                                                                              Netherlands
                                                                                              Maldives
                                                                                              Malaysia
                                                                                              Lesotho
                                                                                              Indonesia
                                                                                              Honduras
                                                                                              Ghana
                                                                                              El Salvador
                                                                                              Ecuador
                                                                                              Dominican Republic
                                                                                              Botswana
                                                                                              Austria
                                                                                                  Finland
                                                                                                      Samoa (Western)
                                                                                                          United Kingdom
                                                                                                          South Africa
                                                                                                          Norway
                                                                                                          Mexico
                                                                                                          Fiji
                                                                                                          Cook Islands
                                                                                                               Portugal
                                                                                                                   Uganda
                                                                                                                   Thailand
                                                                                                                   Tanzania
                                                                                                                   Swaziland
                                                                                                                   Spain
                                                                                                                   Sierra Leone
                                                                                                                   Philippines
                                                                                                                   Peru
                                                                                                                   Panama
                                                                                                                   Nicaragua
                                                                                                                   New Zealand
                                                                                                                   Nepal
                                                                                                                   Malawi
                                                                                                                   Kenya
                                                                                                                   India
                                                                                                                   Costa Rica
                                                                                                                   Bhutan
                                                                                                                   Australia
                                                                                                                       Guatemala
                                                                                                                         Italy
                                                                                                                               Seychelles
                                                                                                                               Colombia
                                                                                                                                Jamaica
                                                                                                                                France
                                                                                                                                  Belgium
                                                                                                                                  Namibia
                                                                                                                                      Uruguay
                                                                                                                                      Tunisia
                                                                                                                                      Sri Lanka
                                                                                                                                      Pakistan
                                                                                                                                      Morocco
                                                                                                                                      Malta
                                                                                                                                      Jordan
                                                                                                                                      Gambia
                                                                                                                                      Ethiopia
                                                                                                                                      Burundi
                                                                                                                                      Argentina
                                                                                                                                      Angola
                                                                                                                                        Israel
                                                                                                                                           Suriname
                                                                                                                                                  United States
                                                                                                                                                         Puerto Rico
                                                                                                                                                         Brazil
                                                                                                                                                                   Bangladesh
                                                                                                                                                                            Guyana

0%                     5%     10%             15%                 20%                 25%                30%                 35%                40%                 45%              50%
                                                                  47
                         Table 1: Some basic differences in banking systems around the world

                                         Total bank                 Percent of     Percent of                                   Percent of 10
                                                      Number of                                  Percent of
                          Total bank      claims on                total assets    total bank                    Professional   biggest banks
                                                      banks per                                  total bank
                         assets / GDP      private                accounted for      assets                      supervisors      rating by
                                                       100,000                                  assets foreign
                           (percent)    sector/ GDP                by 5 largest   government                      per bank      international
                                                       people                                      owned
                                          (percent)                   banks          owned                                         agencies
Angola                       34             21           0.1            79            19              59             N/A            N/A
Argentina                    35             14           0.2            55            44              26              3.4           100
Armenia                      46             26           0.7            46            0               67              1.7            20
Australia                   155            151           0.2            77            0               13              9.2           100
Austria                     349            N/A           9.9            35            12              18             N/A             80
Bahrain                     N/A            N/A           N/A           N/A           N/A             N/A             N/A            100
Bangladesh                   64             46          0.03            38            34              7              N/A             0
Belarus                      77             42           0.3            84            72              27              4.2            80
Belgium                     331            N/A            1             91            0               60              0.8            50
Belize                       89             62           N/A           100            0              100             N/A             0
Benin                       N/A             24           N/A           N/A           N/A             N/A             N/A            N/A
Bhutan                       46             44           0.6           100            48              6               4.3            0
Bosnia and Herzegovina       60             55           0.5            76            1               92               2            N/A
Botswana                     52             25           0.5            92            7               93              3.9            0
Brazil                      105             53           0.1            71            44              18              2.1           100
Bulgaria                    105            N/A           0.4            54            3               81              2.7           100
Burkina Faso                N/A             18           N/A           N/A           N/A             N/A             N/A            N/A
Burundi                      35             17           0.1            87            49              16              3.3           N/A
Canada                      195            N/A           N/A            86            0              N/A              0.8            70
Cayman Islands              N/A            N/A          437.5           38            0              100              0.1            0
Chile                       107             74           0.1            74            19              39              4.1            60
China                       189            N/A          0.02            63           N/A             N/A             N/A            N/A
Colombia                     42             31          0.04            63            6               20             25.3            70
Cook Islands                N/A            N/A           N/A           100            8               92              0.8            0
Costa Rica                   64             47           0.3            78            54              31              7.4            70
Côte d'Ivoire               N/A             18           N/A           N/A           N/A             N/A             N/A            N/A
Croatia                     116             69           0.7            75            4               89              3.3            10
Cyprus                      729            N/A           3.5            69            1               35              0.8            30
Denmark                     245            N/A           2.2            83            1               21             N/A             70
Dominican Republic           33             22           0.1            87            31              8              10.8            80
Ecuador                      36             29           0.2            70            17              2                4            N/A
Egypt                        64             27          0.05           N/A           N/A             N/A             11.8            70
El Salvador                  63             40           0.2            85            6               93             10.1            50
Estonia                     140            N/A           1.3            93            0               99              3.9            0
Ethiopia                     25            N/A          0.02            84            61              0               1.7           N/A
Fiji                         78             65           0.6           100            0              100               5             80
Finland                     256            N/A           1.8            91            0               74              0.7            60
France                      368            N/A           1.1            87            2               12             N/A            100
Gambia                       60             14           0.8            72            0               80              1.4            0
Germany                     124            N/A           2.3            25            32              12             N/A            100
Ghana                        37             14           0.1            45            10              51              5.4            0
Gibraltar                   N/A            N/A           N/A            79            0              100              0.5            0
Greece                      212            N/A           0.2            78            11              21              6.1            80
Guatemala                    46             23           0.1            80            2               10             10.4            80
Guernsey                    N/A            N/A           N/A            12            5               74               2            100
Guinea-Bissau               N/A             6            N/A           N/A           N/A             N/A             N/A            N/A
Guyana                       63             30           0.8            97            0               56              3.8            0
Honduras                     73             49           0.2            69            1               50              6.7            70
Hong Kong, China            705            N/A           2.7            43           N/A             N/A              1.1           100
Hungary                     705            N/A           0.3            63            4               83              3.9            80
Iceland                     193            115           1.6           100            41              0                5             0
India                        80             51          0.01            38            74              7               8.3           100
Indonesia                    47             26           0.1            50            38              34              7.7            90
Iraq                         18             9            N/A           N/A           N/A             N/A             N/A            N/A
Ireland                     483            N/A            1             72            21              63              1.6           100
Isle of Man                 N/A            N/A          36.2            70            0              100              0.2           100
Israel                      148            N/A           0.2            94            0               3               6.5            50
Italy                       204            N/A           1.3            66           0.1              18              0.9           100
Jamaica                      50             26           0.3            95            0               95             11.4            29
Jersey                      N/A            N/A           N/A            65            18             100              0.1           100
Jordan                      N/A             73           N/A           N/A           N/A             N/A             N/A             40
Kazakhstan                  N/A             39           0.2            72            23              17              1.1           100
Kenya                       N/A             33           0.1            50            5               37              1.4            80
Korea, Rep.                 112            102          0.03            80            22              77             N/A            100
Kosovo                       56             35           0.5           N/A           N/A             N/A              3.1            38
Kuwait                      119             71           N/A           N/A           N/A             N/A             N/A            100
Kyrgyz Republic              26            N/A           0.4            55            20              46              2.6            0
Latvia                      N/A            N/A           1.3            59            16              69              1.3           N/A
Lebanon                     N/A             78           N/A           N/A           N/A             N/A             N/A             50
Lesotho                      57             15           0.2           100            3               97              1.3           N/A
Liechtenstein               N/A            N/A          47.2            92            29              4               0.3            20
Lithuania                    86            N/A           0.6            80            0               81              3.1            90
Luxembourg                  1942           N/A            29            31            5               94              0.3            40
Macao, China                238             57           5.2            73           0.2              99              0.6            30
Madagascar                   24            N/A          0.05            82            0              100              1.9            0
Malawi                       37             16           0.1            83            9               29              2.3            0
                                                                   48
                                          Total bank                 Percent of     Percent of                                   Percent of 10
                                                       Number of                                  Percent of
                           Total bank      claims on                total assets    total bank                    Professional   biggest banks
                                                       banks per                                  total bank
                          assets / GDP      private                accounted for      assets                      supervisors      rating by
                                                        100,000                                  assets foreign
                            (percent)    sector/ GDP                by 5 largest   government                      per bank      international
                                                        people                                      owned
                                           (percent)                   banks          owned                                         agencies
Malaysia                      203           120           0.1            59            0               22              7.5            90
Maldives                       98            57           1.9            98            39              61              1.8            0
Mali                          N/A            18          N/A            N/A           N/A             N/A             N/A            N/A
Malta                         814           N/A           6.3            71            0               86              0.7            20
Mauritius                     112            89           1.4            65            1               68              1.9            20
Mexico                         42            19          0.04            74            13              85             10.8           100
Moldova                        60            34           0.4            69            13              42              3.1            0
Montenegro                     96            68           1.7            77           N/A              88               4             10
Morocco                        88            69          N/A            N/A           N/A             N/A             N/A            N/A
Mozambique                     37            28           0.1            92            0               92             N/A             0
Myanmar                       N/A           N/A          N/A            N/A           N/A             N/A             N/A            N/A
Namibia                        70            55           0.2           100            0               86              3.3            25
Nepal                          65            56           0.1            26            24              17             N/A            N/A
Netherlands                   469           N/A           0.5            84            14             N/A              2.8           100
New Zealand                   205           N/A           0.4            84            3               95              0.4           100
Nicaragua                      64            31           0.2            96            1               24              3.7            44
Niger                         N/A            13          N/A            N/A           N/A             N/A             N/A            N/A
Nigeria                        52            29          0.02            48            0               6              16.7           100
Norway                         53           N/A           0.6            76            0               30              0.8           100
Oman                           49            43          N/A            N/A           N/A             N/A             N/A             70
Pakistan                       47            21          0.02            51            21              59              7.3            0
Palestinian Territory         N/A           N/A          N/A             78            0               62              4.1            50
Panama                        269            84           2.7            47            11              62              1.3           100
Paraguay                       54            39           0.2            67            6               40              2.8           N/A
Peru                           42            24           0.1            87            0               49             11.9            40
Philippines                    70            30          0.04            53            13              11             12.2           100
Poland                         74           N/A           0.1            49            22              62              6.8            90
Portugal                      314           N/A           1.1            74            23              22               1             80
Puerto Rico                   N/A           N/A           0.3            59            18              2                1            100
Qatar                         122            44            1             74           N/A              0               4.4            90
Romania                        61            40           0.1            57            8               84              3.6            60
Russia                         75            44           0.7            48            41              18              4.3           N/A
Samoa (Western)                55            47           2.2           100            0               71               2             0
Senegal                       N/A            26          N/A            N/A           N/A             N/A             N/A            N/A
Serbia                         83            50           0.5            45            18              74              1.9            0
Seychelles                    109            24           8.1            94            31              69              1.4            0
Sierra Leone                   30            10           0.2            74            38              62              2.6            0
Singapore                     676           113           3.2            39            0               71              1.1           100
Slovakia                       84           N/A           0.3            72            1               94              2.7           N/A
Slovenia                      143           N/A           0.9            60            51              28              1.5            50
South Africa                  130            80           0.1            92           0.1              28              3.4           100
Spain                         376           N/A           0.7            64            0               8                1            100
Sri Lanka                      54            27           0.1            73            59              14              1.7           100
Suriname                       49            24           1.7            88            33              21              0.7            11
Swaziland                      44            25           0.4           N/A            16              84              2.3           N/A
Switzerland                   548           193           4.2            67            16              12              0.2            90
Syria                          79           N/A           0.1            69            71              0               3.3            10
Taiwan                        261           N/A           0.1            73            18              11              9.4            90
Tajikistan                     25           N/A          N/A             84            14              6              N/A             0
Tanzania                       36            15           0.1            64            5               49              1.8            0
Thailand                      122           102          0.05            63            18              7              13.1           100
Togo                          N/A            31          N/A            N/A           N/A             N/A             N/A            N/A
Tonga                          59            44           2.9           100            13              87              1.7            67
Trinidad and Tobago            77            32           0.6            95            24              46              7.9           N/A
Tunisia                       N/A            65          N/A            N/A           N/A             N/A             N/A             80
Turkey                         89            43           0.1            60            32              17              6.3           100
Uganda                         28            14           0.1            61            3               75              3.6            0
Ukraine                       100            62           0.4            37            17              48              1.8           N/A
United Arab Emirates          N/A           N/A          N/A            N/A           N/A             N/A             N/A             50
United Kingdom                607           206           0.5            68            26              18              0.8           100
United States                  84            57           2.1            47            0              N/A              0.3           100
Uruguay                        64            23           0.4            75            46              54             12.1           100
Vanuatu                       128            68           1.7           100            14              86              1.5            75
Venezuela                     282            19           0.1            62            33              17             N/A            N/A
Virgin Islands, British       N/A           N/A           5.5            95            4               95              0.8            67
Yemen                         N/A           N/A          N/A            N/A           N/A             N/A             N/A            N/A
Zimbabwe                       49           N/A           0.2            54            8               46              1.6           100
                High         1,942          206          437.5          100            74             100            25.3            100
                 Low           18            6            0.01           12             0              0             0.1              0
               Median          78            39           0.4            73            8.5             49            2.7              70
 Sources: Foreign exchange rates (IFS), except for euro and Taiwan (Federal Reserve), and Gibraltar, Guernsey and
 Syria (the central bank of each country); GDP (WDI), WEO database for Taiwan; bank assets (WB Survey IV), and
 IFS database for a few countries; IFS database for total bank claims on private sector; and WB Survey IV for the
 other variables.
                                                              49
                   Table 2: Countries with single vs. multiple bank supervisory authorities

                                                                                                           Multiple Bank
                                            Single Bank Supervisory Authority                               Supervisory
                                                      (126 countries)                                       Authorities
                                                                                                           (10 countries)

                          Angola           Guinea-Bissau                Malta           Sierra Leone          Nigeria
                           Benin                Iraq                  Morocco           South Africa          Tunisia
                         Botswana              Israel               Mozambique           Swaziland
                        Burkina Faso           Jordan                 Namibia               Syria
                          Burundi              Kenya                    Niger             Tanzania
     Africa
 (42 countries)         Côte d'Ivoire         Kuwait                   Oman                 Togo
                           Egypt              Lesotho                   Qatar              Uganda
                                                                                        United Arab
                          Ethiopia          Madagascar                Romania
                                                                                         Emirates
                          Gambia              Malawi                   Senegal             Yemen
                           Ghana                Mali                 Seychelles          Zimbabwe
                         Argentina           Costa Rica               Honduras              Peru            El Salvador
                           Brazil        Dominican Republic            Jamaica            Suriname          Puerto Rico
   Americas
                          Canada              Ecuador                  Mexico        Trinidad and Tobago   United States
 (23 countries)
                           Chile             Guatemala                Nicaragua           Uruguay
                         Colombia             Guyana                  Paraguay           Venezuela
                          Australia          Indonesia              New Zealand           Sri Lanka           Taiwan
                          Bhutan            Korea, Rep.               Pakistan            Thailand
  Asia/Pacific
                            Fiji              Malaysia               Philippines           Tonga
 (19 countries)
                      Hong Kong, China        Maldives             Samoa (Western)
                           India               Nepal                  Singapore
                          Armenia              France               Luxembourg            Ukraine            Germany
                          Belarus              Greece                  Norway                                 Iceland
                         Belgium              Hungary                  Serbia         United Kingdom          Austria
                        Bosnia and
                                               Ireland                Slovakia            Lithuania          Denmark
                        Herzegovina
    Europe
 (39 countries)          Bulgaria               Italy                 Slovenia            Moldova
                          Croatia           Kazakhstan                  Spain            Montenegro
                          Cyprus              Kosovo                 Switzerland         Netherlands
                          Estonia         Kyrgyz Republic             Tajikistan          Portugal
                          Finland              Latvia                  Turkey              Russia
                                                                                       Virgin Islands,
                          Bahrain            Guernsey               Macao, China
                                                                                           British
Offshore Centers           Belize           Isle of Man               Mauritius
 (13 countries)
                       Cayman Islands          Jersey                  Panama
                          Gibraltar         Liechtenstein             Vanuatu
                                                                    50
                    Table 3: Countries with the central bank as a supervisory authority

                                                                         Central Bank
                                                                            among
                                 Central Bank Only                                        Central Bank Not a Supervisory Authority
                                                                           Multiple
                                   (89 countries)                                                      (38 countries)
                                                                          Supervisors
                                                                         (9 countries)

                    Angola            Jordan           Senegal              Nigeria      Madagascar
                    Benin             Kenya           Seychelles            Tunisia        Malta
                   Botswana           Kuwait         Sierra Leone
                 Burkina Faso         Lesotho        South Africa
                   Burundi            Malawi          Swaziland
                 Côte d'Ivoire         Mali             Syria
    Africa          Egypt            Morocco          Tanzania
(42 countries)
                   Ethiopia         Mozambique          Togo
                    Gambia           Namibia           Uganda
                                                     United Arab
                    Ghana              Niger
                                                      Emirates
                 Guinea-Bissau        Oman             Yemen
                     Iraq              Qatar          Zimbabwe
                     Israel          Romania
                   Argentina          Guyana          Suriname            El Salvador      Canada         Ecuador         Paraguay
                                                     Trinidad and
                    Brazil            Jamaica                            United States      Chile        Guatemala           Peru
                                                       Tobago
  Americas
                                                                                          Colombia       Honduras        Puerto Rico
(23 countries)
                                                                                         Costa Rica       Mexico           Uruguay
                                                                                         Dominican
                                                                                                         Nicaragua        Venezuela
                                                                                          Republic
                                                       Samoa
                    Bhutan           Malaysia                               Taiwan        Australia
                                                      (Western)
                      Fiji           Maldives         Singapore
                  Hong Kong,
 Asia/Pacific                          Nepal          Sri Lanka
                    China
(19 countries)
                     India         New Zealand        Thailand
                   Indonesia         Pakistan           Tonga
                  Korea, Rep.       Philippines
                                                                                         Bosnia and
                   Armenia             Italy           Portugal            Germany                        Hungary        Switzerland
                                                                                         Herzegovina
                    Belarus         Kazakhstan         Russia               Iceland        Estonia         Latvia          Turkey
                                                                                                                           United
                   Belgium            Kosovo            Serbia              Austria        Finland      Luxembourg
                                                                                                                          Kingdom
   Europe                            Kyrgyz
                   Bulgaria                           Slovakia             Denmark         France         Norway
(39 countries)                       Republic
                    Croatia          Lithuania        Slovenia
                    Cyprus           Moldova            Spain
                    Greece          Montenegro        Tajikistan
                    Ireland         Netherlands        Ukraine
                                                                                          Cayman
                    Bahrain          Mauritius                                                          Isle of Man     Macao, China
  Offshore                                                                                 Islands
   Centers          Belize           Vanuatu                                              Gibraltar        Jersey          Panama
(13 countries)                                                                                                          Virgin Islands,
                                                                                          Guernsey      Liechtenstein
                                                                                                                            British
                                                    51
                                Table 4: Scope of supervisory authority

               Single Financial Supervisory
                                                Multiple Financial Supervisory Authorities for Financial Sector
               Authority for Financial Sector
                                                                       (101 countries)
                       (25 countries)
                 Lesotho                          Angola            Iraq            Nigeria            Syria
                 Malawi                          Botswana           Israel           Oman            Tanzania
                  Malta                          Burundi           Kenya             Qatar            Tunisia
  Africa
   (31                                            Egypt            Kuwait          Seychelles       Uganda
countries)                                                                                         United Arab
                                                 Ethiopia        Madagascar       Sierra Leone
                                                                                                    Emirates
                                                  Gambia        Mozambique        South Africa       Yemen
                                                  Ghana           Namibia          Swaziland        Zimbabwe
                Colombia          Honduras       Argentina       Costa Rica         Mexico          Suriname
Americas                                                         Dominican                         Trinidad and
                 Ecuador         Puerto Rico      Brazil                           Nicaragua
   (23                                                            Republic                           Tobago
countries)     El Salvador        Uruguay         Canada         Guatemala         Paraguay        United States
                 Guyana                            Chile           Jamaica            Peru          Venezuela
                 Bhutan                          Australia        Malaysia          Pakistan          Taiwan
                   Fiji                         Bangladesh        Maldives        Philippines        Thailand
Asia/Pacific
                                                Hong Kong,                          Samoa
    (21        Korea, Rep.                                        Myanmar                             Tonga
                                                  China                           (Western)
 countries)
                                                  India             Nepal         Singapore
                                                 Indonesia      New Zealand        Sri Lanka
                 Armenia          Hungary         Belarus         Germany         Luxembourg          Serbia
                 Austria           Iceland       Belgium           Greece          Moldova           Slovenia
                                                Bosnia and
                 Denmark           Latvia                          Ireland        Montenegro          Spain
 Europe                                         Herzegovina
   (38           Estonia        Liechtenstein    Bulgaria           Italy         Netherlands       Switzerland
countries)       Finland          Norway          Croatia          Kosovo           Portugal        Tajikistan
                                                                   Kyrgyz
                                                  Cyprus                           Romania            Turkey
                                                                  Republic
                                                  France          Lithuania          Russia          Ukraine
                 Gibraltar                        Bahrain         Guernsey          Lebanon          Vanuatu
 Offshore
 Centers                                                                                          Virgin Islands,
               Macao, China                       Belize         Isle of Man       Mauritius
   (13                                                                                                British
countries)                                       Cayman
                                                                   Jersey           Panama
                                                 Islands
                                                                                                   52

                                          Table 5: Information on bank regulatory, supervisory and deposit insurance variables
    Variable                   Definition                      Quantification                                                  World Bank Survey IV questions
1. Bank Activity Regulatory Variables
Securities Activities The extent to which banks      (Higher values indicate more      4.1 What are the conditions under which banks can engage in securities activities?
                      may engage in                  restrictive.)                     a. A full range of these activities can be conducted directly in banks,
                      underwriting, brokering        a = 1; b = 2; c = 3; and d = 4.   b. A full range of these activities are offered but all or some of these activities must be conducted in subsidiaries, or in
                      and dealing in securities,                                       another part of a common holding company or parent,
                      and all aspects of the                                           c. Less than the full range of activities can be conducted in banks, or subsidiaries, or in another part of a common
                      mutual fund industry.                                            holding company or parent,
                                                                                       d. None of these activities can be done in either banks or subsidiaries, or in another part of a common holding
                                                                                       company or parent.

Insurance Activities The extent to which banks       (Higher values indicate more      4.2 What are the conditions under which banks can engage in insurance activities?
                     may engage in insurance         restrictive.)                     a. A full range of these activities can be conducted directly in banks,
                     underwriting and selling.       a = 1; b = 2; c = 3; and d = 4.   b. A full range of these activities are offered but all or some of these activities must be conducted in subsidiaries, or in
                                                                                       another part of a common holding company or parent
                                                                                       c. Less than the full range of activities can be conducted in banks, or subsidiaries, or in another part of a common
                                                                                       holding company or parent,
                                                                                       d. None of these activities can be done in either banks or subsidiaries, or in another part of a common holding company
                                                                                       or parent

Real Estate            The extent to which banks     (Higher values indicate more      4.3 What are the conditions under which banks can engage in real estate activities?
Activities             may engage in real estate     restrictive.)                     a. A full range of these activities can be conducted directly in banks,
                       investment, development       a = 1; b = 2; c = 3; and d = 4.   b. A full range of these activities are offered but all or some of these activities must be conducted in subsidiaries, or in
                       and management.                                                 another part of a common holding company or parent
                                                                                       c. Less than the full range of activities can be conducted in banks, or subsidiaries, or in another part of a common
                                                                                       holding company or parent
                                                                                       d. None of these activities can be done in either banks or subsidiaries, or in another part of a common holding
                                                                                       company or parent

Overall Restrictions Sum of (I.I) + (I.II) + (I.III) (Higher values indicate more
on Banking                                           restrictive.)
Activities                                           Sum of (I.I) + (I.II) + (I.III)

2. Financial Conglomerate Variables
Bank Owning            The extent to which banks     (Higher values indicate more      4.4 What are the conditions under which banks can engage in nonfinancial businesses except those businesses that are
Nonfinancial Firms     may own and control           restrictive.)                     auxiliary to banking business (e.g. IT company, debt collection company etc.)?
                       nonfinancial firms.           a = 1; b = 2; c = 3; and d = 4.   a. Nonfinancial activities can be conducted directly in banks,
                                                                                       b. Nonfinancial activities must be conducted in subsidiaries, or in another part of a common holding company or
                                                                                       parent
                                                                                       c. Nonfinancial activities may be conducted in subsidiaries, or in another part of a common holding company or
                                                                                       parent, but subject to regulatory limit or approval,
                                                                                       d. None of these activities can be done in either banks or subsidiaries, or in another part of a common holding
                                                                                       company or parent

Nonfinancial Firms     The extent to which           (Higher values indicate more      2.6 Can nonfinancial firms own voting shares in commercial banks?
Owning Banks           nonfinancial firms may        restrictive.)                     a. Nonfinancial firm may own 100% of the equity in a commercial bank.
                       own and control banks.        a = 1; b = 2; c = 3; and d = 4.   b. Nonfinancial firm may own 100% of the equity in a commercial bank, but prior authorization or approval is
                                                                                       required.
                                                                                                  53

    Variable                 Definition                    Quantification                                                   World Bank Survey IV questions
                                                                                      c. Limits are placed on ownership of banks by nonfinancial firms, such as maximum percentage of a commercial
                                                                                      bank's capital or shares.
                                                                                      d. Nonfinancial firms cannot own any equity investment in a commercial bank

Nonbank Financial    The extent to which         (Higher values indicate more         2.7 Can nonbank financial firms (e.g. insurance companies, finance companies, etc.) own voting shares in commercial
Firms Owning         nonbank financial firms     restrictive.)                        banks?
Banks                may own and control         a = 1; b = 2; c = 3; and d = 4.      a. Nonbank financial firm may own 100% of the equity in a commercial bank.
                     banks.                                                           b. Nonbank financial firm may own 100% of the equity in a commercial bank, but prior authorization or approval is
                                                                                      required.
                                                                                      c. Limits are placed on ownership of banks by nonbank financial firms, such as maximum percentage of a commercial
                                                                                      bank's capital or shares.
                                                                                      d. Nonbank financial firms cannot own any equity investment in a commercial bank

Overall Financial    Sum of (II.I) + (II.II) +   (Higher values indicate more
Conglomerates        (II.III)                    restrictive.)
Restrictiveness                                  Sum of (II.I) + (II.II) + (II.III)

3. Competition Regulatory Variables
Limitations on       Whether foreign banks may (Lower values indicate greater         1.8 Are foreign entities prohibited from entering through the following?
Foreign Bank         own domestic banks and    stringency.)                           a. Acquisition
Entry/ Ownership     whether foreign banks may Yes = 0; No = 1.                       b. Subsidiary
                     enter a country's banking                                        c. Branch
                     industry.                                                        d. Joint Venture

Entry into Banking   Whether various types of    (Higher values indicate greater      1.6 Which of the following are legally required to be submitted before issuance of the banking license?
Requirements         legal submissions are       stringency.)                         a. Draft bylaws
                     required to obtain a        Yes = 1; No = 0.                     b. Intended organizational chart
                     banking license.            1.6(a) +1.6(b) + 1.6(e) + 1.6(f) +   d. Market / business strategy
                                                 1.6(g) + 1.6(h) + 1.6(i) + 1.6(d)    e. Financial projections for first three years
                                                                                      f. Financial information on main potential shareholders
                                                                                      g. Background/experience of future Board directors
                                                                                      h. Background/experience of future senior managers
                                                                                      i. Source of funds to be used as capital

Fraction of Entry    The degree to which         Percent                              1.7 In the past 5 years (2006-2010), how many applications for commercial banking licenses from domestic entities
Applications         applications to enter       [1.7(b) + 1.10 (b) + 1.11(b) +       (i.e. those 50% or more domestically owned) have been:
Denied               banking are denied.         1.12(b)] / [1.7(a) + 1.10(a) +       a. Received
                                                 1.11(a) + 1.12(a)]                   b. Denied
                                                                                      1.10 In the past 5 years (2006-2010), how many applications from foreign banks to enter through the acquisition of a
                                                                                      domestic bank were:
                                                                                      a. Received
                                                                                      b. Denied
                                                                                      1.11 In the past 5 years (2006-2010) how many applications from foreign banks to enter through a new subsidiary
                                                                                      were:
                                                                                      a. Received
                                                                                      b. Denied
                                                                                      1.12 In the past 5 years (2006-2010) how many applications from foreign banks to enter by opening a branch were:
                                                                                      a. Received
                                                                                      b. Denied
                                                                                                          54

    Variable                  Definition                      Quantification                                                        World Bank Survey IV questions
Domestic Denials      The degree to which            Percent                                  1.7 In the past 5 years (2006-2010), how many applications for commercial banking licenses from domestic entities
                      domestic applications to       1.7(b) / 1.7(a)                          (i.e. those 50% or more domestically owned) have been:
                      enter banking are denied.                                               a. Received
                                                                                              b. Denied

Foreign Denials       The degree to which            Percent                                  1.10 In the past 5 years (2006-2010), how many applications from foreign banks to enter through the acquisition of a
                      foreign applications to        [1.10(b) + 1.11(b) + 1.12(b)] /          domestic bank were:
                      enter banking are denied.      [1.10(a) + 1.11(a) + 1.12(a)]            a. Received
                                                                                              b. Denied
                                                                                              1.11 In the past 5 years (2006-2010) how many applications from foreign banks to enter through a new subsidiary
                                                                                              were:
                                                                                              a. Received
                                                                                              b. Denied
                                                                                              1.12 In the past 5 years (2006-2010) how many applications from foreign banks to enter by opening a branch were:
                                                                                              a. Received
                                                                                              b. Denied

4. Capital Regulatory Variables
Overall Capital       Whether the capital            (Higher values indicate greater          3.1 Which regulatory capital adequacy regimes did you use as of end of 2010 and for which banks does each regime
Stringency            requirement reflects certain   stringency.)                             apply to (if using more than one regime)?
                      risk elements and deducts      Yes = 1; No = 0.                         a. Basel I
                      certain market value losses    3.1(a) + 3.2(a) + 3.2(b) +               3.2 Which risks are covered by the current regulatory minimum capital requirements in your jurisdiction?
                      from capital before            3.18.3(d)*3 + 1(if 3.18.2<.75)           a. Credit risk
                      minimum capital adequacy                                                3.18.2 What fraction of revaluation gains is allowed as part of capital?
                      is determined.                                                          3.18.3 Are the following items deducted from regulatory capital?
                                                                                              d. Unrealized losses in fair valued exposures
Initial Capital       Whether certain funds may      (Higher values indicate greater          1.4.2 Are the sources of funds to be used as capital verified by the regulatory/supervisory authorities?
Stringency            be used to initially           stringency.)                             1.4.3 Can the initial disbursement or subsequent injections of capital be done with assets other than cash or
                      capitalize a bank and          For question 1.4.2:                      government securities?
                      whether they are officially.   Yes = 1; No = 0;                         1.5 Can the initial disbursement or subsequent injections of capital be done with assets other than cash or government
                                                     For questions 1.4.3 and 1.5:             securities?
                                                     Yes = 0; No = 1.
                                                     1.4.2 + 1.4.3 + 1.5

Capital Regulatory    Sum of (IV.I) + (IV.III)       (Higher values indicate greater
Index                                                stringency.)
                                                     Sum of (IV.I) + (IV.III)

5. Official Supervisory Action Variables
Official Supervisory Whether the supervisory         (Higher values indicate greater          5.9 Are auditors required to communicate directly to the supervisory agency any presumed involvement of bank
Power                authorities have the            power.)                                  directors or senior managers in illicit activities, fraud, or insider abuse?
                     authority to take specific      For question 5.10:                       5.10 Does the banking supervisor have the right to meet with the external auditors and discuss their report without the
                     actions to prevent and          a = 0; b or c = 1.                       approval of the bank?
                     correct problems.               For questions 5.9, 5.12(b), 12.3.2,      a. No
                                                     10.5(b), 11.1(f), 11.1(j) and 11.1(k):   b. Yes, it happens on a regular basis.
                                                     Yes = 1; No = 0.                         c. Yes, it happens on an exceptional basis.
                                                     For questions 11.5(a), 11.5(b) and       5.12 In cases where the supervisor identifies that the bank has received an inadequate audit, does the supervisor have
                                                     11.5(c):                                 the powers to take actions against …
                                                                                                      55

    Variable                Definition                      Quantification                                                      World Bank Survey IV questions
                                                   BS = Bank Supervisor = 1;              b. The external auditor
                                                   DIA = Deposit Insurance Agency =       10.5 Do banks disclose to the supervisors …?
                                                   0.5;                                   b. Off-balance sheet items
                                                   BR/AMC = Bank Restructuring or         11.1 Please indicate whether the following enforcement powers are available to the supervisory agency
                                                   Asset Management Agency = 0.5;         f. Require banks to constitute provisions to cover actual or potential losses
                                                   C = Court = 0; and                     j. Require banks to reduce or suspend dividends to shareholders
                                                   OTH = Other - please specify = 0.      k. Require banks to reduce or suspend bonuses and other remuneration to bank directors and managers
                                                   5.10 + 5.9 + 5.12(b) + 12.3.2 +        11.5 Which authority has the powers to perform the following problem bank resolution activities?
                                                   10.5(b) + 11.1(f) + 11.1(j) +          Enter the initials of the corresponding authority from the following list of options:
                                                   11.1(k)*2 + 11.5(a) + 11.5(b)*2 +      a. Declare insolvency
                                                   11.5(c)*2                              b. Supersede shareholders' rights
                                                                                          c. Remove and replace bank senior management and directors
                                                                                          12.3.2 Can the supervisory authority force a bank to change its internal organizational structure?

Prompt Corrective   Whether a law establishes      (Higher values indicate more           11.1 Please indicate whether the following enforcement powers are available to the supervisory agency
Power               predetermined levels of        promptness in responding to            a. Cease and desist-type orders for imprudent bank practices
                    bank solvency deterioration    problems.)                             f. Require banks to constitute provisions to cover actual or potential losses
                    that force automatic           Yes = 1; No = 0.                       j. Require banks to reduce or suspend dividends to shareholders
                    actions, such as               11.3* [11.1(a) + 11.1(f) + 11.1(j) +   k. Require banks to reduce or suspend bonuses and other remuneration to bank directors and managers
                    intervention.                  11.1(k)*2 + 12.3.2]                    11.3 Does the supervisory agency operate an early intervention framework (e.g. prompt corrective action) that forces
                                                                                          automatic action when certain regulatory triggers/thresholds are breached?
                                                                                          12.3.2 Can the supervisory authority force a bank to change its internal organizational structure?

Restructuring       Whether the supervisory        (Higher values indicate greater        11.5 Which authority has the powers to perform the following problem bank resolution activities?
Power               authorities have the power     restructuring power.)                  Enter the initials of the corresponding authority from the following list of options: BS = Bank Supervisor, C = Court,
                    to restructure and             BS = Bank Supervisor = 1;              DIA = Deposit Insurance Agency, BR/AMC = Bank Restructuring or Asset Management Agency, OTH = Other -
                    reorganize a troubled bank.    DIA = Deposit Insurance Agency =       please specify).
                                                   0.5;                                   b. Supersede shareholders' rights
                                                   BR/AMC = Bank Restructuring or         Other - please specify
                                                   Asset Management Agency = 0.5;         c. Remove and replace bank senior management and directors
                                                   C = Court = 0; and                     Other - please specify
                                                   OTH = Other - please specify = 0.
                                                   11.5(b) + 11.5(c)*2

Declaring           Whether the supervisory        (Higher values indicate greater        11.5 Which authority has the powers to perform the following problem bank resolution activities?
Insolvency Power    authorities have the power     power.)                                Enter the initials of the corresponding authority from the following list of options: BS = Bank Supervisor, C = Court,
                    to declare a deeply troubled   For question 11.5:                     DIA = Deposit Insurance Agency, BR/AMC = Bank Restructuring or Asset Management Agency, OTH = Other -
                    bank insolvent.                BS = Bank Supervisor = 1;              please specify)."
                                                   DIA = Deposit Insurance Agency =       a. Declare insolvency
                                                   0.5;                                   Other - please specify
                                                   BR/AMC = Bank Restructuring or         b. Supersede shareholders' rights
                                                   Asset Management Agency = 0.5;         Other - please specify
                                                   C = Court = 0; and
                                                   OTH = Other - please specify = 0.
                                                   For question 11.6:
                                                   Yes = 1; No = 0.
                                                   11.5(a) + 11.5(b)

Supervisory         Whether the supervisory        (Higher values indicate less           11.1 Please indicate whether the following enforcement powers are available to the supervisory agency
                                                                                                        56

    Variable                  Definition                     Quantification                                                       World Bank Survey IV questions
Forbearance           authorities may engage in     supervisory discretion.)                b. Forbearance (i.e. to waive regulatory and supervisory requirements)
Discretion            forbearance when              For question 11.1(b):                   11.3 Does the supervisory agency operate an early intervention framework (e.g. prompt corrective action) that forces
                      confronted with violations    Yes = 1; No = 0.                        automatic action when certain regulatory triggers/thresholds are breached?
                      of laws and regulations or    For questions 11.3, 12.12 and           12.12 If an infraction of any prudential regulation is found in the course of supervision, must it be reported?
                      other imprudent behavior.     12.12.1:                                12.12.1 Are there mandatory actions that the supervisor must take in these cases?
                                                    Yes = 0; No = 1.
                                                    11.1(b)+11.3+12.12+12.12.1

Court Involvement     The degree to which the       (Higher values indicate less            11.6 Is court approval required for the following bank resolution activities?
                      court dominates the           supervisory discretion.)                a. Declare insolvency
                      supervisory authority.        Yes = 1; No = 0.                        d. Undertake bank resolution mechanisms
                                                    (1 if 11.6(a) = 11.6(b) = 11.6(c) =     b. Supersede shareholders' rights
                                                    11.6(d) = 1, 0 otherwise) + 11.6(e)     c. Remove and replace bank senior management and directors
                                                    + 11.7                                  e. Appoint and oversee a bank liquidator/receiver
                                                                                            11.7 Can the bank shareholders appeal to the court against a resolution decision of the banking supervisor?

Loan Classification   The classification of loans   (Higher values indicate greater         9.1.3 After how many days is a loan in arrears classified as …?
Stringency            in arrears as sub-standard,   stringency.)                            a. Sub-standard?
                      doubtful and loss.            If there is a loan classification       b. Doubtful?
                                                    system, the actual minimum              c. Loss?
                                                    number of days beyond which a
                                                    loan in arrears must be classified as
                                                    substandard, then doubtful, and
                                                    finally loss are summed.
                                                    9.1.3(a) + 9.13(b) + 9.13(c) (days)

Provisioning          The minimum required          (Higher values indicate greater         9.6.3 What is the minimum provisioning required as loans become …?
Stringency            provisions as loans become    stringency.)                            a. Sub-standard?
                      sub-standard, doubtful and    The sum of the minimum required         b. Doubtful?
                      loss.                         provisioning percentages when a         c. Loss?
                                                    loan is successively classified as
                                                    substandard, doubtful, and loss. If a
                                                    range is provided, the minimum
                                                    percentage is used.
                                                    9.6.3(a) + 9.6.3(b) + 9.6.3(c)
                                                    (percent)

Diversification       Whether there are explicit,   (Higher values indicate more            7.2 Are there any regulatory rules or supervisory guidelines regarding asset diversification?
Index                 verifiable, quantifiable      diversification.)                       7.2.2 Are banks prohibited from making loans abroad?
                      guidelines for asset          For question 7.2:
                      diversification and banks     Yes = 1; No = 0.
                      are allowed to make loans     For question 7.2.2:
                      abroad.                       Yes = 0; No = 1.
                                                    7.2 + 7.2.2

6. Official Supervisory Structural Variables
Supervisor Tenure     The average tenure of a       Years                                   12.39 What is the average tenure of banking supervisors (i.e. what is the average number of years that staff have been
                      professional bank                                                     supervisors)?
                      supervisor.
                                                                                                       57

    Variable                   Definition                      Quantification                                                     World Bank Survey IV questions
Independence of        The degree to which the       (Higher values indicate greater       12.4 To whom is the supervisory agency legally responsible or accountable?
Supervisory            supervisory authority is      independence.)                        c. A legislative body, such as Parliament or Congress
Authority-Political    independent within the        Yes = 1; No = 0.
                       government from political
                       influence.

Independence of        The degree to which the       (Higher values indicate greater       12.9 Can individual supervisory staff be held personally liable for damages to a bank caused by their actions or
Supervisory            supervisory authority is      independence.)                        omissions committed in the good faith exercise of their duties?
Authority-Bank         protected by the legal        Yes = 0; No = 1.
                       system from the banking
                       industry.

Independence of        The degree to which the       (Higher values indicate greater       12.6 Does the head of the supervisory agency have a fixed term?
Supervisory            supervisory authority is      independence.)                        12.6.1 If yes, how long (in years) is the term?
Authority-Fixed        able to make decisions        A fixed term of 4 years or greater =
Term                   independently of political    1; less than 4 years or no fixed term
                       considerations.               = 0.

Independence of        Sum of (VI.II) + (VI.III) +   (Higher values indicate greater
Supervisory            (VI.IV)                       independence.)
Authority-Overall                                    Sum of (VI.II) + (VI.III) + (VI.IV)

Multiple Supervisor This variable indicates          Yes = 1; No = 0.                      12.1 What body/agency supervises commercial banks for prudential purposes?
                    whether there is a single                                              c. Multiple bank supervisory agencies / superintendencies
                    official regulatory of
                    banks, or whether multiple
                    supervisor share
                    responsibility for
                    supervising the nation’s
                    banks.

Single vs. Multiple    This variable indicates      Yes = 1; No = 0.                       12.1 What body/agency supervises commercial banks for prudential purposes?
Financial              whether or not there is a                                           b. A single bank supervisory agency / superintendency including the Central Bank
Supervisory            single financial supervisory
Authority              authority.

7. Private Monitoring Variables
Certified Audit        Whether there is a            Yes = 1; No = 0.                      5.1 Is an audit by a professional external auditor required for all commercial banks in your jurisdiction?
Required               compulsory external audit     5.1 * 5.1.1(a)                        5.1.1 If yes, does the external auditor have to ...:
                       by a licensed or certified                                          a. Obtain a professional certification or pass a specific exam to qualify as such
                       auditor.

Percent of 10          The percentage of the top     10.8/10*100 if 13.1>9, 10.8/13.1 if   10.8 How many of the top ten banks (in terms of total domestic assets) are rated by international credit rating agencies
Biggest Banks          ten banks that are rated by   13.1<10                               (e.g., Moody's, Standard and Poor)?
Rated by               international rating          Percent                               13.1 How many commercial banks were there at the end of...?
International Rating   agencies.                                                           2010
Agencies
Percent of 10          The percentage of the top     Percent                               10.9 How many of the top ten banks (in terms of total domestic assets) are rated by domestic credit rating agencies?
                                                                                                     58

    Variable                 Definition                     Quantification                                                     World Bank Survey IV questions
Biggest Banks        ten banks that are rated by                                         13.1 How many commercial banks were there at the end of...?
Rated by Domestic    domestic rating agencies.                                           2010
Rating Agencies

No Explicit Deposit Whether there is an explicit   (Higher values indicate more          8.1 Is there an explicit deposit insurance protection system for commercial banks?
Insurance Scheme    deposit insurance scheme       private supervision.)                 8.17.2 Were insured depositors wholly compensated (to the extent of legal protection) the last time a bank failed?
                    and whether depositors         Yes = 1; No = 0.
                    were fully compensated the     1 if 8.1 = 0 or 8.17.2 = 0;
                    last time a bank failed.       0 if 8.1 = 1 and 8.17.2 = 1.

Bank Accounting      Whether the income            (Higher values indicate more          10.1 Are banks required to prepare consolidated accounts for accounting purposes?
                     statement includes accrued    informative bank accounts.)           10.2.4 Does accrued, though unpaid, interest/principal enter the income statement while the loan is still performing?
                     or unpaid interest or         For questions 10.2.4, 10.1 and        10.2.5 Does accrued, though unpaid, interest/principal enter the income statement while the loan is non-performing?
                     principal on nonperforming    10.5.2:                               10.5.2 Are bank directors legally liable if information disclosed is erroneous or misleading?
                     loans and whether banks       Yes = 1; No = 0.
                     are required to produce       For question 10.2.5:
                     consolidated financial        Yes = 0; No = 1.
                     statements.                   10.2.4 + 10.2.5 + 10.1 + 10.5.2

Private Monitoring   Measures whether there        (Higher values indicate more          3.18 Which of the following items are allowed as part of Tier 1 capital and in what percentages? Enter Yes or No and
Index                incentives/ability for the    private oversight.)                   include corresponding percentages for each option below
                     private monitoring of         Yes = 1; No = 0.                      c. Subordinated debt
                     firms, with higher values     VII.I + (1 if VII.II=100%; 0          3.18.1 Which of the following items are allowed as part of Tier 2 capital and in what percentages? Enter Yes or No
                     indicating more private       otherwise) + (1 if VII.III=100%; 0    and include corresponding percentages for each option below
                     monitoring.                   otherwise) + VII.IV + VII.V + [1 if   d. Subordinated debt
                                                   3.18(c) = 3.18.1(d) = 1; 0            10.5.1 Do banks disclose to the public …?
                                                   otherwise] + 10.5.1(b) + 10.5(c) +    b. Off-balance sheet items
                                                   11.1.1                                11.1.1 Are bank regulators/supervisors required to make public formal enforcement actions, which include cease and
                                                                                         desist orders and written agreements between a bank regulatory/supervisory body and a banking organization?

8. Deposit Insurance Scheme Variables
Deposit Insurer      Whether the deposit           (Higher values indicate more          8.4 Does the deposit insurance agency/fund administrator have the following powers as part of its mandate?
Power                insurance authority has the   power.)                               c. Bank intervention authority
                     authority to make the         Yes = 1; No = 0.                      8.4.1 Does the deposit insurance authority by itself have the legal power to cancel or revoke deposit insurance for any
                     decision to intervene in a                                          participating bank?
                     bank, take legal action       8.4(c) + 8.4.1 + 8.4.2 + 8.4.3        8.4.2 Can the deposit insurance agency/fund take legal action for violations against laws, regulations, and bylaws (of
                     against bank directors or                                           the deposit insurance agency) against bank directors or other bank officials?
                     officials, and has ever                                             8.4.3 Has the deposit insurance agency/fund ever taken legal action for violations against laws, regulations, and
                     taken any legal action                                              bylaws (of the deposit insurance agency) against bank directors or other bank officials?
                     against bank directors or
                     officers.

Deposit Insurance    The size of the deposit       Ratio                                 8.13.1 If prefunded, what is the ratio of accumulated funds to total bank assets as of end of 2010?
Funds-to-Total       insurance fund relative to
Bank Asset           total bank assets.

Funding with         The degree to which moral     (Higher values indicate more moral 8.11 What percentage of the total deposits of participating commercial banks was actually covered by the scheme as of
Insured Deposits     hazard exists.                hazard.)                           end of...?
                                                   8.11*13.4 / 13.2                   2010
                                                                                                   59

    Variable                 Definition                    Quantification                                                     World Bank Survey IV questions
                                                 Percent                               13.2 What were the total assets of all commercial banks at the end of …? (In thousands of local currency)
                                                                                       2010
                                                                                       13.4 What were the total deposits of all commercial banks at the end of …? (In thousands of local currency)
                                                                                       2010

Various Factors      The degree to which moral   (Higher values indicate greater       8.10 Is there formal coinsurance, i.e. are ALL depositors explicitly insured for less than 100% of their deposits?
Mitigating Moral     hazard exists.              mitigation of moral hazard.)          8.13 Funding is provided by ...:
Hazard                                           For questions 8.13(b), 8.14 and       a. Government
                                                 8.10:                                 b. Banks
                                                 Yes = 1; No = 0;                      c. Combination/Other (please explain)
                                                 For questions 8.13(a) and 8.13(c):    8.14 Do deposit insurance fees/premiums charged to banks vary based on some assessment of risk?
                                                 Yes = No = 0.
                                                 8.13 + 8.14 + 8.10

9. Market Structure Indicators
Bank Concentration The degree of                Percent                                13.6.1 Of commercial banks in your country, what percent of total deposits was held by the five largest banks at the
(Deposit)          concentration of deposits in                                        end of...?
                   the 5 largest banks.                                                2010

Bank Concentration The degree of                 Percent                               13.6 Of commercial banks in your country, what percent of total assets was held by the five largest banks at the end
(Asset)            concentration of assets in                                          of...?
                   the 5 largest banks.                                                2010

Foreign-Owned        The extent to which the     Percent                               13.7.2 What percent of the banking system's assets was in banks that were foreign-controlled (e.g., where foreigners
Banks                banking system's assets are                                       owned 50% or more equity) at the end of …?
                     foreign owned.                                                    2010

Government-          The extent to which the     Percent                               13.7.1 What percent of the banking system's assets was in banks that were government-controlled (e.g., where
Owned Banks          banking system's assets are                                       government owned 50% or more equity) at the end of…?
                     government owned.                                                 2010

10. External Governance Variables
Strength of External The effectiveness of        (Higher values indicate better        5.1 Is an audit by a professional external auditor required for all commercial banks in your jurisdiction?
Audit                external audits of banks.   strength of external audit.)          5.1.1 If yes, does the external auditor have to ...:
                                                 For questions 5.1, 5.1.2, 5.1.1(a),   a. Obtain a professional certification or pass a specific exam to qualify as such
                                                 5.7(a), 5.9 and 5.12(b):              5.1.2 Are specific requirements for the extent or nature of the audit spelled out?
                                                 Yes = 1; No = 0.                      5.7 Do supervisors receive a copy of the following ….
                                                 For question 5.10:                    a. The auditor's report on the financial statements
                                                 a = 0; b or c = 1.                    5.9 Are auditors required to communicate directly to the supervisory agency any presumed involvement of bank
                                                 5.1 + 5.1.2 + 5.1.1(a) + 5.7(a) +     directors or senior managers in illicit activities, fraud, or insider abuse?
                                                 5.10 + 5.9 + 5.12(b)                  5.10 Does the banking supervisor have the right to meet with the external auditors and discuss their report without the
                                                                                       approval of the bank?
                                                                                       a. No
                                                                                       b. Yes, it happens on a regular basis.
                                                                                       c. Yes, it happens on an exceptional basis.
                                                                                       5.12 In cases where the supervisor identifies that the bank has received an inadequate audit, does the supervisor have
                                                                                       the powers to take actions against …
                                                                                       b. The external auditor
Financial Statement The transparency of bank     (Higher values indicate better        10.1 Are banks required to prepare consolidated accounts for accounting purposes?
                                                                                                     60

    Variable               Definition                     Quantification                                                       World Bank Survey IV questions
Transparency       financial statements          transparency.)                          10.2.4 Does accrued, though unpaid, interest/principal enter the income statement while the loan is still performing?
                   practices.                    For questions 10.2.4, 10.1,             10.2.5 Does accrued, though unpaid, interest/principal enter the income statement while the loan is non-performing?
                                                 10.5.1(b), 10.5.1(c) and 10.5.2:        10.5.1 Do banks disclose to the public …?
                                                 Yes = 1; No = 0.                        b. Off-balance sheet items
                                                 For question 10.2.5:                    c. Governance and risk management framework
                                                 Yes = 0; No = 1.                        10.5.2 Are bank directors legally liable if information disclosed is erroneous or misleading?
                                                 10.2.4 +10.1 + 10.5.1(b) + 10.5.1(c)
                                                 + 10.5.2 + 10.2.5

Accounting         The type of accounting        (Higher values indicate better          10.2.1 Are applicable accounting standards for banks in your country prepared in accordance with U.S. Generally
Practices          practices used.               practices.)                             Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP)?
                                                 Both (a) and (b) are yes = 1;           a. At individual bank level
                                                 Otherwise = 0.                          b. At consolidated level
                                                 10.2.2 or 10.2.1                        10.2.2 Are applicable accounting standards for banks in your country prepared in accordance with IFRS?
                                                                                         a. At individual bank level
                                                                                         b. At consolidated level

External Ratings   The evaluations by external   (Higher values indicate better credit   3.18 Which of the following items are allowed as part of Tier 1 capital and in what percentages? Enter Yes or No and
and Creditor       rating agencies and           monitoring.)                            include corresponding percentages for each option below
Monitoring         incentives for creditors of   Yes = 1; No = 0.                        c. Subordinated debt
                   the bank to monitor bank      (1 if 3.18(c) = 3.18.1(d) = 1, 0        3.18.1 Which of the following items are allowed as part of Tier 2 capital and in what percentages? Enter Yes or No
                   performance.                  otherwise)*2 + 10.7 + (1 if 10.8 =      and include corresponding percentages for each option below
                                                 100%; 0 otherwise) + (1 if 10.9 =       d. Subordinated debt
                                                 100%; 0 otherwise)                      10.7 Are commercial banks required by supervisors to have external credit ratings?
                                                                                         10.8 How many of the top ten banks (in terms of total domestic assets) are rated by international credit rating agencies
                                                                                         (e.g., Moody's, Standard and Poor)?
                                                                                         10.9 How many of the top ten banks (in terms of total domestic assets) are rated by domestic credit rating agencies?

External           Sum of (X.I) + (X.II) +       (Higher values indicate better
Governance Index   (X.III) + (X.IV)              corporate governance.)
                                                 Sum of (X.I) + (X.II) + (X.III) +
                                                 (X.IV)
                                                       61
              Table 6: Did countries tighten or ease overall restrictions on bank activities
                                 following the global financial crisis?

                                        Tighten                                            Ease
   Argentina                Egypt                   Lebanon         Philippines            Bahrain
    Armenia                Estonia                Liechtenstein       Poland                Brazil
  Bangladesh               France                 Luxembourg          Russia             El Salvador
    Belgium                Gambia                 Macao, China      Seychelles            Hungary
    Bhutan                 Ghana                     Malawi         Singapore              Iceland
   Bosnia and
                            Greece                  Maldives         Slovakia             Indonesia
  Herzegovina
   Botswana               Guatemala                 Malta          South Africa           Jamaica
    Burundi                Guyana                  Mauritius           Spain               Kenya
    Canada                  India                  Mexico             Taiwan              Kuwait
 Cayman Islands            Ireland                 Moldova           Thailand               Peru
                                                                   Trinidad and
      Chile                  Israel                 Morocco                               Portugal
                                                                      Tobago
     China                   Italy                Netherlands     United Kingdom          Romania
     Croatia                Jordan                New Zealand      United States         Sri Lanka
     Cyprus               Korea, Rep.              Nicaragua         Uruguay            Switzerland
    Denmark                Kosovo                   Oman            Venezuela            Tajikistan
                                                                                       Virgin Islands,
     Ecuador                Latvia                  Panama
                                                                                           British




Table 7: Did countries tighten or ease bank capital regulations following the global financial crisis?

                                        Tighten                                            Ease
    Argentina               Estonia                  Kuwait           Poland              Austria
                                                                                        Bosnia and
    Australia                 Fiji           Kyrgyz Republic         Romania
                                                                                        Herzegovina
     Bahrain                Finland               Liechtenstein     Seychelles            Burundi
   Bangladesh              Germany                  Lithuania       Singapore            Gibraltar
     Belarus                Greece                Macao, China       Slovakia            Guernsey
    Belgium                 Guyana                   Malawi          Slovenia             Hungary
    Botswana               Honduras                   Mali          Tajikistan            Iceland
      Brazil                 India                    Malta          Thailand           Isle of Man
    Bulgaria               Indonesia                Moldova           Tonga              Malaysia
                                                                   Trinidad and
     Canada                 Ireland                 Morocco                               Mexico
                                                                     Tobago
 Cayman Islands             Israel                 Namibia        United States           Portugal
    Croatia                  Italy                Netherlands        Vanuatu               Russia
    Cyprus                 Jamaica                  Oman            Venezuela           South Africa
                                                                  Virgin Islands,
    Denmark                 Jordan                  Panama                                 Spain
                                                                      British
      Egypt                 Kenya                     Peru                               Sri Lanka
   El Salvador            Korea, Rep.              Philippines                          Switzerland
                                                                                      United Kingdom
                                                  62
                Table 8: Did countries increase or decrease official supervisory powers
                                 following the global financial crisis?

                Increase                                          Decrease
   Belarus                  Moldova             Angola             Ecuador             Malaysia
   Bhutan                  Netherlands        Argentina              Egypt             Maldives
  Botswana                 New Zealand         Armenia            El Salvador           Malta
 Burkina Faso               Nicaragua          Australia            Estonia            Mauritius
   Burundi                    Niger             Austria               Fiji             Mexico
   Finland                   Norway            Bahrain              Gambia             Morocco
   France                     Oman           Bangladesh            Germany              Nigeria
   Greece                     Peru             Belgium               Ghana             Pakistan
  Guatemala                  Poland             Belize             Gibraltar          Philippines
  Guernsey                 Puerto Rico          Benin              Hungary             Portugal
                                              Bosnia and
 Guinea-Bissau               Russia                                Indonesia              Romania
                                             Herzegovina
    Guyana                Seychelles            Brazil               Israel            Senegal
    Iceland                Slovakia            Bulgaria             Jordan            Singapore
      India               Sri Lanka            Canada             Kazakhstan           Slovenia
  Isle of Man             Suriname          Cayman Islands          Kenya            South Africa
      Italy               Tajikistan             Chile            Korea, Rep.           Spain
    Jamaica                Thailand             China              Kosovo            Switzerland
     Jersey                  Togo             Colombia              Latvia             Taiwan
                         Trinidad and
    Kuwait                                   Cook Islands          Lesotho                 Tonga
                           Tobago
Kyrgyz Republic            Uruguay           Côte d'Ivoire       Liechtenstein            Turkey
   Lebanon                 Vanuatu             Croatia             Lithuania              Uganda
                        Virgin Islands,
 Luxembourg                                    Cyprus            Macao, China        United States
                            British
    Malawi                Zimbabwe            Denmark             Madagascar
     Mali
                                                               63
                         Table 9: Prudential bank regulations and their enforcement

                          If an infraction of any prudential
                                                                    Are there mandatory actions that    Are supervisors legally
                          regulation is found in the course
                                                                    the supervisor must take in these       liable for their
                              of supervision, must it be
                                                                                 cases?                        actions?
                                      reported?
Angola                                    Yes                                     Yes                            No
Argentina                                 Yes                                     Yes                            Yes
Armenia                                   Yes                                     Yes                            No
Australia                                 Yes                                     Yes                            No
Austria                                   Yes                                     Yes                            No
Bahrain                                   Yes                                     Yes                            No
Bangladesh                                Yes                                     Yes                            No
Belarus                                   Yes                                     Yes                            No
Belgium                                   Yes                                     No                             No
Belize                                    Yes                                     Yes                            No
Benin                                    N/A                                      N/A                            No
Bhutan                                    Yes                                     Yes                            Yes
Bosnia and Herzegovina                    Yes                                     Yes                            No
Botswana                                  Yes                                     Yes                            No
Brazil                                    Yes                                     Yes                            No
Bulgaria                                  Yes                                     No                             No
Burkina Faso                              Yes                                     Yes                            No
Burundi                                   Yes                                     Yes                            No
Canada                                    Yes                                     No                             No
Cayman Islands                            Yes                                     No                             No
Chile                                     Yes                                     Yes                            Yes
Colombia                                  Yes                                     Yes                            Yes
Cook Islands                              Yes                                     Yes                            No
Costa Rica                                Yes                                     Yes                            Yes
Côte d'Ivoire                             Yes                                     Yes                            No
Croatia                                   Yes                                     Yes                            No
Cyprus                                    Yes                                     No                             No
Denmark                                   Yes                                     No                             No
Dominican Republic                        Yes                                     Yes                            No
Ecuador                                   Yes                                     No                             Yes
Egypt                                     Yes                                     Yes                            No
El Salvador                               Yes                                     Yes                            Yes
Estonia                                   Yes                                     No                             No
Ethiopia                                  Yes                                     Yes                            No
Fiji                                      Yes                                     Yes                            No
Finland                                   No                                      Yes                            No
France                                    Yes                                     No                             No
Gambia                                    Yes                                     Yes                            No
Germany                                   Yes                                     Yes                            No
Ghana                                     Yes                                     Yes                            No
Gibraltar                                 Yes                                     Yes                            No
Greece                                    No                                      No                             No
Guatemala                                 Yes                                     Yes                            No
Guernsey                                  Yes                                     No                             No
Guinea-Bissau                             Yes                                     Yes                            No
Guyana                                    Yes                                     Yes                            No
Honduras                                  Yes                                     Yes                            Yes
Hong Kong, China                          Yes                                     No                             No
Hungary                                   Yes                                     Yes                            No
Iceland                                   Yes                                     Yes                            No
India                                     Yes                                     No                             No
Indonesia                                 Yes                                     Yes                            No
Iraq                                      Yes                                     Yes                            No
Ireland                                   Yes                                     Yes                            No
Isle of Man                               Yes                                     Yes                            No
                                                             64
                        If an infraction of any prudential
                                                                  Are there mandatory actions that    Are supervisors legally
                        regulation is found in the course
                                                                  the supervisor must take in these       liable for their
                            of supervision, must it be
                                                                               cases?                        actions?
                                    reported?
Israel                                  No                                      No                             No
Italy                                   Yes                                     No                             Yes
Jamaica                                 Yes                                     Yes                            No
Jersey                                  No                                      No                             No
Jordan                                 N/A                                      Yes                            No
Kazakhstan                              Yes                                     Yes                            No
Kenya                                   Yes                                     Yes                            No
Korea, Rep.                             Yes                                     N/A                            Yes
Kosovo                                  yes                                     Yes                            No
Kuwait                                  Yes                                     Yes                            No
Kyrgyz Republic                         Yes                                     Yes                            No
Latvia                                  No                                      Yes                            Yes
Lebanon                                 Yes                                     N/A                            Yes
Lesotho                                N/A                                      N/A                            No
Liechtenstein                           No                                      Yes                            No
Lithuania                               No                                      No                             Yes
Luxembourg                              Yes                                     Yes                            No
Macao, China                            Yes                                     No                             No
Madagascar                              Yes                                     Yes                            No
Malawi                                  Yes                                     Yes                            No
Malaysia                                Yes                                     No                             No
Maldives                                Yes                                     No                             No
Mali                                    Yes                                     Yes                            No
Malta                                   Yes                                     No                             No
Mauritius                               Yes                                     Yes                            No
Mexico                                  Yes                                     Yes                            Yes
Moldova                                 Yes                                     Yes                            No
Montenegro                              Yes                                     Yes                            Yes
Morocco                                 No                                      Yes                            No
Mozambique                              Yes                                     Yes                            Yes
Myanmar                                 Yes                                     Yes                            Yes
Namibia                                 Yes                                     Yes                            No
Nepal                                  N/A                                      Yes                            No
Netherlands                             No                                      No                             No
New Zealand                             Yes                                     No                             No
Nicaragua                               Yes                                     Yes                            Yes
Niger                                   Yes                                     Yes                            No
Nigeria                                 Yes                                     Yes                            No
Norway                                  Yes                                     Yes                            N/A
Oman                                    Yes                                     Yes                            No
Pakistan                                Yes                                     Yes                            No
Palestinian Territory                   Yes                                     Yes                            No
Panama                                  Yes                                     Yes                            Yes
Paraguay                                Yes                                     Yes                            Yes
Peru                                    Yes                                     Yes                            No
Philippines                             Yes                                     Yes                            No
Poland                                  Yes                                     No                             No
Portugal                                Yes                                     Yes                            No
Puerto Rico                             Yes                                     Yes                            Yes
Qatar                                   Yes                                     Yes                            No
Romania                                 Yes                                     Yes                            No
Russia                                  No                                      Yes                            No
Samoa (Western)                         Yes                                     Yes                            No
Senegal                                 Yes                                     Yes                            No
Serbia                                  Yes                                     Yes                            No
Seychelles                              Yes                                     Yes                            No
Sierra Leone                            Yes                                     Yes                            Yes
Singapore                               Yes                                     No                             No
                                                                  65
                             If an infraction of any prudential
                                                                       Are there mandatory actions that    Are supervisors legally
                             regulation is found in the course
                                                                       the supervisor must take in these       liable for their
                                 of supervision, must it be
                                                                                    cases?                        actions?
                                         reported?
Slovakia                                     Yes                                     Yes                            No
Slovenia                                     Yes                                     Yes                            Yes
South Africa                                 Yes                                     Yes                            No
Spain                                        Yes                                     Yes                            No
Sri Lanka                                    Yes                                     No                             No
Suriname                                     Yes                                     No                             No
Swaziland                                    Yes                                     Yes                            No
Switzerland                                  Yes                                     Yes                            No
Syria                                        Yes                                     Yes                            No
Taiwan                                       Yes                                     Yes                            No
Tajikistan                                   No                                      No                             No
Tanzania                                     Yes                                     No                             No
Thailand                                     Yes                                     Yes                            No
Togo                                         Yes                                     Yes                            No
Tonga                                        Yes                                     Yes                            No
Trinidad and Tobago                          Yes                                     Yes                            No
Tunisia                                      Yes                                     Yes                            No
Turkey                                       Yes                                     Yes                            No
Uganda                                       Yes                                     Yes                            No
Ukraine                                      Yes                                     No                             No
United Arab Emirates                         Yes                                     No                             No
United Kingdom                               Yes                                     No                             No
United States                                Yes                                     Yes                            No
Uruguay                                      Yes                                     Yes                            No
Vanuatu                                      Yes                                     Yes                            No
Venezuela                                    Yes                                     Yes                            No
Virgin Islands, British                      Yes                                     No                             No
Yemen                                        Yes                                     Yes                            No
Zimbabwe                                     Yes                                     Yes                            No
TOTAL
                       Yes                  127                                      105                            23
                        No                  11                                       33                             118
                      N/A                    4                                        4                              1
                                                    66
            Table 10: Did countries increase or decrease private monitoring powers
                             following the global financial crisis?

                 Increase                                                   Decrease
   Bangladesh                      Italy                        Argentina                  Iceland
     Belarus                      Kenya                         Armenia                    Jordan
      China                   Kyrgyz Republic                   Australia                 Lebanon
    Denmark                       Latvia                         Bahrain                Luxembourg
   El Salvador                   Lithuania               Bosnia and Herzegovina             Malta
      France                   Macao, China                     Botswana                  Moldova
    Germany                       Mexico                        Bulgaria                    Oman
     Greece                     Netherlands                      Burundi                     Peru
   Guatemala                   South Africa                      Canada                   Portugal
     Hungary                       Spain                    Cayman Islands                Sri Lanka
       India                     Suriname                        Finland                Switzerland
    Indonesia                    Thailand                         Ghana             Trinidad and Tobago
     Ireland                   United States                    Gibraltar                Venezuela
      Israel                                                     Guyana




                 Table 11: Did countries tighten or ease external governance
                            following the global financial crisis?

                              Tighten                                                     Ease
Armenia            Cyprus           Liechtenstein          Seychelles         Egypt              New Zealand
                                                                            Hong Kong,
Australia          Estonia          Luxembourg             Singapore                               Panama
                                                                              China
Belgium           Honduras              Malawi            United States      Lithuania        South Africa
Botswana          Indonesia             Nigeria            Uruguay           Malaysia             Spain
  Chile              Italy              Pakistan                             Moldova         United Kingdom
 Croatia           Jamaica               Peru                               Netherlands
                                                                                               67

                                                            Table 12: Explicit deposit insurance protection system

                       Is there an      Is participation in the deposit insurance
                                                                                      Are the following types of deposits excluded from deposit
                     explicit deposit     system compulsory for the following                                                                           The deposit insurance coverage type is:
                                                                                                         insurance coverage?
                        insurance                   banking entities?
                        protection                                                                            Deposits of the     Deposits of the                                Per
                                                         Foreign       Foreign       Foreign                                                           Per
                        system for      Domestic                                                Interbank        foreign             foreign                      Per         depositor
                                                          bank           bank       currency                                                        depositor                               Other
                       commercial        banks                                                   deposits      branches of        subsidiaries of               depositor        per
                                                       subsidiaries    branches     deposits                                                         account
                          banks?                                                                              domestic banks      domestic banks                             institution
Argentina                  Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes            No                  Yes             No          Yes           No          No
Armenia                    Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes            No                  Yes             No          No            Yes         No
Australia                  Yes             Yes             Yes            No          No            No             No                  Yes             No          No            Yes         No
Austria                    Yes             Yes             Yes            No          Yes           Yes            No                  Yes             No          No            Yes         No
Bahrain                    Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes            Yes                 Yes             No          No            Yes         No
Bangladesh                 Yes             Yes             No             Yes         No            Yes            No                   No             No          Yes           No          No
Belarus                    Yes             Yes             Yes            N/A         Yes           No             N/A                 N/A             No          No            No         Yes (e)
Belgium                    Yes             Yes             Yes            No          No            Yes            No                  Yes             No          No            Yes         No
Bosnia and
                           Yes             Yes             No             No          No            Yes             Yes                 Yes            No          No           Yes           No
Herzegovina
Brazil                     Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes             No                  No            No           No           Yes          No
Bulgaria                   Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes             Yes                 Yes           Yes          No           Yes          No
Canada                     Yes             Yes             Yes            No          Yes           No              Yes                 Yes           No           No           Yes          No
Chile                      Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes             Yes                 Yes           No           Yes          No           No
Colombia                   Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes             No                  No            No           No           Yes          No
Croatia                    Yes             Yes             Yes            No          No            Yes             Yes                 Yes           No           Yes          Yes          No
Cyprus                     Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes             No                  Yes           No           No           Yes          No
Denmark                    Yes             Yes             Yes            No          No            No              Yes                 No            No           No           Yes          No
Dominican Republic         Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes             No                  No            No           No           Yes          No
Ecuador                    Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes         No            No              No                  No            N/A          Yes          N/A          N/A
El Salvador                Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes             Yes                 Yes           No           No           Yes          No
Estonia                    Yes             Yes             Yes            No          No            Yes             No                  Yes           No           No           Yes          No
Finland                    Yes             Yes             Yes            No          No            No              No                  No            No           No          Yes (a)       Yes
France                     Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes             Yes                 Yes           No           No           Yes          No
Germany                    Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes             Yes                 Yes           Yes          No           No           No
Gibraltar                  Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes             No                  Yes           No           No           Yes          No
Greece                     Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes             No                  Yes           No           No           Yes          No
Guatemala                  Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes         No            No              No                  No            No           No           Yes          No
Guernsey                   Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes             Yes                 Yes           No           No           Yes          No
Honduras                   Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes         No            No              No                  No            No           No           No           Yes
Hong Kong, China           Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes             Yes                 Yes           No           No           Yes          No
Hungary                    Yes             Yes             No             No          No            Yes             No                  No            No           No           Yes          No
Iceland                    Yes             Yes             Yes            No          No            Yes             No                  Yes           No           No           Yes          No
India                      Yes             Yes             No             Yes         No            Yes             Yes                 Yes           No           Yes          No           No
Indonesia                  Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes         No            No              No                  Yes           No           No           Yes          No
Iraq                       Yes             N/A             N/A            N/A         No            Yes             No                  No            No           No           No           No
Ireland                    Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes             Yes                 Yes           No           Yes          Yes          No
Isle of Man                Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes             Yes                 Yes           No           No           Yes          No
                                                                                            68

                     Is there an     Is participation in the deposit insurance
                                                                                   Are the following types of deposits excluded from deposit
                  explicit deposit     system compulsory for the following                                                                           The deposit insurance coverage type is:
                                                                                                      insurance coverage?
                      insurance                  banking entities?
                     protection                                                                            Deposits of the     Deposits of the                                Per
                                                      Foreign       Foreign       Foreign                                                           Per
                     system for      Domestic                                                Interbank        foreign             foreign                      Per         depositor
                                                       bank           bank       currency                                                        depositor                               Other
                    commercial        banks                                                   deposits      branches of        subsidiaries of               depositor        per
                                                    subsidiaries    branches     deposits                                                         account
                       banks?                                                                              domestic banks      domestic banks                             institution
Italy                    Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes            No                  Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Jamaica                  Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes            Yes                  No            No          No             Yes         Yes
Jersey                   Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes            Yes                 Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Jordan                   Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes                 Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Kenya                    Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes            Yes                 Yes            Yes         No             No          No
Korea, Rep.              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         N/A           N/A            N/A                 N/A            No          No             Yes         No
Kosovo                   Yes            Yes             Yes            No          No            Yes            Yes                 Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Kyrgyz Republic          Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes            No                  Yes            No          Yes            No          No
Latvia                   Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes            Yes                 Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Lebanon                  Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes            Yes                 Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Lesotho                  Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes            No                   No            No          Yes            No          No
Liechtenstein            Yes            Yes             Yes            No          No            Yes            No                  Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Lithuania                Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes            No                   No            No          No             Yes         No
Luxembourg               Yes            Yes             Yes            No          No            Yes            No                  Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Macao, China             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes            No                   No            No          No             Yes         No
Malaysia                 Yes            Yes             Yes            No          No            Yes            Yes                 Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Malta                    Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes            No                  Yes            No          Yes            Yes         Yes
Mexico                   Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            No             Yes                  No            No          No             Yes         No
Moldova                  Yes            Yes             Yes            No          No            Yes            Yes                 Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Montenegro               Yes            Yes             Yes            No          No            Yes            Yes                 Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Morocco                  Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes            Yes                 Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Mozambique               Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            No             No                   No            Yes         Yes            Yes         No
Myanmar                  Yes            Yes             No             No          Yes           Yes            Yes                 Yes            Yes         N/A           N/A          N/A
Netherlands              Yes            Yes             Yes            No          No            Yes            No                  Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Nicaragua                Yes            Yes             Yes            No          No            Yes            Yes                 Yes            No          Yes            No          No
Nigeria                  Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes                 Yes            N/A         N/A            Yes         N/A
Norway                   Yes            Yes             Yes            No          No            Yes            No                  Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Oman                     Yes            Yes             N/A            Yes         No            Yes            Yes                 N/A            No          No             Yes         No
Paraguay                 Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            No             No                   No            No          No             Yes         No
Peru                     Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes            Yes                 Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Philippines              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            No             No                  Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Poland                   Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes            Yes                 Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Portugal                 Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes            Yes                 Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Puerto Rico              Yes            Yes             Yes            No          No            No             No                   No            Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes
Romania                  Yes            Yes             No             No          No            Yes            No                  Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Russia                   Yes            Yes             Yes            No          No            Yes            Yes                 Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Serbia                   Yes            Yes             No             No          No            Yes            Yes                 Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Singapore                Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes                 Yes            Yes         No             Yes         No
Slovakia                 Yes            Yes             Yes            No          No            Yes            No                  Yes            Yes         Yes            No          No
Slovenia                 Yes            Yes             Yes            No          No            Yes            Yes                 Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Spain                    Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes            No                  Yes            No          No             Yes         No
                                                                                                  69

                           Is there an     Is participation in the deposit insurance
                                                                                         Are the following types of deposits excluded from deposit
                        explicit deposit     system compulsory for the following                                                                           The deposit insurance coverage type is:
                                                                                                            insurance coverage?
                            insurance                  banking entities?
                           protection                                                                            Deposits of the     Deposits of the                                Per
                                                            Foreign       Foreign       Foreign                                                           Per
                           system for      Domestic                                                Interbank        foreign             foreign                      Per         depositor
                                                             bank           bank       currency                                                        depositor                               Other
                          commercial        banks                                                   deposits      branches of        subsidiaries of               depositor        per
                                                          subsidiaries    branches     deposits                                                         account
                             banks?                                                                              domestic banks      domestic banks                             institution
Sri Lanka                      Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         Yes           No             Yes                 Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Swaziland                      Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            No             No                   No            No          No             Yes         No
Switzerland                    Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes            Yes                 Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Syria                          Yes            N/A             N/A            N/A         N/A           N/A            N/A                 N/A            N/A         N/A           N/A          N/A
Taiwan                         Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes            Yes                 Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Tajikistan                     Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes            Yes                 Yes            Yes         No             No          No
Tanzania                       Yes            Yes             Yes            N/A         No            Yes            N/A                  No            No          No             Yes         No
Thailand                       Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes                 Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Tonga                          Yes            N/A             N/A            N/A         N/A           N/A            N/A                 N/A            N/A         N/A           N/A          N/A
Trinidad and Tobago            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes                 Yes            No          Yes            Yes         Yes
Tunisia                        Yes            Yes             N/A            N/A         N/A           N/A            N/A                 N/A            N/A         Yes            Yes         Yes
Turkey                         Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes            Yes                 Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Uganda                         Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            No             No                   No            No          Yes            Yes         No
Ukraine                        Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes            Yes                 Yes            No          No             Yes         No
United Kingdom                 Yes            Yes             Yes            No          No            No             No                  Yes            No          No             Yes         No
United States                  Yes            Yes             Yes            No          No            No             No                   No            No          No             No          Yes
Uruguay                        Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         No            Yes            Yes                 Yes            No          Yes            Yes         No
Venezuela                      Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes                 Yes            No          No             Yes         No
Yemen                          Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes            No                   No            No          No             Yes         No
Zimbabwe                       Yes            Yes             Yes            N/A         No            Yes            N/A                 Yes            No          No             Yes         No
TOTAL
                  Yes         98               95             86             62          17            75               48                  68            9           18            79            9
                  No         N/A*              0              7              29          77            19               43                  24            84          76            15           86
                 N/A         N/A               3              5              7           4             4                7                   6             5           4             4            3

  * Notes: Countries that replied they had no explicit deposit scheme are Angola, Belize, Bhutan, Botswana, Burundi, Cayman Islands, China, Cook Islands, Costa Rica,
  Egypt, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Guyana, Israel, Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Mauritius, Namibia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Panama, Qatar, Seychelles, Sierra
  Leone, South Africa, Suriname, Vanuatu and Virgin Islands, British. Countries that did not provide answers to any of the questions in the table are Benin, Burkina Faso,
  Côte d'Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Mali, Nepal, Niger, Palestinian Territory, Samoa (Western) , Senegal, Togo and United Arab Emirates.
                                                      70
    Table 13: Changes in deposit insurance scheme prior to and post the global financial crisis
            (Advanced economies that suffered the global financial crisis are highlighted.)

                       Is there formal coinsurance, that is, are
                                                                    Do deposit insurance fees charged to banks
                      depositors explicitly insured for less than
      Country                                                        vary based on some assessment of risk?
                               100% of their deposits?
                          Survey III               Survey IV            Survey III             Survey IV
Algeria                      Yes                      N/A                  Yes                   N/A
Angola                       N/A                       No                  N/A                    No
Argentina                     No                       No                  Yes                    Yes
Armenia                       No                       No                  Yes                    No
Australia                    N/A                       No                  N/A                    No
Austria                       No                       No                  No                     No
Bahrain                      Yes                      Yes                  No                     No
Bangladesh                    No                       No                  No                     Yes
Belarus                       No                       No                  No                     No
Belgium                      No                        No                  Yes                    No
Bosnia and
                             No                       No                   No                      No
Herzegovina
Brazil                      No                        No                   No                     No
Bulgaria                    No                        No                   No                     No
Canada                      No                        No                   Yes                    Yes
Chile                       Yes                       Yes                  N/A                    N/A
Colombia                    Yes                       No                   Yes                    Yes
Croatia                     No                        No                   No                     No
Cyprus                      No                        No                   No                     No
Czech Republic              Yes                       N/A                  No                     N/A
Denmark                     No                        No                   No                     No
Dominican Republic          N/A                       No                   N/A                    No
Ecuador                     N/A                       No                   N/A                    Yes
El Salvador                 No                        No                   No                     Yes
Estonia                     Yes                       No                   No                     No
Ethiopia                    N/A                       No                   N/A                    No
Finland                     No                        No                   Yes                    Yes
France                      No                        No                   Yes                    Yes
Germany                     Yes                       No                   No                     Yes
Gibraltar                   Yes                       Yes                  No                     No
Greece                      No                        No                   No                     Yes
Guatemala                   Yes                       No                   No                     No
Guernsey                    N/A                       No                   N/A                    No
Honduras                    N/A                       No                   No                     No
Hong Kong, China            No                        No                   Yes                    Yes
Hungary                     Yes                       No                   Yes                    Yes
Iceland                     Yes                       No                   No                     No
India                       No                        No                   No                     No
Indonesia                   Yes                       No                   No                     No
Ireland                     Yes                       Yes                  No                     No
Isle of Man                 N/A                       No                   N/A                    No
Italy                       No                        No                   Yes                    Yes
Jamaica                     No                        No                   No                     No
Japan                       N/A                       N/A                  No                     N/A
Jersey                      N/A                       No                   N/A                    No
Jordan                      N/A                       No                   No                     No
Kazakhstan                  No                        N/A                  Yes                    N/A
Kenya                       No                        No                   Yes                    No
Korea, Rep.                 N/A                       No                   No                     No
Kosovo                      N/A                       N/A                  N/A                    Yes
Kyrgyz Republic             N/A                       N/A                  N/A                    No
Latvia                      No                        Yes                  No                     Yes
Lebanon                     Yes                       No                   No                     No
Lesotho                     N/A                       Yes                  N/A                    Yes
                                                          71
                           Is there formal coinsurance, that is, are
                                                                        Do deposit insurance fees charged to banks
                          depositors explicitly insured for less than
       Country                                                           vary based on some assessment of risk?
                                   100% of their deposits?
                              Survey III               Survey IV            Survey III             Survey IV
Liechtenstein                    N/A                       No                  No                     No
Lithuania                        yes                       No                   no                    No
Luxembourg                       No                        No                  No                     No
Macao, China                     N/A                       No                  N/A                   N/A
Macedonia                         No                      N/A                  No                    N/A
Malaysia                          No                       No                  Yes                    Yes
Malta                            Yes                       No                  N/A                    No
Mexico                            No                       No                  No                     Yes
Moldova                           No                       No                  No                     No
Montenegro                        No                       No                  No                     No
Morocco                          Yes                       No                  No                     No
Mozambique                        No                       No                  No                     Yes
Myanmar                           No                      Yes                  No                     No
Namibia                           No                       No                  No                     No
Netherlands                      No                        No                  No                     No
Nicaragua                        Yes                       No                  Yes                    Yes
Nigeria                           No                       No                  No                     Yes
Norway                            No                       No                  Yes                    Yes
Oman                             N/A                       No                  No                     No
Paraguay                         N/A                       No                  N/A                    No
Peru                              No                       No                  Yes                    Yes
Philippines                       No                       No                  Yes                    No
Poland                           Yes                       No                  No                     No
Portugal                         Yes                       No                  Yes                    Yes
Puerto Rico                      N/A                      Yes                  N/A                    Yes
Romania                           No                       No                  Yes                    No
Russia                           Yes                       No                  No                     No
Serbia                           N/A                       No                  N/A                    No
Sierra Leone                     N/A                       No                  N/A                    No
Singapore                        Yes                       No                  Yes                    Yes
Slovakia                         Yes                       No                  No                     No
Slovenia                         No                        No                  No                     No
Spain                            No                        No                  No                     No
Sri Lanka                        N/A                       No                  N/A                    Yes
Swaziland                        N/A                       No                  N/A                   N/A
Sweden                            No                      N/A                  No                    N/A
Switzerland                      No                        No                  No                     No
Taiwan                            No                       No                  Yes                    Yes
Tajikistan                       Yes                      Yes                  Yes                    No
Tanzania                          No                      N/A                  No                     No
Thailand                         N/A                       No                  N/A                    No
Trinidad and Tobago               No                       No                  No                     No
Turkey                           N/A                       No                  N/A                    Yes
Uganda                           Yes                       No                  Yes                    Yes
Ukraine                          N/A                       No                  N/A                    No
United Kingdom                   Yes                       No                  No                     No
United States                    N/A                       No                  N/A                    Yes
Uruguay                          Yes                       No                  No                     Yes
Venezuela                         No                       No                  No                     No
Virgin Islands, British          N/A                       No                  N/A                    No
Yemen                            N/A                      N/A                  N/A                    Yes
Zimbabwe                         Yes                       No                  No                     No
                                                                           72
                 Table 14: Information for selected other questions included in Surveys I-IV

                                                                                                                   Survey IV answers
                                                                                                      Number of
                            World Bank Surveys I-IV questions                                                           Number          Number
                                                                                                       countries
                                                                                                                       answering       answering
                                                                                                      providing
                                                                                                                          yes             no
                                                                                                     information
Are the sources of funds to be used as capital verified by the regulatory/supervisory authorities?      140               132              8
Which of the following are legally required to be submitted before issuance of the banking
                                                                                                        143               139              4
license? i. Source of funds to be used as capital
What were the primary reasons for denial of the applications for bank licenses?
                                                                                                         90                32             58
a. Capital amount or quality
What were the primary reasons for denial of the applications for bank licenses?
                                                                                                         89                29             69
b. Banking skills
What were the primary reasons for denial of the applications for bank licenses?
                                                                                                         89                29             60
c. Reputation
What were the primary reasons for denial of the applications for bank licenses?
                                                                                                         90                33             57
d. Incomplete application
Can related parties own capital in a bank?                                                              140               135              5
Which risks are covered by the current regulatory minimum capital requirements in your
                                                                                                        139               138              1
jurisdiction? a. Credit risk
Which of the following items are allowed as part of Tier 1 capital? c. Subordinated debt                133               18              115
Which of the following items are allowed as part of Tier 2 capital? d. Subordinated debt                133               131              2
Is an audit by a professional external auditor required for all commercial banks in your
                                                                                                        142               142              0
jurisdiction?
If yes, does the external auditor have to ...:
                                                                                                        137               131              6
a. Obtain a professional certification or pass a specific exam to qualify as such
Are specific requirements for the extent or nature of the audit spelled out?                            141               121             20
Do supervisors receive a copy of the following…:
                                                                                                        143               143              0
a. The auditor's report on the financial statements
Does the deposit insurance agency/fund administrator have the following powers as part of its
                                                                                                         99                27             72
mandate? c. Bank intervention authority
Does the deposit insurance authority by itself have the legal power to cancel or revoke deposit
                                                                                                         98                24             74
insurance for any participating bank?
Has the deposit insurance agency/fund ever taken legal action for violations against laws,
regulations, and bylaws (of the deposit insurance agency) against bank directors or other bank           94                15             79
officials?
The deposit insurance coverage type is: b. Per depositor                                                 97                17             80
Were insured depositors wholly compensated (to the extent of legal protection) the last time a
                                                                                                         67                50             17
bank failed?
Which criteria are taken into account to classify loans and advances as non-performing …?
                                                                                                        137               121             16
a. Significant financial difficulty of the borrower and deterioration in its creditworthiness
Which criteria are taken into account to classify loans and advances as non-performing …?
                                                                                                        136               127              9
b. Breach of contract (e.g. default or delinquency in interest or principal payments)
Which criteria are taken into account to classify loans and advances as non-performing …?
c. Restructuring (i.e. concession granted, for economic or legal reasons relating to the                139               124             15
borrower’s financial difficulty, that the lender would not otherwise consider)
Which criteria are taken into account to classify loans and advances as non-performing …?
                                                                                                        136               126             10
d. Borrower bankruptcy or other financial reorganization
Which criteria are taken into account to classify loans and advances as non-performing …?
                                                                                                        134               127              7
e. Days past due status (please specify number of days)
Which criteria are taken into account to classify loans and advances as non-performing …?
                                                                                                        134                89             45
f. Existence of collateral, guarantees and/or other credit mitigants
If a customer has multiple loans and advances and one of them is classified as non-performing,
                                                                                                        135                76             59
are all the other exposures automatically classified as non-performing as well?
Do you require banks to write off non-performing loans after a specific time period?                    140                53             87
Does accrued, though unpaid, interest/principal enter the income statement while the loan is still
                                                                                                        142               129             13
performing?
Does accrued, though unpaid, interest/principal enter the income statement while the loan is
                                                                                                        141                38             103
non-performing?
Are all banks operating in your country (including foreign bank branches) required to make
available to the public their annual financial statements…?                                             138               124             14
b. On a consolidated basis (if applicable)
Do banks disclose to the public …? b. Off-balance sheet items                                           143               113             30
Do banks disclose to the public …? c. Governance and risk management framework                          142               106             36
Are bank directors legally liable if information disclosed is erroneous or misleading?                  137               131              6
Are commercial banks required by supervisors to have external credit ratings?                           140               19              121
Please indicate whether the following enforcement powers are available to the supervisory
                                                                                                        140               131              9
agency: j. Require banks to reduce or suspend dividends to shareholders
Please indicate whether the following enforcement powers are available to the supervisory
agency: k. Require banks to reduce or suspend bonuses and other remuneration to bank                    138                99             39
directors and managers
Can the supervisory authority force a bank to change its internal organizational structure?             142               128             14
                                                                     73
                                     Table 15: Some new information in Survey IV

                                                                                         Number of countries    Number      Number
                          World Bank survey questions                                        providing         answering   answering
                                                                                            information           yes         no
5.13 Do supervisors delegate part of their supervisory tasks to external auditors?              104               19          85
6.5 Is the remuneration or compensation of the following individuals evaluated
as part of the supervisory process to ensure that they do not lead to excessive
                                                                                                137               84          53
risk-taking?
a. Board directors
6.5 Is the remuneration or compensation of the following individuals evaluated
as part of the supervisory process to ensure that they do not lead to excessive
                                                                                                139               85          54
risk-taking?
b. Senior bank management
6.5 Is the remuneration or compensation of the following individuals evaluated
as part of the supervisory process to ensure that they do not lead to excessive
                                                                                                136               76          60
risk-taking?
c. Other bank staff (e.g. traders)
6.5.1 If so, does the supervisory agency have the authority to take regulatory
                                                                                                102               78          24
action when it considers that the remuneration or compensation is excessive?
11.4.1 Is the insolvency framework the same for bank holding companies and
                                                                                                132               73          59
banks?
12.25 Do you conduct stress test as part of the process of assessing systemic
                                                                                                136              113          33
stability?
12.26 If you conduct stress tests, at what level are they performed….? a. at the
                                                                                                136              101          35
bank level
12.26 If you conduct stress tests, at what level are they performed….?
                                                                                                136               62          74
b. at the system wide level
12.27 Do you have any counter-cyclical regulations or tools to dampen
                                                                                                127               11         116
boom/bust cycles in credit flows? a. Counter-cyclical capital requirements
12.27 Do you have any counter-cyclical regulations or tools to dampen
                                                                                                123               8          115
boom/bust cycles in credit flows? b. Counter-cyclical loan to value ratios
12.27 Do you have any counter-cyclical regulations or tools to dampen
boom/bust cycles in credit flows? c. Granular capital requirements based on loan                124               14         110
to value ratios
12.27 Do you have any counter-cyclical regulations or tools to dampen
                                                                                                126               22         104
boom/bust cycles in credit flows? d. Counter-cyclical provisioning requirements
12.27 Do you have any counter-cyclical regulations or tools to dampen
boom/bust cycles in credit flows? e. Temporary restrictions on dividend and                     124               31          93
bonuses distribution
12.28 Do you supervise systemic institutions in a different way than non-
                                                                                                137               70          67
systemic ones?
        12.29 If yes, do you have any tools to oversee more closely and/or limit
the activities of large/interconnected institutions? a. Additional capital                       66               32          34
requirements
        12.29 If yes, do you have any tools to oversee more closely and/or limit
the activities of large/interconnected institutions? b. Additional liquidity                     66               26          40
requirements
        12.29 If yes, do you have any tools to oversee more closely and/or limit
the activities of large/interconnected institutions? c. Asset/risk diversification               66               27          41
requirements
        12.29 If yes, do you have any tools to oversee more closely and/or limit
the activities of large/interconnected institutions? d. Restrictions/limits on                   65               31          34
activities
        12.29 If yes, do you have any tools to oversee more closely and/or limit
the activities of large/interconnected institutions? e. Restrictions/limits on size of           63               11          52
institution
        12.29 If yes, do you have any tools to oversee more closely and/or limit
the activities of large/interconnected institutions? f. Additional corporate taxes               64               2           62
for large institutions
        12.29 If yes, do you have any tools to oversee more closely and/or limit
the activities of large/interconnected institutions? g. Closer or more frequent                  68               62          6
supervision
        12.29 If yes, do you have any tools to oversee more closely and/or limit
the activities of large/interconnected institutions? h. Restrictions on the group's              56               14          42
legal structure
                                                                        74
          Table 16: Was there a convergence or divergence in regulation and supervision overtime?
       (Number of countries with index values different from the median by at least 10, 25, 30 or 50 percent)

                  Total                                 Normalized
                 number                   Median         Standard                   10%               25%               30%               50%
                            Range                        Deviation
                   of
                                    Survey    Survey   Survey   Survey       Survey   Survey   Survey   Survey   Survey   Survey   Survey   Survey
                countries
                                      I         IV       I        IV           I        IV       I        IV       I        IV       I        IV
   Overall
 restrictions
                  105       3—12      7            7   0.3029   0.2851         84         90     53         51     34         25     13         7
   on bank
  activities
 Entry into
  Banking         135       0—8       8            8   0.1305   0.0591         37         20     4          1      4          1      2          0
Requirements
Bank capital
                  108       0—10      6            7   0.3051   0.2346         90         81     51         41     43         13     2          3
regulations
   Official
 supervisory      132       0—14      11        11     0.2235    0.22          65         58     36         28     7          16     4          1
   powers
  Private
                   92       0—12      8            8   0.1824   0.1843         68         63     4          8      4          7      1          0
 monitoring

  External
                   33       0—19      12        15     0.1716   0.1073         11         11     3          0      3          0      0          0
 governance
   75




APPENDIX
                                                          76
                Appendix table 1: Guide to database on bank regulation and supervision


Part 1: ENTRY INTO BANKING

1.1 What body/agency grants commercial banking licenses? Please include the name of licensing agency. If more
    than one, please describe their respective licensing roles.

1.2 Do you have the authority to take legal action against those entities that undertake banking activities without a
    given license?

1.3 Is more than one license required (e.g. one for each banking activity, such as deposit-taking, consumer lending
etc.)?

    1.3.1 If more than one license is needed, please indicate the maximum number required

1.4 What is the minimum capital entry requirement for commercial bank operations of the following types? Enter
amount (in thousands of local currency) as of end of 2010 for each option below (please state currency)

    a. Domestic bank
    b. For a subsidiary of a foreign bank
    c. For a branch of a foreign bank

    1.4.1 Does the minimum capital entry requirement vary depending on the nature of the banking businesses that
    are licensed?

             1.4.1.1 If Yes, Please explain:

    1.4.2 Are the sources of funds to be used as capital verified by the regulatory/supervisory authorities?

    1.4.3 Can the initial disbursement or subsequent injections of capital be done with assets other than cash or
    government securities?

1.5 Can initial capital contributions by prospective shareholders be in the form of borrowed funds?

1.6 Which of the following are legally required to be submitted before issuance of the banking license?

          a. Draft bylaws
          b. Intended organizational chart
          c. Structure of Board (composition, committees, functions)
          d. Market / business strategy
          e. Financial projections for first three years
          f. Financial information on main potential shareholders
          g. Background/experience of future Board directors
          h. Background/experience of future senior managers
          i. Source of funds to be used as capital
1.7 In the past 5 years (2006-2010), how many applications for commercial banking licenses from domestic entities
(i.e. those 50% or more domestically owned) have been: Enter number of applications for each option below

         a. Received
         b. Denied
         c. Withdrawn
         d. Accepted

1.8 Are foreign entities prohibited from entering through the following?
         a. Acquisition
         b. Subsidiary
         c. Branch
         d. Joint Venture
                                                          77
1.9 If acquisitions of domestic banks by foreign banks are not prohibited, what is the maximum percentage of
foreign ownership that is legally allowed?

1.10 In the past 5 years (2006-2010), how many applications from foreign banks to enter through the acquisition of a
domestic bank were: Enter number of applications for each option below?

         a. Received
         b. Denied
         c. Withdrawn
         d. Accepted

1.11 In the past 5 years (2006-2010) how many applications from foreign banks to enter through a new subsidiary
were: Enter number of applications for each option below?

         a. Received
         b. Denied
         c. Withdrawn
         d. Accepted

1.12 In the past 5 years (2006-2010) how many applications from foreign banks to enter by opening a branch were:
Enter number of applications for each option below?

         a. Received
         b. Denied
         c. Withdrawn
         d. Accepted

1.13 What were the primary reasons for denial of the applications in questions 1.7, 1.10, 1.11 and 1.12?

         a. Capital amount or quality
         b. Banking skills
         c. Reputation
         d. Incomplete application
         e. Other (please explain)
1.14 In general, how long (in number of months) has it taken for a new banking license to be issued, from receipt of
the application to final disposition?



Part 2: OWNERSHIP

2.1 Please state the bank ownership level thresholds as of end of 2010 (if they exist) that would trigger evaluation
and approval requirements by the supervisor (e.g., requirements to obtain regulatory approval once the share of bank
ownership by an individual, family or group reaches a certain percentage)

2.2 What are the requirements for evaluation / approval of significant bank shareholders?

         a. Minimum level of education
         b. Minimum level of financial and/or banking related experience
         c. Financial capacity to support bank capital
         d. No criminal record
         e. No bankruptcy record
         f. Lack of conflict of interest
         g. Other (please explain)

2.3 Is there a maximum percentage of a bank's equity that can be owned by a single owner?

2.3.1 If yes, what is the percentage as of end of 2010?

2.3.2 Please specify any differences that exist for domestic versus foreign owners
                                                            78
2.4 Does the regulator have the legal authority to oppose the ultimate (beneficial) owner when assessing bank
ownership?

2.5 Do laws or regulations require the ultimate (beneficial) owner and controller of a bank to be publicly disclosed?

         2.5.1 Can related parties own capital in a bank?

         2.5.2 If yes, what are the maximum percentages associated with the total ownership by a related party
         group (e.g., family, business associates, etc.)

2.6 Can nonfinancial firms own voting shares in commercial banks? Please see options provided and select option
that best characterizes your banking sector

         a. Nonfinancial firm may own 100% of the equity in a commercial bank.
         b. Nonfinancial firm may own 100% of the equity in a commercial bank, but prior authorization or
         approval is required.
         c. Limits are placed on ownership of banks by nonfinancial firms, such as maximum percentage of a
         commercial bank's capital or shares.
         d. Nonfinancial firms cannot own any equity investment in a commercial bank

         2.6.1 What fraction of capital in the largest 10 banks (in terms of their domestic assets) is owned by
         commercial/industrial and/or financial conglomerates? If there are fewer than 10 banks, use that number in
         your answer. Your response should reflect the situation as of end of 2010

2.7 Can nonbank financial firms (e.g. insurance companies, finance companies, etc.) own voting shares in
commercial banks? Please see options provided and select option that best characterizes your banking sector

         a. Nonbank financial firm may own 100% of the equity in a commercial bank.
         b. Nonbank financial firm may own 100% of the equity in a commercial bank, but prior authorization or
         approval is required.
         c. Limits are placed on ownership of banks by nonbank financial firms, such as maximum percentage of a
         commercial bank's capital or shares.
         d. Nonbank financial firms cannot own any equity investment in a commercial bank



Part 3: CAPITAL

Overview of regulatory capital adequacy regime

3.1 Which regulatory capital adequacy regimes did you use as of end of 2010 and for which banks does each regime
apply to (if using more than one regime)? Mark the appropriate response below and specify for which types of banks
each regime applies

         a. Basel I
         b. Basel II
         c. Leverage ratio
         d. Other (please explain)

3.2 Which risks are covered by the current regulatory minimum capital requirements in your jurisdiction? Please
specify all applicable risks.

         a. Credit risk
         b. Market risk
         c. Operational risk
         d. Other risks (please explain)

3.3.1 What was the minimum required risk-based regulatory capital ratio as of end of...?

         2008
                                                          79
         2009
         2010

3.3.2 What was the minimum required non risk-based regulatory capital ratio as of end of...?

         2008
         2009
         2010

3.4.1 What was the actual risk based capital ratio of the banking system as of end of...?

         2008
         2009
         2010

3.4.2 What was the actual non- risk based capital ratio of the banking system as of end of...?

         2008
         2009
         2010

3.5 What was the actual Tier 1 capital ratio of the banking system as of end of...?

         2008
         2009
         2010

3.6 The regulatory minimum capital requirements are applied…

         a. On a solo basis at the individual bank level
         b. On a consolidated basis at every banking group or subgroup level
         c. On a consolidated basis for the nonbank holding company (if it exists) that is the parent entity of a bank
         d. On a solo basis at the holding company level

         3.6.1 Do you require banks to perform an internal assessment of their capital adequacy against their
         economic capital?

         3.6.2 If so, do you review internal assessments performed by banks?

3.7 Does your agency have the legal authority to require additional capital that is over-and-above the minimum
required capital for individual banks if deemed necessary?

Basel I regime (please complete if applicable)

3.8 Do you apply different risk weights than those in the Basel Committee's original Basel I framework for any
material exposures (e.g. corporate lending, mortgage loans, consumer loans, loans to government etc.)?

         3.8.1 If so, please describe these differences along with the specific risk weights that are being applied.

3.9 In case you plan to move to the Basel II framework, what is the target calendar year of adoption?

Basel II regime (please complete if applicable)

3.10 What variants are offered to banks in calculating capital requirements for credit risk?

         a. Simplified standardized approach (SSA)
         b. Standardized approach (SA)
         c. Foundation internal ratings-based approach (F-IRB)
         d. Advanced internal ratings-based approach (A-IRB)
                                                          80
3.11 What was the impact of moving to Basel II on the overall regulatory capital level of the banking system? Please
select the option that best characterizes the situation in your jurisdiction

         a. Increased substantially.
         b. Increased slightly.
         c. Neutral / little change.
         d. Decreased slightly
         e. Decreased substantially

Regulatory leverage ratio (please complete if applicable)

3.12 What is the regulatory leverage ratio that you are using based on…?

         a. Minimum capital to asset multiples
         b. Maximum assets to capital multiples
         c. Other. Please explain

3.13 The leverage ratio is applied …

         a. On a solo basis at the individual bank level
         b. On a consolidated basis at every banking group or subgroup levels
         c. On a consolidated basis for the nonbank holding company (if it exists) that is the parent entity of a bank

3.14 Which concept of capital is used in calculating the leverage ratio?

         a. Total equity capital
         b. Total regulatory capital
         c. Only Tier 1 capital
         d. Other (please explain)

3.15 Are off-balance sheet items included (either in notional amounts or risk-weighted) in assets when calculating
the leverage ratio?

3.16 What was the actual leverage ratio for the banking system as of end of...?

         2008
         2009
         2010

Definition of capital

3.17 Which of the following are legally allowed in regulatory capital and which are the minimum (or maximum)
percentages? Enter Yes or No and include corresponding minimum (or maximum) percentages for each option
below:

         a. Common equity
                minimum
                maximum

         b. Tier 1
                     minimum
                     maximum

         c. Tier 2
                     minimum
                     maximum

         d. Tier 3
                     minimum
                     maximum
                                                           81
         e. Other (please explain)
                   minimum
                   maximum
         If other, please explain

3.18 Which of the following items are allowed as part of Tier 1 capital and in what percentages? Enter Yes or No
and include corresponding percentages for each option below

         a. Hybrid debt capital instruments
         b. Asset revaluation gains (or revaluation reserves)
         c. Subordinated debt

3.18.1 Which of the following items are allowed as part of Tier 2 capital and in what percentages? Enter Yes or No
and include corresponding percentages for each option below

         a. Hybrid debt capital instruments
         b. General provisions
         c. Asset revaluation gains (or revaluation reserves)
         d. Subordinated debt

3.18.2 What fraction of revaluation gains is allowed as part of capital?

3.18.3 Are the following items deducted from regulatory capital? Enter Yes or No for each option. If the response is
no, please explain their treatment."

         a. Goodwill
         Please explain
         b. Deferred tax assets
         Please explain
         c. Intangibles
         Please explain
         d. Unrealized losses in fair valued exposures
         Please explain
         e. Investment in the capital of certain banking, financial and insurance entities which are outside the scope
         of consolidation
         Please explain



Part 4: ACTIVITIES

4.1 What are the conditions under which banks can engage in securities activities?

         a. A full range of these activities can be conducted directly in banks,
         b. A full range of these activities are offered but all or some of these activities must be conducted in
         subsidiaries, or in another part of a common holding company or parent,
         c. Less than the full range of activities can be conducted in banks, or subsidiaries, or in another part of a
         common holding company or parent,
         d. None of these activities can be done in either banks or subsidiaries, or in another part of a common
         holding company or parent.

4.2 What are the conditions under which banks can engage in insurance activities?

         a. A full range of these activities can be conducted directly in banks,
         b. A full range of these activities are offered but all or some of these activities must be conducted in
         subsidiaries, or in another part of a common holding company or parent
         c. Less than the full range of activities can be conducted in banks, or subsidiaries, or in another part of a
         common holding company or parent,
         d. None of these activities can be done in either banks or subsidiaries, or in another part of a common
         holding company or parent
                                                           82

4.3 What are the conditions under which banks can engage in real estate activities?

         a. A full range of these activities can be conducted directly in banks,
         b. A full range of these activities are offered but all or some of these activities must be conducted in
         subsidiaries, or in another part of a common holding company or parent
         c. Less than the full range of activities can be conducted in banks, or subsidiaries, or in another part of a
         common holding company or parent
         d. None of these activities can be done in either banks or subsidiaries, or in another part of a common
         holding company or parent

4.4 What are the conditions under which banks can engage in nonfinancial businesses except those businesses that
are auxiliary to banking business (e.g. IT company, debt collection company, etc.)?

         a. Nonfinancial activities can be conducted directly in banks,
         b. Nonfinancial activities must be conducted in subsidiaries, or in another part of a common holding
         company or parent
         c. Nonfinancial activities may be conducted in subsidiaries, or in another part of a common holding
         company or parent, but subject to regulatory limit or approval,
         d. None of these activities can be done in either banks or subsidiaries, or in another part of a common
         holding company or parent

4.4.1 Can banks own voting shares in nonfinancial firms? Please mark the option that best characterizes the situation
in your jurisdiction

         a. A bank may own 100% of the equity in any nonfinancial firm,
         b. A bank may own 100% of the equity in a nonfinancial firm but ownership is limited based upon a bank's
         equity capital,
         c. A bank can only acquire less than 100%
         If so, please mention the maximum % which can be owned
         d. A bank may not have any equity investment in a nonfinancial firm whatsoever

4.5 In your jurisdiction, what type of financial conglomerate structures involving banks are allowed?

         a. Conglomerates whose parent is a bank
         b. Conglomerates whose parent is a non-bank financial institution (e.g. insurance company or securities
         firm)
         c. Conglomerates whose parent is a non-financial institution (e.g. non-operating financial holding
         company)



Part 5: EXTERNAL AUDITING REQUIREMENTS

Appointment and dismissal of auditors

5.1 Is an audit by a professional external auditor required for all commercial banks in your jurisdiction?

5.1.1 If yes, does the external auditor have to...?

         a. Obtain a professional certification or pass a specific exam to qualify as such
         b. Register with an appropriate public and/or professional body
         c. Have a minimum required bank auditing experience
         d. Be approved or reviewed by the supervisor (e.g. by having a pre-defined list of approved auditors or by
         providing written approval)

5.1.2 Are specific requirements for the extent or nature of the audit spelled out?

5.2 Are there mandatory rotation requirements (i.e. limits on the number of consecutive years audited) in place for
the…
                                                          83
         a. Lead auditor (engagement/concurring partner)
         b. Auditing firm

5.3 Are banks required to promptly report to the banking supervisor any change of external auditor and the reasons
for the change?

5.3.1 Are banks required to nominate more than one external auditor?

Auditing standards - scope of work

5.4 Do laws or regulations require auditors to conduct their audits in accordance with International Standards on
Auditing (ISA)?

5.5 Do regulations explicitly prohibit auditing firms from providing non-audit services to the banks whose financial
accounts they audit?

Audit findings and reports

5.6 Is the audit report on the financial statements of a bank required to be publicly disclosed together with these
financial statements?

5.7 Do supervisors receive a copy of the following ….

         a. The auditor's report on the financial statements
         b. The auditor's letter to bank management
         c. Other communication to the audit committee

5.8 Are auditors required to promptly inform banking supervisors when they intend to issue qualified opinions on
the accounts?

5.8.1 Are auditors required to promptly inform banking supervisors when they identify information that could affect
the safety and soundness of a bank?

5.9 Are auditors required to communicate directly to the supervisory agency any presumed involvement of bank
directors or senior managers in illicit activities, fraud, or insider abuse?

Relationship between the banking supervisor and external auditor

5.10 Does the banking supervisor have the right to meet with the external auditors and discuss their report without
the approval of the bank?

         a. No
         b. Yes, it happens on a regular basis.
         c. Yes, it happens on an exceptional basis.

5.11 Are external auditors subject to independent oversight by…?

         a. Ministry of Finance or other government department
         b. Specialized public entity (e.g. independent audit regulator)
         c. Banking supervisory agency
         d. Other (please explain)

5.12 In cases where the supervisor identifies that the bank has received an inadequate audit, does the supervisor have
the powers to take actions against …

         a. The bank
         b. The external auditor

5.12.1 How many actions have been taken by the supervisor in the past 5 years (2006-2010) against…?

         a. The bank
                                                          84
         b. The external auditor

5.13 Do supervisors delegate part of their supervisory tasks to external auditors?

         a. No
         b. Yes, as part of the regular supervisory process
         c. Yes, on an exceptional basis

5.14 Among the ten biggest banks in your country, how many are audited by one of the 'big four' accounting firms
(PwC, KPMG, E&Y, Deloitte)?



Part 6: BANK GOVERNANCE

Use text field below for additional notes if questions in this section are not specific enough. Please remember to
include number of questions to which you refer in your notes.

6.1 Have you issued specific guidelines or requirements that explicitly address the following areas in the governance
of commercial banks?

         a. Establishment of Audit Committee
         b. Establishment of Compensation Committee
         c. Requirement for a majority of independent directors in Board
         d. Requirement for a majority of independent directors in Audit and Compensation Committees
         e. Structure of remuneration packages for Board directors and senior management
         f. Public disclosure of remuneration packages for Board directors and senior management
         g. Board directors' responsibility for accurate and truthful financial and regulatory reporting, including
         public disclosure
         h. Separation of the roles of CEO and Board chairperson
         i. Provisions covering related party transactions
         j. Fit and proper requirements for Board and senior management
         k. Existence of independent risk management function within the bank

6.2 Do the above guidelines or requirements apply uniformly to all banks (e.g. including state-owned and foreign
banks)?

6.3 How many enforcement actions have you taken over the past 5 years (2006-2010) based on a breach of any of
the above bank governance requirements?

6.4 Does the supervisor exercise approval authority with respect to the appointment of…?

         a. Board directors
         b. Senior bank management

6.5 Is the remuneration or compensation of the following individuals evaluated as part of the supervisory process to
ensure that they do not lead to excessive risk-taking?

         a. Board directors
         b. Senior bank management
         c. Other bank staff (e.g. traders)

6.5.1 If so, does the supervisory agency have the authority to take regulatory action when it considers that the
remuneration or compensation is excessive?

6.6 Does the regulatory definition of related parties include the following…?

         a. Significant/controlling shareholders
         b. Board directors
         c. Relatives of significant/controlling shareholders and board directors
                                                           85
         d. Business interests of significant/controlling shareholders, board directors, and their relatives

6.7 Is there a regulatory limit on related party exposures?

6.7.1 If so, what is the limit as a percentage of a bank's regulatory capital?

6.8 Have you introduced changes to the bank governance framework in your country as a result of the global
financial crisis? Mark the appropriate response below and explain where appropriate

         a. New requirements on executive compensation
         b. Independence of the Board
         c. Chief risk officer direct reporting line to the Board or Board Committee
         d. Existence of a Board risk committee
         e. Other (please explain)



Part 7: LIQUIDITY & DIVERSIFICATION REQUIREMENTS

Risk concentrations

7.1 Are banks limited in their lending to a single borrower or a group of inter-related borrowers?

7.1.1 If yes, what is the limit as a percentage of a bank's regulatory capital?

7.1.2 Are there any exempted items (e.g. cash secured lending, government or government guaranteed lending etc.)
in applying the limits?

7.2 Are there any regulatory rules or supervisory guidelines regarding asset diversification?

         If yes, please explain.

7.2.2 Are banks prohibited from making loans abroad?

Regulatory liquidity requirements

7.3 Are there regulatory rules or supervisory guidelines regarding the following aspects of banks' liquidity
management?

         a. Diversification of funding sources
         b. Contingency funding plans, including stress testing

7.3.1 If so, do they also apply for foreign branches?

         a. Diversification of funding sources
         b. Contingency funding plans, including stress testing

7.4 Are the following requirements in place in your jurisdiction?

         a. Banks' liquidity management of foreign currencies
         b. Central Bank reserve and/or deposit requirements
         c. Regulatory minimum ratio on liquid assets (e.g. as a percentage of total balance sheet or deposit base)
         d. Maturity mismatches/'gap' limits

7.4.1 Are banks required to hold reserves in foreign currencies or other foreign-denominated instruments in order to
fulfill the requirements listed above?
                                                            86
Part 8: DEPOSITOR (SAVINGS) PROTECTION SCHEMES

Organizational arrangements

8.1 Is there an explicit deposit insurance protection system for commercial banks?

8.2 Is there a legally separate deposit insurance agency?

         a. Yes
         b. No - within central bank.
         c. No - within banking supervision agency.
         d. No - within Ministry of Finance.
         e. Other (please explain)

8.2.1 The insurance fund is managed by…:

         a. the private sector alone
         b. jointly by private/public officials
         c. the public sector alone

8.3 Is the deposit insurance fund used for purposes other than depositor protection (e.g. liquidity provision to
banks)?

8.4 Does the deposit insurance agency/fund administrator have the following powers as part of its mandate?

         a. Bank examination authority
         b. Authority to access information collected by banking supervisors
         c. Bank intervention authority
         d. Method of failure resolution authority
         e. Paybox authority

8.4.1 Does the deposit insurance authority by itself have the legal power to cancel or revoke deposit insurance for
any participating bank?

8.4.2 Can the deposit insurance agency/fund take legal action for violations against laws, regulations, and bylaws (of
the deposit insurance agency) against bank directors or other bank officials?

8.4.3 Has the deposit insurance agency/fund ever taken legal action for violations against laws, regulations, and
bylaws (of the deposit insurance agency) against bank directors or other bank officials?

Membership and coverage

8.5 Is participation in the deposit insurance system compulsory for the following banking entities?

         a. Domestic banks
         b. Foreign bank subsidiaries
         c. Foreign bank branches

8.6 Are the following types of deposits excluded from deposit insurance coverage?

         a. Foreign currency deposits
         b. Interbank deposits
         c. Deposits of the foreign branches of domestic banks
         d. Deposits of the foreign subsidiaries of domestic banks

8.7 The deposit insurance coverage type is:

         a. Per depositor account
         b. Per depositor
         c. Per depositor per institution
                                                           87
          d. Other (please explain)

8.8 What is the basic deposit insurance limit per category of insured deposits as of end of 2010? Please enter amount
in thousands of local currency

8.9 Is the coverage amount indexed to prices?

8.10 Is there formal coinsurance, i.e. are ALL depositors explicitly insured for less than 100% of their deposits?

8.11 What percentage of the total deposits of participating commercial banks was actually covered by the scheme as
of end of...?

          2008
          2009
          2010

8.11.1 As a share of total assets, what is the value of large denominated debt liabilities of banks (e.g. subordinated
debt, bonds, etc.) that are definitely not covered by any explicit or implicit savings protection scheme?

Funding

8.12 Is there an ex ante fund/reserve to cover deposit insurance claims in the event of the failure of a member bank?

8.13 Funding is provided by...:

          a. Government
          b. Banks
          c. Combination/Other (please explain)

8.13.1 If prefunded, what is the ratio of accumulated funds to total bank assets as of end of 2010?

8.14 Do deposit insurance fees/premiums charged to banks vary based on some assessment of risk?

8.15 Is the premium assessed on a participating bank's….?

          a. Insured deposits
          b. Total deposits
          c. Total assets
          d. Other (please explain)

Depositor reimbursement

8.16 What event triggers a claim for payment by the deposit insurance system?

          a. Court-declared bank bankruptcy
          b. Banking supervisor decision
          c. Deposit insurance agency/fund administrator decision
          d. Other (please explain)

8.17 From the time of the event's trigger, within how many days is the deposit insurance scheme legally obligated to
fully reimburse insured depositors?

Other relevant information:

8.17.1 In general, how long (in days) does it take in practice to pay depositors in full?

8.17.2 Were insured depositors wholly compensated (to the extent of legal protection) the last time a bank failed?

8.17.3 Were any deposits not explicitly covered by the deposit insurance scheme at the time of failure compensated
the last time a bank failed (excluding funds later paid out in liquidation procedures)?
                                                          88
8.18 What happens when the deposit insurance fund is insufficiently large to be able to fully refund depositors?

         a. Call on banks for the shortfall
         b. Call on the Ministry of Finance for the shortfall
         c. Borrow money
         d. Limit payouts
         e. Other (please explain)

8.18.1 Has such a situation occurred in the last 5 years (2006-2010)?

8.19 Have you introduced changes to your deposit protection system as a result of the global financial crisis? Mark
the appropriate response below and explain where appropriate

         a. Expansion of coverage (types of exposures, nature of depositors etc.)
         b. Increase in amount covered
         c. Temporary inclusion of guarantees on bank debt
         d. Government guarantee of deposits and bank debts
         e. Other (please explain)



Part 9: ASSET CLASSIFICATION, PROVISIONING, AND WRITE-OFFS

Asset classification

9.1 Do you have an asset classification system under which banks have to report the quality of their loans and
advances using a common regulatory scale?

9.1.1 If so, please provide the type and number of different asset classification categories (e.g. 1-5, AAA-CCC etc.)
that you are using in this system

9.1.2 Please specify whether it ….:

         a. Applies to all commercial banks
         b. Covers all types of borrowers (e.g. including government)
         c. Covers all loans and advances to a borrower
         d. Imposes a uniform classification requirement for specific borrowers (e.g. government and/or state-owned
         enterprises can only be graded at or above a certain category)

9.1.3 After how many days is a loan in arrears classified as …?: Provide numbers for each of the three loan
categories listed

         a. Sub-standard?
         b. Doubtful?
         c. Loss?

9.2 Which criteria are taken into account to classify loans and advances as non-performing …?:

         a. Significant financial difficulty of the borrower and deterioration in its creditworthiness
         b. Breach of contract (e.g. default or delinquency in interest or principal payments)
         c. Restructuring (i.e. concession granted, for economic or legal reasons relating to the borrower’s financial
         difficulty, that the lender would not otherwise consider)
         d. Borrower bankruptcy or other financial reorganization
         e. Days past due status (please specify number of days)
         f. Existence of collateral, guarantees and/or other credit mitigants
         g. Other (please explain)

9.3 Does accrued, though unpaid, interest/principal enter the bank's income statement while the loan is classified as
non-performing?
                                                          89
9.4 Are banks allowed to upgrade the classification of a loan or advance immediately after it has been restructured?

9.5 If a customer has multiple loans and advances and one of them is classified as non-performing, are all the other
exposures automatically classified as non-performing as well?

Provisioning of classified loans

9.6 Are there minimum levels of specific provisions for loans and advances that are set by the regulator?

9.6.1 If so, are these linked to the regulatory asset classification system mentioned in question 9.1 above?

9.6.2 Please specify whether these minimum specific provisioning rules...:

         a. Allow for the value of the collateral to be deducted from the amount of a loan or advance before
         provisioning is applied
         b. Apply to all commercial banks
         c. Cover all types of borrowers (e.g. including government)
         d. Cover all loans and advances to a borrower
         e. Impose uniform provisioning requirements for specific borrowers (e.g. loans to government and/or state-
         owned enterprises do not require provisions)

9.6.3 What is the minimum provisioning required as loans become …

          a. Sub-standard?
          b. Doubtful?
          c. Loss?
9.7 Is there a regulatory requirement for general provisions on loans and advances?

9.7.1 If so, what are general provisions based on?

         a. Percentage of gross loans.
         b. Statistical/counter-cyclical system of provisioning.
         c. Other - please explain

Write-offs

9.8 Do you require banks to write off non-performing loans after a specific time period?

9.8.1 If so, what is the maximum time (in months) that a loan or advance can be non-performing before it has to be
written off?

Other

9.9 Up to what level (if any) are the following types of provisions tax deductible?

         a. Specific provisions
         b. General provisions



Part 10: ACCOUNTING/INFORMATION DISCLOSURE

Scope of accounting consolidation

10.1 Are banks required to prepare consolidated accounts for accounting purposes?

Accounting standards

10.2.1 Are applicable accounting standards for banks in your country prepared in accordance with U.S. Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP)?
                                                          90
         a. At individual bank level
         b. At consolidated level

10.2.2 Are applicable accounting standards for banks in your country prepared in accordance with IFRS?

         a. At individual bank level
         b. At consolidated level

10.2.3 If response to 10.2.1 and 10.2.2 is no, please explain each case under options a and b:

         a. Any major deviations between local and international accounting standards
         b. Which authority in your country sets the accounting standards for banks (e.g. banking supervisor,
         accounting board etc.)

10.2.4 Does accrued, though unpaid, interest/principal enter the income statement while the loan is still performing?

10.2.5 Does accrued, though unpaid, interest/principal enter the income statement while the loan is non-performing?

Public disclosure standards

10.3 Are all banks operating in your country (including foreign bank branches) required to make available to the
public their annual financial statements?

         a. On an individual basis
         b. On a consolidated basis (if applicable)

10.4 Are banks required to submit their financial statements to the banking supervisor prior to public disclosure?

10.4.1 If yes, respond to yes or no to each option provided below:

         a. Is the supervisor required to review them?
         b. Can the supervisor require changes to them before they are published?

10.5 Do banks disclose to the supervisors…?

         a. Full audited financial statements
         b. Off-balance sheet items
         c. Governance and risk management framework
         d. Regulatory capital and capital adequacy ratio
         e. Transactions with related parties
         f. Any other material information (i.e. information which omission or misstatement could change or
         influence the assessment or decision of a user relying on that information for making decisions)
         g. Scope of consolidation (including reasons for not including certain entities, where appropriate)

10.5.1 Do banks disclose to the public …?

         a. Full audited financial statements
         b. Off-balance sheet items
         c. Governance and risk management framework
         d. Regulatory capital and capital adequacy ratio
         e. Transactions with related parties
         f. Any other material information (i.e. information which omission or misstatement could change or
         influence the assessment or decision of a user relying on that information for making decisions)
         g. Scope of consolidation (including reasons for not including certain entities, where appropriate)

10.5.2 Are bank directors legally liable if information disclosed is erroneous or misleading?

10.6 Do supervisors require banks to publicly disclose…

         a. All fines and settlements resulting from non-compliance with regulations
                                                           91
         b. Other information not required by financial reporting standards (e.g. prudential reports). If so, please
         explain.

10.7 Are commercial banks required by supervisors to have external credit ratings?

10.8 How many of the top ten banks (in terms of total domestic assets) are rated by international credit rating
agencies (e.g., Moody's, Standard and Poor)?

10.9 How many of the top ten banks (in terms of total domestic assets) are rated by domestic credit rating agencies?



Part 11: DISCIPLINE/ PROBLEM INSTITUTIONS/ EXIT

Enforcement

11.1 Please indicate whether the following enforcement powers are available to the supervisory agency

         a. Cease and desist-type orders for imprudent bank practices
         b. Forbearance (i.e. to waive regulatory and supervisory requirements)
         c. Require a bank to meet supervisory requirements (e.g. capital, liquidity etc.) that are stricter than the
         legal or regulatory minimum
         d. Require bank to enhance governance, internal controls and risk management systems
         e. Require bank to apply specific provisioning and/or write-off policies
         f. Require banks to constitute provisions to cover actual or potential losses
         g. Restrict or place conditions on the types of business conducted by bank
         h. Withdraw the bank's license
         i. Require banks to reduce/restructure their operations (e.g. via asset sales and branch closures) and adjust
         their risk profile
         j. Require banks to reduce or suspend dividends to shareholders
         k. Require banks to reduce or suspend bonuses and other remuneration to bank directors and managers
         l. Suspend or remove bank directors
         m. Suspend or remove managers
         n. Require commitment/action from controlling shareholder(s) to support the bank with new equity (e.g.
         capital restoration plan)

11.1.1 Are bank regulators/supervisors required to make public formal enforcement actions, which include cease and
desist orders and written agreements between a bank regulatory/supervisory body and a banking organization?

11.2 Please indicate how many times any of the above enforcement actions in the last 5 years (2006-2010):

         a. Have been contested in court
         b. Have been overturned by the court

11.3 Does the supervisory agency operate an early intervention framework (e.g. prompt corrective action) that forces
automatic action when certain regulatory triggers/thresholds are breached?

11.3.1 If so, what triggers/thresholds are used for initiating automatic actions?

         a. Breach of minimum regulatory capital adequacy ratio
         b. Breach of other regulatory requirements (e.g. liquidity ratio, fit and proper criteria)
         c. Evaluation of likely non-viability given trends and risk factors
         d. Other (please specify)

Resolution

11.4 Is there a separate bank insolvency framework that is distinct from that of non-financial firms?

11.4.1 Is the insolvency framework the same for bank holding companies and banks? If not please explain the
differences
                                                           92
11.5 Which authority has the powers to perform the following problem bank resolution activities?

Enter the initials of the corresponding authority from the following list of options: BS = Bank Supervisor, C =
Court, DIA = Deposit Insurance Agency, BR/AMC = Bank Restructuring or Asset Management Agency, OTH =
Other - please specify)."

         a. Declare insolvency
         Other - please specify
         b. Supersede shareholders' rights
         Other - please specify
         c. Remove and replace bank senior management and directors
         Other - please specify
         d. Undertake bank resolution mechanisms
         Other - please specify
         e. Appoint and oversee a bank liquidator/receiver
         Other - please specify

11.6 Is court approval required for the following bank resolution activities?

         a. Declare insolvency
         b. Supersede shareholders' rights
         c. Remove and replace bank senior management and directors
         d. Undertake bank resolution mechanisms
         e. Appoint and oversee a bank liquidator/receiver

11.7 Can the bank shareholders appeal to the court against a resolution decision of the banking supervisor?

11.7.1 If yes, how many appeals were made in the past 5 years (2006-2010)?

11.7.1.1 Of which, how many were successful?

11.8 Can a resolution action against a bank continue if a court action is filed, or does the court appeal lead to the
suspension of such action until a ruling is made?

11.9 Which mechanisms are provided in existing legislation to resolve a problem bank prior to its closure and
liquidation?

         a. Open bank assistance
         b. Purchase and assumption transaction (with or without government support)
         c. Government intervention (e.g. via conservatorship or nationalization)
         d. Bridge bank
         e. Other (please specify)

11.10.1 How many banks were resolved in...?

         2008
         2009
         2010

11.10.2 How many banks were liquidated in...?

         2008
         2009
         2010

11.11.1 What proportion of banking system assets were resolved in...?

         2008
         2009
         2010
                                                          93

11.11.2 What proportion of banking system assets were liquidated in...?

         2008
         2009
         2010

11.12 Have you introduced significant changes to the bank resolution framework in your country as a result of the
global financial crisis?

         a. Introduce a separate bank insolvency framework
         b. Implement coordination arrangements among domestic authorities
         c. Other, please explain



Part 12: SUPERVISION

Institutional Structure and Mandate

12.1 What body/agency supervises commercial banks for prudential purposes?

         a. The Central Bank.
         b. A single bank supervisory agency / superintendency.
         c. Multiple bank supervisory agencies / superintendencies including the Central Bank
         d. Multiple bank supervisory agencies / superintendencies excluding the Central Bank
         e. Other (please explain)

12.1.1 Are there any banks that are not under the jurisdiction of this agency?

         If yes, please explain

12.2 Is the body/agency in charge of supervising banks also responsible for the supervision of the following
financial sectors?

         a. Insurance
         b. Securities
         c. Pension funds
         d. Other (please explain)

12.3 Does the body/agency have a specific mandate set out in written form?

12.3.1 If so, which of the following financial system responsibilities does the mandate also include?

         a. Systemic/financial stability
         b. Market conduct
         c. Consumer protection
         d. Prevention of financial crime (anti-money laundering / combating financing of terrorism)
         e. Competition/antitrust policy
         f. Financial market access/development
         g. Deposit insurance
         h. Bank restructuring/resolution
         i. Other (please explain)

12.3.2 Can the supervisory authority force a bank to change its internal organizational structure?

12.4 To whom is the supervisory agency legally responsible or accountable?

         a. The head of government (e.g. President, Prime Minister)
         b. The Finance Minister or other cabinet level official
                                                          94
         c. A legislative body, such as Parliament or Congress
         d. Other (please explain)

12.5 How is the head of the supervisory agency appointed?

         a. Decision of the head of government (e.g. President, Prime Minister)
         b. Decision of the Finance Minister or other cabinet level authority
         c. Decision of a legislative body, such as Parliament or Congress
         d. Other (please explain)

12.5.1 Is the appointment based on a recommendation by an external expert or panel of experts?

12.6 Does the head of the supervisory agency have a fixed term?

12.6.1 If yes, how long (in years) is the term?

12.6.2 Is there a maximum number of terms?

12.6.3 If yes, please respond how many terms are permitted.

12.7 Can the head of the supervisory agency be removed by…?

         a. Decision of the head of government (e.g. President, Prime Minister)
         b. Decision of the Finance Minister or other cabinet level authority
         c. Decision of a legislative body, such as Parliament or Congress
         d. Other (please explain)

12.8 Does the supervisory agency need to obtain approval from the government in order to…?

         a. Issue binding secondary regulations for the banking sector
         b. Determine its budget
         c. Obtain funding
         d. Hire and fire senior staff
         e. Define salaries and benefits structure of staff
         f. Define its organizational structure

12.9 Can individual supervisory staff be held personally liable for damages to a bank caused by their actions or
omissions committed in the good faith exercise of their duties?

12.9.1 If so, has individual supervisory staff been held personally liable in the last 5 years (2006-2010)?

12.10 Can the supervisory agency be held legally liable for damages to a bank caused by its actions?

12.10.1 If so, has the supervisory agency been held legally liable in the last 5 years (2006-2010)?

12.11 Is a formal consultation process with the industry and the public required prior to the introduction of new
regulations?

12.12 If an infraction of any prudential regulation is found in the course of supervision, must it be reported?

12.12.1 Are there mandatory actions that the supervisor must take in these cases?

12.12.2 Who authorizes exceptions to such actions?

12.12.3 How many exceptions were granted during the last 5 years (2006-2010)?

Supervisory Approach

12.13 Please rank from 1-3 (1 being the most important) the relative importance placed on the following activities in
banking supervision. Place ranking next to each option
                                                            95
         a. Analysis and monitoring of compliance and trends observed from reported prudential returns
         b. Review of the accuracy of reports and of regulatory compliance
         c. Assessment of the risk profile, strategic direction, financial condition, internal governance and controls,
         and risk management

12.14 The internal organization of banking supervision can be best characterized as...:

         a. Integrated on-site and offsite activities for each entity under a senior/managing supervisor
         b. Resident supervisory teams in large systemic complex banks and groups
         c. Existence of specialized examiners (e.g. Treasury, IT, risk management) that can be used across different
         banks

12.15 Which of the following best describes the bank risk rating methodology used by your agency?

         a. A rating system using only ratios and indicators built with reported information
         b. A rating system combining quantitative information with qualitative assessments of management and
         controls
         c. A broader risk rating system combining quantitative and qualitative measures of inherent risk,
         management and controls, and residual risk by type of bank activity and/or risk category
         d. Other (please explain)

12.16 Is the intensity and frequency of supervisory activities explicitly linked to the bank's risk rating?

12.17 Is the risk rating disclosed to the bank's Board?

12.18 Do you undertake on-site inspections for material foreign operations (whether in the form of branches or
subsidiaries) of your banks or do you only rely on host country supervisors?

12.19 How many onsite examinations per bank were performed in the last 5 years (2006-2010)?

12.20 How frequently are onsite inspections conducted in large and medium size banks?

Consolidated Supervision

12.21 If you do not have an integrated financial supervisory agency covering all significant financial institutions,
how is a financial group with significant banking activities supervised?

         a. The banking supervisory agency/body is legally empowered to act as the 'lead/supplemental supervisor'
         and supervises on a consolidated basis
         b. The banking supervisory agency/body is nominated as the 'lead/supplemental supervisor' under informal
         arrangements between the relevant parties and supervises on a consolidated basis
         c. There is no 'lead/supplemental supervisor' but there is coordination between financial supervisors
         formalized in MOUs
         d. Other (please explain)

Systemic Supervision

12.22 Is there a specialized department in your agency dealing with financial stability and systemic supervision?

12.22.1 Which of the following factors do you consider in assessing systemic risk?

         a. Bank capital ratios
         b. Bank leverage ratios
         c. Bank profitability ratios
         d. Bank liquidity ratios
         f. Growth in bank credit
         g. Sectorial composition of bank loan portfolios
         h. FX position of banks
         i. Bank non-performing loan ratios
         j. Bank provisioning ratios
                                                           96
         k. Stock market prices
         l. Housing prices
         m. Other (please specify)

12.23 Is your agency responsible for publishing a financial stability report?

12.24 If your agency is not directly responsible for publishing a financial stability report, do you provide input to the
responsible agency for such a report?

12.25 Do you conduct stress test as part of the process of assessing systemic stability?

12.26 If you conduct stress tests, at what level are they performed…?

         a. at the bank level
         b. at the system wide level
         c. other, please explain

12.27 Do you have any counter-cyclical regulations or tools to dampen boom/bust cycles in credit flows? Enter Yes
or No and enter date (in format: MM/DD/YYYY) when they came or will come into effect

         a. Counter-cyclical capital requirements
         Date:
         b. Counter-cyclical loan to value ratios
         Date:
         c. Granular capital requirements based on loan to value ratios
         Date:
         d. Counter-cyclical provisioning requirements
         Date:
         e. Temporary restrictions on dividend and bonuses distribution
         Date:

12.28 Do you supervise systemic institutions in a different way than non-systemic ones?

12.29 If yes, do you have any tools to oversee more closely and/or limit the activities of large/interconnected
institutions? Enter Yes or No and enter date (in format: MM/DD/YYYY) when they came or will come into effect

         a. Additional capital requirements
         Date:
         b. Additional liquidity requirements
         Date:
         c. Asset/risk diversification requirements
         Date:
         d. Restrictions/limits on activities
         Date:
         e. Restrictions/limits on size of institution
         Date:
         f. Additional corporate taxes for large institutions
         Date:
         g. Closer or more frequent supervision
         Date:
         h. Restrictions on the group's legal structure
         Date:
         i. Other
         Date:
         If Other, please explain

Supervisory Staff

12.30 How many professional bank supervisors are there in total (excluding all support functions and management)?
                                                           97
12.31 Of those, how many are specialized in specific bank functions (e.g. IT, Treasury) or risks (e.g. credit / market /
operational risk)?

12.32 What percentage of the supervisors has graduated from a four year college/university?

12.33 What percentage of the supervisors has post-graduate degrees such as MBAs, CPA or CFAs?

12.34 How many hours of training (at the supervisory agency or elsewhere) on average have supervisors had in the
last year?

12.35 What is the annual average salary of a senior supervisor (someone with 10 or more years of experience in
bank supervision)? (In thousands of local currency)

12.36 What was the annual total budget for banking supervision during 2010? (In thousands of local currency)

12.37 What was the source of this funding?

         a. Allocation from government budget
         b. Fees and assessments paid by regulated banks
         c. Other (please explain)

12.38 How many of the bank supervisors have more than 10 years experience in bank supervision?

12.39 What is the average tenure of banking supervisors (i.e. what is the average number of years that staffs have
been supervisors)?



Part 13: BANKING SECTOR CHARACTERISTICS

Size

13.1 How many commercial banks were there at the end of...?

         2008
         2009
         2010

13.1.1 Of all deposit taking institutions in your country, what fraction of their assets is held by just commercial
banks at the end of...?

         2008
         2009
         2010

13.2 What were the total assets of all commercial banks at the end of…? (In thousands of local currency)

         2008
         2009
         2010

13.3 What was the total equity of all commercial banks at the end of…? (In thousands of local currency)

         2008
         2009
         2010

13.4 What were the total deposits of all commercial banks at the end of…? (In thousands of local currency)

         2008
         2009
                                                         98
         2010

13.5 What were the total loans of all commercial banks at the end of…? (In thousands of local currency)

         2008
         2009
         2010

Structure of the banking sector

13.6 Of commercial banks in your country, what percent of total assets was held by the five largest banks at the end
of...?

         2008
         2009
         2010

13.6.1 Of commercial banks in your country, what percent of total deposits was held by the five largest banks at the
end of...?

         2008
         2009
         2010

13.7.1 What percent of the banking system's assets was in banks that were government-controlled (e.g., where
government owned 50% or more equity) at the end of…?

         2008
         2009
         2010

13.7.2 What percent of the banking system's assets was in banks that were foreign-controlled (e.g., where foreigners
owned 50% or more equity) at the end of…?

         2008
         2009
         2010

13.8 What percent of the total foreign-owned bank assets in your domestic banking system was held in branches as
opposed to other juridical forms (e.g. subsidiaries) at the end of...?

         2008
         2009
         2010

Performance

13.9 What was the after-tax return on equity for the commercial banking system at the end of...?

         2008
         2009
         2010

13.10 What was the aggregate net interest margin for the commercial banking system at the end of...? (In thousands
of local currency)

         2008
         2009
         2010
                                                          99
13.11 What percent of the commercial banking system's total gross income was in the form of non-interest income
in at the end of...?

         2008
         2009
         2010

13.12 What were the aggregate operating costs to assets ratio for the commercial banking system in at the end of...?

         2008
         2009
         2010

13.13 What was the ratio of non-performing loans (gross of provisions) to total gross loans at the end of …?

         2008
         2009
         2010

13.14 What was the ratio of specific provisions to gross non-performing loans at the end of...?

         2008
         2009
         2010

13.15 What was the ratio of general provisions to total gross loans at the end of...?

         2008
         2009
         2010

Asset and liabilities composition

13.16 What percent of the commercial banking system’s assets was foreign-currency denominated at the end of...?

         2008
         2009
         2010

13.17 What percent of the commercial banking system’s liabilities was foreign-currency denominated at the end
of...?

         2008
         2009
         2010

13.18 What percent of the commercial banking system’s assets was in public sector claims at the end of...?

         2008
         2009
         2010

13.19 What percent of the commercial banking system’s assets is funded with deposits at the end of...?

         2008
         2009
         2010

13.20 What percentage of total bank assets were residential real estate loans at the end of...?
                                                        100
         2008
         2009
         2010

13.21 What percentage of total bank assets were commercial real estate loans at the end of...?

         2008
         2009
         2010

13.22 What percentage of residential real estate loans were securitized at the end of…?

         2008
         2009
         2010

Other

13.23 What is the statutory corporate tax rate on domestic bank income as of end of 2010?

13.24 What was the effective tax rate on the aggregate commercial banking system's pre-tax income at the end of
2010?



Part 14: CONSUMER PROTECTION

14.1 Does your agency have the responsibility to implement, oversee and/or enforce any aspect of financial
consumer protection laws and regulations that apply to banks?

         a. Yes
         b. No, financial consumer protection laws and regulations are implemented, overseen and enforced by other
         government agencies.
         c. Other, please describe

14.2 If your agency has the responsibility to implement, oversee and/or enforce any aspect of financial consumer
protection laws, is there a separate unit or team designated to work on consumer protection in your agency?

         a. Yes
         b. No
         c. Does not apply

14.3 What actions can your agency take to enforce consumer protection laws and regulations?

         a. Issue warnings to financial institutions
         b. Require providers to refund excess charges
         c. Require providers to withdraw misleading advertisements
         d. Impose fines and penalties
         e. Issue public notice of violations
         f. Withdraw the offending provider’s license to operate
         g. Other, please specify

14.4 Please indicate the number of times the actions stated above in 14.3 were taken in the past 5 years (2006-2010)

         a. Issue warnings to financial institutions
         b. Require providers to refund excess charges
         c. Require providers to withdraw misleading advertisements
         d. Impose fines and penalties
         e. Issue public notice of violations
         f. Withdraw the offending provider’s license to operate
                                                        101
         g. Other, please specify

14.5 By law or regulations, are banks required to notify consumers in writing of pricing, terms and conditions of
financial products prior to signing an agreement?

14.6 By law or regulation, which of the following are part of the disclosure requirements mentioned in 14.5 that
banks need to comply with upon signing any financial product contract:

         a. Plain language requirement (Clear and simple language that can be readily understood by any customer)
         b. Local language requirement
         c. Prescribed standardized disclosure format (e.g., one-page "Key Facts" document)
         d. Clearly spell out recourse rights and processes

14.7 By law or regulation, which of the following are part of the disclosure requirements mentioned in 14.5 that
banks need to comply with upon signing a deposit contract:

         a. Annual percentage yield and interest rate
         b. Method of compounding
         c. Minimum balance requirements
         d. Fees and penalties
         e. Early withdrawal penalties

14.8 By law or regulation, which of the following are part of the disclosure requirements mentioned in 14.5 that
banks need to comply with upon signing a credit contract:

         a. Annual percentage rate using a standard formula
         b. Fees
         c. Computation method (average balance, interest)
         d. Required insurance

14.9 By law or regulation, are banks required to provide their customers with a periodic statement of their accounts?

         a. Yes, periodic statement must be provided free of charge with the following frequency:
         i. Monthly
         ii. Quarterly
         iii. Annually
         iv. Other
         b. No, but a statement can be provided free of charge upon customer request
         c. No, but customer can purchase this additional service
         d. Regulations do not specify

14.10 By law or regulation, which of the following are parts of the disclosure requirements for periodic statements
for deposit products?

         a. Annual percentage yield calculated using a standard formula
         b. Amount of interest earned
         c. Fees imposed
         d. Account balance

14.11 By law or regulation, which of the following are parts of the disclosure requirements for periodic statements
for credit products?

         a. All transactions concerning the account for the period covered by the statement
         b Annual percentage rate (applied during the period)
         c Interest charged for the period
         d. Fees charged for the period
         e. Minimum amount due
         f. Date due
         g. Outstanding balance
                                                          102

14.12 Are there specific provisions in the existing laws or regulations that restrict:

         a. Deceptive advertising
         b. Unfair or high-pressure selling practices
         c. Abusive collection practices
         d. Unauthorized use of client data or breach of client confidentiality

14.13 Does any law or regulation set standards for complaints resolution and handling by financial institutions,
including:

         a. Requirement for financial institutions to implement procedures and processes for resolving customer
         complaints
         b. Timeliness of response by financial institution
         c. Accessibility (i.e. can a complaint be filed with a local branch, by phone, etc.)

14.14 Is there a system in place that allows a customer of a financial institution to seek affordable and efficient
recourse with a third party (a financial ombudsman or equivalent institution) in the event that the customer’s
complaint is not resolved to the customer’s satisfaction under internal procedures of the relevant financial
institution?

         a. Yes, financial ombudsman
         b. Yes, general ombudsman
         c. Yes, a mediation service
         d. No, dispute has to be resolved in court
                                                 103
                  Appendix table 2: Countries participating in the World Bank surveys

                                                                                        All four
            Country              Survey I      Survey II    Survey III    Survey IV
                                                                                        surveys
Albania                             X             X
Algeria                                           X             X
Angola                                                          X             X
Anguilla                                          X             X
Antigua and Barbuda                               X             X
Argentina                           X             X             X             X            X
Armenia                             X             X             X             X            X
Aruba                               X             X
Australia                           X             X             X             X            X
Austria                             X             X             X             X            X
Azerbaijan                          X             X
Bahrain                             X             X             X             X            X
Bangladesh                          X                           X             X
Belarus                             X             X             X             X            X
Belgium                             X             X             X             X            X
Belize                                            X             X             X
Benin                                             X             X             X
Bhutan                              X             X             X             X            X
Bolivia                             X             X             X
Bosnia and Herzegovina              X             X             X             X            X
Botswana                            X             X             X             X            X
Brazil                              X             X             X             X            X
Bulgaria                            X             X             X             X            X
Burkina Faso                                      X             X             X
Burundi                             X             X             X             X            X
Cambodia                            X             X
Cameroon                                          X             X
Canada                              X             X             X             X            X
Cayman Islands                      X                           X             X
Central African Republic                          X             X
Chad                                              X             X
Chile                               X             X             X             X            X
China                               X                           X             X
Colombia                                          X             X             X
Congo, Rep.                                       X             X
Cook Islands                                                    X             X
Costa Rica                                        X             X             X
Côte d'Ivoire                                     X             X             X
Croatia                             X             X             X             X            X
Cyprus                              X             X             X             X            X
Czech Republic                      X             X             X
Denmark                             X             X             X             X            X
Dominica                                          X             X
Dominican Republic                                              X             X
Ecuador                                           X                           X
Egypt                               X             X             X             X            X
El Salvador                         X             X             X             X            X
Equatorial Guinea                                 X             X
Estonia                             X             X             X             X            X
Ethiopia                                                        X             X
Fiji                                              X             X             X
Finland                             X             X             X             X            X
France                              X             X             X             X            X
Gabon                                             X             X
Gambia                              X             X                           X
Georgia                             X
Germany                             X             X             X             X            X
Ghana                               X             X             X             X            X
Gibraltar                           X             X             X             X            X
Greece                              X             X             X             X            X
Grenada                                           X             X
                                     104
                                                                        All four
             Country    Survey I   Survey II   Survey III   Survey IV
                                                                        surveys
Guatemala                  X          X            X           X           X
Guernsey                   X          X            X           X           X
Guinea                                X
Guinea-Bissau                         X            X           X
Guyana                     X          X            X           X           X
Honduras                   X          X            X           X           X
Hong Kong, China                      X            X           X
Hungary                    X          X            X           X           X
Iceland                    X          X            X           X           X
India                      X          X            X           X           X
Indonesia                  X                       X           X
Iraq                                                           X
Ireland                    X          X            X           X           X
Isle of Man                           X            X           X
Israel                     X          X            X           X           X
Italy                      X          X            X           X           X
Jamaica                    X                       X           X
Japan                      X          X            X
Jersey                                X            X           X
Jordan                     X          X            X           X           X
Kazakhstan                 X          X            X           X           X
Kenya                      X          X            X           X           X
Korea, Rep.                X          X            X           X           X
Kosovo                                             X           X
Kuwait                     X          X            X           X           X
Kyrgyz Republic            X          X            X           X           X
Latvia                     X          X            X           X           X
Lebanon                    X          X            X           X           X
Lesotho                    X          X            X           X           X
Liechtenstein              X          X            X           X           X
Lithuania                  X          X            X           X           X
Luxembourg                 X          X            X           X           X
Macao, China               X          X            X           X           X
Macedonia                  X          X            X
Madagascar                            X                        X
Malawi                     X                       X           X
Malaysia                   X          X            X           X           X
Maldives                   X                       X           X
Mali                                  X            X           X
Malta                      X          X            X           X           X
Mauritius                  X          X            X           X           X
Mexico                     X          X            X           X           X
Moldova                    X          X            X           X           X
Montenegro                                                     X
Montserrat                            X            X
Morocco                    X          X            X           X           X
Mozambique                                         X           X
Myanmar                                                        X
Namibia                    X          X                        X
Nepal                      X                                   X
Netherlands                X          X            X           X           X
New Zealand                X          X            X           X           X
Nicaragua                             X            X           X
Niger                                 X            X           X
Nigeria                    X          X            X           X           X
Norway                                X            X           X
Oman                       X          X            X           X           X
Pakistan                              X            X           X
Palestinian Territory                                          X
Panama                     X          X            X           X           X
Papua New Guinea                      X            X
Paraguay                              X                        X
Peru                       X          X            X           X           X
                                                105
                                                                                   All four
           Country                 Survey I   Survey II   Survey III   Survey IV
                                                                                   surveys
Philippines                           X          X            X           X           X
Poland                                X          X            X           X           X
Portugal                              X          X            X           X           X
Puerto Rico                           X          X                        X
Qatar                                 X          X                        X
Romania                               X          X            X           X           X
Russia                                X          X            X           X           X
Rwanda                                X          X
Saint Kitts and Nevis                 X          X            X
Saint Lucia                                      X            X
Saint Vincent and The Grenadines                 X            X
Samoa (Western)                       X          X                        X
Saudi Arabia                          X          X            X
Senegal                                          X            X           X
Serbia                                                                    X
Serbia & Montenegro                              X
Seychelles                            X          X            X           X           X
Sierra Leone                                                              X
Singapore                             X          X            X           X           X
Slovakia                              X          X            X           X           X
Slovenia                              X          X            X           X           X
Solomon Islands                       X
South Africa                          X          X            X           X           X
Spain                                 X          X            X           X           X
Sri Lanka                             X          X            X           X           X
Sudan                                            X
Suriname                                         X            X           X
Swaziland                                        X                        X
Sweden                                X          X            X
Switzerland                           X          X            X           X           X
Syria                                                         X           X
Taiwan                                X          X            X           X           X
Tajikistan                            X          X            X           X           X
Tanzania                                                      X           X
Thailand                              X          X            X           X           X
Togo                                             X            X           X
Tonga                                 X          X                        X
Trinidad and Tobago                   X          X            X           X           X
Tunisia                                          X                        X
Turkey                                X          X                        X
Turkmenistan                          X          X
Turks and Caicos Islands              X          X
Uganda                                                        X           X
Ukraine                                          X                        X
United Arab Emirates                             X                        X
United Kingdom                        X          X            X           X           X
United States                         X          X            X           X           X
Uruguay                                          X            X           X
Vanuatu                               X          X            X           X           X
Venezuela                             X          X            X           X           X
Vietnam                               X
Virgin Islands, British               X          X            X           X           X
Yugoslavia                            X
Yemen                                                                     X
Zambia                                X
Zimbabwe                                         X            X            X
       Total number of countries     118        151          143          143        84
       Total number of questions     180        275          300          270
                                                                               106

                      Appendix table 3: World Bank Survey IV - Countries classified by income and region (total 136 countries)*

                                High income (43)              Upper middle income (38)           Lower middle income (33)                Lower income (22)
                           Canada                            Argentina          Jamaica            Belize
                        Cayman Islands                        Brazil            Mexico          El Salvador
                         Puerto Rico                           Chile            Panama          Guatemala
                         Trinidad and
      Americas                                               Colombia            Peru             Guyana
                           Tobago
    (26 countries)       United States                       Costa Rica        Suriname          Honduras
                                                             Dominican
                                                                               Uruguay           Nicaragua
                                                              Republic
                                                              Ecuador         Venezuela          Paraguay
                          Australia                            China           Thailand           Bhutan          Philippines      Bangladesh
                         Korea, Rep.                          Malaysia      Samoa (Western)         Fiji           Sri Lanka        Myanmar
    Asia & Pacific
                         New Zealand                          Maldives                             India            Tonga            Nepal
    (21 countries)        Singapore                                                              Indonesia         Vanuatu
                                                                                                  Pakistan
                           Austria          Isle of Man       Belarus         Montenegro          Armenia                        Kyrgyz Republic
                                                            Bosnia and
                           Belgium             Italy                           Romania            Kosovo                            Tajikistan
                                                            Herzegovina
                            Croatia        Liechtenstein     Bulgaria           Russia           Moldova
                            Cyprus         Luxembourg       Kazakhstan          Serbia           Ukraine
                           Denmark         Netherlands        Latvia            Turkey
  Europe & Central          Estonia           Norway         Lithuania
         Asia              Finland             Poland
    (44 countries)          France            Portugal
                           Germany           Slovakia
                           Gibraltar         Slovenia
                            Greece             Spain
                           Hungary          Switzerland
                            Iceland       United Kingdom
                            Ireland
                           Bahrain           Oman              Jordan                             Egypt             Syria
    Middle East &            Israel           Qatar           Lebanon                              Iraq            Yemen
     North Africa          Kuwait
                                           United Arab
                                                              Tunisia                            Morocco
    (15 countries)                          Emirates
                            Malta
                                                             Botswana          Seychelles        Angola           Mauritania          Benin              Mali
                                                             Mauritius        South Africa     Côte d'Ivoire       Nigeria        Burkina Faso       Mozambique
                                                             Namibia                              Ghana            Senegal          Burundi             Niger
                                                                                                 Lesotho          Swaziland         Ethiopia         Sierra Leone
 Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                                     Gambia            Tanzania
   (30 countries)                                                                                                                 Guinea-Bissau          Togo
                                                                                                                                     Kenya             Uganda
                                                                                                                                   Madagascar         Zimbabwe
                                                                                                                                     Malawi
Note: * denotes that7 regions including Cooks Island, Guernsey, Hong Kong China, Macao China, Palestinian Territory, Taiwan and Virgin Island, British provided
responses to survey IV, but are not in the World Bank country list.
                                                               107
                     Appendix table 4: Information on bank structural, regulatory, supervisory
                                          and deposit insurance variables
                                                       Number of
                                                        countries                      Standard    Minimum   Maximum
                      Variable                                       Mean     Median
                                                       providing                       deviation    value     value
                                                      information
1. Bank Activity Regulatory Variables
   (a) Securities activities                             137          1.80     2.00      0.92        1.00      4.00
   (b) Insurance activities                              138          2.53     2.00      0.82        1.00      4.00
   (c) Real estate activities                            137          2.87     3.00      1.08        1.00      4.00
2. Mixing Banking / Commerce Regulatory Variables
   (a) Bank Ownership of Nonfinancial Firms              137          2.94     3.00      1.00        1.00      4.00
   (b) Nonfinancial Firm Ownership of Banks              131          2.22     2.00      0.67        1.00      4.00
3. Competition Regulatory Variables
   (a) Limitations on foreign bank ownership of
                                                         140          0.97     1.00      0.17        0.00      1.00
   domestic banks
   (b) Limitations on foreign bank entry                 135          2.70     3.00      0.63        0.00      3.00
   (c) Entry into banking requirements                   143          7.82     8.00      0.46        5.00      8.00
4. Capital Regulatory Variables
   (a) Overall capital stringency                        140         5.04      5.00      1.53        2.00      7.00
   (b) Initial capital stringency                        142         2.29      2.00      0.76        0.00      3.00
   (c) Capital regulatory index                          140         7.36      8.00      1.72        2.00     10.00
   (d) Maximum capital percentage by single owner        50          46.58     22.50     40.44       0.00     100.00
5. Official Supervisory Action Variables
   (a) Official supervisory power                        142          10.74    11.00      2.44       5.00      14.00
       (1) Prompt corrective action                      138          4.48     6.00       2.11       0.00      6.00
       (2) Restructuring power                           133          2.11     2.00       1.09       0.00      3.00
       (3) Declaring insolvency power                    129          1.00     1.00       0.81       0.00      2.00
   (b) Supervisory forbearance discretion                143          1.14     1.00       0.92       0.00      4.00
   (c) Loan classification stringency                    83          554.75   630.00    189.98      153.00    1260.00
   (d) Provisioning stringency                           85          162.82   170.00     44.30       0.00     300.00
   (e) Liquidity / Diversification index                 141          1.40     1.00       0.64       0.00      2.00
6. Official Supervisory Resource Variables
   (a) Supervisors per bank                              111          3.93      2.67      4.05       0.10     25.26
   (b) Bank supervisor years per bank                    99          42.15     19.50     57.32       0.41     328.42
   (c) Supervisor tenure                                 110          8.55      8.00      3.95       1.00     21.00
   (d) Onsite examination frequency                      119          4.06      4.00      2.90       0.00     18.00
   (e) Independence of supervisory authority             132          1.92      2.00      0.81       0.00      3.00
7. Private Monitoring Variables
   (a) Certified Audit Required                          137          0.96     1.00      0.21        0.00      1.00
   (b) Percent of 10 biggest banks rated by
                                                         115         57.35     70.00     40.07       0.00     100.00
   international rating agencies
   (c) Accounting disclosure insurance scheme            142          3.56     4.00      0.57        1.33      4.00
   (d) No Explicit Deposit Insurance Scheme              129          0.34     0.00      0.48        0.00      1.00
   (e) Private Monitoring index                          122          7.79     8.00      1.40        4.00      11.00
8. Deposit Insurance Scheme Variables
   (a) Deposit insurer power                             100          1.10      1.00     1.26        0.00      4.00
   (b) Extra deposit insurance coverage                  102          0.72      1.00     0.45        0.00      1.00
   (c) Deposit insurance payout delay                    41          101.71    30.00    189.58       1.00     1095.00
   (d) Deposit insurance funds-to-total bank assets      52           0.07      0.01     0.19       -0.060     0.81
   (e) Moral hazard index                                89           1.11     1.00      0.82        0.00      3.00
9. Market Structure Indicators
   (a) Bank concentration                                122         71.89     75.14     19.97      14.00     100.00
   (b) Foreign bank ownership                            117         49.34     48.60     33.66      0.00      100.00
   (c) Government owned banks                            118         15.31      8.85     18.06      0.00       73.70
   (d) Number of new banks                               128         11.71     5.00      34.06      0.00      371.00
       (1) New domestic banks                            127         4.36      1.00      17.95      0.00      192.00
       (2) New foreign banks                             123         7.68      3.00      17.80      0.00      179.00
   (e) No entry application                              126          0.90     1.00       0.29      0.00       1.00
       (1) No domestic applications                      125          0.63     1.00       0.48      0.00       1.00
       (2) No foreign applications                       123          0.85     1.00       0.36      0.00       1.00
   (f) Fraction of entry applications denied             108         0.12      0.00       0.23      0.00       1.00
       (1) Foreign denials                               108          0.09     0.00       0.21      0.00       1.00
       (2) Domestic denials                              124          0.11     0.00       0.28      0.00       1.00
                                                               108
                       Appendix table 5: Information on bank structural, regulatory, supervisory
                             and deposit insurance variables: Averages by income level

                                                                Upper   Lower                         Developing
                                                       High                      Lower    Developed                 Offshore
                       Variable                                middle   middle                        or emerging
                                                      income                     income   countries                 centers
                                                               income   income                          markets
1. Bank Activity Regulatory Variables
   (a) Securities activities                           1.36     1.92     2.16     2.05      1.37         1.97         1.71
   (b) Insurance activities                            2.48     2.54     2.77     2.52      2.33         2.63         2.50
   (c) Real estate activities                          2.60     2.91     3.22     3.05      2.50         3.02         3.00
2. Mixing Banking / Commerce Regulatory Variables
   (a) Bank Ownership of Nonfinancial Firms            2.67     2.83     3.29     3.14      2.63         3.06         2.50
   (b) Nonfinancial Firm Ownership of Banks            2.20     2.00     2.29     2.60      2.23         2.25         2.00
3. Competition Regulatory Variables
   (a) Limitations on foreign bank ownership of
                                                       0.98     1.00     0.97     0.90      1.00         0.96         1.00
   domestic banks
   (b) Limitations on foreign bank entry               2.88     2.70     2.67     2.30      3.00         2.56         3.00
   (c) Entry into banking requirements                 7.67     7.87     7.97     7.86      7.74         7.86         7.71
4. Capital Regulatory Variables
   (a) Overall capital stringency                     5.26     4.95     5.22     4.64       5.13         5.03        4.86
   (b) Initial capital stringency                     1.81     2.49     2.55     2.64       1.65         2.53        2.21
   (c) Capital regulatory index                       7.07     7.46     7.84     7.36       6.77         7.61        7.07
   (d) Maximum capital percentage by single owner     47.64    65.81    39.49    24.36      47.00        45.90       41.67
5. Official Supervisory Action Variables
   (a) Official supervisory power                     10.80    10.95    10.63    10.49     10.67        10.75         11.11
       (1) Prompt corrective action                    4.21     4.13     4.97     5.00      4.00         4.63         4.54
       (2) Restructuring power                         2.18     2.40     1.92     1.86      2.09         2.10         2.50
       (3) Declaring insolvency power                  0.82     1.31     0.82     1.05      0.78         1.06         0.90
   (b) Supervisory forbearance discretion              1.37     1.10     0.96     0.74      1.49         0.98         1.55
   (c) Loan classification stringency                 523.60   491.48   567.59   654.73    537.63       559.62       524.00
   (d) Provisioning stringency                        130.69   166.88   169.23   182.50    104.50       170.03       185.00
   (e) Liquidity / Diversification index               1.60     1.33     1.18     1.36      1.61         1.31         1.50
6. Official Supervisory Resource Variables
   (a) Supervisors per bank                           2.30     5.39     5.36     2.20       2.32         4.95         0.86
   (b) Bank supervisor years per bank                 19.51    52.66    42.02    17.77      20.44        43.42        5.83
   (c) Supervisor tenure                              8.49     9.76     7.83     8.08       8.83         8.78         6.81
   (d) Onsite examination frequency                   3.82     4.14     4.40     4.62       4.19         4.20         2.64
   (e) Independence of supervisory authority          2.08     1.94     1.87     1.82       2.11         1.92         1.67
7. Private Monitoring Variables
   (a) Certified Audit Required                        0.98     0.92     0.97     1.00      0.97         0.96         0.93
   (b) Percent of 10 biggest banks rated by
                                                      70.24    59.52    48.42    15.00      75.33        50.92       54.40
   international rating agencies
   (c) Accounting disclosure insurance scheme          3.60     3.49     3.61     3.41      3.63         3.53         3.57
   (d) No Explicit Deposit Insurance Scheme            0.22     0.42     0.42     0.40      0.19         0.40         0.50
   (e) Private Monitoring index                        8.35     7.66     7.46     7.43      8.44         7.63         7.43
8. Deposit Insurance Scheme Variables
   (a) Deposit insurer power                          1.08     0.93      1.12     1.64      1.23         1.10        0.11
   (b) Extra deposit insurance coverage               0.68     0.73      0.80     0.73      0.72         0.77        0.11
   (c) Deposit insurance payout delay                 90.83    45.79    225.67   180.00     67.50       124.20       90.00
   (d) Deposit insurance funds-to-total bank assets   0.005     0.11     0.18     0.01      0.002        0.11
   (e) Moral hazard index                             1.25     1.04      0.81     1.38      1.32         1.02         0.75
9. Market Structure Indicators
   (a) Bank concentration                             70.42    74.81    72.47    71.93      68.66        73.53       68.52
   (b) Foreign bank ownership                         46.32    49.39    49.95    44.16      40.46        48.76       82.37
   (c) Government owned banks                         10.03    19.95    17.05    18.04       9.96        18.51        6.88
   (d) Number of new banks                            16.44    15.68     6.27    6.12       20.33        10.74        5.79
       (1) New domestic banks                         4.82     6.59     3.03     2.27       6.58         4.23        0.86
       (2) New foreign banks                          11.63    9.08     3.23     3.86       13.75         6.51       4.93
   (e) No entry application                           0.97     0.95     0.77     1.00       0.96         0.91        0.86
       (1) No domestic applications                   0.73     0.64     0.63     0.60       0.76         0.64        0.31
       (2) No foreign applications                    0.97     0.84     0.73     0.93       0.96         0.83        0.86
   (f) Fraction of entry applications denied          0.06     0.15     0.16     0.19       0.03         0.16        0.02
       (1) Foreign denials                            0.04     0.09     0.14     0.20       0.02         0.12        0.02
       (2) Domestic denials                           0.07     0.19     0.17     0.00       0.02         0.16        0.00
                                                  109
                  Appendix table 6: Groupings of countries by development status

   Developed                                                                           Offshore centers
                                        Developing countries (101)
 countries (31)                                                                              (14)
    Australia             Angola                  India                 Paraguay           Bahrain
    Austria              Argentina              Indonesia                 Peru              Belize
    Belgium               Armenia                  Iraq                Philippines     Cayman Islands
    Canada                Bahrain                Jamaica                 Poland           Gibraltar
    Cyprus              Bangladesh               Jordan                   Qatar           Guernsey
    Denmark               Belarus              Kazakhstan               Romania          Isle of Man
    Estonia                Belize                 Kenya                  Russia             Jersey
    Finland                Benin                 Kosovo              Samoa (Western)       Lebanon
     France               Bhutan                 Kuwait                  Senegal        Liechtenstein
                        Bosnia and
    Germany                                  Kyrgyz Republic             Serbia         Macao, China
                        Herzegovina
     Greece              Botswana                 Latvia               Seychelles         Mauritius
Hong Kong, China           Brazil                Lebanon              Sierra Leone         Panama
    Iceland               Bulgaria               Lesotho              South Africa         Vanuatu
                                                                                        Virgin Islands,
     Ireland            Burkina Faso            Lithuania               Sri Lanka
                                                                                            British
     Israel               Burundi              Madagascar               Suriname
      Italy                Chile                 Malawi                 Swaziland
  Korea, Rep.              China                Malaysia                  Syria
  Luxembourg             Colombia               Maldives                Tajikistan
     Malta               Costa Rica               Mali                  Tanzania
  Netherlands           Côte d'Ivoire           Mauritius               Thailand
  New Zealand              Croatia               Mexico                   Togo
                         Dominican
    Norway                                      Moldova                  Tonga
                          Republic
                                                                      Trinidad and
    Portugal              Ecuador              Montenegro
                                                                        Tobago
   Singapore               Egypt                Morocco                 Tunisia
Slovak Republic         El Salvador           Mozambique                 Turkey
    Slovenia              Ethiopia              Myanmar                  Uganda
     Spain                  Fiji                 Namibia                Ukraine
                                                                       United Arab
    Sweden                Gambia                  Nepal
                                                                        Emirates
  Switzerland              Ghana                Nicaragua               Uruguay
    Taiwan               Guatemala                Niger                 Vanuatu
United Kingdom         Guinea-Bissau             Nigeria               Venezuela
  United States           Guyana                  Oman                   Yemen
                         Honduras                Pakistan              Zimbabwe
                          Hungary                Panama
                                                    110
Appendix table 7: Are applicable accounting standards for banks in your country prepared
in accordance with IFRS or U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP)?

                                       IFRS                                                GAAP
  Armenia           Denmark             Italy              Maldives       Singapore        Angola
  Australia          Egypt            Jamaica                Malta         Slovakia        Ecuador
   Austria          Estonia            Jersey              Mauritius       Slovenia        Nigeria
   Bahrain          Ethiopia           Jordan             Montenegro     South Africa    Puerto Rico
 Bangladesh           Fiji             Kenya               Morocco          Spain          Tunisia
   Belarus           France         Korea, Rep.             Namibia       Sri Lanka      United States
  Belgium           Germany           Kosovo              Netherlands     Swaziland
   Belize            Ghana            Kuwait              New Zealand        Syria
   Bhutan           Gibraltar     Kyrgyz Republic          Nicaragua      Tajikistan
 Bosnia and
                     Greece            Latvia               Norway         Tanzania
 Herzegovina
  Botswana          Guatemala         Lebanon              Pakistan          Tonga
                                                          Palestinian    Trinidad and
    Brazil           Guyana           Lesotho
                                                           Territory        Tobago
   Bulgaria         Honduras        Liechtenstein         Philippines       Turkey
   Burundi         Hong Kong          Lithuania             Poland          Uganda
   Canada            Iceland        Luxembourg             Portugal         Ukraine
                                                                         United Arab
     Chile          Indonesia      Macao, China              Qatar
                                                                           Emirates
    China               Iraq        Madagascar              Romania     United Kingdom
    Croatia           Ireland        Malawi                  Serbia        Uruguay
    Cyprus         Isle of Man       Malaysia              Seychelles     Zimbabwe

Note: Countries whose accounting standards for banks are in accordance with BOTH IRS AND GAAP
are Cayman Islands, Cook Islands, Guernsey, Israel, Mozambique, Myanmar, Oman, Panama, Samoa
(Western), Switzerland, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Virgin Islands (British), and Yemen.
Countries whose accounting standards for banks are in accordance with NEIHER IRS NOR GAAP are
Argentina, Benin, Burkina Faso, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Dominican Republic, El Salvador,
Finland, Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Hungary, India, Mali, Mexico, Moldova, Niger, Paraguay, Peru, Russia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Suriname, Taiwan, Thailand, and Togo.
