NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WORKING OVER TIME:
DYNAMIC INCONSISTENCY IN REAL EFFORT TASKS
Ned Augenblick
Muriel Niederle
Charles Sprenger
Working Paper 18734
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18734
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2013

We are grateful for many helpful discussions including those of Steffen Andersen, James Andreoni,
Colin Camerer, Yoram Halevy, David Laibson, Matthew Rabin, Georg Weizsacker and participants
at the Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics. We thank Wei Wu for helpful research assistance and
technological expertise. Support is gratefully acknowledged from the NSF and also from the Department
of Economics and the Haas School of Business at Stanford University. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Ned Augenblick, Muriel Niederle, and Charles Sprenger. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Working Over Time: Dynamic Inconsistency in Real Effort Tasks
Ned Augenblick, Muriel Niederle, and Charles Sprenger
NBER Working Paper No. 18734
January 2013
JEL No. C9,D12
ABSTRACT
Experimental tests of dynamically inconsistent time preferences have largely relied on choices over
time-dated monetary rewards. Several recent studies have failed to find the standard patterns of time
inconsistency. However, such monetary studies contain often discussed confounds. In this paper, we
sidestep these confounds and investigate choices over consumption (real effort) in a longitudinal experiment.
We pair those effort choices with a companion monetary discounting study. We confirm very limited
time inconsistency in monetary choices. However, subjects show considerably more present bias in
effort. Furthermore, present bias in the allocation of work has predictive power for demand of a meaningfully
binding commitment device. Therefore our findings validate a key implication of models of dynamic
inconsistency, with corresponding policy implications.
Ned Augenblick
Haas School of Business - EAP Group
545 Student Services Building, 1900
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
ned@haas.berkeley.edu
Muriel Niederle
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
niederle@stanford.edu

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18734

Charles Sprenger
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
c.sprenger@gmail.com

1

Introduction

Models of dynamically inconsistent time preferences (Strotz, 1956; Laibson, 1997; O’Donoghue
and Rabin, 1999) are a pillar of modern behavioral economics, having added generally to
economists’ understanding of the tensions involved in consumption-savings choices, task performance, temptation, and self-control beyond the standard model of exponential discounting
(Samuelson, 1937). Given the position of present-biased preferences in the behavioral literature, there is clear importance in testing the model’s central falsifiable hypothesis of diminishing
impatience through time. Further, testing auxiliary predictions such as individuals’ potential
to restrict future activities through commitment devices can deliver critical prescriptions to
policy makers. In this paper we present a test of dynamic inconsistency in consumption and
investigate the demand for a meaningfully binding commitment device.
To date, a notably large body of laboratory research has been generated focused on identifying the shape of time preferences (for a comprehensive review to the early 2000s, see Frederick,
Loewenstein and O’Donoghue, 2002).1 The core of this experimental literature has identified
preferences from time-dated monetary payments. A paradigmatic example would have a subject state the monetary payment received today, $X, that makes her indi↵erent to $50 received
in one months’ time, then would have her state the monetary payment received in one months’
time, $Y , that makes her indi↵erent to $50 received in two months’ time.2 Non-equivalence in
the stated indi↵erent values is often taken as evidence of dynamic inconsistency, and $X < $Y is
taken as evidence of a present-biased shape of discounting. Though conducted experiments differ along many dimensions including payment horizons, methods, subject pools, and potential
1

Though much of the literature has focused on laboratory samples, there is also a growing body of research
attempting to identify the shape and extent of discounting from real world choices and aggregate data such as
durable goods purchase, annuity choice, and consumption patterns (Hausman, 1979; Lawrance, 1991; Warner
and Pleeter, 2001; Gourinchas and Parker, 2002; Cagetti, 2003; Laibson, Repetto and Tobacman, 2003, 2005).
2
A popular methodolgy for eliciting such indi↵erences is the Multiple Price List technique (Coller and
Williams, 1999; Harrison, Lau and Williams, 2002) asking individuals a series of binary choices between time
dated payments, identifying intervals in which $X and $Y lie. Psychology has often relied on an alternative
method to identify dynamic inconsistency, asking subjects a series of questions involving increasing delay lengths
and examining whether the implied discount factors nest exponentially (see, for example Kirby, Petry and Bickel,
1999; Giordano, Bickel, Loewenstein, Jacobs, Marsch and Badger, 2002).

2

transaction costs, a stylized fact has emerged that many subjects are dynamically inconsistent
and the majority of inconsistencies are in the direction of present bias (Frederick et al., 2002).3
Several confounds exist for identifying the shape of time preferences from experimental
choices over time-dated monetary payments, muddying the strict interpretations of behavior
provided above. Critically, issues of payment reliability and risk preference suggest that if information is to be gleaned from such choices, it may be linked to the subject’s assessment of
the experimenter’s reliability.4 Recent work validates this suspicion. Andreoni and Sprenger
(2012a), Gine, Goldberg, Silverman and Yang (2010), and Andersen, Harrison, Lau and Rutstrom (2012) all document that when closely controlling transactions costs and payment reliability, dynamic inconsistency in choices over monetary payments is virtually eliminated on
aggregate. Further, when payment risk is added in an experimentally controlled way, nonexpected utility risk preferences deliver behavior observationally equivalent to present bias as
described above (Andreoni and Sprenger, 2012b).5
Beyond these operational issues, there is reason to question the use of potentially fungible
monetary payments to identify the parameters of models defined over time-dated consumption. Clear arbitrage arguments exist indicating that nothing beyond the interval of subjects’
borrowing and lending rates should be revealed in choices over monetary payments.6 Chabris,
3
For example, Ashraf, Karlan and Yin (2006) find that roughly 47% of their subjects are dynamically
inconsistent over hypothetical time-dated monetary payments and around 60% of the inconsistencies are in
the direction of present bias. Similarly, Meier and Sprenger (2010) find that roughly 45% of their subjects
are dynamically inconsistent over incentivized time dated payments and 80% of the inconsistencies are in the
direction of present bias.
4
This point was originally raised by Thaler (1981) who, when considering the possibility of using incentivized
monetary payments in intertemporal choice experiments noted ‘Real money experiments would be interesting
but seem to present enormous tactical problems. (Would subjects believe they would get paid in five years?)’
5
Specifically, Andreoni and Sprenger (2012b) show that when sooner payments are certain while future payments are delivered only with 80%, subjects prefer the certain sooner payment. When payments at both time
periods are made uncertain, occurring with 50% sooner and 40% in the future, subjects appear more patient,
violating discounted expected utility. The observation that non-expected utility risk preferences generate dynamic inconsistencies was previously thoughtfully analyzed theoretically by Machina (1989). Halevy (2008)
makes the link between prospect theory probability weighting and diminishing impatience through time citing
psychology experiments conducted by Keren and Roelofsma (1995) and Weber and Chapman (2005) who show
in an original experiment and a partial reproduction, respectively, that when payment risk is added to binary
choices over monetary payments, dynamic inconsistency is reduced in some experimental contexts.
6
This point has been thoughtfully taken into account in some studies. For example, Harrison et al. (2002)
explicitly account for potential arbitrage in their calculations of individual discount rates by measuring individual
borrowing and saving rates and incorporating these values in estimation. Cubitt and Read (2007) provide

3

Laibson and Schuldt (2008) describe the difficulty in mapping experimental choices over money
to corresponding model parameters, casting skepticism over monetary experiments in general.
The model is one of consumption, so falsifying the key prediction of diminishing impatience
through time may be more convincing when done in the relevant domain, consumption.7 There
are only a few experimental tests of dynamic inconsistency for consumption. Key contributions
include Read and van Leeuwen (1998) who identify dynamic inconsistency in the surprise reallocations of snack choices, and McClure, Laibson, Loewenstein and Cohen (2007) and Brown,
Chua and Camerer (2009), who document dynamic inconsistency in brief intertemporal choices
over squirts of juice and soda.
In this paper we attempt to move out of the domain of monetary choices and into the
domain of consumption, while maintaining a portable design that allows individual parameters
of dynamic inconsistency to be estimated. With 102 UC Berkeley Xlab subjects, we introduce
a seven week longitudinal experimental design asking subjects to allocate and subsequently
reallocate units of e↵ort (i.e., negative leisure consumption) over time at various gross interest
rates.

Subject responses are incentivized by requiring completion of the tasks from either

one initial allocation or one subsequent reallocation. Subjects receive a one-time completion
bonus of $100 in the seventh week of the experiment, fixing the monetary dimension of their
e↵ort allocation choices. The tasks over which subjects make choices are transcription of
meaningless greek texts and completion of partial tetris games. Allocations are made in a
convex decision environment permitting identification of both cost function and discounting
parameters. Di↵erences between initial allocations and subsequent reallocations allow for the
identification of dynamic inconsistency.
The repeated interaction of our seven-week study allows us to complement measures of e↵ort
excellent recent discussion of the arbitrage arguments and other issues for choices over monetary payments.
One counterpoint is provided by Coller and Williams (1999), who present experimental subjects with a fully
articulated arbitrage argument and external interest rate information and document only a small treatment
e↵ect.
7
Though our objective in the present study is the exploration of present bias separate from issues of fungibility,
recent developments in the field have led to another important facet of the debate: why and when do monetary
discounting studies deliver measures of present bias with predictive validity despite their potential flaws? This
question lies outside the scope of this paper but clearly represents an important avenue for future research.

4

discounting with measures of monetary discounting taken from Andreoni and Sprenger (2012a)
Convex Time Budget (CTB) choices over cash payments received in the laboratory. In these
choices, subjects allocate money across time at various gross interest rates. We can compare
dynamic inconsistency measured over work and money at both the aggregate and individual
level.
Finally, once subjects have experienced the tasks for several weeks, we elicit their demand
for a commitment device. Specifically, we allow subjects to probabilistically favor their initial
allocations over their subsequent reallocations of work. We investigate the aggregate demand
for our o↵ered commitment device and correlate identified dynamic inconsistency over both
e↵ort and money with commitment demand.
We document three primary findings. First, in the domain of money we find virtually
no aggregate evidence of present bias using immediate in-lab cash payments. Second, in the
domain of e↵ort we find significant evidence of present bias. Allocations of tasks made one
week in advance exceed those made on the date of actual e↵ort by approximately 9%, on
average. Corresponding parameter estimates corroborate these non-parametric results. Third,
we find that the elicited demand for commitment is limited to price zero, at which price 59%
of subjects would prefer a higher likelihood of implementing one of their initial allocations
over their subsequent reallocations. More importantly, we show that subjects we identified as
present biased choose the commitment device, while others do not. We show that the choice
of commitment is binding and meaningful in the sense that initial preferred allocations di↵er
significantly from subsequent reallocations. This provides key validation and support for our
experimental measures and well-known theoretical models of present bias.
Despite recent negative findings for models of dynamic inconsistency with time-dated payments, we find support for the model’s central prediction of diminishing impatience through
time in the domain of consumption. Further, the auxiliary predictions of both the potential
demand for commitment and the link between commitment demand and present bias are also
validated.

5

The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 provides details for our longitudinal experimental
design. Section 3 describes identification of intertemporal parameters based on experimental
choices over both e↵ort and money. Section 4 presents results. Section 5 is a discussion and
section 6 concludes.

2

Design

To examine dynamic inconsistency in real e↵ort, we introduce a longitudinal experimental
design conducted over seven weeks. In the experiment, subjects are asked to allocate, subsequently reallocate and complete tasks for two jobs. If all elements of the experiment are
completed satisfactorily, subjects receive a completion bonus of $100 in Week 7 of the study.
Otherwise they receive only $10 in Week 7. The objective of the completion bonus is to fix the
monetary dimension of subjects’ e↵ort choices. Subjects are always paid the same amount for
their completed work, the question of interest is when they prefer to exert e↵ort.
Having individuals make intertemporal choices over e↵ort allows us to circumvent many of
the key concerns that plague monetary discounting experiments. First, subjects cannot borrow,
save or substitute units of tasks outside of the experiment, removing opportunities of arbitrage.8
Second, the precise date of consumption is known to both the researcher and the subject at the
time of decision, allowing for precise identification of discounting parameters. Third, individuals
select into a seven week experiment with a $100 completion bonus in the seventh week, reducing
issues of payment reliability. This also separates e↵ort allocation decisions from payment. And
lastly, we implement a minimum work requirement. This equalizes transaction costs over time
as subjects are forced to participate and complete minimum e↵ort on all dates.
We present the design in five subsections. First, we describe the Jobs to be completed.
Second, we present a timeline of the experiment and the convex decision environment in which
allocations were made. The third subsection describes the design of the commitment device
8

Though this removes substitutability of the task at hand, subjects may alter their allocations of other,
extra-lab consumption. As a first pass we ignore this possibility and the possibility that subjects subcontract
their experimental tasks. Section 6 provides additional discussion.

6

for which demand was elicited once subjects had gained experience with the tasks. The fourth
subsection addresses design details including recruitment, selection and attrition. The fifth
subsection presents the complementary monetary discounting study facilitated by the repeated
interaction with subjects during the experiment.

2.1

Jobs

The experiment focuses on intertemporal allocations of e↵ort. Subjects are asked to allocate,
subsequently reallocate and complete tasks of two jobs. In Job 1, subjects transcribe a meaningless greek text through a computer interface. Figure 1, Panel A demonstrates the paradigm.
Greek letters appear in random order, slightly blurry, in subjects’ transcription box. By pointing and clicking on the corresponding keyboard below the transcription box, subjects must
reproduce the observed series of Greek letters. One task is the completion of one row of Greek
text with 80 percent accuracy as measured by the Levenshtein Distance.9 In the first week,
subjects completed a task from Job 1 in an average of 54 seconds.

By the final week, the

average was 46 seconds.
In Job 2, subjects are asked to complete four rows of a standard tetris game. Figure 1,
Panel B demonstrates the paradigm. Blocks of random shapes appear at the top of the tetris
box and fall at fixed speed. Arranging the shapes to complete a horizontal line of the tetris
box is the game’s objective. Once a row is complete, it disappears and the shapes above fall
into place. One task is the completion of four rows of tetris. If the tetris box fills to the top
with shapes before the four rows are complete, the subject begins again with credit for the rows
already completed. In the first week, subjects completed a task from Job 2 in an average of 55
seconds. By the final week, the average was 46 seconds.
9

The Levenshtein Distance is commonly used in computer science to measure the distance between two
strings and is defined as the minimum number of edits needed to transform one string into the other. Allowable
edits are insertion, deletion or change of a single character. As the strings of Greek characters used in the
transcription task are 35 characters long our 80 percent accuracy measure is equivalent to 7 edits or less or a
Levenshtein Distance  7.

7

Figure 1: Experimental Jobs
Panel A: Job 1- Greek Transcription

Panel B: Job 2- Partial Tetris Games

2.2
2.2.1

Experimental Timeline and Allocation Environment
Timeline

The seven weeks of the experiment are divided into two blocks. Weeks 1, 2, and 3 serve as
the first block. Weeks 4, 5, and 6 serve as the second block and mirror the first block with
the addition of a commitment decision discussed below. Week 7 occurs in the laboratory and
is only used to distribute payment to the subjects. Subjects always participate on the same
8

day of the week throughout the experiment. That is, subjects entering the lab on a Monday
allocate tasks to be completed on future Mondays. Therefore, the time frame over which e↵ort
choices are made is exactly seven days in all choices.
Weeks 1 and 4 occur in the laboratory and subjects are reminded of their study time the
night before. Weeks 2, 3, 5, and 6 are completed online. For Weeks 2, 3, 5, and 6, subjects
are sent an email reminder at 8pm the night before with a (subject-unique) website address.
Subjects are required to log in to this website between 8am and midnight of the day in question
and complete their work by 2am the following morning.
At each point of contact, subjects are first given instructions about the decisions to be
made and work to be completed that day, reminded of the timeline of the experiment, given
demonstrations of any unfamiliar actions, and then asked to complete the necessary actions.
In each week, subjects are required to complete 10 tasks of each Job prior to making
allocations decision or completing allocated tasks. The objective of this pair of 10 tasks,
which we call “minimum work,” is two-fold. First, minimum work requires a few minutes of
participation at each date, forcing subjects to incur the transaction costs of logging on to the
experimental website at each time.10 Second, minimum work, especially in Week 1, provides
experience for subjects such that they have a sense of how e↵ortful the tasks are when making
their allocation decisions.

We require minimum work in all weeks before all decisions and

provide this information to subjects to control for issues related to projection bias (Loewenstein,
O’Donoghue and Rabin, 2003). This ensures that subjects have experienced and can forecast
having experienced the same amount of e↵ort when making their allocation decisions at all
points in time.
10

A similar technique is used in monetary discounting studies where minimum payments are employed to
eliminate subjects loading allocations to certain dates to avoid transaction costs of receiving multiple payments
or cashing multiple checks (Andreoni and Sprenger, 2012a).

9

2.2.2

Allocation Environment

In Week 1, subjects allocate tasks between Weeks 2 and 3. Hence, subjects are choosing how
much work to complete at two future dates. In Week 2, subjects also allocate tasks between
Weeks 2 and 3. Note that in Week 1 subjects are making decision involving two future dates,
whereas in Week 2, subjects are making decisions involving the present and a future date.
Before making the choice in Week 1, subjects are told of the Week 2 decisions and are aware
that exactly one of all Week 1 and Week 2 allocation decisions will be implemented.11
Initial allocations and subsequent reallocations for Jobs 1 and 2 are made in a convex
decision environment. Using slider bars, subjects allocate tasks to two dates, one earlier and
one later, under di↵erent gross interest rates.12 Figure 2 provides a sample allocation screen.
To motivate the intertemporal tradeo↵s faced by subjects, decisions are described as having
di↵erent ‘task rates’ such that every task allocated to the sooner date reduces the number of
tasks allocated to the later date by a stated number. For example, a task rate of 1:0.5 implies
that each task allocated to Week 2 reduces by 0.5 the number allocated to Week 3.

It is

important to note that the minimum 10 tasks required for each job detailed in the previous
section are separate from this allocation decision and are not counted toward the allocations.
The subjects’ decision can be formulated as allocating tasks e over times t and t + k, et and
et+k , subject to the present-value budget constraint,

et +

1
· et+k = m,
p

(1)

where 1/p represents the provided task rate. For each task and for each date where allocations
were made, subjects faced five task rates, 1/p 2 {0.5, 0.75, 1, 1.25, 1.5}. The number of tasks
that subjects could allocate to the sooner date was fixed at fifty such that m = 50 in every
decision in the experiment. Note that as the task rate falls, the relative cost of a task in Week
11

Subjects were not shown their initial allocations when making their subsequent reallocations.
Passive allocations are avoided in the design as the sliders’ initial location was in the middle of the slider
bar and subjects were required to click on every slider before submitting their answers.
12

10

2 (the earlier week) falls, altering intertemporal incentives.
Figure 2: Convex Allocation Environment

In Weeks 1 and 2 each subject makes 20 allocation decisions: five for each Job in Week
1 and five for each Job in Week 2. After the Week 2 decisions, one of these 20 allocations is
chosen at random as the ‘allocation-that-counts’ and subjects have to complete the allocated
number of tasks to ensure successful completion of the experiment. However, the randomization device probabilistically favors the Week 2 allocations over the Week 1 allocations. In
particular, subjects are told (from the beginning) that their Week 1 allocations will count with
probability 0.1, while their Week 2 reallocations will count with probability 0.9. Within each
week’s allocations, every choice is equally likely to be the allocation-that-counts.13 This randomization process e↵ectively favors flexibility while maintaining incentive compatibility in a
comprehensible manner. This design choice was made for two reasons. First, it increased the
chance that subjects experienced their own potentially present-biased reallocations. Second,
it provides a greater symmetry to the decisions in the second block of three weeks that elicit
demand for commitment.
13

For a complete description of the randomization process please see instructions in Appendix C.

11

The second block of the experiment, Weeks 4, 5, and 6, mimics the first block of Weeks 1, 2,
and 3, with one exception. In Week 4, subjects are o↵ered a probabilistic commitment device,
which is described in detail in the following subsection.

2.3

Commitment Demand

In the second block of the experiment, Weeks 4, 5, and 6, once subjects have gained experience
with the tasks and the experimental design, they are o↵ered a probabilistic commitment device. In the first block of the experiment, the allocation-that-counts is taken from the Week 1
allocations with probability 0.1 and from the subsequent Week 2 reallocations with probability
0.9, favoring the later reallocations. In Week 4, subjects are given the opportunity to choose
which allocations will be probabilistically favored. In particular, they can choose whether the
allocation-that-counts comes from Week 4 with probability 0.1 (and Week 5 with probability
0.9), favoring flexibility, or from Week 4 with probability 0.9, favoring commitment. This form
of commitment device was chosen because of its potential to be meaningfully binding. Subjects who choose to commit and who di↵er in their allocation choices through time can find
themselves constrained by commitment with high probability.
In order to operationalize our elicitation of commitment demand, subjects are asked to
make 15 multiple price list decisions between two options. In the first option, the allocationthat-counts will come from Week 4 with probability 0.1. In the second option, the allocationthat-counts will come from Week 4 with probability 0.9. In order to determine the strength
of preference, an additional payment of between $0 and $10 is added to one of the options for
each decision.14

Figure 3 provides the implemented price list. One of the 15 commitment

decisions is chosen for implementation, ensuring incentive compatibility. Subjects are told that
the implementation of the randomization for the commitment decisions will occur once they
submitted their Week 5 allocation decisions.
Our commitment demand decisions, and the second block of the experiment, serve three
14

We chose not to have the listed prices ever take negative values (as in a cost) to avoid subjects viewing
paying for commitment as a loss.

12

Figure 3: Commitment Demand Elicitation

purposes. First, they allow us to assess the demand for commitment and its extent. If individuals demand commitment, it is important to know both how much they are willing to pay
for the opportunity to restrict their future activities and to help separate commitment demand
from simple decision error. Second, a key objective of our study is to explore the theoretical
link, under the assumption of sophistication, between present bias and commitment demand.
Are subjects who are present biased comparing initial allocations to subsequent reallocations
more likely to demand commitment? With the exception of Ashraf et al. (2006) and Kaur,
Kremer and Mullainathan (2010) virtually no research tests this critical implication of models
of dynamic inconsistency. We will compare our results to those papers in subsection 4.4. Finally, a correlation between time inconsistency and commitment validates the interpretation of
present bias over other explanations for time inconsistent e↵ort choices.
To summarize our longitudinal e↵ort experiment, Table 1 contains the major events in each
week.

13

Table 1: Summary of Longitudinal Experiment

Week
Week
Week
Week
Week
Week
Week

2.4

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

(In Lab):
(Online):
(Online):
(In Lab):
(Online):
(Online):
(In Lab):

Minimum
Work
x
x
x
x
x
x

10 E↵ort Allocation-ThatAllocations Counts Chosen
x
x
x
x
x

Complete
Work

Commitment
Choice

Receive
Payment

x
x
x

x

x
x
x

Design Details

102 subjects from the UC Berkeley Xlab subject pool were initially recruited into the experiment
across 4 experimental sessions on February 8th, 9th and 10th, 2012 and were told in advance
of the seven week longitudinal design and the $100 completion bonus.15 Subjects did not
receive an independent show up fee. 90 subjects completed all aspects of the working over time
experiment and received the $100 completion bonus. The 12 subjects who selected out of the
experiment do not appear di↵erent on either initial allocations, comprehension or a small series
of demographic data collected at the end of the first day of the experiment.16 One more subject
completed initial allocations in Week 1, but due to computer error did not have their choices
recorded. This leaves us with 89 subjects.
One critical aspect of behavior limits our ability to make inference for time preferences
based on experimental responses. In particular, if subjects have no variation in allocations
in response to gross interest rate changes in some weeks, then attempting to point identify
both discounting and cost function parameters is difficult or impossible, yielding imprecise and
unstable estimates. Similar to multiple price list experiments, if a subject always chooses a
15

This is a potentially important avenue of selection into the experiment. Our subjects were willing to put
forth e↵ort and wait seven weeks to receive $100. Though we have no formal test, this suggests that our subjects
may be a relatively patient selection.
16
3 of those 12 subjects dropped after the first week while the remaining 9 dropped after the second week.
Including data for these 9 subjects where available does not qualitatively alter the analysis or conclusions.

14

specific option, only one-sided bounds on parameters can be obtained. Here, the problem is
compounded by our e↵orts to identify both discounting and cost function parameters. In our
sample, nine subjects have this issue for one or more weeks of the study. For the analysis, we
focus on the primary sample of 80 subjects who completed all aspects of the experiment with
positive variation in their responses in each week. In Appendix Table A2, we re-conduct the
aggregate analysis including these nine subjects and obtain very similar findings.

2.5

Monetary Discounting

Subjects were present in the UC Berkeley X-Laboratory in the first, fourth, and seventh weeks
of the experiment. This repeated interaction facilitates a monetary discounting study that
complements our main avenue of analysis. In Weeks 1 and 4 of our experimental design, once
subjects complete their allocation of tasks, they are invited to respond to additional questions
allocating monetary payments to Weeks 1, 4, and 7. In Week 1, we implement three Andreoni
and Sprenger (2012a) Convex Time Budget (CTB) choice sets, allocating payments across: 1)
Week 1 vs. Week 4; 2) Week 4 vs. Week 7 (Prospective); and 3) Week 1 vs. Week 7. Individuals
are asked to allocate monetary payments c across the two dates t and t + k, ct and ct+k , subject
to the intertemporal budget constraint,

r · ct + ct+k = m.

(2)

The experimental budget is fixed at m = $20 and five gross interest rates are implemented in
each choice set, r 2 {0.99, 1, 1.11, 1.25, 1.43}. These gross interest rates were chosen for comparison with prior work (Andreoni and Sprenger, 2012a).17 Such questions permit identification
of monetary discounting parameters following Andreoni and Sprenger (2012a). In Week 4, we
ask subjects to allocate in a CTB choice set over Week 4 and Week 7 under the same five gross
interest rates. We refer to these choices made in Week 4 as Week 4 vs. Week 7 and those made
in Week 1 over these two dates as Week 4 vs. Week 7 (Prospective). Hence, subjects complete
17

Additionally, r = 0.99 allows us to investigate the potential extent of negative discounting.

15

a total of four CTB choice sets.
The CTBs implemented in Weeks 1 and 4 are paid separately and independently from the
rest of the experiment with one choice from Week 1 and one choice from Week 4 chosen to be
implemented. Subjects are paid according to their choices. Subjects are not told of the Week
4 choices in Week 1. As in Andreoni and Sprenger (2012a), miniminum payments of $5 at each
payment date are enacted to eliminate transaction cost issues similar to those discussed above.
Appendix C provides the full experimental instructions.
The implemented monetary discounting experiments have two nuances relative to Andreoni
and Sprenger (2012a). First, Andreoni and Sprenger (2012a) implement CTBs with payment
by check. Our design implements payment by cash with potentially lower transaction costs.
Second, Andreoni and Sprenger (2012a) implement CTBs with present payment received only
by 5:00 p.m. in a subject’s residence mailbox. Here we provide payment immediately in the
laboratory limiting arguments about the relevant epoch of the present.
In both Weeks 1 and 4, the monetary allocations are implemented after the more central
e↵ort choices. The monetary choices were not announced in advance and subjects could choose
not to participate; five did so in either Weeks 1 or 4. In our analysis of monetary discounting,
we focus on the 75 subjects from the primary sample with complete monetary choice data.

3

Identification

In the intertemporal allocation of e↵ort and money, discounting and additional parameters can
be identified at either the aggregate or individual level under various structural assumptions. In
the following two subsections we describe which experimental variation provides identification
of specific parameters of interest and lay out methodology for estimation at both the aggregate
and individual level.

16

3.1

E↵ort Discounting

In the working over time experiment, subjects allocate e↵ort to an earlier date, et , and a later
date, et+k , subject to the intertemporal budget constraint described in (1). Hence, the subject’s
decision problem is
1
minet ,et+k C(et , et+k ) s.t. et + et+k = m,
p
where C(et , et+k ) is a general cost function, assumed to be globally convex such that standard
constrained optimization yields meaningful first order conditions. We assume that the cost
function is time separable, that the instantaneous cost function is stationary and takes an
exponential form, and that discounting follows the quasi-hyperbolic form proposed by Laibson
(1997). Under these structural assumptions we can write

C(et , et+k ) = (et + !) +

where

1t=0 k

(et+k + !) ,

(3)

> 1 represents the stationary parameter on the convex instantaneous cost of e↵ort

function. The present-bias parameter, , activated when the time period t is the present, 1t=0 ,
captures the extent to which individual’s disproportionately discount the future when viewed
from the present. The parameter

captures the daily discount factor over the k = 7 days of

each considered allocation. The additive term ! in the cost function could be interpreted as
a Stone-Geary minimum or as some background level of required work. Such parameters are
used in monetary discounting studies (Andersen, Harrison, Lau and Rutstrom, 2008; Andreoni
and Sprenger, 2012a), and are either taken from some external data source on background
consumption or estimated from experimental choices. For simplicity, we interpret ! as the
required minimum work of the experiment and set ! = 10.
Minimizing (3) subject to (1) yields the intertemporal Euler equation

(

et + ! (
)
et+k + !

1)

(

17

1
(1t=0 ) k

) = p.

Rearranging and taking logs yields

log(

log( )
1
log( )
et + !
)=
· (1t=0 ) +
·k+(
) · log(p),
et+k + !
1
1
1

(4)

which is linear in the key experimentally varied parameters of whether allocations involve the
present, 1t=0 , and a log transform of the task rate, log(p).
From the intertemporal Euler equation above, identification of discounting and the cost
function is straightforward. The task rate delivers identification of the cost function, ; the
choice being made in the present (Week 2 decision) rather than the future (Week 1 decision)
delivers identification of present bias, ; and the delay length gives identification of the discount
factor, .18
In order to estimate discounting and cost function parameters from aggregate data, we
assume an additive error structure and estimate the linear regression implied by (4). The
parameters of interest can be recovered from non-linear combinations of regression coefficients
with standard errors calculated via the delta method.19 One important issue to consider in
the estimation of (4) is the potential presence of corner solutions. We provide estimates from
two-limit tobit regressions designed to account for the possibility that the tangency condition
implied by (4) does not hold with equality (Wooldridge, 2002).
Estimating (4) is easily extended to the study of individual parameters. To begin, (4) can
be estimated at the individual level.20 However, with limited numbers of individual choices
it is helpful to consider alternative, more structured approaches. In particular, we allow for
heterogeneous discounting across individuals, but assume all individuals have the same cost
18

Of course, with only one delay length of seven days considered in the experiment, we have limited confidence
that our estimate of can be extrapolated to arbitrary delay lengths.
19
To be specific, the regression equation is, for k = 7,
log(

et + !
)i = ⌘ 0 k + ⌘ 1 · (1t=0 )i + ⌘ 2 · log(p)i + ✏i ,
et+k + !

⌘ 2 ) and ˆ = 1 + 1/ˆ
⌘ 2 . Note that ˆ = exp(ˆ
⌘ 0 /ˆ
⌘ 2 ) is
and we recover the parameters of interest as ˆ = exp(ˆ
⌘ 1 /ˆ
recovered from the constant as only one delay length was used in the experimental design.
20
Broadly similar conclusions are reached when estimating (4) at the individual level, however, parameter
precision is greatly reduced and substantial estimate instability is uncovered in some cases.

18

function. Consider a vector of fixed e↵ects (1j )i which take the value 1 if observation i was
contributed by individual j. This leads to the fixed e↵ects formulation

log(

where ,

(log( j ) log( ))
log( )
log( )
et + !
)i =
·k+
· (1j )i · k +
· (1t=0 )i
et+k + !
1
1
1
(log( j ) log( ))
1
· (1t=0 )i · (1j )i +
· log(p)i ,
+
1
1
refer to sample means, and

j,

j

refer to individual-specific discounting param-

eters. With an additive error structure this is easily estimable.21 The individual fixed e↵ect
interacted with the decision being made in the present provides identification of the individualspecific

j.

In Appendix A we conduct simulation exercises under various correlation structures

for the true parameters of interest and document that the implemented estimation methods
perform well both at the aggregate and individual level.

3.2

Monetary Discounting

Our methods for recovering monetary discounting parameters at both the aggregate and individual level closely follow those for e↵ort. Following most of the literature, we abstract from
standard arbitrage arguments for monetary discounting and assume laboratory administered
rates are the relevant ones.22 In particular, for monetary payments, ct and ct+k , allocated
subject to the constraint (2), we assume a quasi-hyperbolic constant relative risk averse utility
function,
U (ct , ct+k ) = (ct + !)↵ +

1t=0 k

(ct+k + !)↵ .

(5)

Here, the utility function is assumed to be concave, ↵ < 1, such that first order conditions
provided meaningful optima. Here, the parameter ! is a background parameter that we take
21

We allow both
and to vary across individuals such that the implemented regression is a standard
interaction with both level and slope e↵ects.
22
One prominent exception to this tradition is Harrison et al. (2002), who measure and account for extra-lab
borrowing and savings opportunities.

19

to be the $5 minimum payment of the monetary experiment.23
Maximizing (6) subject to the intertemporal budget constraint (2) yields an intertemporal
Euler equation similar to that above for e↵ort. Taking logs and rearranging we have

log(

log( )
1
log( )
ct + !
)=
· (1t=0 ) +
·k+(
) · log(r),
ct+k + !
↵ 1
↵ 1
↵ 1

(6)

which can again be estimated at the aggregate or individual level via two-limit Tobit. Discounting and utility function parameters can be recovered via non-linear combinations of regression
coefficients as above with standard errors estimated again via the delta method.

4

Results

The results are presented in three subsections. First, we present results from the monetary
discounting study and compare our observed level of limited present bias with other recent
findings. Second, we move to e↵ort related discounting and provide both non-parametric and
parametric evidence of present bias. In a third subsection we present results related to commitment demand and document correlations between identified present bias over work and money
with the demand for our lab-o↵ered commitment device.

4.1

Monetary Discounting

Figure 4 presents the data from our monetary discounting experiment. The mean allocation
to the sooner payment date at each interest rate is reported for the 75 subjects from the
primary sample for whom we have all monetary discounting data. Four data series are provided
separated by delay length corresponding to the four payment sets over which subjects made
allocations. Standard error bars are provided, clustered at the individual level.
23
Andreoni and Sprenger (2012a) provide detailed discussion of the use of such background parameters and
provide robustness tests with di↵ering values of ! and di↵ering assumptions for the functional form of utility
in CTB estimates. The findings suggest that though utility function curvature estimates may be sensitive to
di↵erent background parameter assumptions, discounting parameters, particularly present bias, are virtually
una↵ected by such choices.

20

Figure 4: Monetary Discounting Behavior
6 Week Delay

0

5

10

15

Mean Sooner Allocation

20

3 Week Delay

1

1.2

1.4

1

1.2

1.4

Gross Interest Rate
Week 1 vs. Week 4
Week 4 vs. Week 7
SEM

Week 4 vs. Week 7 Prospective
Week 1 vs. Week 7

k
e
n
o
m
y
b
s
h
p
ra
G

We highlight two features of Figure 4. First, note that as the gross interest rate increases
the average allocation to the sooner payment decreases, following the law of demand. Indeed,
at the individual level 98% of choices are monotonically decreasing in interest rate, and only
1 subject exhibits more than 5 non-monotonicities in demand in their monetary choices.24
This suggests that subjects as a whole understand the implied intertemporal tradeo↵s and the
decision environment.
Second, Figure 4 allows for non-parametric investigation of present bias in two contexts.25
First, one can consider the static behavior, often attributed to present bias, of subjects being
24

Subjects have 16 opportunities to violate monotonicity comparing two adjacent interest rates in their 20
total CTB choices. 63 of 75 subjects have no identified non-monotonocities. Andreoni and Sprenger (2012a)
provide a detailed discussion of the extent of potential errors in CTB choices. In particular they note that
prevalence of non-monotonicities in demand are somewhat less than the similar behavior of multiple switching
in standard Multiple Price List experiments.
25
Though the six-week delay data are used in estimation, our non-parametric tests only identify present bias
from choices over three-week delays. We ignore here the method of identifying present bias frequently used in
psychology where short horizon choices are compared to long horizon choices.

21

more patient in the future than in the present by comparing Week 1 vs. Week 4 to Week 4 vs.
Week 7 (Prospective). In this comparison, controlling for interest rate fixed e↵ects, subjects
do allocate on average $0.54 (s.e = 0.31) more to the sooner payment when it is in the present
F (1, 74) = 2.93, (p = 0.09). A second measure of present bias is to compare Week 4 vs. Week
7 (Prospective) made in Week 1 to the Week 4 vs. Week 7 choices made in Week 4. This
measure is similar to the recent work of Halevy (2012). Ignoring income e↵ects associated with
having potentially received prior experimental payments, this comparison provides a secondary
measure of present bias. In this comparison, controlling for interest rate fixed e↵ects, subjects
allocate on average $0.47 (s.e = 0.32) more to the sooner payment when the sooner payment
is in the present, F (1, 74) = 2.08, (p = 0.15).26
Over monetary payments, we find limited non-parametric support for the existence of a
present bias. In Table 2, columns (1) and (2) we provide corresponding parameter estimates
implementing two-limit Tobit regressions of (6), with standard errors clustered at the individual
level. In column (1) we use all 4 CTB choice sets. In column (2) we use only the choice sets
which have three-week delays for continuity with both our non-parametric evidence and the
comparisons generally made in experimental economics. In both cases we estimate ↵
ˆ of around
0.975 indicating limited utility function curvature over monetary payments. Further, we identify
daily discount factors of around 0.998. The 95% confidence interval in column (1) for the daily
discount factor implies annual discount rates between 40% and 140%.27
In column (1) of Table 2 we estimate ˆ = 0.974 (s.e. = 0.009), close to dynamic consistency.
Though we do reject the null hypothesis of
value for

= 1,

2

(1) = 8.77, (p < 0.01), our estimated

is economically close to 1. In column (2), focusing only on three week delay data,

we find ˆ = 0.988 (0.009) and are unable to reject the null hypothesis of dynamic consistency,
26
Additionally, this measure is close in spirit to our e↵ort experiment where initial allocations are compared
to subsequent reallocations. To get a sense of the size of potential income e↵ects, we can also compare the
Week 1 vs. Week 4 choices made in Week 1 to the Week 4 vs. Week 7 choices made in Week 4. Controlling for
interest rate fixed e↵ects, subjects allocate on average $0.07 (s.e = 0.31) more to the sooner payment in Week
1, F (1, 74) = 0.05, (p = 0.82), suggesting negligible income e↵ects.
27
Admittedly, our ability to precisely identify aggregate discounting was not a focus of the experimental
design and is compromised by limited variation in delay length and interest rates. In monetary discounting
experiments it is not unusual to find implied annual discount rates in excess of 100%.

22

Table 2: Parameter Estimates
Monetary Discounting

E↵ort Discounting

(1)
All Delay
Lengths

(2)
Three Week Delay
Lengths

(3)
Job 1
Greek

(4)
Job 2
Tetris

(5)
Combined

Present Bias Parameter: ˆ

0.974
(0.009)

0.988
(0.009)

0.900
(0.037)

0.877
(0.036)

0.888
(0.033)

Daily Discount Factor: ˆ

0.998
(0.000)

0.997
(0.000)

0.999
(0.004)

1.001
(0.004)

1.000
(0.004)

Monetary Curvature Parameter: ↵
ˆ

0.975
(0.006)

0.976
(0.005)
1.624
(0.114)

1.557
(0.099)

1.589
(0.104)

800
80

800
80

1600
80
Yes

Cost of E↵ort Parameter: ˆ

# Observations
# Clusters
Job E↵ects
H0 :

=1

H0 : (Col. 1) = (Col. 5)
H0 : (Col. 2) = (Col. 5)

1500
75
2
(1) = 8.77
(p < 0.01)

1125
75
2
(1) = 1.96
(p = 0.16)

2
(1) = 7.36
(p < 0.01)

2

(1) = 11.43
(p < 0.01)

2

(1) = 11.42
(p < 0.01)

2

(1) = 6.37
(p = 0.01)
2

(1) = 8.26
(p < 0.01)

Notes: Parameters identified from two-limit Tobit regressions of equations (6) and (4) for
monetary discounting and e↵ort discounting, respectively. Parameters recovered via non-linear
combinations of regression coefficients. Standard errors clustered at individual level reported
in parentheses, recovered via the delta method. E↵ort regressions control for Job E↵ects (Task
1 vs. Task 2). We use Chi-squared tests for the null hypotheses in the last three rows.
2

(1) = 1.96, (p = 0.16). For a fixed delay length and interest rate, subjects make virtually

identical allocations in the present and the future.
Our non-parametric and parametric results closely mirror the aggregate findings of Andreoni
and Sprenger (2012a) and Gine et al. (2010).28 A potential concern of these earlier studies that
carefully control transaction costs and payment reliability, is that a payment in the present
was implemented by a payment in the afternoon of the same day, e.g. by 5:00 pm in the
subjects’ residence mailboxes in Andreoni and Sprenger (2012a). In this paper, because subjects
28

In both of these prior exercises substantial heterogeneity in behavior is uncovered. In subsection 4.3 we
conduct individual analyses, revealing similar findings.

23

repeatedly have to come to the lab, a payment in the present is implemented by an immediate
cash payment. The fact that we replicate the earlier studies that carefully control for transaction
costs and payment reliability alleviates the concerns that payments in the afternoon are not
treated as present payments.
Confirming the finding of limited present bias in the domain of money motivates our exploration of choices over e↵ort. Clear confounds exist for identifying or rejecting models of
dynamic inconsistency from monetary choices. In the next section we attempt to test the
central hypothesis of diminishing impatience without these confounds in the domain of e↵ort.

4.2

E↵ort Discounting

Subjects make a total of 40 allocation decisions over e↵ort in our seven week experiment.
Twenty of these decisions are initial allocations and reallocations made in the first block of the
experiment. The other twenty are made in the second block. Our design is focused on testing
whether participants identified as being present biased (in Block 1) demand commitment in
Week 4 (in Block 2). Hence, we opt to present here allocation data from only the first block of
the experiment, Weeks 1 and 2. This allows the prediction of Week 4’s commitment demand to
be conducted truly as an out-of-sample exercise. In Appendix B.3, we present results of present
bias from both blocks of the experiment and document very similar results.
In Figure 5 we show for each task rate the amount of tasks allocated to the sooner date,
Week 2, which could range from 0 to 50. We contrast initial allocations of e↵ort made in Week
1 at each task rate with subsequent reallocations made in Week 2 for the 80 subjects of the
primary sample. Standard errors bars are provided, clustered at the individual level.
As with monetary discounting, subjects appear to have understood the central intertemporal
tradeo↵s of the experiment as both initial allocations and subsequent reallocations decrease as
the task rate is increased. At the individual level 95% of choices are monotonically decreasing in
interest rate, and only 5 subjects exhibit more than 5 non-monotonicities in their e↵ort choices.29
29

Subjects have 32 opportunities to violate monotonicity comparing two adjacent interest rates in their 40
total CTB choices. 41 of 80 subjects are fully consistent with monotonicity and only 5 subjects have more

24

Figure 5: Real E↵ort Discounting Behavior
Tetris

10

20

Sooner Tasks

30

40

Greek Transcription

.5

1

1.5 .5

1

1.5

Task Rate
Initial Allocation
Mean

Re-Allocation
Mean

SEM

ytk
sb
h
p
ra
G

This suggests that subjects as a whole understand the implied intertemporal tradeo↵s and the
decision environment.
Apparent from the observed choices is that at all task rates average subsequent reallocations
lie below average initial allocations. Controlling for all task rate and task interactions, subjects
allocate 2.47 fewer tasks to the sooner work date when the sooner work date is the present
F (1, 79) = 14.78, (p < 0.01). Subjects initially allocate 9.3% more to the sooner date than
they subsequently reallocate (26.59 initial vs. 24.12 reallocation).30
Motivated by our non-parametric analysis we proceed to estimate intertemporal parameters.
Table 2 columns (3) through (5) present two-limit Tobit regressions based on (4). In column
(3) the analyzed data are the allocations for Job 1, Greek Transcription. We find an estimated
than 5 non-monotonicities. Deviations are in general small with a median required allocation change of 3 tasks
to bring the data in line with monotonicity. Three subjects have more than 10 non-monotonicities indicating
upward sloping sooner e↵ort curves. Such subjects may find the tasks enjoyable such that they prefer to do
more tasks sooner to fewer tasks later. We believe the increased volume of non-downward sloping behavior in
e↵ort relative to money has several sources. Subjects may actually enjoy the tasks, they make more choices
for e↵ort than for money, and half of their allocations are completed outside of the controlled lab environment.
Importantly, non-monotonicities decrease with experience such that in the second block of the experiment 97
percent of choices satisfy monotonicity while in the first block, only 93 percent do so, F (1, 79) = 8.34 (p < 0.01).
30
The behavior is more pronounced for the first block of the experiment. For both blocks combined subjects allocate 25.95 tasks to the sooner date, 1.59 more tasks than they subsequently reallocate (24.38 tasks),
representing a di↵erence of around 6%, F (1, 79) = 15.16, (p < 0.01). See Appendix B.3 for detail.

25

cost parameter ˆ = 1.624 (0.114). Abstracting from discounting, a subject with this parameter
would be indi↵erent between completing all 50 tasks on one experimental date and completing
32 tasks over two experimental dates.31 The daily discount factor of ˆ = 0.999 (0.004) is similar
to our findings for monetary discounting.
In column (3) of Table 2 we estimate an aggregate ˆ = 0.900 (0.037), and easily reject the
null hypothesis of dynamic consistency,

2

(1) = 7.36, (p < 0.01). In column (4), we obtain

broadly similar conclusions for Job 2, the partial tetris games. We aggregate over the two
jobs in column (5), controlling for the job, and again document that subjects are significantly
present-biased over e↵ort.32
Finally, our implemented analysis allows us to compare present bias across e↵ort and money
with

2

that the

tests based on seemingly unrelated estimation techniques. We reject the null hypothesis
identified in column (5) over e↵ort is equal to that identified for monetary discounting

in column (1),

2

(1) = 6.37, (p = 0.01), or column (2),

2

(1) = 8.26, (p < 0.01). Subjects are

significantly more present-biased over e↵ort than over money.33

4.3

Individual Analysis

On aggregate, we find that subjects are significantly more present-biased over work than over
money. In this sub-section we investigate behavior at the individual level to understand the
extent to which present bias over e↵ort and money is correlated within individual.
In order to investigate individual level discounting parameters we run fixed e↵ect versions
of the regressions provided in columns (2) and (5) of Table 2.34 As discussed in section 3, we
31

In many applications in economics and experiments, quadratic cost functions are assumed for tractability
and our analysis suggests that at least in our domain this assumption would not be too inaccurate.
32
For robustness, we run regressions similar to column (5) separately for each week and note that though the
cost function does change somewhat from week to week, present bias is still significantly identified as individuals are significantly less patient in their reallocation decisions compared to their initial allocation decisions.
Appendix Table A3 provides estimates.
33
In Appendix B.3 we conduct identical analysis using both Blocks 1 and 2 and arrive at the same conclusions.
See Appendix Table A4 for estimates.
34
We choose to use the measures of present bias based on three week delay choices for the monetary discounting
for continuity with our non-parametric tests of present bias. Further, when validating our individual measures,
we focus on reallocations over three week delay decisions as in the presentation for the aggregate data. Very
similar results are obtained if we use the fixed e↵ects versions of Table 2, column (1).

26

identify discounting parameters at the individual level assuming no heterogeneity in cost or
utility function curvature. Individual parameter estimates of ˆ e , present bias for e↵ort, and
ˆ m , present bias for money, are recovered as non-linear combinations of regression coefficients
as described in section 3.
One technical constraint prevents us from estimating individual discounting parameters with
two-limit Tobit as in the aggregate analysis. In order for parameters to be estimable at the
individual level with two-limit Tobit, some interior allocations are required. As suggested by
our curvature estimates in Table 2, 86% of monetary allocations are at budget corners and 61%
of the sample has zero interior allocations. This issue is not as severe for e↵ort discounting as
only 31% of allocations are at budget corners and only 1 subject has zero interior allocations.
For individual-level discounting, we therefore use ordinary least squares for both money and
e↵ort.35
Figure 6 presents individual estimates and their correlation. First, note that nearly 60%
of subjects have an estimated ˆ m close to 1, indicating dynamic consistency for monetary
discounting choices. This is in contrast to only around 25% of subjects with ˆ e close to 1. The
mean value for ˆ m is 0.99 (s.d. = 0.06), while the mean value for ˆ e is 0.91 (s.d. = 0.20). The
di↵erence between these measures is significant, t = 3.09, (p < 0.01). Second, note that for the
majority of subjects when they deviate from dynamic consistency in e↵ort, they deviate in the
direction of present bias.
Since correlational studies (e.g., Ashraf et al., 2006; Meier and Sprenger, 2010) often use
binary measures of present bias, we define the variables ‘Present Biased’e and ‘Present Biased’m
which take the value 1 if the corresponding estimate of

lies strictly below 0.99 and zero

otherwise. We find that 56% of subjects have a ‘Present-Biased’e of 1 while only 33% of
subjects have a ‘Present-Biased’m of 1. The di↵erence in proportions of individuals classified
35

Nearly identical aggregate discounting estimates are generated when conducting ordinary least squares
versions of Table 2. Curvature estimates, however, are sensitive to estimation techniques that do and do not
recognize that the tangency conditions implied by (4) and (6) may be met with inequality at budget corners.
Andreoni and Sprenger (2012a) provides further discussion.

27

as present-biased over work and money is significant, z = 2.31, (p = 0.02).36

0

Fraction
.2 .4 .6

Figure 6: Individual Estimates of Present Bias

.75
Work Present Bias

1

1.25

1.5

.5

.75
Monetary Present Bias

1

1.25

1.5

.5

.75
Work Present Bias

1

1.25

1.5

Monetary Present Bias
.8 .9 1 1.11.2

0

Fraction
.2 .4 .6

.5

Two important questions with respect to our individual measures arise. First, how much
do these measures correlate within individual? The answer to this question is important for
understanding both the validity of studies relying on monetary measures and the potential consistency of preferences across domains. If significant correlations are obtained it suggests that
there may be some important preference-related behavior uncovered in monetary discounting
studies.37 Figure 6 presents a scatterplot of ˆ m and ˆ e . In our sample of 75 subjects with both
complete monetary and e↵ort discounting choices, we find that ˆ e and ˆ m have almost zero
correlation, ⇢ =

0.05, (p = 0.66). Additionally, we find that the binary measures for present

36

Further, one can define future bias in a similar way. 17% of subjects are future biased in money while 29%
of subjects are future biased over e↵ort. Similar di↵ering proportions between present and future bias have
been previously documented (see, e.g., Ashraf et al., 2006; Meier and Sprenger, 2010). Two important counterexamples are Gine et al. (2010) who find almost equal proportions of present and future biased choices and
Dohmen, Falk, Hu↵man and Sunde (2006) who find a greater proportion of future-biased than present-biased
subjects.
37
Indeed psychology provides some grounds for such views as money generates broadly similar rewards-related
neural patterns as more primary incentives (Knutson, Adams, Fong and Hommer, 2001), and in the domain
of discounting evidence suggests that discounting over primary rewards, such as juice, produces similar neural
images to discounting over monetary rewards (McClure, Laibson, Loewenstein and Cohen, 2004; McClure et
al., 2007).

28

bias, ‘Present Biased’e and ‘Present Biased’m are also uncorrelated, ⇢ = 0.11, (p = 0.33).38
Table 3: Validation of Individual Parameter Estimates
Dependent Variable:

Budget Share Distance
E↵ort Discounting
(1)
(2)

Real E↵ort Present Bias Parameter: ˆ e

Monetary Discounting
(3)
(4)

0.532***
(0.053)

Present Biasede (=1)

-0.123***
(0.020)

Monetary Present Bias Parameter: ˆ m

2.393***
(0.052)

Present Biasedm (=1)

-0.201***
(0.026)
-0.531***
(0.052)

0.020***
(0.007)

-2.391***
(0.049)

0.044***
(0.015)

Job E↵ects
Choice Set E↵ects

Yes
-

Yes
-

Yes

Yes

# Observations
# Uncensored Observations
# Clusters

800
798
80

800
798
80

750
731
75

750
731
75

Constant

Notes: Coefficients from tobit regressions of budget share distance 2 [ 1, 1] on identified individual discounting parameters. 10 reallocations per individual for e↵ort decisions and 10
reallocations per individual for monetary decisions. Standard errors clustered on individual
level in parentheses. Job fixed e↵ects for e↵ort and choice set fixed e↵ects for monetary discounting included but not reported. Discounting parameters identified from OLS regressions for
monetary discounting and real e↵ort discounting with individual specific e↵ects for both ˆ and
ˆ . Curvature parameter, ↵, and cost parameter, , assumed constant across individuals. E↵ort
regressions identifying parameters control for Job E↵ects (Job 1 vs. Job 2). Monetary Present
Bias (=1) and E↵ort Present Bias (=1) calculated as individuals with estimated ˆ < 0.99 in
the relevant domain. Levels of significance: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.
The second question concerning our estimated parameters is whether they can be validated
38
Interestingly, when using both Blocks 1 and 2 of the data, we come to a slightly di↵erent conclusion. Though
ˆ and ˆ remain virtually uncorrelated, with the additional data we uncover a substantial and significant
m
e
correlation between Present Biased’e and ‘Present Biased’m ⇢ = 0.24, (p = 0.03). Further, ‘Present Biased’m
is also significantly correlated with the continuous measure ˆ e , ⇢ = 0.27, (p = 0.02). More work is needed to
understand the relationship between monetary and e↵ort present bias parameters.

29

in sample. That is, given that ˆ e and ˆ m are recovered as non-linear combinations of regression
coefficients, to what extent do these measures predict present-biased reallocations of tasks and
money? In order to examine this internal validity question, we generate distance measures for
reallocations. For e↵ort choices we calculate the budget share of each allocation for Week 2
e↵ort. The di↵erence in budget shares between reallocation and initial allocation is what we
term a ‘Budget Share Distance.’39 As budget shares are valued between [0, 1], our budget share
distance measure takes values on the interval [ 1, 1], with negative numbers indicating presentbiased reallocations. Each subject has 10 such e↵ort budget share distance measures in Block
1. A similar measure is constructed for monetary discounting choices. Taking only the three
week delay data, at each gross interest rate we take the di↵erence between the future allocation
(Week 4 vs. Week 7 (Prospective)) budget share and the present allocation (Week 1 vs. Week
4 or Week 4 vs. Week 7) budget share. This measure takes values on the interval [ 1, 1], with
negative numbers indicating present-biased reallocations. Each subject has 10 such monetary
budget share distance measures.
Table 3 presents a validation table with tobit regressions of ‘Budget Share Distance’ for
e↵ort and money on our corresponding parameter estimates.40 Individuals who are identified
as present-biased by our parameter measures do indeed have more present-biased reallocations
for both work and money. Columns (1) and (3) demonstrate that individuals with lower values
of ˆ e and ˆ m make more present-biased reallocations, and those subjects with

= 1 would be

predicted to make virtually identical allocations through time. Columns (2) and (4) demonstrate that subjects who are present-biased over e↵ort allocate 12 percent less of their budget
to the sooner date when the sooner date is the present. Subjects who are present-biased over
money allocate around 20 percent less of their budget to the sooner payment when the sooner
payment is in the future.
In the next section we move out-of-sample to investigate commitment demand. The invesSpecifically, given an initial Week 1 allocation of e2 of work to be done in Week 2 and a reallocation of e02
e0 e
in Week 2 of work to be done in week 2, the budget share distance is 2m 2 .
40
Tobit regressions are implemented to account for the dependent variable being measured on the interval
[ 1, 1].
39

30

tigation of commitment demand is critical to ruling out potential alternative explanations for
time inconsistency in e↵ort allocations. Our preferred explanation is the existence of a presentbias in individual decision-making. Many alternative explanations exist, which are considered
in detail in Section 5. Importantly, under none of these alternative hypotheses would we expect a clear link between the behavioral pattern of reallocating fewer tasks to the present and
commitment demand. This is in contrast to a model of present bias under the assumption of
sophistication. Present-biased individuals should have demand for commitment. In the next
section we document commitment demand on the aggregate level and link commitment demand
to measured present-bias at both the aggregate and individual level.

4.4

Commitment Demand

In Week 4 of our experiment, subjects are o↵ered a probabilistic commitment device. Subjects
are asked whether they prefer the allocation-that-counts to come from their Week 4 allocations
with probability 0.1 (plus an amount $X) or with probability 0.9 (plus an amount $Y), with
either $X=0 or $Y=0. The second of these choices represents commitment and $X - $Y is the
price of commitment.41 Virtually nobody is willing to pay more than $0.25 for commitment,
with 91 percent of subjects preferring flexibility when the cost of commitment ($X - $Y) is
$0.25. Likewise, nobody is willing to pay more than $0.25 for flexibility, with 90 percent of
subjects preferring commitment when the price of commitment ($X - $Y) is -$0.25. It appears
that most subjects simply followed the money in the elicitation, preferring either commitment
or flexibility depending on which option provided additional payment.42
We obtain some heterogeneity in behavior at price zero ($X=0 and $Y=0) where 59%
(47/80) of subjects commit, indicating substantial commitment demand. We define the binary
41

To avoid cutting the sample further, here we consider all 80 subjects in the primary sample. 4 of 80 subjects
switched multiple times in the commitment device price list elicitation. Identical results are obtained excluding
such individuals.
42
We are hesitant to draw strong conclusions based on price sensitivity for two reasons. First, the elicitation
procedure may not have been optimized for fine price di↵erentiations. Second, given the observed reallocations,
and the overall payment subjects received for units of work, it is not clear how much the option to reallocate
should be worth.

31

variable ‘Commit (=1)’ which takes the value 1 if a subject chooses to commit at price zero
and use this measure in the following analysis.
Figure 7: Commitment Demand
Panel A: Commit (=0)
Tetris

10

20

Sooner Tasks

30

40

Greek Transcription

.5

1

1.5 .5

1

1.5

Task Rate
Initial Allocation
Mean

Re-Allocation
Mean

SEM

ytk
sb
h
p
ra
G

Panel B: Commit (=1)
Tetris

10

20

Sooner Tasks

30

40

Greek Transcription

.5

1

1.5 .5

1

1.5

Task Rate
Initial Allocation
Mean

Re-Allocation
Mean

SEM

ytk
sb
h
p
ra
G

Figure 7 separates Figure 5 showing the real e↵ort discounting behavior by commitment
demand at price zero. Immediately apparent from Figure 7 is that experimental behavior
separates along commitment demand. Subjects who demand commitment in Week 4 made
32

substantially present biased reallocations in Week 2 given their initial Week 1 e↵ort allocations.
Controlling for all task rate and task interactions, subjects who demand commitment allocate
3.58 fewer tasks to the sooner date when it is the present, F (1, 46) = 12.18, (p < 0.01).
Subjects who do not demand commitment make more similar initial allocations and subsequent
reallocations of e↵ort. Controlling for all task rate and task interactions, they only allocate 0.89
fewer tasks to the sooner date when it is the present, F (1, 32) = 4.01, (p = 0.05). Furthermore,
subjects who demand commitment in Week 4 reallocated significantly more tasks than subjects
who did not demand commitment, F (1, 79) = 5.84, (p = 0.02).
Table 4 generates a similar conclusion with parametric estimates. In columns (3) and (4),
we find that subjects who demand commitment in Week 4 are significantly present biased over
e↵ort in Weeks 1-3,

2

(1) = 9.00, (p < 0.01). For subjects who do not demand commitment,

we cannot reject the null hypothesis of

= 1 at conventional levels,

2

(1) = 2.64, (p =

0.10). Further, we reject the null hypothesis of equal present bias across committers and noncommitters,

2

(1) = 4.85, (p = 0.03).43

In columns (1) and (2) of Table 4 we repeat this exercise, predicting commitment demand
for e↵ort using present bias parameters from monetary decisions. While subjects who demand
commitment also seem directionally more present-biased for monetary decisions than subjects
who do not demand commitment, the di↵erence is not significant, (p = 0.26).
In Table 5 we assess whether present bias identified at the individual level predicts commitment demand. We show logit regressions with ‘Commit(=1)’ as the dependent variable and
measures of present bias over work and money as independent variables. In column (1) we find
that the continuous value ˆ e significantly predicts commitment demand. Column (2) shows that
while the binary measure, Present Biasede , has the right sign, it fails to be significant.44 There
43

These results are stronger for the first block of the experiment prior to the o↵ering of the commitment
device, though the general patterns holds when we use both blocks of data. Appendix Table A6 provides
analysis including the data from both blocks.
44
In Appendix Table A7, we use parameter estimates from Blocks 1 and 2 combined and find that both the
continuous and the binary measure are predictive. Indeed, marginal e↵ects indicate that individuals who are
present biased are 33 percentage points more likely to demand commitment, an increase of 56% from the mean.
That binary present bias identified from the combined data set has increased predictive power may be related
to the arbitrary cuto↵ ( ˆ e < 0.99) employed for the measure. For example, identifying binary present bias with

33

Table 4: Monetary and Real E↵ort Discounting by Commitment
Monetary Discounting
Commit (=0)

E↵ort Discounting

Commit (=1) Commit (=0)

Commit (=1)

(1)
Tobit

(2)
Tobit

(3)
Tobit

(4)
Tobit

Present Bias Parameter: ˆ

0.999
(0.010)

0.981
(0.013)

0.965
(0.022)

0.835
(0.055)

Daily Discount Factor: ˆ

0.997
(0.000)

0.997
(0.001)

0.988
(0.005)

1.009
(0.005)

Monetary Curvature Parameter: ↵
ˆ

0.981
(0.009)

0.973
(0.007)
1.553
(0.165)

1.616
(0.134)

660
33
Yes

940
47
Yes

Cost of E↵ort Parameter: ˆ

# Observations
# Clusters
Job E↵ects
H0 :

=1

H0 : (Col. 1) = (Col. 2)

420
28
-

705
47
-

2 (1)

= 0.01
(p = 0.94)

2 (1)

= 2.15
(p = 0.14)

2 (1)

= 2.64
(p = 0.10)

2 (1)

= 9.00
(p < 0.01)

2 (1) = 1.29
(p = 0.26)

H0 : (Col. 3) = (Col. 4)

2 (1) = 4.85
(p = 0.03)

Notes: Parameters identified from OLS regressions of equations (1) and (2) for monetary
discounting and real e↵ort discounting. Parameters recovered via non-linear combinations of
regression coefficients. Standard errors clustered at individual level reported in parentheses,
recovered via the delta method. Commit (=1) or Commit (=0) separates individuals into those
who did (1) or those who did not (0) choose to commit at a commitment price of zero dollars.
E↵ort regressions control for Job E↵ects (Job 1 vs. Job 2). Tested null hypotheses are zero
present bias, H0 : = 1, and equality of present bias across commitment and no commitment,
H0 : (Col. 1) = (Col. 2) and H0 : (Col. 3) = (Col. 4).
are again some suggestive, but statistically insignificant results, delivered by our measures of
monetary present bias in columns (3) and (4). In columns (5) and (6) we combine present bias
measures and note that where significant relations are achieved, present bias over e↵ort has
substantially more predictive power than present bias over money for explaining commitment
lower values of ˆ e yields significance with only Block 1 data.

34

demand.
Table 5: Predicting Commitment Demand
Dependent Variable : Commit (=1)
(1)
ˆe

(2)

(3)

(4)

-2.595** [-0.625]
(1.170)

Present Biasede (=1)

(5)

(6)

-3.157** [-0.725]
(1.333)
0.031 [0.008]
(0.459)

ˆm

0.301 [0.070]
(0.488)
-3.146 [-0.735]
(4.140)

Present Biasedm (=1)

-3.841 [-0.883]
(4.008)
0.622 [0.140]
(0.533)

0.588 [0.133]
(0.537)

Constant

2.746**
(1.087)

0.336
(0.340)

3.635
(4.092)

0.323
(0.288)

7.262*
(4.259)

0.180
(0.369)

# Observations
Log-Likelihood
Pseudo R2
Mean of Dependent Variable

80
-52.031
0.040
0.59

80
-54.218
0.000
0.59

75
-49.280
0.006
0.63

75
-48.838
0.014
0.63

75
-46.529
0.061
0.63

75
-48.646
0.018
0.63

Notes: Coefficients from logistic regression of demand for commitment on identified individual
discounting parameters. Marginal e↵ects in brackets. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Commit (=1) or Commit (=0) separates individuals into those who did (1) or those who did
not (0) choose to commit at a commitment price of zero dollars. Discounting parameters
identified from OLS regressions of equations (1) and (2) for monetary discounting and real
e↵ort discounting with individual specific e↵ects for both ˆ and ˆ . Curvature parameter, ↵,
and cost parameter, , assumed constant across individuals. E↵ort regressions identifying
parameters control for Job E↵ects (Job 1 vs. Job 2). Present Biasedm (=1) and Present
Biasede (=1) calculated as individuals with estimated ˆ < 0.99 in the relevant domain. Levels
of significance: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.
These findings indicate that present bias in e↵ort is significantly related to future commitment demand. Individuals who are present biased over e↵ort are substantially more likely to
demand commitment at price zero.
It is important to ensure that the desired commitment is meaningful in that it imposes a
binding constraint. Specifically, we ask whether individuals who demand commitment actually
restrict their own activities through commitment, forcing themselves to complete more work
than they instantaneously desire.45 Given the nature of our commitment device, this seems at
45

Though our o↵ered commitment contract allows individuals only to meaningfully restrict themselves, this
need not be the case. One example would be to have individuals commit to completing at least 1 task at the
sooner work date. As virtually all initial allocations and subsequent reallocations satisfy this condition anyways,

35

least ex-ante plausible, and will be the case as long as initial allocations di↵er from reallocations.
Two such comparisons are considered. First, we consider the first block of the experiment
when no commitment contract is available. How many more tasks would subjects have been
required to complete in Week 2 had the commitment contract been in place? To answer this
question we examine budget share distances for Block 1. Non-committers have a mean budget
share distance of

0.018 (clustered s.e. = 0.009) allocating about 2 percentage points less of

each budget to Week 2 when deciding in the present. In contrast, committers have a mean
budget share distance of

0.072 (0.020), allocating 7 percentage points less to Week 2 when

deciding in the present. While both values are significantly di↵erent from zero (F (1, 79) =
4.14, (p = 0.05), F (1, 79) = 12.39, (p < 0.01), respectively), the di↵erence between the two
is also statistically significant, F (1, 79) = 5.88, (p = 0.02). Hence, had commitment been
available in Week 2 and had subjects made the same choices, committers would have been
required to complete significantly more work than they instantaneously desired and would
have been more restricted than non-committers. The same analysis can be done for Block 2
focusing on required work in Week 5. Non-committers have a mean budget share distance
of 0.011 (0.017) while committers have a mean distance of

0.030 (0.013). The di↵erence

for committers remains significantly di↵erent from zero, F (1, 79) = 5.57, (p = 0.02), and
the di↵erence between the two remains significant at the 10% level F (1, 79) = 3.68, (p =
0.06).46 Hence, in the presence of commitment in Week 5, committers are required to complete
significantly more work than they instantaneously desire and are more restricted than noncommitters.
We are aware of two prior exercises exploring the potential extent of present bias and its
correlation with commitment demand. Kaur et al. (2010) link the apparently present-biased
behavior of working harder on paydays with demand for a dominated wage contract wherein
individuals choose a work target. If the work target is not met, an individual receives a
low piece-rate wage, while if it is met or exceeded the individual receives a higher piece rate
such commitment is not very meaningful.
46
The di↵erence for non-committers is no longer significantly di↵erent from zero F (1, 79) = 0.39, (p = 0.53).

36

wage. As the dominated wage contract can be viewed as a commitment to complete a certain
amount of work, this represents a potential link between commitment and present bias. Though
compelling, the commitment levels are chosen by individuals themselves and are set around 1/6
of average productivity.47 Ashraf et al. (2006) consider hypothetical intertemporal choices over
money, rice and ice cream and link those to take-up of a savings commitment device. The
authors show that present bias in hypothetical monetary decisions is correlated with take-up
for women.

5

Discussion

Our e↵ort discounting data address several key confounds present in monetary studies, such as
fungibility and arbitrage issues. However, some discussion is required before one can attribute
the observed behavior for e↵ort choices to dynamic inconsistency. Clearly, the ability to predict commitment demand based on present-biased reallocations gives a degree of confidence.
In this section we discuss four additional hypotheses which can generate time inconsistent effort allocations. Though none of these explanations would predict a correlation between time
inconsistency and commitment demand, we can also address these hypotheses directly.
First, subjects may reallocate fewer tasks to the present because of time constraints. Subjects who log on to the experimental website just prior to midnight may have limited opportunity to complete their tasks. Importantly, we recorded allocation times. On average, subjects
completed their allocations in Weeks 2 and 5 with around 8 hours remaining before the imposed
midnight deadline. Only 8 of 80 subjects completed their allocations in Weeks 2 or 5 with less
than 2 hours remaining before the imposed midnight deadline and only 2 of 80 completed their
allocations with less than 1 hour remaining. Of course, subjects that log in later may be more
likely to be present-biased, but the physical time constraint appears not to be a driving force
in the allocations.48
47

The commitment may serve other purposes than constraining behavior that may still be desirable to individuals who work harder on paydays.
48
Interestingly, in unreported post-hoc results, when splitting the sample at the median allocation completion

37

Second, subjects may make reallocations not because they are present-biased but because
they find the task to be more or less difficult than they previously envisioned.49 Though we
do attempt to give subjects a sense of the tasks, this is a plausible and critical confound. Importantly, our environment is potentially able to address this confound as changes to perceived
cost functions are separable from time preferences. The shape of the cost function is identified
from changes in the experimental task rates. Because both initial allocations and subsequent
reallocations are made at various task rates, the cost function is identified at both points and
time. In Appendix Table A3, we estimate cost functions and discounting parameters at each
point in time, lending credence to the notion that changes in cost functions are not driving the
observed behavior.50
Third, and relatedly, attention must be paid to the role of uncertainty in delivering a
present-biased pattern of behavior. When making initial allocations, subjects do so under a
di↵erent informational environment than when making their subsequent reallocations. There
could be uncertainty for initial allocations, which is partially resolved when reallocations are
made one week later. Several aspects of uncertainty warrant attention. First, individuals may
carry preferences for the resolution of uncertainty (Kreps and Porteus, 1978; Epstein and Zin,
1989; Chew and Epstein, 1989). Unlike monetary designs, in our e↵ort experiment such a
preference may more naturally lead to a future bias. Subjects desiring to resolve uncertainty
in their reallocation choices could, in principle, choose to complete their tasks immediately
when the present is available. Second, our discounting estimates do not account for subjects’
potential uncertainty on their own parameters, such as uncertainty with regards to the future
costliness of the task. Though the weekly parameter estimates provided in Table A3 help to
alleviate some concerns, a deeper problem may exist. Subjects may make allocations in Week
time we do find that subjects who log in later are estimated to be more present-biased.
49
We see this channel as distinct from the role of uncertainty, as such changes in difficulty need not have been
forecasted.
50
The non-parametric analysis above also gives some sense of the validity of this concern. If changing cost
functions were to drive the behavior, one would observe a di↵erent pattern of reallocations. If an individual
moved from having an extremely convex to an almost linear cost function, the corresponding allocations would
shift from having limited price sensitivity to being very price sensitive. Hence, one would expect reallocations
to be higher than initial allocations at some prices and lower at others.

38

1 that minimize their discounted expected cost in future weeks given the potential realizations
of future parameters. This uncertainty may be subsequently resolved in Week 2, such that
subjects minimize their discounted cost at specific realizations of key parameters. As the
minimizer of the expectation need not be the expectation of the minimizer, such issues can
lead to inconsistencies between initial allocations and subsequent reallocations. To explore the
extent to which this issue hampers identification of present bias, we conduct simulations under
a variety of uncertainty structures in Appendix A. Uncertainty, unresolved at initial allocation
and realized at the time of reallocation, does bias our estimates of

both at the aggregate and

individual level. However, the direction of bias is generally upward in the parameter regions of
interest, leading to less estimated present bias.51 Importantly, a subject with future uncertainty
would benefit from flexibility, such that even if present bias was delivered by uncertainty of
some form one would not expect a correlation between present bias and commitment demand.
Fourth, present-biased reallocations of e↵ort may be a simple decision error. Hence, present
bias, or any dynamic inconsistency, may be an unstable phenomenon. The two blocks of
our experiment speak to this possibility. Subjects have two opportunities to exhibit presentbiased reallocations. Indeed, present-biased behavior in Block 1 and Block 2 is significantly
correlated.52 At the allocation level, a subject who is present biased in Block 1 is 58% more
likely than others to be present biased in Block 2, F (1, 79) = 6.94, (p = 0.010).53 Additionally,
an individual who is dynamically consistent in Block 1 is 85% more likely to be dynamically
consistent in Block 2 than others F (1, 79) = 50.88, (p < 0.01).54
51

Intuitively, subjects with unresolved uncertainty on future parameters seek to avoid the extreme possibilities
of working under a very convex cost structure that is only rarely realized. This leads initial allocations to be
frequently lower than subsequent reallocations, particularly at higher task rates. Appendix A provides greater
detail.
52
Though the behavior is significantly correlated when examined as indicators for present bias, future bias
and dynamic consistency; the budget share distances are not significantly correlated through time. This may
be due to the sheer volume of data with budget share distances equal to zero and the relative lack of stability
for future-biased behavior.
53
Test statistic from OLS regression of binary indicator for a present-biased reallocation in Block 2 on matched
indicator for present-biased reallocation in Block 1 with standard errors clustered on the subject level. The
estimated constant is 0.218 (s.e. = 0.030) and the coefficient on Block 1 present bias is 0.128 (s.e. = 0.049).
54
Test statistic from OLS regression of binary indicator for a dynamically consistent reallocation in Block 2
on matched indicator for a dynamically consistent reallocation in Block 1 with standard errors clustered on the
subject level. The estimated constant is 0.400 (s.e. = 0.041) and the coefficient on Block 1 dynamic consistency is

39

This discussion helps to clarify some of the potential confounds for our observed e↵ects.
We view it as unlikely that present-biased reallocations of e↵ort are driven by time constraints,
unforeseen difficulty or uncertainty. Further, that present bias over e↵ort exhibits stability
and predicts commitment demand gives confidence that our observed e↵ects are generated by
dynamic inconsistency.

6

Conclusion

Present biased time preferences are a core of behavioral research. The key hypothesis of diminishing impatience through time is able to capture a number of behavioral regularities at odds
with standard exponential discounting. Further, the possibility of sophistication provides an
important channel for policy improvements via the provision of commitment devices. With the
exception of only a few pieces of research, most evidence of dynamic inconsistency is generated
from experimental choices over time-dated monetary payments. Such methods are subject to a
variety of critical confounds, muddying the resulting inference for a model defined over streams
of consumption.
The present study recognizes the key shortcomings of monetary discounting experiments
and attempts to identify dynamic inconsistency for choices over real e↵ort. We introduce a longitudinal design asking subjects to allocate and subsequently reallocate units of e↵ort through
time. A complementary monetary study is conducted for comparison. We document three key
findings. First, in choices over monetary payments, we find limited evidence of present bias.
This finding supports recent work demonstrating that when transactions costs and payment
risk are closely controlled, monetary choices generate only limited present bias. Second, in
choices over e↵ort, we find substantial present bias. Subjects reallocate about 9% less work to
0.342 (s.e. = 0.048). Interestingly, somewhat less precision is found for future biased reallocations. An individual
who is future-biased in Block 1 is 54% more likely to be future-biased in Block 2 than others F (1, 79) =
3.07, (p = 0.08). Test statistic from OLS regression of binary indicator for a future-biased reallocation in
Block 2 on matched indicator for a future-biased reallocation in Block 1 with standard errors clustered on
the subject level. The estimated constant is 0.162 (s.e. = 0.025) and the coefficient on Block 1 future bias is
0.088 (s.e. = 0.050).

40

the present than their initial allocation. Corresponding parameter estimates generate a similar
conclusion. Individuals are estimated to be substantially present-biased in e↵ort choices and
significantly closer to dynamically consistent in choices over money. Third, we study commitment demand, documenting that at price zero roughly 60% of subjects prefer commitment to
flexibility. A key result is that these commitment decisions correlate significantly with previously measured present bias. Individuals who demand commitment are significantly more
present-biased in e↵ort than those who do not. This provides validation for our experimental
measures and helps to rule out a variety of potential confounds. Importantly, in our design
commitment meaningfully restricts activities. Committed subjects are required to complete
more e↵ort than they instantaneously desire. By documenting the link between experimentally
measured present bias and commitment demand, we provide support for models of dynamic
inconsistency with sophistication. Subjects are apparently aware of their present bias and take
actions to limit their future behavior.
We view our paper as providing a portable experimental method allowing tractable estimation of intertemporal preferences over consumption (e↵ort) and correlating such preferences
with a meaningful, potentially constraining, commitment device. Though the implementation
here is with American undergraduates, we feel the design is suitable for field interventions.
We draw one conclusion and several words of caution from our findings. Our results indicate
that present bias is plausibly identified in choices over e↵ort and, furthermore, is linked to
e↵ort-related commitment demand. However, we caution using the estimated parameters at
face value as they are for a specific subject pool (self-selected to work for six weeks for final
payment in week seven) and a specific task. There may be other decision environments wherein
behavior may not be well captured by models of dynamic inconsistency. For example, subjects
may wish to get a painful single experience over with immediately or postpone a single pleasure
(Loewenstein, 1987).55 Additionally, though fungibility issues may be mediated in the present
design, the natural problems of arbitrage will still exist if subjects substitute e↵ort in the
55

This suggests a key anticipatory component of intertemporal behavior, potentially mediated by our design’s
use of minimum e↵ort requirements and convex decisions.

41

lab with their extra-lab behavior. The existence and use of such substitutes, like avoiding
doing laundry or homework in response to the experiment, may bias our discounting estimates.
Together these cautions suggest important benefits to future research exploring the correlation
between our measures and ecologically relevant decisions.

42

References
Andersen, Ste↵en, Glenn W. Harrison, Morten I. Lau, and Elisabet E. Rutstrom,
“Eliciting Risk and Time Preferences,” Econometrica, 2008, 76 (3), 583–618.
,

,

, and

, “Discounting Behavior: A Reconsideration,” Working Paper, 2012.

Andreoni, James and Charles Sprenger, “Estimating Time Preferences with Convex Budgets,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (7), 3333–3356.
and

, “Risk Preferences Are Not Time Preferences,” American Economic Review, 2012,

102 (7), 3357–3376.
Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin, “Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence
from a Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
2006, 121 (1), 635–672.
Brown, Alexander L., Zhikang Eric Chua, and Colin F. Camerer, “Learning and
Visceral Temptation in Dynamic Saving Experiments,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
2009, 124 (1), 197–231.
Cagetti, Marco, “Wealth Accumulation Over the Life Cycle and Precautionary Savings,”
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 2003, 21 (3), 339–353.
Chabris, Christopher F., David Laibson, and Jonathon P. Schuldt, “Intertemporal
Choice,” in Steven N. Durlauf and Larry Blume, eds., The New Palgrave Dictionary of
Economics, London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008.
Chew, S. H. and Larry G. Epstein, “The Structure of Preferences and Attitudes Towards
the Timing of the Resolution of Uncertainty,” International Economic Review, 1989, 30 (1),
103–117.
Coller, Maribeth and Melonie B. Williams, “Eliciting individual discount rates,” Experimental Economics, 1999, 2, 107–127.
43

Cubitt, Robin P. and Daniel Read, “Can Intertemporal Choice Experiments Elicit Preferences for Consumption,” Experimental Economics, 2007, 10 (4), 369–389.
Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Hu↵man, and Uwe Sunde, “Dynamic inconsistency predicts self-control problems in humans,” Working Paper, 2006.
Epstein, Larry G. and Stanley E. Zin, “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal
Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework,” Econometrica,
1989, 57 (4), 937–969.
Frederick, Shane, George Loewenstein, and Ted O’Donoghue, “Time discounting and
time preference: A critical review,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2002, 40 (2), 351–401.
Gine, Xavier, Jessica Goldberg, Dan Silverman, and Dean Yang, “Revising Commitments: Time Preference and Time-Inconsistency in the Field,” Working Paper, 2010.
Giordano, Louis A., Warren K. Bickel, George Loewenstein, Eric A. Jacobs, Lisa
Marsch, and Gary J. Badger, “Mild opioid deprivation increases the degree that opioid
dependent outpatients discount delayed heroin and money,” Psychopharmacology, 2002, 163,
174–182.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Jonathan A. Parker, “Consumption Over the Life Cycle,” Econometrica, 2002, 70 (1), 47–89.
Halevy, Yoram, “Strotz Meets Allais: Diminishing Impatience and the Certainty E↵ect,”
American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (3), 1145–1162.
, “Time Consistency: Stationarity and Time Invariance,” Working Paper, 2012.
Harrison, Glenn W., Morten I. Lau, and Melonie B. Williams, “Estimating individual
discount rates in Denmark: A field experiment,” American Economic Review, 2002, 92 (5),
1606–1617.

44

Hausman, Jerry A., “Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization of EnergyUsing Durables,” The Bell Journal of Economics, 1979, 10 (1).
Kaur, Supreet, Michael Kremer, and Sendhil Mullainathan, “Self-Control and the
Development of Work Arrangements,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings,
2010, 100 (2), 624–628.
Keren, Gideon and Peter Roelofsma, “Immediacy and Certainty in Intertemporal Choice,”
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Making, 1995, 63 (3), 287–297.
Kirby, Kris N., Nancy M. Petry, and Warren K. Bickel, “Heroin addicts have higher
discount rates for delayed rewards than non-drug-using controls,” Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 1999, 128, 78–87.
Knutson, Brian, Charles M. Adams, Grace W. Fong, and Daniel Hommer, “Anticipation of Increasing Monetary Reward Selectively Recruits Nucleus Accumbens,” The
Journal of Neuroscience, 2001, 21 (RC159), 1–5.
Kreps, David M. and Evan L. Porteus, “Temporal Resolution of Uncertainty and Dynamic
Choice Theory,” Econometrica, 1978, 46 (1), 185–200.
Laibson, David, “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1997, 112 (2), 443–477.
, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman, “A debt puzzle,” in Philippe Aghion, Roman
Frydma, Joseph Stiglitz, and Michael Woodford, eds., Knowledge, information and expectation in modern economics: In honor of Edmund S. Phelps, Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 2003, pp. 228–266.
,

, and

, “Estimating discount functions with consumption choices over the lifecycle,”

Working Paper, 2005.

45

Lawrance, Emily C., “Poverty and the Rate of Time Preference: Evidence from Panel Data,”
Journal of Political Economy, 1991, 99 (1), 54–77.
Loewenstein, George F., “Anticipation and the Valuation of Delayed Consumption,” The
Economic Journal, 1987, 97 (387), 666–684.
, Ted O’Donoghue, and Matthew Rabin, “Projection Bias in Predicting Future Utility,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (4), 1209–1248.
Machina, Mark J., “Dynamic Consistency and Non-Expected Utility Models of Choice Under
Uncertainty,” Journal of Economic Literature, 1989, 27 (4), 1622–1668.
McClure, Samuel, David Laibson, George Loewenstein, and Jonathan Cohen, “Separate neural systems value immediate and delayed monetary rewards,” Science, 2004, 306,
503–507.
,

,

, and

, “Time discounting for primary rewards,” Journal of Neuroscience, 2007,

27 (21), 5796–5804.
Meier, Stephan and Charles Sprenger, “Present-Biased Preferences and Credit Card Borrowing,” American Economic Journal - Applied Economics, 2010, 2 (1), 193–210.
O’Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin, “Doing it Now or Later,” American Economic
Review, 1999, 89 (1), 103–124.
Read, Daniel and Barbara van Leeuwen, “Predicting Hunger: The E↵ects of Appetite
and Delay on Choice,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 1998, 76 (2),
189–205.
Samuelson, Paul A., “A Note on Measurement of Utility,” The Review of Economic Studies,
1937, 4 (2), 155–161.
Strotz, Robert H., “Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization,” Review
of Economic Studies, 1956, 23, 165–180.
46

Thaler, Richard H., “Some Empircal Evidence on Dynamic Inconsistency,” Economics Letters, 1981, pp. 201–207.
Warner, John and Saul Pleeter, “The Personal Discount Rate: Evidence from Military
Downsizing Programs,” American Economic Review, 2001, 91 (1), 33–53.
Weber, Bethany J. and Gretchen B. Chapman, “The Combined E↵ects of Risk and
Time on Choice: Does Uncertainty Eliminate the Immediacy E↵ect? Does Delay Eliminate
the Certainty E↵ect?,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 2005, 96
(2), 104–118.
Wooldridge, Je↵rey M., Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, MIT Press:
Cambridge, MA, 2002.

47

