NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE MISSING TRANSMISSION MECHANISM IN THE MONETARY EXPLANATION
OF THE GREAT DEPRESSION
Christina D. Romer
David H. Romer
Working Paper 18746
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18746
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 201

This paper is an expanded version of a paper presented at the American Economic Association Annual
Meeting in the session entitled “The Fiftieth Anniversary of Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz,A
Monetary History of the United States.´The abbreviated paper will appear in the American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings, May 2013. We are grateful to Paul Matsiras for research assistance
and to Laurence Ball for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 201 by Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Missing Transmission Mechanism in the Monetary Explanation of the Great Depression
Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer
NBER Working Paper No. 18746
January 201
JEL No. E32,E58,N12
ABSTRACT
This paper examines an important gap in the monetary explanation of the Great Depression: the lack
of a well-articulated and documented transmission mechanism of monetary shocks to the real economy.
It begins by reviewing the challenge to Friedman and Schwartz’s monetary explanation provided by
the decline in nominal interest rates in the early 1930s. We show that the monetary explanation requires
not just that there were expectations of deflation, but that those expectations were the result of monetary
contraction. Using a detailed analysis of Business Week magazine, we find evidence that monetary
contraction and Federal Reserve policy contributed to expectations of deflation during the central years
of the downturn. This suggests that monetary shocks may have depressed spending and output in part
by raising real interest rates.
Christina D. Romer
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
cromer@econ.berkeley.edu
David H. Romer
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
dromer@econ.berkeley.edu

For many, Friedman and Schwartz’s Monetary History of the United States
(1963) is synonymous with the notion that monetary contraction and errors by the
Federal Reserve caused the Great Depression. Though that is one of the book’s
conclusions, this quick summary both sells the book short in important ways and
oversells its findings about the 1930s.
It sells the book short because the contributions of the Monetary History extend
far beyond the Depression. Friedman and Schwartz use an extensive reading of the
historical record over nearly a century to identify times when the money supply moved
for reasons unrelated to current or prospective macroeconomic conditions. That output
moved in the same direction as money following these “crucial experiments” remains
some of the strongest evidence we have that monetary shocks have real effects.
But saying that the book proves that monetary shocks caused the Great
Depression is a stretch. Of the monetary shocks Friedman and Schwartz identify, those
early in the Depression are arguably the most tenuous. And crucially, the book provides
scant discussion about the mechanism by which monetary shocks affect the economy.
This weakness is most pressing in the discussion of the Depression. Because nominal
interest rates fell precipitously early in the Depression and remained low throughout, it
is hard to appeal to the standard transmission mechanism operating through the
nominal cost of credit.
This paper seeks to fill in the missing transmission mechanism in Friedman and
Schwartz’s explanation of the Depression. In Section I, we discuss the challenge to
Friedman and Schwartz’s explanation provided by the anomalous behavior of nominal

2
interest rates. The previous literature has shown that falling nominal interest rates could
be consistent with monetary contraction if there were expectations of deflation. But we
argue that the monetary explanation requires not just that there were such expectations,
but that they were the result of monetary contraction. Because previous work has been
largely silent on this issue, we are left without evidence about a necessary link from
monetary shocks to the fall in output in the early 1930s.
In Section II, we analyze one component of the business press in detail to see if
there was a link between monetary shocks and expectations of deflation in the central
years of the downturn—1930 and 1931. We find evidence that professional observers did
indeed expect deflation in substantial part because of Federal Reserve behavior and
monetary contraction. This suggests that monetary shocks in the Depression may have
affected output and employment by raising real interest rates.
I. CHALLENGES TO THE MONETARY EXPLANATION
It is useful to begin with a review of Friedman and Schwartz’s monetary
explanation of the Depression, and the literature that has developed around the missing
transmission mechanism.
A. Friedman and Schwartz’s Explanation
The core of the Monetary History’s treatment of the Depression (Chapter 7) is a
careful historical analysis of the underlying reasons for the decline in the money stock in
the early 1930s. This is where Friedman and Schwartz make their case that the
monetary decline was relatively exogenous to the decline in output.
Friedman and Schwartz’s implicit definition of a monetary shock is very broad:

3
any movement in money that is unusual given the economic circumstances. One shock
they identify in this period that is easy to defend on these grounds is the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York’s decision to raise the discount rate by 200 basis points in October
1931, following Britain’s departure from the gold standard. The resulting fall in the
money stock was clearly not an endogenous reaction to the fall in output. It was the
result of the conscious decision to defend the gold standard.
Friedman and Schwartz suggest that there were other monetary shocks in 192931, though they are vague about the number and their timing. Their argument is that the
Federal Reserve stood by as banking panics caused large declines in the money
multiplier, and hence in the supply of money, and that under either the previous
clearinghouse system or a better functioning central bank, such drops in the money
supply would not have occurred.
In Chapter 7, the role of the monetary contraction in causing the real decline is
largely implicit. Only after Friedman and Schwartz bring in other episodes—1920, 1936–
37, and perhaps the panics under the National Banking System—do they have a clear
case that exogenous monetary contractions cause output contraction. Armed with that
relationship, one can then go back to the 1930s and say that since there were large
exogenous monetary contractions in this period, they likely caused much of the real
decline.
B. The Anomalous Behavior of Nominal Interest Rates
A striking feature of the Monetary History is that the approach is almost entirely
reduced form. Friedman and Schwartz focus on the evidence that output and prices fell
after monetary shocks. They provide little discussion and virtually no evidence on the

4
possible transmission mechanism of monetary shocks to spending and output.
Most scholars have assumed that Friedman and Schwartz had in mind a
conventional interest-rate channel. In the textbook IS-LM model, a reduction in the
money supply shifts the LM curve back and raises real and nominal interest rates. Such
an account fits what happened following many of Friedman and Schwartz’s
contractionary monetary shocks—such as 1920 and the panics under the National
Banking System. But it provides a terrible description of what happened during most of
1929–33.
Figure 1 shows the monthly prime commercial paper rate for 1925 to 1933. 1 There
was a sharp rise in nominal interest rates following the October 1931 increase in the
discount rate. Interest rates also rose noticeably beginning in early 1928. As described
by both Friedman and Schwartz and Hamilton (1987), the Federal Reserve tightened
policy moderately in this period to try to rein in speculation in the stock market. Since
policy was not responding to current or prospective economic growth, but rather to
asset prices, this episode appears to fit Friedman and Schwartz’s definition of a
monetary shock.
However, other than these two times, the course of nominal interest rates during
the Depression was strongly downward. Rates plummeted following the Great Crash of
the stock market in October 1929. They fell further during the first two waves of panics
(October 1930 and March 1931). After the brief rise in late 1931, they fell continuously
until February 1933.

The data are from Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1943, Table No. 120, pp. 450—
451).

1

5

7
6

Percent

5
4
3
2
1
Jan-33

Jan-32

Jan-31

Jan-30

Jan-29

Jan-28

Jan-27

Jan-26

Jan-25

0

FIGURE 1: COMMERCIAL PAPER RATE

C. Challenges to Friedman and Schwartz’s Emphasis on Monetary Shocks
The literature has responded to this anomalous behavior of nominal rates in two
ways. One is to suggest that Friedman and Schwartz are simply wrong about the
importance of monetary shocks, at least in some time periods.
Temin (1976) argues that the behavior of nominal rates in 1930 implies that the
IS curve must have shifted back more than the LM curve. He posits an unusual drop in
consumer spending as the culprit, but cannot identify a cause. Romer (1990) suggests
that a rise in income uncertainty associated with the stock market crash may have been
the source. Olney (1999) argues that the particulars of consumer credit contracts led
households to cut spending to ensure their ability to pay credit charges.
We suspect that even Friedman and Schwartz would agree that nonmonetary
forces were important in the first year of the Depression. The contractionary monetary
shock in early 1928 can likely explain why the U.S. economy was cooling off in the
summer of 1929. But this modest monetary tightening is not a plausible explanation for

6
the catastrophic decline in output immediately following the stock market crash in
October 1929. Industrial production, which had declined just 1.7 percent between July
and September of 1929, fell 10.7 percent from September to December. It fell another
17.0 percent before the first wave of banking panics in October 1930. 2
To explain why nominal rates continued to fall, one could argue that there were
further IS shocks after late 1930. One candidate is the nonmonetary transmission
channel for the panics proposed by Bernanke (1983): the banking panics had effects on
spending not just through a decline in the money supply, but also by causing a reduction
in credit supply at a given level of the safe interest rate. There is certainly some evidence
that such effects were present, but evidence that they were large enough to account for
the enormous output decline is lacking.
Our assessment is that nonmonetary (IS) shocks were clearly present in the
Depression, and possibly predominant in the first year. But scholars have not
persuasively identified sufficiently large nonmonetary shocks for the critical period from
roughly late 1930 to early 1933.
D. An Alternative Transmission Mechanism
The other way researchers have sought to reconcile Friedman and Schwartz’s
monetary hypothesis with the behavior of nominal rates is to bring in the rapid deflation
that began in late 1929. Wholesale prices fell 17.5 percent between July 1929 and
December 1930. They fell another 13.9 percent over 1931. 3 If the deflation was expected,
real rates could have risen even as nominal rates declined. Indeed, in the IS-LM

The data are from the Board of Governors, http://www.federalreserve.gov/datadownload/, series
IP.B50001.S.
3 The data are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, http://www.bls.gov/data/, Series WPU0000000.
2

7
framework presented in terms of real output and the nominal interest rate, an increase
in expected deflation enters as a shift back of the IS curve.
This insight led to a cottage industry of papers studying whether the deflation of
the early 1930s was expected. Hamilton (1992), using data on commodities futures
prices, argues that it was not, at least before 1931. Cecchetti (1992), using simple
statistical forecasts as a proxy for expectations formation, argues that it was. Nelson
(1991), in perhaps the most convincing study of the three, examines the business press
from June 1929 to December 1930, and finds that professional observers were expecting
deflation at least as early as the summer of 1930.
If we accept that much of the deflation was expected, that strengthens the
Friedman and Schwartz monetary explanation. It suggests that real borrowing costs
were high, and so could have depressed spending and output.
However, there is still an important gap. For the monetary story to be right, it is
not enough that the deflation was expected. If the expectations resulted from the initial
fall in output or supply shocks, those factors would be the ultimate source of the
continued downturn. Thus, the monetary explanation of the Great Depression requires
that the expectations of deflation were driven by the monetary contraction. For that
reason, the rest of this paper seeks to provide evidence on the source of the expectations
of deflation.
II. EXPECTATIONS OF DEFLATION AND MONETARY DEVELOPMENTS
There are many ways to try to obtain evidence about a possible link between
monetary shocks and expected deflation during the Depression. The approach that we
use is to examine one component of the business press closely for the first two years of

8
the Depression. That is, we try to obtain direct evidence about whether the expectations
of deflation of well-informed contemporary observers were driven by monetary
developments.
A. Narrative Source
The particular source that we consider is The Business Week magazine. During
the downturn, Business Week sometimes discussed what market participants were
expecting to happen to prices. But for the most part, it simply gave its own views. So this
source can show whether the expectations of deflation of a well-informed contemporary
observer were driven by monetary developments.
Most of Business Week’s discussion of price movements involved commodity
prices: the prices of key minerals and agricultural goods. However, the magazine was
very clear that it believed overall prices, as well as wages, would eventually follow
commodity prices down. For example, in May 1930 it stated, “Retailers are beginning to
pass on to the consumer some of the sharp drop in raw commodity prices” (5/28/30, p.
5).
Based on Nelson’s (1991) narrative work and our own survey of other
publications, Business Week in the early years of the Depression appears more moderate
and more open to the monetary hypothesis than some other publications. Thus, even if
we do find a link between monetary contraction and expectations of deflation in
Business Week, it is possible that other contemporary observers did not see one.
B. Business Week’s Model of Deflation
One important piece of evidence that Business Week’s expectations of deflation
were affected by monetary changes comes from its discussions of the causes of

9
deflation. 4 If price declines were attributed to monetary contraction, expectations of
monetary contraction would likely create expectations of deflation.
Throughout 1930 and 1931, many of the weekly ups and downs of commodity
prices were attributed to news about the available stocks of particular commodities and
other supply-side factors. But for most of the period, credit contraction was viewed as
the central cause of overall deflation. For example, in March 1930, Business Week had
an article on the historical precedents for commodity price deflation. It stated (3/12/30,
p. 20):
Two factors have been present in all of these periods of falling
commodity prices—a marked rise in production and stocks of commodities
on hand, and contraction in bank credit. …
Relative contraction of bank credit during periods of increasing
production and stocks has probably been the most important factor.
Likewise, in October 1931, it referred to “[t]he decline of prices and the rise in the value
of money during the past two years, due to drastic contraction of credit” (10/21/31, p.
48; see also 4/8/31, p. 48, and 4/15/31, cover).
Though Business Week referred mainly to credit, other discussions made it clear
that it viewed this term as roughly synonymous, or at least closely related, to “money.”
In an editorial discussing the causes of deflation, it said (9/9/31, p. 44):
They are symptoms of … a sudden, mysterious, universal shrinkage and
shortage of the money and credit medium by which everything is
exchanged and the supply of which rests solely in the hands of the world’s
banking institutions. 5
Perhaps the clearest statement of Business Week’s model of the causes of
One needs to be careful in interpreting the word “deflation.” in documents from this period. In some
cases, the term clearly means price declines; but in others, it means policies or actions that will bring
about price declines and general economic contraction. In the quotations given below, we try to make
clear any time the context suggests the latter interpretation was meant.
5 That Business Week titled the editorial “No Wampum” is perhaps evidence itself that it equated credit
and money.
4

10
deflation came in September 1931. After stating that recent commodity price declines
could not be explained by supply or idiosyncratic factors, it said: “This collapse is the
consequence of a world-wide deflation of credit which has contracted purchasing power
and curtailed consumption” (9/2/31, p. 48).
Business Week’s discussion of the causes of some particular episodes of deflation
shows that it believed Federal Reserve policy was an important determinant of the
supply of money and credit. For example, in March 1930, it stated (3/12/30, p. 20; see
also 2/26/30, p. 4):
The recent period of falling commodity prices, beginning in September,
1928, coincides with a period in which the rate of expansion of bank credit
in the Federal Reserve System in this country began to decline relative to
the increase in production, largely because of the efforts of the Federal
Reserve authorities to control security speculation.
An analysis of wage deflation in mid-1931 again reveals a link between credit
contraction and Federal Reserve policy. An editorial stated (8/5/31, p. 40):
The two fundamental factors affecting wages and employment during
this depression have been credit policy of our banking system as affected
by Federal Reserve operations, and trade organizing activity ….
[A]ppropriate, prompt and aggressive action by the Reserve authorities
could have … checked the deflation of prices and wages.
Business Week’s belief that credit contraction led to deflation, and that Federal
Reserve policy affected credit supply, makes it plausible that expectations of deflation
were also affected by credit supplies and Federal Reserve actions. The next two sections
look for a more direct link between Business Week’s expectations and its perceptions of
Federal Reserve policy.
C. Expectations of Deflation and Federal Reserve Policy in 1930
Business Week began 1930 fairly optimistic about the end of deflation. Its

11
January 1 issue said, “Prices, wages and employment will be somewhat, but not much,
lower in 1930 than in 1929” (p. 22). A week later, it even described a scenario for how
“there may be a buyer’s scramble and a sharp rise in commodity prices next spring”
(1/8/30, p. 4). The magazine did not give a clear reason for this expectation, however.
Some of it appears to have been due to a general sense that the economy was bouncing
back from the stock market crash (1/22/30, p. 4). But expectations about monetary
policy also seem to have played a role. At the end of January, it said: “Business revival
would probably be facilitated and not much endangered by a further lowering of
rediscount rates. We should expect this any week now” (1/29/30, p. 4).
As deflation continued through February and March, the magazine became less
sanguine. It wrote at the end of February (2/26/30, p. 4):
The unexpected commodity price deflation since the market crash has
apparently given a second and more serious shock to business itself. This
is a deferred result of credit restriction a year ago, which still persists.
The magazine argued forcefully for more Federal Reserve action in consecutive
editorials titled “More Juice, Please” (2/26/30, p. 48) and “Do It Now” (3/5/30, p. 48).
It appeared to fear continued commodity price deflation because of Federal Reserve inaction, saying, “Continued weakness in commodity prices indicates plainly enough that
markets are dull and doubtful. … All these things show clearly the effect of delay in
credit expansion” (3/12/30, p. 4).
Over the next few months, Business Week did not express clear expectations
about future price movements. Various weeks showed a range of optimistic and
pessimistic price forecasts.
In late June, when the New York Federal Reserve lowered its discount rate
further, Business Week was enthusiastic. In July it listed “Eight Solid Facts That Point to

12
Business Upturn,” of which expanding bank credit was number one. It said: “This means
that, so long as this expansion continues, either price levels or the volume of business
activity is bound to rise—or both” (7/9/30, p. 5).
Two things are apparent from this discussion of the first half of 1930. One is that
Business Week was not consistently expecting much deflation. If the magazine was
representative of market participants, this suggests that some other force, such as
Temin’s autonomous drop in consumption, was driving down nominal interest rates in
this period.
The other is that Business Week believed that adequate monetary expansion
would stop the price declines. When the Federal Reserve showed signs of acting, the
magazine expected it to be helpful. This is strong evidence that the magazine used credit
and monetary policy developments in formulating its expectations of price movements.
It also suggests that they supported Friedman and Schwartz’s notion that alternative
policies were possible and known at the time, which would have prevented the decline in
credit and prices.
By the middle of July, Business Week was nervous that the Federal Reserve
would not carry through with monetary expansion. It wrote (7/16/30, p. 41):
The Federal Reserve system did not follow up that aggressiveness of
last week which had caused a short flurry of excitement. The large increase
in Reserve credit at that time had encouraged hopes that the system was
setting out actively to combat declining prices.
In early August, it reported: “[T]he Federal Reserve system, instead of continuing a
helpful release of credit to counteract the creeping paralysis of deflation, has done
nothing” (8/6/30, p. 10).
Despite this concern about a lack of Federal Reserve action, Business Week did

13
not appear to consistently expect deflation in August and September. For example, in
September it said that a turning point for commodity prices might be at hand (9/24/30,
p. 7). This suggests that other factors, such as its sense that prices simply could not fall
below prewar levels, were also affecting its expectations (for example, 7/2/30, p. 6, and
9/17/30, p. 44).
It was only in October that Business Week became clearly gloomy about the
prospect for more deflation. And, it connected the expectations of deflation in part to
Federal Reserve inaction, speaking of “the wave of uncontrolled deflation which
financial fatalism and lack of business statesmanship in this country let loose upon the
world” (10/22/30, cover). Its editorial said (p. 40):
The deflationists are in the saddle. …
With the three largest banks lined up on their side … and with the
Federal Reserve authorities standing idly by, it has become clear since the
middle of September that what was a comparatively mild business
recession during the first half of 1930 has now become a case of worldwide reckless deflation.
The first wave of banking panics, which Friedman and Schwartz identify as
starting in October 1930, did not show up in Business Week until December. The failure
of the Bank of the United States was reported without fanfare in a short article in the
middle of the magazine (12/17/30, p. 17). The outlook summary on the cover said:
[T]he tidal wave of deflation … has not altogether subsided. … The bond
market has been seriously weakened by receding investment confidence
and lack of Federal Reserve support. … [T]he deadly contraction of credit
continues.
Clearly, Business Week was expecting continued deflation in part because of credit
contraction caused by the interaction of the panics and Federal Reserve inaction.
However, unlike Friedman and Schwartz, Business Week viewed the Federal Reserve’s
inaction during the panic largely as a continuation of a general pattern of inadequate

14
response to declining credit availability, rather than a distinct policy failure.
D. Expectations of Deflation and Federal Reserve Policy in 1931
Business Week began 1931 fairly optimistic about the end of deflation and the
revival of business, in part because of a discount rate cut at the end of December. On
January 7, 1931, Business Week stated (cover; dots of ellipsis in original):
Basic commodity prices seem to have exhausted the possibilities of further
decline. … Though the tangible effects of lowered Federal Reserve
rediscount rates on the bond market are still to be tested, increasing
support may be expected.
But this optimism gave way to predictions of continued deflation as additional
Federal Reserve actions failed to materialize. In February, Business Week stated: “The
deflationists are now dominant in every aspect of public and private policy. Federal
Reserve credit is being steadily contracted; … commodity prices still drift downward”
(2/4/31, cover). In an editorial in April, it said: “aggressive, persistent open-market
operations by the Federal Reserve Banks could have compelled [banks] to cut short the
chronic contraction of credit which has prolonged depression … [and] this drifting,
demoralizing deflation” (4/15/31, p. 48).
In late April, the magazine gave one of its clearest statements that it was
expecting continued deflation because of low levels of credit and anticipated Federal
Reserve inaction. It said, “Our idle gold hoard piles up without increasing the means of
payment by credit expansion because of paralysis of banking policy, thus prolonging
price deflation” (4/29/31, cover).
In May, the Federal Reserve cut its discount rate again, and Business Week
expressed more optimism about price movements. In June, it said of commodity prices,
“A drastic and sudden reversal of the downward trend is not impossible or unlikely.”

15
One reason it gave for this view was, “Low money rates for short term commercial loans
now enforced by Federal Reserve and European central bank policy will stimulate
speculation for the rise and encourage consumers to accumulate supplies somewhat in
excess of future requirements” (6/10/31, p. 9).
By early July, Business Week was almost euphoric at what it saw as signs of credit
expansion. It stated (7/8/31, cover; dots of ellipsis in original):
Still it is increasingly evident that the explosive materials for a major
upswing of surprising speed and proportions are accumulating in the
unprecedented credit position of the Reserve system, the curious currency
situation, the continued imports of gold, the abnormally unbalanced
condition of commodity stocks …. These factors alone are automatically
forcing a reversal of deflation, and are being strengthened by decisive
considerations of domestic and international political and financial policy,
all pointing imperatively toward credit expansion and price restoration.
However, when the anticipated aggressive action failed to materialize and further
banking troubles emerged, Business Week became more concerned about the economy
and the prospects for continued deflation. On September 9, it talked about “the
seemingly unappeasable demand for cash,” and said, “Federal Reserve policy continued
to make their assistance available only in such a way as to increase the strain on the
banks” (p. 41). The cover summary said that “[t]he drastic decline in commodity prices,
resumed in August,” suggesting that the magazine may have started expecting more
deflation. It drew a link between policy inaction and this expectation when it said, “The
‘wait and see’ school is still in the ascendancy, and signs of the large-scale effort
necessary to check the process are still lacking” (9/9/31, cover). In a similar vein, two
weeks later it again linked its expectations of deflation to its expectations about
monetary policy (9/23/31, cover):
The comparative steadiness of commodity averages is encouraging but
conceals a still unstable price situation. … Persistent inaction in official

16
and financial circles in face of continued uncontrolled deflation becomes
increasingly alarming.
When Britain went off the gold standard, Business Week became more worried
that monetary developments would speed deflation. On October 7, it reported (p. 8):
In the United States the Reserve system is being subjected not only to
the strain of these foreign withdrawals, but to a persistently increasing
internal hoarding demand for currency ….
All this, taken in connection with the tidal wave of wage cuts, means
further deflation in this country, as commodity prices decline, foreign
trade is further hampered and credit becomes more costly and scarce. 6
The magazine was enthusiastic when President Hoover proposed various actions
to try to improve the situation. One of the proposed measures was a private pool of
rescue funds. Private bankers would pledge to buy eligible paper from banks that were
not members of the Federal Reserve system, and so could not use the discount window.
It stated: “The pool, if entirely successful, may make financing easier and cheaper for
business, make banks better able and more willing to lend. … The pool offers a method
whereby inflation would be possible” (10/21/31, p. 5). Though Business Week was likely
using “inflation” in this instance to refer to a range of expansionary developments, it
clearly conveyed the sense that its expectations of deflation had lessened because of the
possible monetary expansion. This change in their expectations was confirmed when a
few weeks later it proclaimed (11/11/31, cover):
The devastating process of commodity price deflation appears definitely to
have ended as credit expansion sets in in speculative channels and sharp
reduction of supplies in some lines looms up for next year.
This episode, like the others we have discussed, shows a link between
expectations of deflation and monetary policy actions in one informed observer in the

In this case, “deflation” clearly refers to something broader than price declines—likely the whole process
of credit contraction, declining output, and falling prices.
6

17
early 1930s. A large fraction of the changes in Business Week’s price expectations,
especially the longer-lasting ones, were due to changes in anticipated monetary and
credit conditions. The other fact that these episodes drive home is the volatility of the
magazine’s expectations of deflation. Business Week clearly changed its views about
future price movements frequently. As a result, increases in both the volatility and the
average level of the real interest rate may have affected spending in the early 1930s.
III. CONCLUSION
This paper has sought to address an important weakness in Friedman and
Schwartz’s monetary explanation of the Great Depression: the lack of a well-articulated
and documented transmission mechanism for the monetary shocks. Building on
previous work, we emphasize the role of expected deflation in raising real interest rates.
Our contribution is to show that the monetary explanation requires not just that there
were expectations of deflation in the early 1930s; they must have been the result of the
monetary contraction.
Our narrative analysis of the discussion of deflation in Business Week shows that
such a link between monetary contraction and expected deflation existed strongly in this
source. Perceived Federal Reserve action (or, often, inaction) was frequently given as the
reason for the monetary contraction and the magazine’s price expectations. If this result
holds up in other narrative sources, it would provide important confirmation of the
monetary explanation of the Depression.
This finding may also have implications for monetary policy and the transmission
mechanism in other periods, such as later in the 1930s and in recent years. When
nominal interest rates are at the zero lower bound, expansionary monetary policy can

18
increase output in part by raising expectations of inflation and lowering real interest
rates. Based on Business Week’s expectation formation process in the early 1930s, it
appears that expansionary policy may indeed create such expectations.

19
REFERENCES
Bernanke, Ben S. 1983. “Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation
of the Great Depression,” American Economic Review 73(3): 257–76.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 1943. Banking and Monetary
Statistics, Washington, D.C.: The National Capital Press.
The Business Week. Various issues.
Cecchetti, Stephen G. 1992. “Prices during the Great Depression: Was the Deflation of
1930–1932 Really Unanticipated?” American Economic Review 82(1): 141–56.
Friedman, Milton, and Anna Jacobson Schwartz. 1963. A Monetary History of the
United States, 1867–1960. Princeton: Princeton University Press for NBER.
Hamilton, James D. 1987. “Monetary Factors in the Great Depression.” Journal of
Monetary Economics 19(2): 145–69.
Hamilton, James D. 1992. “Was the Deflation during the Great Depression Anticipated?
Evidence from the Commodity Futures Market,” American Economic Review
(82)1: 157–78.
Nelson, Daniel B. 1991. “Was the Deflation of 1929–1930 Anticipated? The Monetary
Regime as Viewed by the Business Press,” Research in Economic History 13: 1–
65.
Olney, Martha L. 1999. “Avoiding Default: The Role of Credit in the Consumption
Collapse of 1930,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(1): 319–35.
Romer, Christina D. 1990. “The Great Crash and the Onset of the Great Depression,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 105(3): 597–624.
Temin, Peter. 1976. Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression? New York:
Norton.

