NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES FEDERAL FINANCIAL AID AFFECT COLLEGE ENROLLMENT? EVIDENCE
FROM DRUG OFFENDERS AND THE HIGHER EDUCATION ACT OF 1998
Michael F. Lovenheim
Emily G. Owens
Working Paper 18749
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18749

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013

We would like to thank Sue Dynarski and Kirabo Jackson as well as seminar participants at Cornell
University for helpful comments. We thank Blythe McCoy for excellent research assistance as well.
No outside funding was received for this research, and the authors have no outside financial relationships
to disclose that are relevant to this work. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Michael F. Lovenheim and Emily G. Owens. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Federal Financial Aid Affect College Enrollment? Evidence from Drug Offenders and
the Higher Education Act of 1998
Michael F. Lovenheim and Emily G. Owens
NBER Working Paper No. 18749
February 2013
JEL No. H30,I28,K14
ABSTRACT
In 2001, amendments to the Higher Education Act made people convicted of drug offenses ineligible
for federal financial aid for up to two years after their conviction. Using rich data on educational outcomes
and drug charges in the NLSY 1997, we show that this law change had a large negative impact on
the college attendance of students with drug convictions. On average, the temporary ban on federal
financial aid increased the amount of time between high school graduation and college enrollment
by about two years, and we also present suggestive evidence that affected students were less likely
to ever enroll in college. Students living in urban areas and those whose mothers did not attend college
appear to be the most affected by these amendments. Importantly, we do not find that the law deterred
young people from committing drug felonies nor did it substantively change the probability that high
school students with drug convictions graduated from high school. We find no evidence of a change
in college enrollment of students convicted of non-drug crimes, or of those charged by not convicted
of drug offenses. In contrast to much of the existing research, we conclude that, for this high-risk group
of students, eligibility for federal financial aid strongly impacts college investment decisions.

Michael F. Lovenheim
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
Cornell University
135 Martha Van Rensselaer Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
mfl55@cornell.edu
Emily G. Owens
Cornell University
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
137 MVR Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
ego5@cornell.edu

1.

Introduction
Changes in the United States economy over the past several decades have led to historically

high returns to obtaining a college degree (e.g., Autor et al. 2008). At the same time, because the
cost of obtaining a college degree is also high, and growing, liquidity constrained students may
under-invest in higher education. This concern is particularly salient for fragile populations, such
as low-income families and students whose parents do not have a college education. In order to
support lower-income students’ ability to afford college, the Federal Government provides
financial assistance to these students, typically in the form of Pell Grants and Stafford Loans.
Federal aid is quite generous – in the 2009-2010 school year alone, the U.S. government gave
out over $42 billion in grant aid and over $100 billion in loan aid to college students (College
Board 2011). A question of central concern is how, or whether, this aid impacts the likelihood
that high school graduates, in particular those from disadvantaged backgrounds, enroll in and
graduate from college.
Despite the high policy importance of identifying how financial aid affects college
investment decisions, research on federal aid is scant and is hampered by the fact that, by
construction, cross-sectional variation in federal student aid is correlated with differences across
students in family finances. The amount of aid available to any particular student is therefore
almost certainly correlated with unobserved factors that also affect the likelihood of investing in
college. A lack of exogenous variation across students in aid eligibility makes it difficult to
credibly identify the effect of federal student aid for college on postsecondary investment using
the current federal financial aid system.
Recent reviews of the financial aid literature (Deming and Dynarski 2009, Kane 2006)
highlight the lack of consistent results. Early quasi-experimental research on the introduction of
1

the Pell Grant system in the 1970s finds little effect of the program on college enrollment among
recent high school graduates (Hansen 1983, Kane 1994, Kane 1995).1 However, changes in the
higher education system in the US since that time make these results difficult to extrapolate to
more recent cohorts of students.
Some more recent studies present some evidence that federal financial aid grants can increase
college enrollment. For example, Dynarski (2003) examined the 1982 revocation of
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) benefits for college-age children with deceased parents.
Using a difference-in-difference methodology, she finds that each $1000 in SSI aid increased
college enrollment by 3.6 percentage points. This paper was distinguished from previous work
on federal aid both in its use of plausibly exogenous aid eligibility as well as in the salience of
the aid. Students eligible for SSI received the grant automatically if they enrolled in college. In
contrast, students need to apply for other sources of federal aid by filling out the Free
Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA), which is a long and cumbersome process that can
deter many needy students from applying (Dynarski and Scott-Clayton, 2006). Indeed, Bettinger
et al. (2012) highlight this point by conducting an experiment through H&R Block in which they
fill out FAFSA forms for a randomly selected group of low-income tax filers with college-age
children. They find that filling out this form leads to large increases in college-going and
collegiate attainment, suggesting both that receiving federal financial aid positively affects
college investment decisions and that the current manner in which the federal aid system
operates dissuades many low-income students from accessing aid.2

1

Seftor and Turner (2002) demonstrate that enrollment among older, “non-traditional” students increased with
the introduction of the Pell Grant. Furthermore, it is important to note that these results all assume that
counterfactual enrollment trends were not declining.
2
There also is a sizable related literature examining the effect of state merit aid on college enrollment and
completion. Similar to the estimates from the federal aid literature, these studies tend to find mixed results (see

2

This paper contributes to the financial aid literature by examining the effect of a unique,
short-term shock to the availability of federal financial among an at-risk population: teens
convicted of a drug offense. The 1998 amendments to the Higher Education Act (HEA98)
specified that, beginning in 2001, any student convicted of a drug offense was ineligible for
federal financial aid for one to two years post-conviction, depending on the student’s criminal
record. We use this rule change in a difference-in-difference framework, comparing college
attendance among those with and without drug convictions in the years surrounding the law
change, using the 1997 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth. While not without limitations,
this data set allows us to observe detailed criminal history information as well as data on student
characteristics, cognitive ability, and postsecondary investment.
Our analysis builds on previous work on federal aid by focusing on an important and understudied group of at-risk students, for whom the social returns to higher education and human
capital investment may be particularly high (Lochner 2004). Furthermore, our empirical strategy
exploits changes in eligibility for federal financial aid as it is currently experienced by students.
This analysis is the first to estimate how students respond to exogenous federal aid eligibility
changes that operate through the current FAFSA application process, rather than manipulation of
the process itself, as in Bettinger et al. (2012).
In contrast to the early research on Pell grants, we find that HEA98 significantly and
substantially reduced the probability that students with drug convictions attended college
immediately after graduating from high school. Student responses are highly consistent with the
structure of the law: we estimate that students with drug convictions took an average of 28
additional months to enroll in college post-HEA98, which is statistically indistinguishable from
Dynarski, 2000; Dynarski 2008; Scott-Clayton 2011; Cornwell, Mustard and Sridhar 2006; Cornwell, Lee and
Mustard, 2005; Fitzpatrick and Jones, 2012; Goodman, 2008; Sjoquist and Winters 2012).

3

the specified two year ineligibility period.
Due to the relatively small number of treated students, the magnitude of our estimates is
somewhat sensitive to the inclusion of student characteristics. However, when focusing on those
who have the highest predicted likelihood of having a drug conviction, as well as on the most atrisk subsamples – those whose mothers did not attend college and students living in urban areas
– our enrollment estimates remain large and are stable with respect to the inclusion of additional
controls.
We also are able to rule out many other plausible alternate explanations for our results. The
data indicate that students did not delay high school graduation in response to the eligibility
change, and there is no evidence that the HEA98 deterred students from committing drug crimes.
HEA98 appears to have had little impact on students with other types of criminal records as well;
our results are inconsistent with changes in college enrollment among students convicted of nondrug crimes over this time period, and we do not observe any impact on students charged, but not
convicted, of a drug offense. Finally, we conduct a series of permutation tests to verify that our
estimated effects are not driven by outliers.
Our estimates are suggestive of a small effect of the eligibility change on the probability
students with drug convictions ever attend college or obtain a bachelor’s degree (BA). However,
these estimates are imprecise due to the small number of individuals with drug convictions in our
sample. Overall, the largest impact of the law is on delayed entry into college: HEA98 created an
involuntary “double gap year” for the most at-risk students of an at-risk group. While most of
these students eventually enroll, such delays reduce the returns to a college education, as the
higher wages that accompany collegiate attainment are realized for two fewer years.
By necessity, we focus on a select sample of disadvantaged students with a recent drug
4

conviction, since that is the group affected by HEA98. On the one hand, this presents a potential
limitation in generalizing our results to a larger group of low-income and at-risk students,
although the extent to which the response of students with drug convictions to financial aid
would differ systematically from the response of disadvantaged students more generally is
unclear. On the other hand, drug offenders are of particular policy interest. Since the law was
passed, the fraction of adults with a criminal history has grown by over 20% (Guerino et al.
2010). At the same time, federal and state policy has continued to evolve in a way that has
deliberately excluded ex-felons from many sources of employment and social support, including
federal contract work, federally funded housing assistance, TANF, and food stamps (GAO
2005). To the extent that these policies make it more difficult for those with criminal records to
participate in the legitimate sector, they may increase the likelihood that these people return to
illegal activity (Bushway and Sweeten 2007). The high social cost of crime makes any policy
affecting outcomes for this high-risk group of individuals worth examining.
The paper proceeds as follows: in the next section, we provide additional background on the
HEA98 as well as long run trends in drug convictions. We then describe our data and analytic
approach in Section 3. Section 4 presents results, and we conclude with a discussion in Section 5.
2.

The Higher Education Act of 1998 and Juvenile Drug Convictions
The main purpose of the HEA98 was to re-authorize the Higher Education Act of 1965,

which was the original act that set up the current federal financial aid system. However, the
HEA98 included a provision that restricts the federal financial aid eligibility of students who
have been convicted of drug-related offenses. The amendment specifically stated that:
“A student who has been convicted of any offense under any Federal or State law involving
the possession or sale of a controlled substance shall not be eligible to receive any grant, loan, or
work assistance under this title during the period beginning on the date of such conviction…”
5

The ineligibility period was one year for the first possession conviction, two years for the
second, and an indefinite ban for a third offense. Students convicted of selling a controlled
substance were ineligible for two years after a first offense and indefinitely for subsequent
offenses. Under the law, students could regain eligibility earlier if they completed a drug
rehabilitation program that included unannounced drug tests and was recognized by a federal or
state licensed medical board. The temporary aid ban went into effect in 2001, and through 2007,
the FAFSA asked students whether they have been convicted of possession or sale of illegal
drugs in state or federal court. Students who failed to answer the drug conviction question were
ineligible for financial aid (GAO 2005).3 The eligibility provision in the law does not distinguish
between felony and misdemeanor convictions or state versus federal convictions and does not
explicitly exclude convictions in juvenile court, which most states include as part of an
offender’s official criminal history until age twenty three (Owens 2009). 4 Any drug offense made
one ineligible for aid for at least one year.5
Using the 2003-2004 National Postsecondary Student Aid Survey (NPSAS), the GAO (2005)
3

From 2007 onward, students were only asked about convictions that occurred while they were receiving
federal financial aid, meaning that all first-time applicants were eligible on this margin. This is not relevant for our
study, as our period of analysis extends through 2003.
4
It is important to note that the federal government in general, and in particular the Department of Education,
currently lacks the ability to validate one’s response to this question with certainty. While it is illegal to lie on the
FAFSA, some students may do so in order to obtain aid. Particularly for state-level drug convictions, it would be
very difficult for the government to check whether each student does not have a drug conviction. Bushway et al.
(2007) highlight the prevalence of both false negatives and false positives in most criminal background checks. If
students systematically misrepresented their criminal history on the FAFSA after the HEA98 went into effect, then
we would not expect the law change to reduce the college enrollment rate of drug offenders.
5
The zero-tolerance approach of HEA98 was consistent with trends in federal drug policy at the time but was
actually counter to state-level movements lowering the expected cost of drug use. In 2000, Nevada, Colorado, and
Hawaii became the seventh, eighth, and ninth states to decriminalize the possession of small amounts of marijuana
for personal medical use, which the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in 2001 was still an unlawful act (USA v. Oakland
Cannabis Buyers' Cooperative (OCBC) and Jeffrey Jones). Neither the state laws nor the Supreme Court ruling had
a clear impact on the likelihood that students with drug convictions attended college or delayed college enrollment.
These states also represent a very small fraction of our sample, and we demonstrate below that the likelihood of a
drug conviction does not shift in 2001, which suggests that these state changes are unlikely to produce a bias in our
estimates.

6

reported that about 41,000 students were denied aid due to a drug-related conviction, and this
estimate excludes those who do not apply because of a previous drug conviction. While a small
proportion of the population of college students, this provision impacts a non-trivial number of
people, who are likely to be drawn disproportionately from lower socioeconomic backgrounds.
Black males are overrepresented in the criminal justice system overall, and they are particularly
overrepresented among drug offenders. Based on a sample of felony defendants convicted in
state courts in 2000, roughly 53% of drug offenders were black and 83% were male. For sake of
comparison, 44% of violent offenders and 39% of property offenders in that year were black, and
91% and 75%, respectively, were male. In other words, the black and male students who, based
on the demographics of those involved in the criminal justice system, are the most likely to be
affected by HEA98 are also the least likely to attend college, ceteris paribus. 6
Ex Ante, the net social cost of HEA98 is unclear for a number of reasons. First, it is not
obvious what effect, if any, this regulation has on college investment. While any increase in the
cost of enrolling in college should reduce the probability that students go, existing research has
not found consistent impacts of federal aid on college attendance, particularly in the absence of
changing the FAFSA application process. Furthermore, even if the marginal impact of federal
aid on attendance was non-zero, the average treatment effect of HEA1998 may be particularly
small, as those with drug convictions may be unlikely to attend college regardless of financial aid
eligibility.7
Second, even if HEA98 did impact college enrollment, there are arguably both social costs
6

See Kane (1994) for trends in black-white differences in college enrollment and Bound, Lovenheim and
Turner (2010) and Goldin, Katz, and Kuziemko (2006) for trends in male-female college enrollment. These papers
show that women are more likely to attend college than men and that African American students are less likely to
attend than are white students.
7
People convicted of drug felonies are generally less civically engaged for reasons besides the conviction
(Sweeten et al. 2009, Hjalmarsson and Lopez 2010).

7

and social benefits to this law. If HEA98 discouraged high-risk students from enrolling in
college, any standard model of human capital formation and crime would predict that this would
increase criminal behavior of affected students (Becker 1968, Lochner and Moretti 2004,
Lochner 2004, Mocan et al. 2005). At the same time, to the extent that HEA98 increased the cost
of engaging in drug related activity, forward looking students may have been deterred by this
law, reducing their participation in illegal drug markets. The remainder of this paper examines
empirically how HEA98 affected college investment and drug convictions in order to provide
evidence on the empirical relevance of these costs and benefits of HEA98.
3. Estimating the Impact of HEA98 on College Attendance
3.1. Data
We estimate the impact of HEA98 on the college attendance of drug convicts using the
NLSY97. This nationally representative sample of 12-18 year olds in 1997 contains self-reported
data on educational attainment, interaction with the criminal justice system, and a rich set of
demographic characteristics. As in all nationally representative surveys, roughly 1% of
respondents report being convicted of a drug offense, 8 but the fact that we observe both
education and criminal justice outcomes makes it uniquely suited to evaluate the HEA98.
Further, the fact that drug convictions are self-reported means that we are essentially observing
the same type of criminal information the student is asked to self-report on the FAFSA, although
the NLSY97 is arguable more likely to be accurate, as responses are anonymous. However, we
do make some minor adjustments to the data set to address issues of plausible effect size and
endogenous selection into the “treatment.”
8

For example, in the 2003 Monitoring the Future, roughly 8% of high school seniors reported ever being
arrested for any reason (http://www.albany.edu/sourcebook/pdf/t343.pdf). According to the Uniform Crime Reports,
overall drug offense arrest rates were about 0.4% in this time period
(http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/content/pub/pdf/aus8009.pdf).

8

Any impact of HEA98 on college enrollment may be statistically muted by the inclusion of
NLSY97 respondents who are not eligible to enroll in college. We therefore restrict our analysis
to high school graduates only, because these are the students who are on the margin of college
enrollment. While this restriction could bias our estimates if students with drug convictions are
more or less likely to graduate from high school after HEA98, we show below that no such
response is evident in the data.
Our identification strategy consists of comparing the change in college enrollment
likelihoods of students who were convicted of drug offenses to those who were not before and
after 2001. Determining treatment status thus is critical to accurately identifying any effects of
this rule change on college attendance. Because of the three year delay in when HEA98 went
into effect, students may have anticipated the 2001 change and altered their schooling investment
decisions as a result. We therefore assign each student to a “synthetic cohort” based on the year
and month of birth and then assign students to treatment status based on the year in which they
turn 18. Students who turn 18 in the 2000-2001 school year or after are considered to be subject
to the HEA98 provisions.9
Using information on the type and dates of convictions, we identify whether or not each
student was convicted of a drug offense in the two years prior to the date of expected graduation,
which is based on his synthetic cohort. For example, if a student is in the synthetic cohort
expected to graduate in spring 2002, he is “treated” if he was convicted of a drug offense in any
time between 2000 and 2002. As discussed in Section 2, HEA98 prohibits drug offenders from
obtaining financial aid for different time periods, depending on how many convictions they have

9

We also have assigned treatment status based on the expected year of graduation using one’s grade in 1997,
assuming each student does not skip or repeat a grade from the time of first observation. This method of assigning
treatment status yields similar results, and these estimates are available upon request from the authors.

9

and what type of drug offense they were convicted of. Given the small sample of students with
drug convictions, we use the most expansive definition in order to maximize power. Our twoyear window, which corresponds to one’s second possession offense and first sales offense,
catches the most students who are potentially affected by the restriction.10 About 1.2% of the
high school graduates in NLSY97 have a drug conviction within two years of their predicted
graduation date. Overall, there are 41 high school graduates with a drug conviction pre-2001 and
46 in the post-2001 period.11
The NLSY97 also contains a large amount of information about student academic and
socioeconomic backgrounds that allows us to both test for and control for differential selection
into drug convictions surrounding HEA98. In particular, all respondents are given the Armed
Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB), which is a cognitive skills test used by the
military. It is widely used in empirical work to measure student cognitive ability (e.g., Belley and
Lochner, 2007; Lovenheim and Reynolds, 2011, Lovenheim and Reynolds, 2013). We also
construct measures of household composition in 1997 (single parent, two parents or other
parental structure), the number of household members under 18, mother’s age at 1st birth,
mother’s age at respondent’s birth, Census region, urban status and household income in 1997.
We control separately for mother’s and father’s educational attainment (less than high school,
high school diploma, some college, college graduate) as well as for gender and race. Table 1
presents descriptive statistics for all controls used in the analysis, which we show separately by
pre- and post-2001 as well as by drug conviction status.
10

To the extent that we mis-classify some offenders with convictions more than a year prior to their FAFSA
application, our estimates will be biased towards zero.
11
While 46 treated observations is a small number, such small samples are not uncommon in this literature. For
example, in the Dynarski (2003) difference-in-difference analysis examining the effects of the end of SSI payments
for college on enrollment, she has 54 treated observations, which is only slightly larger than the number we have
here.

10

3.2. Estimation Strategy
The estimation strategy we employ is to compare the change in the likelihood of college
enrollment between drug offenders and non-offenders when HEA98 goes into effect in 2001.
The central difference-in-difference model we estimate is as follows:
P( Attend ) it = α + δ 1 Postt + δ 2Convicti + β ( Postt * Convicti ) + ϑX it + λ ( Postt * X it )
+ γ (Convicti * X it ) + ε it ,

(1)

where Attend is an indicator equal to 1 if the student attends college within two years of high
school graduation.12 We examine enrollment within two years because of our use of a two-year
window for convictions and in order to focus our analysis on “traditional” students who attend
college directly after high school. The variable Post is an indicator for the 2001-2003 synthetic
cohorts, Convict is an indicator for whether the student was convicted of a drug offense in the
previous two years, and X is a vector of observable characteristics that were described in Section
3.1.
Recent work by Bound, Lovenheim and Turner (2010) and Bailey and Dynarsky (2011)
demonstrate a changing relationship between gender, race, family income and college attendance
over time. It also is plausible that the impact of having a drug conviction varies by
socioeconomic status; being convicted of a drug offense may matter less for high-performing
students, or for those from high-income families. Furthermore, random variation in the
composition of drug offenders due to the small number of such offenders in the data could bias
our estimates. We therefore interact all of our control variables in Xit with Postt, and with
Convicti, allowing for us to control more flexibly for any relationship between demographics and
college attendance that may be correlated with treatment status. These interactions control for
12

College enrollment includes any enrollment in a two- of four-year school, whether public, private or non-

profit.

11

any secular shifts in the observable characteristics of student post-HEA98 and control for
differences in the relationship between observable characteristics and college enrollment by drug
conviction status.
The coefficient of interest in this model is β, which is the difference-in-difference estimate
conditional on the observable characteristics as well as on those characteristics interacted with
Post and Convict indicators. The central identifying assumption required to interpret β as causal
is that the only reason for a change in the relative enrollment rates between drug offenders and
non-offenders post-2001 is the financial aid restrictions in HEA98. The major threat to
identification comes from the fact that HEA98 did not go into effect for three years after its
passage and only applied to people convicted of drug offenses after 1999 (who would be filling
out the FAFSA in 2001). This lag between the enactment and implementation could cause a
potentially endogenous reduction in the fraction of students committing drug crimes and/or a
strategic manipulation of when someone with a drug arrest was convicted.
We address this selection problem in several different ways. First, any change in the types of
students who are convicted of drug offenses when HEA98 goes into effect should become
apparent in the extensive set of background characteristics that we observe. For example, if
relatively higher-achieving students were less likely to have drug convictions post-2001, then we
might estimate β to be negative, but this positive effect could be due to the fact that convicts
post-2001 were less qualified for college and would not be due to less access to financial aid.
Table 1 presents descriptive statistics of the students in our sample by predicted graduation
date and offender status. The final column of the table provides difference-in-difference
estimates that test whether observable differences between drug offenders and non-offenders
shifted post-2001. First, note that relative to their peers, students with drug convictions are
12

disadvantaged on almost all margins – their parents have less education, their family incomes are
lower, they are more likely to live in single-parent households, and they are more likely to live in
urban areas. Those convicted of drug offenses also are much more likely to be male. However, as
the difference-in-difference estimates show, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that there was
no change in these differences surrounding the implementation of HEA98 in 2001. The
difference-in-difference estimates typically are small relative to the underlying means, and in
only one case is the estimate statistically significantly different from zero at the 5% level.
Furthermore, the point estimates suggest drug offenders are becoming more advantaged over
time rather than less relative to their non-offender counterparts. Drug offenders also are slightly
more likely to be white over time. Note that these differences will serve to bias our estimate of β
towards zero in models in which these observable characteristics are not controlled for. To the
extent that there are unobserved changes in the likelihood of enrolling for college that are
correlated with these small demographic differences, it suggests our difference-in-difference
model may understate the importance of financial aid for college enrollment.
<table 1 about here>
A common criticism of the NLSY97 is that item non-response for key demographic variables
is prevalent. If the pattern of missing data is systematically related to our treatment variables,
such non-response is particularly problematic. In Table 2, we present group-level means and
difference-in-difference estimates of the probability that missing parental education, income,
ASVAB score, and mother’s fertility history are related to the effective date of HEA98. As in
Table 1, we find no evidence of a differential change in the probability that drug offenders and
non-offenders do not report this information, and the estimated magnitude of the differences are

13

small relative to the group means.13
<table 2 about here>
Another way to test for selection is to see whether there were differential pre-treatment trends
in college enrollment between drug offenders and non-offenders. In particular, if college
enrollment among drug offenders was declining over time, we could confound this secular
decrease with the effect of the change in the financial aid rule. In Figure 1, we plot the fraction of
people attending college within two years after they graduate from high school, again based on
their predicted year of graduation. Students without drug convictions should not be affected by
HEA98, and indeed there is no shift in college attendance among this group in 2001. Prior to
2001, there is a modest upward trend in the fraction of people with drug convictions that go to
college. But after 2001, the first year that drug offenders were ineligible for federal aid, this trend
reverses. Based on the graphical evidence, there is a roughly 12 percentage point (or 33%) drop
in college attendance, with no recovery by 2003. Furthermore, the same drop is not present for
those only charged with a drug offense, as Figure 1 also demonstrates. In fact, college attendance
rises slightly throughout our sample of people charged with drug offenses, while it declines
precipitously among those convicted of drug crimes beginning in the 2001 cohort.
<figure 1 about here>
Together, Table 1 and Figure 1 show that any bias in our estimate of β must be due to a shift
in the underlying likelihood of attending college among those convicted of drug offenses in the
2001-2003 cohorts relative to the previous cohorts in a manner that is (1) unrelated to the

13

Note that we include missing indicators in equation (1) interacted with conviction status and the Post dummy,
which we prefer because AFQT and family income, in particular, explain a substantial fraction of the variation in
college attendance. While it is potentially problematic to include missing data indicators, replicating our analysis
with a more conservative set of control variables, excluding any variables with missing values, produces estimates
that are substantively identical to the ones presented here. These results are available on request.

14

extensive characteristics we observe and (2) not forecasted by pre-treatment trends. One possible
shift could be an endogenous change in the likelihood of engaging in drug-related behaviors due
to the law. Indeed, the main argument for the drug provisions in HEA98 was to deter teens from
such activities; by raising the cost of conviction, HEA98 may have deterred some individuals
from engaging in drug crimes.
The marginal drug offender deterred by the changes in federal law, including HEA98, would
arguably be more likely to attend college than infra-marginal drug offenders, and therefore such
a deterrent effect could lead to a spurious negative correlation between HEA98 and college
attendance. The same would be true if police officers, prosecutors, or judges were less likely to
convict marginal drug offenders if that conviction would impact their ability to receive federal
financial aid.
We can explicitly test for such a deterrent effect by estimating a slight modification of
equation (1), where we analyze whether or not the effective date of HEA98 changed the
probability that a student has a drug conviction, was charged with a drug offense, or was
convicted conditional on being charged. We limit this analysis to high school graduates, as these
are the individuals included in our estimation of equation (1).
<Table 3 about here>
The results from this analysis are presented in Table 3. When we do not condition on
observables, we actually find that high school graduates are just over 40% more likely to be
convicted of a drug felony after HEA98 (column i), are 30% more likely to be charged with a
drug offense (column iii) and are 11% more likely to be convicted conditional on being charged.
This is exactly the opposite effect we would expect in any standard model of deterrence or

15

compensating behavior on the part of prosecutors.14 When we condition on demographic
characteristics (columns ii, iv and vi), the direction of the selection effect reverses, but the
magnitudes of the coefficients are small in absolute terms and relative to the sample mean and
are not statistically different from zero at conventional levels. We therefore conclude that any
contamination of our treatment effect due to endogenous compositional change is minimal at
most. Table 3 also suggests that the law did not have the intended effect: drug crimes among
prospective college students were not reduced.
Thus, there is little evidence of a demographic shift in any particular set of characteristics of
drug offenders surrounding HEA98. Visually, there is a sharp dropoff in college attendance
among offenders when the financial aid provisions of HEA98 come into effect that is not
forecasted by pre-treatment trends. And, there is no evidence of an endogenous reduction in the
likelihood of getting charged or convicted of a drug crime due to the law. These findings give us
confidence that our estimate of β is identifying the causal estimate of the financial aid restrictions
embedded in HEA98.
4. Results
4.1. Baseline Estimates
Table 4 presents our central difference-in-difference estimates of the effect of HEA98 on
college enrollment. In column (i), we do not condition our estimates on demographic changes,
essentially replicating the estimate in the first row of Table 1, and we find a statistically
imprecise 12 percentage point reduction in the probability that drug offenders enrolled in college
after 2001. While not precise, this is a large change relative to the pre-2001 attendance rate
among drug offenders (36%), and it also is large relative to the 27 percentage point difference in
14

However, it is consistent with Pfaff (2011), who argues that a large fraction of the increased prison population
is due to prosecutors filing more felony charges, conditional on arrest, over time.

16

the college attendance rate across convicts and their peers (see Table 1). Though suggestive of a
large impact of financial aid on two-year enrollment, the small number of convicts renders this
estimate rather noisy.
We next add in controls for observable characteristics and their interactions with the
treatment indicators sequentially. In column (ii), we include our basic controls for demographic
characteristics. Variation in the composition of high school graduates explains much of the trend
in attendance rates over time and slightly mitigates the differences in college attendance for
offenders and non offenders. Conditional on demographics, we estimate that excluding drug
offenders from aid eligibility reduces the probability they enrolled in college within two years of
graduating high school by 16 percentage points, with a p-value of 11.5%. While not statistically
significant at conventional levels, this is a 44% decline relative to the baseline of 36%.
<Table 4 about here>
Finally, in column (iii), we show our preferred specification, in which we relax our
constraints on the relationship between individual characteristics and college enrollment over
time and across groups. In contrast to the existing literature that finds negligible effects of
FAFSA-based federal aid on college enrollment, we estimate that when drug convicts were
excluded from federal aid, there was a 22 percentage point (or 61%) reduction in the probability
that they attended college immediately after high school. We can reject the null hypothesis that
this effect is different from zero at the 5% level, but our small sample sizes lead to standard error
bounds that encompass small and very large effects. Given the inconsistent findings in previous
work about whether federal financial aid affects college-going (Kane 2006; Deming and
Dynarski 2009), this estimate is notable and large. Denying drug offenders Pell grants and
Stafford loans may have been functionally equivalent to preventing them from attending college
17

for at least two years after graduating from high school.
A question raised by Table 4 is why the estimate becomes larger when we control for
observable characteristics. If the larger point estimate is driven by shifts in the demographic
makeup of convicts surrounding the 2001 law change, then it might point to changing selection
of who is convicted of a drug offense post-2001. In Figure 2, we present trends in predicted
college enrollment by cohort. We predict college enrollment in the pre-treatment sample using a
logit model of the probability of enrolling in college two years after high school graduation as a
function of all observables used in Table 4 except the Post and Convicted indicators. We then
used the estimated coefficients from this model to predict enrollment for each respondent in our
data.
Figure 2 shows that for the “not convicted” sample, there were no obvious changes in the
demographic makeup of students that would predict a shift in college enrollment. There is a fair
amount of year-to-year variability in the predicted college enrollment of the convicted sample.
However, the trends in the figure do not point to a sharp break in observable characteristics of
drug offenders in 2001, and instead suggest that our small sample size of offenders leads to
idiosyncratic variation in their demographic makeup that happens to be correlated with the
implementation of the financial aid rule in 2001. Our small treated sample makes our estimates
more subject to bias from such variation, which highlights the need to control for a detailed set of
demographics in our empirical specification.
Appendix Table A-1 shows some additional information on which observables are most
correlated with the financial aid treatment and how the exclusion of each variable (or set of
variables for categorical variables) affects our main estimates of the effect of financial aid on
college enrollment. In the first column, we estimate equation (1) using the given variable as the
18

dependent variable but controlling for all other observables as in column (iii) of Table 4. In only
one case do we see a statistically significant effect at even the 10% level. In the second column,
we show estimates akin to column (iii) of Table 4, except we exclude the given variable or set of
variables. These estimates show that our results are robust to excluding any variable from our
model, which suggests our estimates are not being driven by changes in any single observable
characteristic surrounding the policy change. Put differently, the year-to-year variation in the
demographic makeup of drug offenders shown in Figure 2 is not due to any one variable, and the
fact that our estimate grows when we control for observables is not due to our decision to include
a specific observable in our model.
While the shifting demographic makeup of offenders combined with the small number of
treated observations in the data render our estimates somewhat sensitive to the inclusion of
demographic controls, our results may be more stable when examining specific subgroups that
have a higher ex ante likelihood of conviction. This stability comes about because restricting to
such sub-samples makes the treatment and control groups much more similar to each other,
which would likely make their unobserved enrollment trends more similar to each other as well.
In Table 5, we estimate equation (1) limited to three groups of students who might be more likely
to be convicted of a drug crime: students whose mothers did not attend college, students living in
urban places, and students whose observable characteristics make it more likely they will have a
drug conviction.15 Furthermore, these groups represent more disadvantaged samples whose

15

Arrest rates for drug offenses, like all crimes, are much higher in cities than in suburban or rural counties.
For example, in 2002, there were roughly 589 drug arrests per 100,000 city residents, compared to 426 and 416
arrests per 100,000 residents in suburban and rural areas, respectively (Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics
Online, http://www.albany.edu/sourcebook/csv/t43.csv).

19

college enrollment behavior also might be more sensitive to financial aid.16
<Table 5 about here>
As shown in Panel A of Table 5, students whose mothers have no college education are
between 26 and 38 percentage points less likely to attend college within two years when they are
treated with the HEA98 aid restriction. All three estimates are significant at the 10% level or
higher, and the estimates with all observables and with no observables are very similar to each
other. Among those convicted of drug offenses prior to the enactment of HEA98, 43% of
students whose mother did not attend college were enrolled within two years, so these effects are
between 59 and 87 percent relative to baseline enrollment rates. Panel B, which shows results for
urban students, presents similar findings. Here, the estimates vary little in terms of magnitude
and statistical significance across columns as controls are added. Restricting aid eligibility for
urban students with a drug conviction reduces their likelihood of enrollment by about 22
percentage points, which is about 59% relative to the pre-treatment baseline enrollment rate.
In Panel C, we restrict our estimation sample to those who have a higher predicted
probability of having a drug conviction. We estimate this likelihood using a logit model of
conviction as a function of observables in the pre-treatment period. We then predict the
likelihood of conviction for all students, and the sample in Panel C consists of those who have
above the median predicted likelihood of having a drug conviction. The estimates again are
consistent across columns when controls are added and show that attendance drops by about 19
percentage points when drug convicts lose aid eligibility. This effect is about 59.5% relative to
the baseline attendance rate and suggests that when one restricts the sample to those who are

16

For example, Black et al. (2005) estimate that on average, each year of maternal education is associated with
just over 2 more months of schooling for her children in an OLS framework, but IV results suggest that this may be
due to other differences between mothers with high and low levels of education.

20

more likely to have a drug conviction, the estimates are both similar to those in column (iii) of
Table 4 and also are far more robust to the inclusion of demographic controls. Once we pare
down the sample to those who are most likely to be treated as a function of exogenous
background characteristics, there is large and statistically significant negative effect of aid
ineligibility on college enrollment that is insensitive to the manner in which demographics are
included in the model.
4.3. Effects on Other Educational Outcomes
Because our college attendance estimate examines two-year enrollment, it may confound the
effects of HEA98 on delayed attendance and on ever attending college. In Table 6, we exploit the
richness of the education data in the NLYS97 to better understand how HEA98 affected drug
offenders. We include the full set of demographic controls and their interactions with Convictedi
and Postt in all reported specifications.
<Table 6 about here>
In column (i), we show that, while HEA98 prevented drug offenders from attending college
immediately after high school, there is weaker evidence that a temporary restriction on federal
aid permanently reduced the chances that someone attended college.17 Drug offenders were 8
percentage points less likely to ever attend college after the law’s enactment, but this point
estimate is smaller than the standard error and about 1/5 of the underlying mean likelihood of
ever attending college. This estimate is suggestive of a long-run effect, but given the wide
confidence interval it is not definitive. Consistent with a small long-run effect, we also find only
suggestive evidence that HEA98 reduces the probability that high school students with drug

17

The most recent year of NLSY97 data is 2009. So, by “ever attend college” we refer to the likelihood our
respondents attend by 2009. In 2009, the youngest cohort is 25, and while college attendance among older students
is rising, the vast majority of college students first attend college by their early 20s (Fitzpatrick and Turner 2007).

21

offenses graduate from a four- year college (column ii). While our estimate is large relative to
the baseline graduation rate pre-2001 among drug offenders, the fact that very few students who
have drug convictions obtain a BA regardless of financial aid eligibility implies that we have a
limited ability to detect any effect on college completion given our small sample size of drug
offenders.
The HEA98 stipulated that after one to two years most drug offenders would once again be
eligible for federal aid, depending on the number of past offenses. The temporary nature of the
ban makes time to enrollment a natural outcome of interest. In column (iii), we estimate that, on
average, after 2001, drug offenders delayed college enrollment by 28 months (se=8.01).18 There
is an 80% chance that drug offenders waited exactly 24 months, roughly the amount of time
HEA98 required students arrested in their senior year of high school to wait before becoming
eligible for aid, to enroll in college. Thus, it appears that the main effect of the law was to delay
college entry, which creates potentially significant costs for students who have to wait several
years longer to obtain the returns to a college education.19
Since the HEA98 waiting period began at date of conviction, drug offenders may have
strategically manipulated when they graduated from high school in anticipation of being
temporarily ineligible for federal aid. In column (iv) of Table 6, we estimate the amount of time
it took each individual to complete high school. On average, students with drug offenses who are
predicted to graduate after 2001 took almost 4 more months to complete high school. This effect
is relatively small and is imprecisely estimated. At the same time, in column (v) we show that

18

Note that time between high school and college enrollment is measured as of the actual month of high school
graduation, not of the predicted month of graduation based on one’s synthetic cohort.
19
While most of these students will not obtain a BA, there is ample evidence in the literature of sizable returns
to sub-baccalaureate training (e.g., Kane and Rouse 1995; Andrews, Li and Lovenheim 2012; Jepsen, Troske and
Coomes 2011).

22

HEA98 did not reduce the long-run likelihood of ever graduating from high school. This is an
important result, as it suggests that our decision to condition on high school graduation should
not introduce a bias into our estimates. Furthermore, these results imply that the vast majority of
the increased delay in time to college enrollment among offenders in the 2001-2003 cohorts is
due to waiting to enroll in college post-high school, rather than due to later high school
graduation.20
< Figure 2 about here >
4.4. Robustness Checks
One potential limitation of our analysis is that, because of the small number of “treated”
individuals, our estimates may be driven by a few outliers. In order to address this issue, we
conducted a series of permutation tests. First, we re-estimated our preferred model, Table 4
column (iii), 46 times, excluding one treated individual each time. Panel A of Figure 3 presents
all of estimated treatment effects from these regressions along with the bounds of the 95%
confidence interval. All estimates are statistically different from zero at the 5% level and range
from -0.24 to -0.18. We then systematically eliminate each possible pair of treated individuals
from our sample. These 1,036 different regressions, presented in Panel B of Figure 3, produce
average treatment effects ranging from -0.27 to -0.15, and 97.4% of them are statistically
different from zero. Based on these tests, we conclude that, even with our limited sample, our
results are unlikely to be statistical anomalies.
<Table 7 about here >
Finally, in order to verify that we are picking up the impact of the HEA98 financial aid
20

These alternate outcomes are replicated for our two subsamples in Appendix Table A-2. The results are
qualitatively similar, with the exception of the delay and eventual college enrollment for graduates whose mother
did not attend college. This group is less likely to “ever attend,” and those who do attend delay attendance by only 3
months on average.

23

restrictions rather than some unobserved shift in the composition of drug offenders or some
contemporaneous unobserved shock, we conduct a series of falsification tests in which we vary
our definition of “drug offenders.” Again, the richness of the NLYS97 allows us to differentiate
people who interacted with the criminal justice system but did not in the specific way that would
make them ineligible for federal loans and grants.
First, in columns (i) and (ii) of Table 7, we replace Convictedi with Chargedi. Since our
treated group now includes individuals who were only arrested and charged with drug crimes in
addition to those who ended up being convicted, we expect that our treatment effect will be
attenuated. Indeed, this is what we find. Columns (i) and (ii) of Table 7 show that the impact of
delayed eligibility falls by 75% under this definition, and it no longer is statistically significant at
even the 10% level. In columns (iii) and (iv), we verify that the difference between column (ii) of
Table 6 and column (iii) of Table 4 is driven by these unaffected drug users by restricting our
treated group to those who are charged, but not convicted, of drug offenses. We estimate the
HEA98 caused an imprecise 6 percentage point increase in the probability that these students
attended college two years after high school when we control for observables. Thus, the effects
we estimate in our baseline models are not driven by differential impacts of general interaction
with the criminal justice system post-HEA98 but are specifically driven by the differential
impact of being convicted, which is consistent with the structure of HEA98.
In columns (v) and (vi) of Table 7, we focus on students who were convicted of drug
offenses at least three years before they were predicted to graduate high school. Consistent with
the language of HEA98, we find no evidence that these students were any less likely to enroll in
college after high school. If anything, students with older drug convictions are more likely to
attend college after 2001, but this estimate is very imprecisely estimated. Overall, Table 7 shows
24

that the effects we estimate in Tables 4 and 6 are due to the differential effects of having a drug
conviction within two years in the 2001-2003 cohorts, which gives us some confidence our
estimates are identifying the causal impact of HEA98 on college enrollment behavior because
this is the group one would expect to be affected given how the law is written.
In the last two columns, we perform a final falsification test exploring the impact of HEA98
on students convicted of non-drug offenses, such as violent crimes (e.g., assault or robbery),
property offenses (e.g., burglary) and major driving offenses (e.g., drunk driving). While
conviction for any of these offenses could result in incarceration, HEA98 did not affect the
federal financial aid eligibility of these students. We estimate that, after the effective date of
HEA98, high school seniors convicted of serious crimes are roughly 7 percentage points less
likely to attend college within two years of graduating high school, which is 1/3 of the change for
drug offenders.
In a given year, roughly 44% of adults convicted of a drug offense have been convicted of
some sort of felony in the past. 21 Since criminals, especially juveniles, tend to commit multiple
types of crimes (Blumstein et. al 1988), it is not surprising that about 20% of students in our
sample with a drug conviction also have been convicted of another crime. In the final column of
Table 7, we control for both the presence of a drug conviction and a non-drug conviction,
allowing us to better address this confounding issue. These controls reduce the magnitude of the
statistically imprecise impact of non-drug convictions by almost half, implying that the larger
“treatment effect” estimated in column (vii) was due to non-drug offenders also having drug
convictions. Column (viii) shows little evidence of a shift in the likelihood of a student with a
non-drug offense attending college in 2001, while the estimate for drug offenders still is large
21

See http://www.albany.edu/sourcebook/pdf/t553.pdf.

25

and is statistically significant at the 10% level. Thus, consistent with the provisions in HEA98,
only students with drug convictions reduced college enrollment in 2001, suggesting this
reduction was a response to lack of access to federal financial aid rather than due to underlying
trends in college participation among those with criminal convictions.
5. Conclusion
Due to the rising costs of college attendance and the growing importance of collegiate
attainment for life outcomes, understanding how financial aid impacts postsecondary enrollment
is of high importance. It is particularly important to identify the role of financial aid for
underprivileged students, who attend college at much lower rates than their wealthier
counterparts. Students who are convicted of felony drug charges are arguably among the most atrisk students in America. While their performance on achievement tests is comparable to their
peers, these student come from poorer families with non-traditional parental arrangements, and
their parents are less likely to have attended college. Furthermore, being convicted of any felony
offense at a young age is a strong predictor of future violent criminal behavior (Blumstein and
Cohen 1987). The opportunity cost of allowing these young people to continue to fail, while
difficult to quantify precisely, is inarguably large.
Despite the importance of identifying the effect of financial aid in general and federal
financial aid in particular on college enrollment, the previous literature has not reached a
consensus, due predominantly to the difficulty in generating exogenous variation in aid access.
This paper exploits a rule change from the Higher Education Act of 1998 that temporarily
eliminated federal financial aid eligibility for students convicted of a drug offense in the previous
two years. We show extensive evidence that this rule change created an exogenous decrease in
financial aid eligibility for students with a drug conviction.
26

Using NLSY97 data on college enrollment, student socioeconomic and cognitive
backgrounds and criminal histories, we employ a difference-in-difference methodology that
examines how college enrollment among drug offenders relative to non-offenders changed
surrounding the implementation of HEA98 in 2001, the first year this rule went into effect. We
find evidence that the temporary prohibition on federal aid caused a large decline in the fraction
of drug offenders who enrolled in college within two years of graduating from high school,
particularly for students living in urban areas and those whose mothers never enrolled in college.
This decline was driven predominantly by elongating the time between high school and college;
drug offenders on the margin of college enrollment simply waited to enroll until they were
eligible again for aid. The effects on ever attending college (by 2009) and on BA completion are
more modest. This elongation has costs, however, in the form of delaying the returns to
collegiate attainment. In addition, we find no evidence that the law had a deterrent effect on drug
offenses. Thus, by forcing drug offenders to wait two years before enrolling in college,
HEA1998 lowered the lifetime earnings of these at-risk students without generating benefits to
society through reduced crime.
While this paper identifies the effect of federal financial aid on college enrollment among a
distinct set of students – drug offenders – they are of high interest because they are from low
socioeconomic backgrounds and because they are at risk of committing more crime in the future.
Attending college may be an important “turning point” in the lives of delinquent youths, on par
with marriage or employment (Sampson and Laub 1990, Uggen 2000), and education, in
particular post-secondary education, is strongly correlated with desistance from crime (Nuttall et
al. 2003, Johnson 2001, Clark 2001). By restricting access to financial aid, HEA98 may have
inadvertently harmed the long-run life outcomes of these at-risk students. Indeed, in our sample
27

students with drug convictions are 0.8 of a percentage point (se=0.5), or 60%, more likely to be
convicted of another drug crime in the three years after high school graduation if they are subject
to the HEA98 financial aid restrictions.
Despite the selected sample, this paper is the first in the literature to show evidence that
modern federal financial aid eligibility impacts college decisions, and there is little reason to
believe low-income students more generally respond in a fundamentally different way to the
availability of this aid. Given the importance of understanding how federal financial aid impacts
college-going decisions, more research on the impact of this aid on a more general group of
students is needed.

28

REFERENCES
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz and Melissa S. Kearney. 2008. " Trends in U.S. Wage
Inequality: Revising the Revisionists." Review of Economics and Statistics 90(2): 300-323.
Andrews, Rodney, Jing Li and Michael Lovenheim. 2012. “Quantile Treatment Effects of
College Quality on Earnings: Evidence from Administrative Data in Texas.” NBER Working
Paper No. 18068.
Bailey, Martha, and Susan Dynarski. 2011. “Gains and Gaps: Changing Inequality in US
College Entry and Completion” NBER Working Paper No. 17633.
Becker, Gary. 1968. “Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach.” Journal of Political
Economy 76(2): 169-217.
Bettinger, Eric, Bridget Terry Long, Philip Oreopoulos, and Lisa Sanbonmatsu. 2012. “The
Role of Application Assistance and Information in College Decisions: Results from the H&R
Block FAFSA Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(3): 1205-1242.
Blumstein, Alfred and Jacqueline Cohen. 1987. “Characterizing Criminal Careers” Science
28(237): 985-991.
Bound, John, Michael F. Lovenheim, and Sarah Turner. 2010. "Why Have College
Completion Rates Declined? An Analysis of Changing Student Preparation and Collegiate
Resources." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2(3): 129-157.
Bushway, Shawn; Shauna Briggs, Faye Taxman, Meridith Thanner, and Mischelle Van
Brakle. 2007. “Private Providers of Criminal History Records: Do You Get What You Pay For?”
in Bushway, Shawn D., Michael Stoll, and David Weiman (eds.) The Impact of Incarceration on
Labor Market Outcomes. New York: Russell Sage Foundation Press. P. 174-200.
Bushway, Shawn and Gary Sweeten. 2007. “Abolish Lifetime Bans for Ex-Felons.”
Criminology and Public Policy 6:4:697-706.
Clark, D. 2001. “Analysis of Return Rates of the Inmate College Program Participants.” State
of New York Department of Correctional Services, Division of Program Planning, Research, and
Evaluation Report.
College Board. 2011. “Trends in Student Aid 2011.” Trends in Higher Education Series.
College Board Advocacy and Policy Center:
http://trends.collegeboard.org/downloads/Student_Aid_2011.pdf.
Cornwell, Christopher, David B. Mustard and Deepa Sridhar. 2006. “The Enrollment Effects
of Merit-Based Financial Aid: Evidence from Georgia's HOPE Program.” Journal of Labor
Economics 24(4): 761-786.
29

Cornwell, Christopher, Kyung Hee Lee, and David B. Mustard. 2005. “Student Responses to
Merit Scholarship Retention Rules.” Journal of Human Resources 40(4): 895-917.
Deming, David and Susan Dynarski. 2009. “Into College, Out of Poverty? Policies to
Increase the Postsecondary Attainment of the Poor.” NBER Working Paper No. 15387.
Dynarski, Susan. 2000. “Hope for Whom? Financial Aid for the Middle Class and Its Impact
on College Attendance.” National Tax Journal 53(3): 629-661.
Dynarski, Susan. 2003. “Does Aid Matter? Measuring the Effect of Student Aid on College
Attendance and Completion.” American Economic Review 93(1): 278-288.
Dynarski, Susan. 2008. “Building the Stock of College-Educated Labor.” Journal of Human
Resources 43(3): 576-610.
Dynarski, Susan, and Judith Scott-Clayton. 2006. “The Cost of Complexity in Federal
Student Aid: Lessons from Optimal Tax Theory and Behavioral Economics.” National Tax
Journal 59(2): 319-356.
Fitzpatrick, Maria D. and Damon Jones. 2012. “Higher Education, Merit-Based Scholarships
and Post-Baccalaureate Migration.” Mimeo.
Fitzpatrick, Maria D. and Sarah E. Turner. 2007. “Blurring the Boundary: Changes in
Collegiate Participation and the Transition to Adulthood.” In S. Danziger and C.E. Rouse (ed.)
The Price of Independence. New York: Russell Sage
Goldin, Claudia, Lawrence F. Katz, and Ilyana Kuziemko. 2006. “The Homecoming of
American College Women: The Reversal of the College Gender Gap.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 20(4): 133-156.
Goodman, Joshua. 2008. “Who Merits Financial Aid? Massachusetts’ Adams Scholarship.”
Journal of Public Economics 92(10-11): 2121-2131.
Government Accountability Office (GAO). 2005. “Drug Offenders: Various Factors May
Limit the Impacts of Federal Laws That Provide for Denial of Selected Benefits.” United States
Government Accountability Office Report to Congressional Requesters GAO-05-238,
September.
Guerino, P.M., P.M. Harrison, and W. Sabol. 2010. Prisoners in 2010. NCJ 236096.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics.
http://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/p10.pdf.
Hansen, W. Lee. 1983. “Impact of Student Financial Aid on Access.” In Joseph Froomkin
(ed.) The Crisis in Higher Education. New York: Academy of Political Science.
30

Hjalmarsson, Randi and Mark Lopez. 2010. “The Voting Behavior of Disenfranchised
Criminals: Would They Vote if They Could?” American Law and Economics Review 12(2): 265279.
Jepsen, Christopher, Kenneth Troske and Paul Coomes. 2009. “The Labor-Market Returns
for Community College Degrees, Diplomas, and Certificates.” University of Kentucky Center for
Poverty Research Discussion Paper Series, DP2009-08.
Kane, Thomas J. 1994. “College Entry by Blacks since 1970: The Role of College Costs,
Family Background, and the Returns to Education.” Journal of Political Economy 102(5): 878911.
Kane, Thomas J. 1995. “Rising Public College Tuition and College Entry: How Well do
Public Subsidies Promote Access to College?” NBER Working Paper No. 5164.
Kane, Thomas J. 2006. “Public Intervention in Post-Secondary Education,” in Erik Hanushek
and Finis Welch (eds.) Handbook of the Economics of Education, Vol. 2, Ch. 23, Amsterdam:
Elsevier Science.
Kane, Thomas J. and Cecilia Elena Rouse. 1995. “Labor Market Returns to Two- and FourYear Colleges.” American Economic Review 85(3): 600-614.
Lochner, Lance and Enrico Moretti. 2004. “The Effect of Education on Crime: Evidence
from Prison Inmates, Arrests, and Self-Reports.” American Economic Review 94(1): 155-189.
Lochner, Lance. 2004. “Education, Work, and Crime: A Human Capital Approach.”
International Economic Review 45(3): 811-843.
Lovenheim, Michael and C. Lockwood Reynolds. 2011. “Changes in Postsecondary Choices
by Ability and Income: Evidence from the National Longitudinal Surveys of Youth.” Journal of
Human Capital 5(1): 70-109.
Lovenheim, Michael and C. Lockwood Reynolds. 2013. “The Effect of Housing Wealth on
College Choice: Evidence from the Housing Boom.” Journal of Human Resources.
Mocan, H. Naci, Stephen C. Billups and Jody Overland. 2005. “A Dynamic Model of
Differential Human Capital and Criminal Activity.” Economica 72(288): 655-681.
Nuttall, J., Hollmen, L. and Staley, E. M. 2003. “The Effect of Earning a GED on Recidivism
Rates.” Journal of Correctional Education 54(3): 90-94.
Owens, Emily G. 2009. “More Time, Less Crime? Estimating the Incapacitative Effect of
Sentence Enhancements” Journal of Law and Economics 52(3): 551-579.
31

Pfaff, John. 2011. “The Causes of Growth in Prison Admissions and Populations” SSRN
working paper 1884674.
Sampson, Robert. and John Laub. 1990. "Crime and Deviance over the Life Course: The
Salience of Adult Social Bonds." American Sociological Review 55(5):609-27.
Scott-Clayton, Judith. 2011. “On Money and Motivation: A Quasi-Experimental Analysis of
Financial Incentives for College Achievement.” Journal of Human Resources 46(3): 614-646.
Seftor, Neil and Sarah Turner. 2002. “Back to School: Federal Student Aid Policy and Adult
College Enrollment.” Journal of Human Resources 5(2): 230-6.
Sjoquist, David L. and John V. Winters. 2012. Building the Stock of College-Educated Labor
Revisited.” Journal of Human Resources 47(1): 270-285.
Sweeten, Gary, Shawn Bushway, and Ray Paternoster. 2009. “Does Dropping Out of School
Mean Dropping Into Delinquency?” Criminology 47(1):47-91.

32

Table 1: Means and Standard Deviations of Analysis Variables
Variable
Attend College
ASVAB (10,000 units)
Household Income ($10,000)
Single Parent
Two Parents
Other Parental Structure
# HH Members < 18
Urban
Mom Age at 1st Birth
Mom Age at Respondent Birth
Northeast
North Central
South
West
Mother < High School
Mother High School Diploma
Mother Some College
Mother BA+
Father < High School
Father High School Diploma
Father Some College
Father BA+
Black
Hispanic
Male
Observations

Pre-Change
No Conviction Conviction
0.623
0.358
(0.485)
(0.485)
5.390
5.027
(2.798)
(2.543)
5.647
4.419
(4.599)
(2.635)
0.262
0.397
(0.440)
(0.495)
0.687
0.462
(0.464)
(0.505)
0.051
0.141
(0.220)
(0.352)
2.219
2.207
(1.178)
(1.154)
0.686
0.884
(0.464)
(0.325)
23.35
23.86
(4.62)
(4.98)
25.72
25.68
(5.38)
(4.83)
0.188
0.301
(0.391)
(0.464)
0.274
0.170
(0.446)
(0.380)
0.332
0.330
(0.471)
(0.476)
0.205
0.199
(0.404)
(0.404)
0.148
0.094
(0.356)
(0.295)
0.381
0.426
(0.486)
(0.502)
0.253
0.291
(0.435)
(0.460)
0.218
0.190
(0.413)
(0.398)
0.161
0.228
(0.368)
(0.427)
0.367
0.521
(0.482)
(0.509)
0.202
0.170
(0.401)
(0.383)
0.271
0.080
(0.444)
(0.277)
0.144
0.193
(0.351)
(0.400)
0.121
0.156
(0.326)
(0.368)
0.503
0.811
(0.500)
(0.396)
3,958

41

Post-Change
No Conviction Conviction
0.651
0.269
(0.477)
(0.448)
5.435
5.753
(2.773)
(2.475)
5.500
4.137
(4.558)
(2.707)
0.241
0.367
(0.428)
(0.487)
0.719
0.605
(0.450)
(0.494)
0.040
0.028
(0.196)
(0.168)
2.424
2.360
(1.145)
(0.974)
0.690
0.813
(0.463)
(0.394)
23.76
24.17
(4.78)
(4.94)
26.40
27.09
(5.30)
(5.36)
0.183
0.231
(0.387)
(0.426)
0.267
0.229
(0.443)
(0.425)
0.333
0.428
(0.450)
(0.500)
0.217
0.112
(0.412)
(0.319)
0.145
0.174
(0.392)
(0.384)
0.350
0.256
(0.477)
(0.442)
0.268
0.209
(0.443)
(0.412)
0.237
0.361
(0.425)
(0.486)
0.152
0.166
(0.359)
(0.378)
0.385
0.499
(0.487)
(0.508)
0.201
0.197
(0.401)
(0.404)
0.261
0.138
(0.439)
(0.350)
0.144
0.130
(0.351)
(0.340)
0.117
0.072
(0.321)
(0.262)
0.498
0.819
(0.500)
(0.390)
3,356

46

D-D
-0.117
(0.104)
0.681
(0.710)
-0.134
(1.167)
-0.009
(0.094)
0.111
(0.099)
-0.110∗∗
(0.045)
-0.052
(0.250)
-0.074
(0.100)
-0.10
(1.06)
0.73
(1.21)
-0.066
(0.084)
0.066
(0.096)
0.098
(0.101)
-0.098
(0.088)
0.084
(0.080)
-0.139
(0.109)
-0.097
(0.099)
0.153
(0.095)
-0.053
(0.093)
-0.041
(0.124)
0.027
(0.103)
0.067
(0.113)
-0.064
(0.076)
-0.080
(0.070)
0.013
(0.107)
7,401

All tabulations include only high school graduates. Standard deviations are in parentheses in the ﬁrst four
columns and Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses in the D-D column: ** indicates
statistical signiﬁcance at the 5% level and * indicates statistical signiﬁcance at the 10% level.

33

Table 2: Means and Standard Deviations of Missing Indicator Variables
Variable
Mother’s Education Missing
Father’s Education Missing
Family Income Missing
ASVAB Missing
Mom Age at 1st Birth Missing
Mom Age at Respondent Birth Missing

Pre-Change
No Conviction Conviction
0.066
0.100
(0.249)
(0.303)
0.156
0.283
(0.363)
(0.456)
0.260
0.250
(0.438)
(0.438)
0.172
0.293
(0.378)
(0.461)
0.068
0.099
(0.252)
(0.303)
0.058
0.099
(0.233)
(0.303)

Post-Change
No Conviction Conviction
0.058
0.073
(0.233)
(0.263)
0.142
0.245
(0.349)
(0.435)
0.222
0.306
(0.416)
(0.466)
0.163
0.252
(0.369)
(0.439)
0.067
0.069
(0.251)
(0.256)
0.054
0.069
(0.227)
(0.256)

D-D
-0.018
(0.052)
-0.025
(0.077)
0.094
(0.092)
-0.032
(0.081)
-0.030
(0.054)
-0.027
(0.050)

All tabulations include only high school graduates. Standard deviations are in parentheses in the ﬁrst four columns
and Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses in the D-D column: ** indicates statistical
signiﬁcance at the 5% level and * indicates statistical signiﬁcance at the 10% level.

Table 3: Eﬀect of The Financial Aid Policy Change on Drug
Charges and Convictions
Independent Variable
Post-Change
Observables
Dep. Var. Mean

I(Convicted)
(i)
(ii)
0.005∗ -0.001
(0.003) (0.007)
No

Yes

I(Charged)
(iii)
(iv)
0.007∗ -0.001
(0.004) (0.010)
No

0.012

Yes
0.023

I(Convict|Charge)
(v)
(vi)
0.056
-0.025
(0.083) (0.181)
No

Yes
0.510

All estimates include only high school graduates. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses: ** indicates signiﬁcance at the 5% level and *
indicates signiﬁcance at the 10% level.

34

Table 4: Eﬀect of Conviction on College
Enrollment Surrounding Eligibility Policy Change
Independent Variable

(i)
-0.117
(0.108)
-0.266∗∗
(0.083)
0.028∗∗
(0.012)

(ii)
-0.160
(0.101)
-0.180∗∗
(0.079)
0.005
(0.023)

(iii)
-0.220∗∗
(0.091)
0.812∗∗
(0.452)
-0.046
(0.086)

R2

0.006

0.235

0.242

Observables
Observables*Post
Observables*Convicted

No
No
No

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Post*Convicted
Convicted
Post-Change

All estimates include only high school graduates.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses: ** indicates signiﬁcance at the 5% level and *
indicates signiﬁcance at the 10% level.

35

Table 5: Eﬀect of Conviction on College
Enrollment Surrounding Eligibility
Policy Change for Sub-Samples
Panel A: Mother Did Not Attend College
Independent Variable
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
-0.313∗∗ -0.255∗
-0.381∗∗
Post*Convicted
(0.151)
(0.143)
(0.075)
-0.065
-0.088
2.406∗∗
Convicted
(0.124)
(0.119)
(0.441)
0.031∗
0.049
0.040
Post-Change
(0.018)
(0.036)
(0.123)
Total Obs/Treated Obs
3865/19
Panel B: Urban Sample
Independent Variable
(i)
(ii)
-0.220∗∗ -0.240∗∗
Post*Convicted
(0.110)
(0.106)
-0.278∗∗ -0.222∗∗
Convicted
(0.089)
(0.088)
0.028∗∗
0.022
Post-Change
(0.014)
(0.027)
Total Obs/Treated Obs
5379/38
Panel C: Above Median Predicted
Likelihood of Conviction
Independent Variable
(i)
(ii)
-0.185∗
-0.188∗
Post*Convicted
(0.114)
(0.110)
-0.249∗∗ -0.263∗∗
Convicted
(0.093)
(0.091)
0.041∗∗
0.033
Post-Change
(0.017)
(0.030)
Total Obs/Treated Obs
4066/38
Observables
Observables*Post
Observables*Convicted

No
No
No

Yes
No
No

(iii)
-0.218∗∗
(0.094)
0.093
(0.441)
0.033
(0.103)

(iii)
-0.192∗∗
(0.099)
0.730
(0.496)
-0.003
(0.129)

Yes
Yes
Yes

All estimates include only high school graduates. The
likelihood of conviction is estimated using a logistic
model of the probability of conviction as a function of all
observables in the pre-2001 period. Heteroskedasticityrobust standard errors are in parentheses: ** indicates
signiﬁcance at the 5% level and * indicates signiﬁcance
at the 10% level.

36

Table 6: Eﬀect of Conviction on College and High School Outcomes
Surrounding Eligibility Policy Change

Independent Variable
Post*Convicted
Convicted
Post-Change
Pre-HEA98
Oﬀender Mean
1

2

Ever Attend
College
(i)
-0.080
(0.105)
0.928∗
(0.473)
0.006
(0.083)

0.410

BA
(ii)
-0.072
(0.051)
0.909∗∗
(0.317)
-0.002
(0.079)

0.074

Time Between
HS & Coll.
(iii)
27.98∗∗
(8.01)
52.50
(32.06)
5.86∗
(3.40)

8.44

Time to
HS Degree
(iv)
3.82
(2.79)
16.26
(15.53)
6.98∗∗
(1.78)

HS
Degree
(v)
0.075
(0.068)
-1.068∗∗
(0.319)
-0.109∗
(0.060)

242.85

0.631

The “Pre-HEA98 Oﬀender Mean” is the mean of the drug convict sample pre-2001. All
estimates except the ﬁnal column include only high school graduates. The Time to HS
Degree is enumerated by the number of months since January 1, 1980. Time Between
HS & Coll. is the number of months between actual high school graduation and college
enrollment.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses: ** indicates signiﬁcance at
the 5% level and * indicates signiﬁcance at the 10% level.

37

Table 7: Falsiﬁcation Tests

Independent Variable
Post*Convicted/Charged
Convicted/Charged
Post-Change
Post*Non-Drug Conviction
Non-Drug Conviction
Observables
Observables*Post
Observables*Convicted/Charged
1

2

Charged in Last
Two Years
(i)
(ii)
0.015
-0.056
(0.083)
(0.076)
-0.220∗∗
0.368
(0.061)
(0.325)
0.026∗∗ -0.046
(0.012)
(0.086)
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Charged but
Not Convicted
(iii)
(iv)
0.172
0.058
(0.117)
(0.102)
-0.176∗∗
0.276
(0.085)
(0.432)
0.026∗∗ -0.037
(0.012)
(0.076)
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Convicted Three or
More Years Ago
(v)
(vi)
-0.025
0.137
(0.304)
(0.103)
-0.621∗∗ -0.376∗∗
(0.008)
(0.083)
0.025∗∗ -0.046
(0.011)
(0.086)
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Including NonDrug Convictions
(vii)
(viii)
.
-0.166∗
.
(0.100)
.
-0.091
.
(0.075)
-0.006
-0.012
(0.083) (0.083)
-0.069
-0.036
(0.057) (0.059)
0.035
0.007
(0.224) (0.224)
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

All estimates include only high school graduates. The estimates in columns (iii) and (iv) examine those who were
charged with a drug oﬀense in the past two years but who were not convicted. Estimates in columns (v) and (vi)
examine those who have a drug conviction more than two years prior to the synthetic cohort graduation year. In the
ﬁnal two columns, we analyze non-drug oﬀenses on the prior two years and drug and non-drug oﬀenses simultaneously.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses: ** indicates signiﬁcance at the 5% level and * indicates
signiﬁcance at the 10% level.

38

.6

Figure 1: Trends in College Enrollment Rates by Conviction Status and High
School Cohort
Drug Conviction

.1

College Attendance Rate (Within 2 Years)
.2
.3
.4
.5

No Convictions
Drug Charge

1998

1999

2000
2001
Predicted HS Graduation Year

2002

2003

Source: Author’s calculations from the 1997 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth as described in the
text.

39

Predicted College Attendance Rate (Within 2 Years)
0
.1
.2
.3
.4
.5
.6

Figure 2: Trends in Predicted Attendance by Conviction Status

Convicted

1998

1999

Not Convicted

2000
2001
Predicted HS Graduation Year

2002

2003

Source: Author’s calculations from the 1997 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth as described in the text.
The ﬁgure shows yearly average predicted attendance rates, where the predictions are made by estimating
a logit model of the likelihood of enrolling within two years of high school graduation on all observables
(excluding year and conviction dummies) using pre-treatment data. The logit coeﬃcients are then used to
predict attendance for each student in the estimation sample.

40

Figure 3: Permutation Tests

−.5

−.4

Coefficient Estimate
−.3
−.2
−.1

0

.1

Panel A: Removing 1 Observation

0

.1

.2

.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
Cumulative Percent of Estimates

.8

.9

1

.9

1

−.5

−.4

Coefficient Estimate
−.3
−.2
−.1

0

.1

Panel B: Removing 2 Observations

0

.1

.2

.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
Cumulative Percent of Estimates

.8

Source: Author’s calculations from the 1997 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth as described in the
text. In Panel A, we remove each of the 46 treated observations and re-estimate the model. The ﬁgure
shows the inverse CDF of the resulting estimates with the bounds of the 95% conﬁdence interval. In Panel
B, we remove each pair of two treated sample members and plot the inverse CDF of resulting estimates
along with the bounds of the 95% conﬁdence interval.

41

Table A-1: Balance Tests and Sensitivity Analyses
Variable
ASVAB (10,000 units)
Missing ASVAB
Household Income ($10,000)
Missing Income
Single Parent
Other Parental Structure
# HH Members < 18
Urban
Mom Age at 1st Birth
Mom Age at Respondent Birth
Northeast
South
West
Mother < High School
Mother Some College
Mother BA+
Mother Missing Education
Father < High School
Father Some College
Father BA+
Father Missing Education
Black
Hispanic
Male

Predicted College Attendance

Variable as
Outcome
7.683
(6.394)
-0.008
(0.085)
-0.424
(0.516)
0.084
(0.086)
-0.010
(0.099)
-0.072
(0.052)
-0.239
(0.206)
0.035
(0.080)
-0.878
(0.610)
0.686
(0.639)
-0.042
(0.095)
-0.007
(0.098)
0.069
(0.094)
0.106∗
(0.064)
-0.076
(0.095)
0.068
(0.084)
0.008
(0.035)
-0.085
(0.078)
0.011
(0.084)
0.031
(0.063)
0.029
(0.096)
-0.025
(0.070)
-0.082
(0.066)
0.034
(0.085)
0.061
(0.057)

Variable(s) Excluded
from Model
-0.214∗∗
(0.091)
-0.218∗∗
(0.088)
-0.166∗
(0.093)
-0.216∗∗
(0.091)
-0.232∗∗
(0.091)
-0.200∗∗
(0.093)
-0.201∗∗
(0.091)
-0.223∗∗
(0.096)

-0.217∗∗
(0.093)

-0.184∗
(0.095)

-0.229∗∗
(0.086)
-0.221∗∗
(0.091)
-0.167∗
(0.102)

All estimates include only high school graduates. In the first column, we show estimates of equation (1) with the given variable as the dependent
variable and excluded from the right hand side. In the case of categorical or related variables (such as family income and missing family income), the
relevant set of variables is excluded from the right hand side of the regression. In the second column, we show estimates of equation (1) with the
given variable or set of variables excluded. The last row of the table uses predicted attendance based on a logit model of attendance on all observables
as a dependent variable, while the second column shows estimates of equation (1) but using predicted attendance, predicated attendance times Post
and predicted attendance times Convicted as controls instead of all of the observables and their interactions. Standard errors are in parentheses: **
indicates significance at the 5% level and * indicates significance at the 10% level.

42

Table A-2: Eﬀect of Conviction on College and High School Outcomes Surrounding Eligibility Policy Change for Subsamples
Panel A: Mother Did Not Attend College
Ever Attend
Time Between
College
BA
HS & Coll.
Independent Variable
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
-0.226∗∗
-0.114∗∗
3.28
Post*Convicted
(0.116)
(0.076)
(2.29)
Pre-HEA98
Oﬀender Mean
0.510
0.085
17.76

Independent Variable
Post*Convicted
Pre-HEA98
Oﬀender Mean

Panel B: Urban Sample
Ever Attend
Time Between
College
BA
HS & Coll.
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
-0.092
-0.044
31.11∗∗
(0.105)
(0.038)
(7.98)
0.425

Panel C: Above Median
Ever Attend
College
Independent Variable
(i)
-0.035
Post*Convicted
(0.487)
Pre-HEA98
Oﬀender Mean
0.339
1

2

0.045

16.04

Time to
HS Degree
(iv)
4.63
(5.23)

HS
Degree
(v)
0.213∗∗
(0.087)

244.38

0.484

Time to
HS Degree
(iv)
0.73
(3.01)

HS
Degree
(v)
0.076
(0.071)

243.49

0.674

Predicted Likelihood of Conviction
Time Between
Time to
BA
HS & Coll.
HS Degree
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
-0.048
15.67∗∗
4.67
(0.051)
(2.90)
(3.24)
0.051

12.93

241.64

HS
Degree
(v)
0.038
(0.068)
0.572

The “Pre-HEA98 Oﬀender Mean” is the mean of the drug convict sample pre-2001. All
estimates except the ﬁnal column include only high school graduates. The Time to HS
Degree is enumerated by the number of months since January 1, 1980. Time Between HS
& Coll. is the number of months between actual high school graduation and college enrollment. The likelihood of conviction is estimated using a logistic model of the probability
of conviction as a function of all observables in the pre-2001 period.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses: ** indicates signiﬁcance at
the 5% level and * indicates signiﬁcance at the 10% level.

43

