                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    MEASURING SOVEREIGN CONTAGION IN EUROPE

                                        Massimiliano Caporin
                                          Loriana Pelizzon
                                        Francesco Ravazzolo
                                          Roberto Rigobon

                                        Working Paper 18741
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18741


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2013




We thank Alessandro Fontana, David Lando, Marco Lippi, Andrew Lo, Steve Schaefer and seminar
and conference participants at CREDIT 2012, Goethe University, Einaudi Institute for Economics
and Finance, MAF 2012, MIT workshop of the Research Consortium for Systemic Risk, Norges Bank,
Sixth CEPS Finance high-level roundtable on macro prudential policy in the EU, University of Geneva,
Workshop on Sovereign Risk, Fiscal Solvency and Monetary Policy: Where Do We Stand?, for helpful
comments. The views expressed in this paper are our own and do not necessarily reflect those of Norges
Bank. The views expressed here in are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18741.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Massimiliano Caporin, Loriana Pelizzon, Francesco Ravazzolo, and Roberto Rigobon.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Measuring Sovereign Contagion in Europe
Massimiliano Caporin, Loriana Pelizzon, Francesco Ravazzolo, and Roberto Rigobon
NBER Working Paper No. 18741
January 2013
JEL No. E58,F34,F36,G12,G15

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the sovereign risk contagion using credit default swaps (CDS) and bond premiums
for the major eurozone countries. By emphasizing several econometric approaches (nonlinear regression,
quantile regression and Bayesian quantile regression with heteroskedasticity) we show that propagation
of shocks in Europe's CDS has been remarkably constant for the period 2008-2011 even though a significant
part of the sample periphery countries have been extremely affected by their sovereign debt and fiscal
situations. Thus, the integration among the different eurozone countries is stable, and the risk spillover
among these countries is not affected by the size of the shock, implying that so far contagion has remained
subdue. Results for the CDS sample are confirmed by examining bond spreads. However, the analysis
of bond data shows that there is a change in the intensity of the propagation of shocks in the 2003-2006
pre-crisis period and the 2008-2011 post-Lehman one, but the coefficients actually go down, not up!
All the increases in correlation we have witnessed over the last years come from larger shocks and
the heteroskedasticity in the data, not from similar shocks propagated with higher intensity across
Europe. This is the fi˝rst paper, to our knowledge, where a Bayesian quantile regression approach
is used to measure contagion. This methodology is particularly well-suited to deal with nonlinear and
unstable transmission mechanisms.


Massimiliano Caporin                                 Francesco Ravazzolo
Department of Economics and Management               Norges Bank
Via del Santo 33                                     Francesco.ravazzolo@norges-bank.no
Padova, Italy
massimiliano.caporin@unipd.it                        Roberto Rigobon
                                                     MIT Sloan School of Management
Loriana Pelizzon                                     100 Main Street, E62-516
University of Venice                                 Cambridge, MA 02142
Department of Economics                              and NBER
Cannareggio 873                                      rigobon@mit.edu
Venice, 30100 ITALY
pelizzon@unive.it
1         Introduction

The sovereign debt crisis in Europe that began in late 2009 has reignited the literature on con-
tagion. How much contagion to countries in the European Monetary Union could be expected
as a result of a possible credit event in Greece, Italy or Spain?
        How much are France and Germany going to be affected? How about countries outside the
European Union? Through which channel is the shock going to be transmitted? Clearly these
are some of the important questions for economists, policymakers, and practitioners. However,
addressing these questions requires surmounting some extraordinary empirical challenges.1
        The first challenge is definitional. What exactly is contagion? Is it the “normal” or “usual”
propagation of shocks, or is it the transmission of shocks that takes place under unusual cir-
cumstances?2
        Some literature tends to define contagion as the co-movement that takes place under extreme
conditions — or tail events3 — while another sizeable proportion of the literature compares how
shocks propagate differently during normal and rare events. The first definition concentrates
on measuring the transmission after a bad shock occurs, while the second definition investigates
how different the propagation mechanism is after a negative shock appears. It is impossible
to solve this definitional problem in this paper; rather our objective is to present convincing
evidence of the amount of contagion that takes place according to the second definition. In
other words, we are interested in understanding how much potential contagion exists within the
European sovereign debt market, where contagion is defined as how different the propagation is
after a large negative realization has taken place compared to the propagation after an average
realization.
        The second challenge is an empirical one. Contagion is an unobservable shock and there-
    1
      Rigobon (2001).
    2
      See Forbes and Rigobon (2002), as well as Dungey and Zhumabekova (2001).
    3
      As it has been defined by the copula approach to measure contagion (Rodriguez, 2007)




                                                      2
fore most empirical techniques have problems dealing with omitted variables and simultaneous
equations. The problem is even more complicated because the data suffers from heteroskedas-
ticity — which implies that if the conditional volatility moves in the sample it might result
in econometric biases. In other words, if the correlation between two variables is different in
normal and in crisis times, how can we be sure that this difference is due to the outcome of
a shift in the propagation mechanism and not the result of the fact that correlations are not
neutral to shifts in volatility? Crisis periods are usually associated with higher volatility and
simple correlations are unable to deal with this problem.4 Moreover, if a linear regression has
been estimated across different regimes, how can the researcher be sure that the coefficients
are different because the underlying parameters are shifting, as opposed to the fact that the
omitted variables and simultaneous equation biases are not neutral to changes in the volatility?
      Finally, the third challenge is that the channel of contagion is rarely understood before the
crisis occurs. For example, very few would have ever predicted that the transmission channel
of the 1998 Russian crisis was going to be Long Term Capital Management. Furthermore,
even though several economists anticipated the 2008 U.S. crisis, none could foretell that the
transmission would be from the subprime mortgage market to insurance companies, to AIG,
and then to the rest of the world. The economics profession is extremely good at describing the
channels through which shocks are transmitted internationally immediately after the contagion
has taken place. This puts a significant constraint on structural estimations of contagion the
problem being that the channel has to be specified ex-ante. Reduced-form estimations, on the
other hand, have the advantage that they are channel-free and therefore might capture the
presence of contagion that was not fully accounted for prior to the shock’s occurrence.
      In this paper we first evaluate the extent of contagion in the eurozone credit default swaps
(CDS) by using a reduced-form approach based on quantile regressions. The main advantage of
using the quantile regressions is that this is a very natural and powerful way to deal with possible
  4
      See Forbes and Rigobon (2002).




                                                  3
nonlinearities or parameter instability in the data. By conditioning on the size of the shocks and
evaluating the propagation mechanisms via the reduce-form model-based coefficients linking the
dependent variable and the explanatory ones, this methodology allows us to understand and to
estimate the extent of asymmetries — such as the transmission of positive and negative shocks.
Since, we define contagion as a shift in the intensity of propagation when large shocks occur
compared to normal times, we compare the coefficient of the propagation of shocks between
two countries when the country of interest shows values that belong to the highest quantiles
during turbulent times and the middle ones during normal times. When the coefficients are
stable over quantiles we reject the contagion hypothesis.
   Indeed this is the result we find: for every pair of countries in our data, at the extreme
quantile the coefficient for the propagation of shocks between two countries is not statistically
different from the coefficient for the propagation of shocks that exists in the median quantile.
Potential econometric problems such as omitted variables and endogeneity biases are not sig-
nificant enough to reject the hypothesis. Again, our analysis shows no evidence of contagion
and we do not observe a shift in the propagation of shocks when a given country goes through a
turbulent period. For the period from November 2008 to September 2011 we examine sovereign
CDS for seven European countries on the Euro area: France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy,
Portugal, Spain, plus a European country that is not in the European Monetary Union: the
United Kingdom.
   The biggest drawback of using the CDS data is that it starts in November 2008 – well into
the U.S. financial crisis. Then, the comparison we perform is between two different periods
when the Lehman meltdown began in September 2008 a time during which European sovereign
CDS did not show any increased default risk and the European fiscal crisis which began on late
2009 when CDS, on the contrary, fluctuated substantially, as shown in Figure 1. The advantage
of the CDS data is that it captures the sovereign risk and therefore yields a very clean exercise.
   To deal with the weaknesses in the data we also measure the extent of contagion in bond




                                                4
spreads, for which we have data beginning in 2003. When we perform the exact same exercise
that we did for the CDS but use the bond spread, we find two main results. One, there is
a change in the intensity of the shock propagation in the pre-crisis period (2003–2006) and
the post-crisis one (2008–2011). However, the coefficients actually go down, not up! This is
encouraging as it that the methodology is powerful enough to reject certain samples. Second,
the propagation between 2008–2011 is stable and, quite surprisingly, the coefficients are very
similar between bonds and CDS. Third, we observe a reduction in the propagation of the
shocks between the 2003–2006 pre-crisis period and the 2008–2011 post-crisis one rather than
an increase.
       All our results offer a consistent message: the propagation of shocks in Europe’s CDS
and bond spreads has been remarkably constant across quantiles between 2008 and 2011 even
though for a significant part of that sample periphery countries have been affected by their
sovereign debt and fiscal situations. All the increases in correlation we have witnessed the
last two years are coming from larger shocks, not from similar shocks propagated with higher
intensity (contagion) across Europe. Finally, we find that the bond market provides the only
evidence of parameter instability, and this result actually points to a weakening of the contagion
channel between the 2003–2006 period and the period after 2008.
       We start by measuring over time the correlations for country-pairs and show that these
shift substantially. In this particular case the Forbes and Rigobon (2002) correction cannot be
used because that procedure requires knowing which country or variable caused the increase
in volatility. This is impossible for several of our pairs.5 The next step is to directly test
for nonlinearity by using a polynomial specification within a time-series regression framework.
We estimate this by allowing for second- and third-order terms and test for the significance of
nonlinearity. In our regressions we find a large number of significant coefficients (73%), but
when we evaluate their economic impact we find that the nonlinearity is small. The problem
   5
    In addition, as indicated by Rigobon (2003) the adjustment in Forbes and Rigobon (2002) requires that the
variables not suffer from omitted variables or endogeneity bias.




                                                     5
with these regressions is that they impose too much structure and might be underestimating
the transmission of extreme events.
   Next, we propose quantile regressions as a powerful methodology to measure contagion.
We apply a standard quantile regression and show that the transmission of shocks is the same
across different quantiles. Although this specification allows for changes in the conditional
densities across time, through the impact of covariates, it might suffer from inefficiencies due
to time-varying volatility. This leads us to the estimation using quantile regressions, as these
allow for heteroscedasticity.
   Following Chen, Gerlack, and Wei (2009) and Xiao and Koenker (2009) we assume that the
conditional variance of the residuals follows a GARCH(1,1) specification. The model is esti-
mated using Bayesian inference and accounts for parameter uncertainty through simultaneous
inference of all model parameters. Moreover, the methodology used is efficient and flexible in
handling the nonstandard likelihood and is based on the use of prior information. We choose
a weak informative prior to allow the data to dominate inference. Again the results show that
sovereign risk is largely a linear phenomenon, i.e. we are not able to find significant evidence
of sovereign risk contagion among the European countries for the sample considered. Posterior
distributions of the parameters show lower uncertainty than the standard quantile regressions,
in particular for extreme quantile.
   It is impossible to adequately review the extensive literature on contagion in this paper. We
direct the interested reader to the multiple iterative reviews that already exist in the literature.
Among others, we cite Pericoli and Sbracia (2003), Dungey et al. (2005), and Pesaran and Pick
(2007). We concentrate here on those papers that have measured the degree of co-movement
among sovereign CDS. In particular, some recent research on this topic concentrates on the rela-
tionship between sovereign credit spreads and common global and financial market factors. For
example, see Kamin and von Kleist (1999), Eichengreen and Mody (2000), Mauro, Sussman,
and Yafeh (2002), Pan and Singleton (2008),Longstaff et al. (2011) and Ang and Longstaff




                                                 6
(2011). This body of works shows that the most significant variables for CDS spreads are the
U.S. stock and high-yield market returns as well as the volatility risk premium embedded in
the VIX index. Moreover, using a broad panel of bank and sovereign CDS data, Acharya,
Drechsler and Schnabl (2011) concentrate on the financial sector bailouts and show that bank
and sovereign credit risk are intimately linked. Kallestrup, Lando and Murgoci (2012) also
show that cross-border financial linkages affect CDS spreads beyond what can be explained by
exposure to common factors. Our paper complements and extends this literature by investi-
gating the degree of co-movement among sovereign CDS (and bond spreads) after controlling
for common factors that explain credit spreads, as highlighted by the previous literature.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data. Section
3 presents the different approaches used to investigate the linearity of the relationship across
CDS and bond spreads and its stability and the results. Section 4 concludes by discussing the
implications of our paper.



2     The Data

A CDS contract obliges the seller to compensate the buyer in the event of a loan default,
see the definitions provided in Duffie (1999), Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis (2005), Pan and
Singleton (2008), Longstaff, Pan, Pedersen, and Singleton (2011), among others. It is generally
a swap agreement because in the event of a default, the buyer of the CDS receives money
(usually the face value of the bond) and the seller of the CDS receives the defaulted bond.
We obtain five-year sovereign CDS spreads from Datastream. We consider daily data of the
euro-denominated CDS for seven eurozone countries: France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy,
Portugal and Spain, plus the United Kingdom, acountry which is not in the monetary union.
Therefore, our sample considers periphery countries (Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Spain) and
the four largest economies in the European Community: France, Germany, Italy and the United




                                               7
Kingdom. The three year sample covers the period from November 2008 to September 2011.
The start of this sample period is dictated by the availability of CDS data for all of the seven
countries in the study. Figure 1 reports the evolution of the CDS levels in the sample period
considered.
      Table 1 provides summary information for the daily sovereign CDS spread.6 The average
values of the CDS range widely across countries. The lowest average is 35.43 basis points
for Germany; the highest average is 785 basis points for Greece. The standard deviations as
well as the difference between the maximum and the minimum values indicate that spread for
sovereign CDS present significant time-series variation. In Figure 2 we reports the dynamic of
the changes in the CDS spreads through time. It is important to observe that the magnitude
of the changes differs over time indicating that heteroskedasticity is present.
      Since we focus on the co-movement in CDS spreads among the different countries in addition
to common changes attributable to a set of global common factors, we also consider the variables
that the previous literature has identified as the most significant for CDS spreads. We therefore
consider the changes in Euribor, the spread between Euribor and EONIA, and the risk appetite
calculated as the difference between the VSTOXX (volatility index for the EuroStoxx50) and
the volatility of the EuroStoxx50 obtained by a GARCH(1,1) model. Table 1 also provides the
summary statistics for these variables as well as the summary statistics of the daily changes in
sovereign CDS spreads.
      To provide some additional descriptive statistics, Table 2 reports the correlation matrix of
daily changes in the five-year CDS spreads. Table 2 shows that while there is clearly signifi-
cant cross-sectional correlation in spreads, the correlations are far from perfect. Most of the
correlations are less than 0.7, and several are less than 0.50. The average correlation across the
eight sovereign countries is 0.502.
  6
      All the CDS spreads are denominated in basis points.




                                                      8
3         Methodology and Results

3.1        Nonparametric Inference

As a first evaluation of the linearity and stability of the relationship across CDS, we consider
the rolling evaluation of the linear correlation. We calculate the correlation among changes in
CDS spreads by considering 60 observations, roughly equivalent to one quarter.7 Figure 3 plots
rolling window correlation from January 2009 through September 2011, and overall shows high
correlation values between changes in the CDS national indices; these generally range between
0.3 and 0.7. Furthermore, we observe that the correlations across the countries largely change
over the sample period. An examination of the last part of the sample shows that the overall
correlation among the different countries has been reduced. However, this is not the case for
all the countries. As an example we report the correlation of France’s CDS compared with all
the other countries. As Figure 4 shows, in the last part of the sample the correlation with all
the other countries decrease, with the exception of an increase with Italy and Ireland.8
        To evaluate the possible presence of nonlinearities in the relationship across CDS, we con-
sider the exceedence correlation measures proposed by Longin and Solnik (2001). Given a
quantile level q, the exceedence correlations are computed as follows:




                 ρ− = Corr [∆CDSi,t , ∆CDSj,t |Fi (∆CDSi,t ) < q, Fj (∆CDSj,t ) < q] ,                  (1)

             ρ+ = Corr [∆CDSi,t , ∆CDSj,t |Fi (∆CDSi,t ) > 1 − q, Fj (∆CDSj,t ) > 1 − q] .              (2)


where ∆CDSi,t indicates changes of CDS (∆CDSi,t = CDSi,t − CDSi,t−1 ) and i, j denote any
two different countries, while Fi and Fj are the cumulative density functions of the correspond-
    7
     We have repeated the same analysis using the delta-log of CDS instead of using the delta of the CDS and
the results are qualitatively the same.
   8
     The rolling window correlations among the other countries are provided upon request.




                                                     9
ing CDS variations. Therefore, the exceedence correlation ρ− measures the association across
two given CDS changes when both are located in their lower q quantile, while ρ+ refers to
the joint occurrence of positive changes above 1 − q. By construction, the quantile q assume
values in the range (0, 0.5]. For the purposes of this study, the quantity ρ+ is more interesting.
Figure 5 presents the results for France.9 We graphically represent the exceedence correlations
by reporting in the middle of the panels the full sample standard correlation while on the left
and right sides we report ρ− and ρ+ , respectively. In most cases the exceedence correlation ρ+
is decreasing as q decreases (note that ρ+ considers the correlation above the quantile 1 − q),
suggesting that large positive CDS changes correspond to lower correlations across countries.
This is not the case for the opposite direction: for large negative CDS changes, the correlation
across countries tends to increase (in most cases).
      Despite being interesting, exceedence correlation measure has a drawback: it is affected by
the changes in the marginal density of the variables. Moreover, it suffers from the problem
highlighted by Forbes and Rigobon (2002): the ∆CDS volatility might differ during market
turbulent periods compared to the volatility that occurs during tranquil market periods, and
these changes may bias the correlation measure. This problem clearly emerges when looking at
Figure 2, where the volatility tended to increase during 2010. For this reason these exceedence
correlation measures cannot be used to investigate the sovereign risk spillover among countries.
      Yet, the adjustment proposed in Forbes and Rigobon (2002) cannot be used in this case.
The primarily reason is that such an adjustment requires knowing the source of the increase
in volatility. For instance, the 1994 Tequila Crisis originated in Mexico and therefore the
proposal adjustment can be implemented. During the European sovereign debt crises there are
several countries in crisis. This renders the correlation measures uninformative of the degree of
co-movement in the data.
  9
      The exceedence correlations among the other countries are provided upon request.




                                                      10
3.2       Parametric Inference

To deal with the problem that arises from the heteroskedasticity in the data and the bias it
produces in correlation measures, a very rough and simple method is to estimate the relationship
using projection methods. In this setting, contagion is reflected as a significant coefficient of
nonlinear linkages, like the second- and the third- order terms on top of linear linkages, i.e.
testing for nonlinearity.
       To investigate the nonlinearity in the projection between the changes in the CDS spreads of
any two countries, we first consider the simple linear model and then test the null hypothesis
of linearity using a simple diagnostic procedure. More formally, we first estimate a Generalized
Auto Regressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity (GARCH)(1,1) baseline model:




                       ∆CDSi,t = βij,0 + βij,1 ∆CDSj,t + γij0 Xt−1 + σij,t εij,t                            (3)

                        εij,t |I t−1 ∼ D (0, 1)                                                             (4)
                              2
                             σij,t = θij,0 + θij,1 e2ij,t−1 + θij,2 σij,t−1
                                                                     2
                                                                                                            (5)


where i and j are the two country identifiers, Xt−1 is a vector of lagged covariates that includes
changes in Euribor, the spread between Euribor and EONIA, and the risk appetite calculated
as the difference between the VSTOXX and the GARCH(1,1) volatility of the EuroStoxx50
index, eij,t−1 = σij,t εij,t .10 Moreover, the parameters in the GARCH equation (5) must satisfy
the constraints leading to variance positivity and covariance stationarity, namely θij,0 > 0,
θij,1 ≥ 0, θij,2 ≥ 0, and , θij,1 + θij,2 ≤ 1. The parameters in equation (3) are estimated by
quasi-maximum likelihood with robust standard errors. In the rest of the section, we drop the
  10
     We have repeated the same analysis using as covariates the variables adopted by Ang and Longstaff (2011),
i.e. the daily returns of the DAX index, the daily change in the five-year constant maturity Euro swap rate, the
daily change in the VSTOXX volatility index, the daily change in the European ITraxx Index of CDS spreads,
the daily change in the CDS contract for Japan, China, and for the CDX Emerging Market (CDX EM) Index of
sovereign CDS spreads. The data for these variables are all obtained from the Bloomberg system. The results,
again, are unchanged.



                                                      11
subscript ij for the sake of brevity.
   We consider a reduced-form approach since we do not impose a priori a specific transmission
channel for shocks. Therefore, our estimated equations always involve the ∆CDS of only two
countries. The null hypothesis of linearity is tested by the following extended model:



                                                          p
                                                          X
              ∆CDSi,t = β0 + β1 ∆CDSj,t + γ Xt−1 +   0
                                                                 βl (∆CDSj,t )l + σt εt       (6)
                                                           l=2
                 εt |I t−1 ∼ D (0, 1)                                                         (7)

                     σt2 = θ0 + θ1 e2t−1 + θ2 σt−1
                                               2
                                                                                              (8)


where linearity is associated with the null hypothesis H0 : βl = 0 ∀l = 2, . . . p. Given the
presence of the GARCH term, we evaluate the null hypothesis using a likelihood ratio test.
   Table 3 shows that the coefficients of the powers in equation 6, if singularly considered,
are statistically significant in many cases. Specifically, β2 and β3 (i.e. the coefficients of the
square and cubic terms) are statistically significant, respectively, in 26 and 40 cases out of
56. Moreover, jointly testing their significance shows evidence of their relevance in 41 out of
56 cases. However, if we compare the impact coming from the linear term to the coefficients
associated with the squared and cubed changes used to explain the CDS variation, we note that
the coefficients are extremely small. This trait is common across countries and is not associated
with a specific dependent country nor on a particular country where the ∆CDS movements
originated. More specifically, if we calculate the economic relevance of the coefficients by
multiplying them by the square and the cubic value of the median of the absolute ∆CDS for
country j reported in Table 1 we see that the economic impact of the nonlinearity is extremely
small (as shown in Table 4).
   We thus face some evidence of nonlinearity albeit with a limited economic impact. The
possible sources of this behavior might be identified in the inappropriateness of the linear spec-




                                                12
ification and the fact that such regressions might be subject to omitted variable or simultaneous
equations biases. The biases are a nonlinear function of the conditional volatility and these are
in generally mistaken for nonlinearities when not properly corrected. These issues will be dealt
with below. Thus far, however, whatever evidence of nonlinearity we find implies a very small
effect, and therefore supplies a very limited evidence of contagion.
       The weakness of the linear and nonlinear specifications also might mask parameter instabil-
ity that occurs at the extreme realizations of the distribution. During large market movements,
the linkage between the ∆CDS of the selected European countries might not follow a linear
relationship. In fact, during flight-to-quality episodes, large movements in cross-country de-
pendence might drop, while during contagion events this dependency would be expected to
increase. The flight-to-quality case and the potential changes in the linear relationship might
also be seen in the exceedence correlations which in most cases are not stable across quan-
tiles. We thus address the problem from a different technical viewpoint and consider quantile
regressions between the ∆CDS of any two countries.


3.3       Quantile Regressions

Quantile regressions offer a systematic strategy for examining how variables influence the lo-
cation, scale, and shape of the entire response distribution and therefore permit to measure
shift in the propagation intensity when large shocks occur. The advantage is that quantile
regressions are a particularly efficient way to estimate a linear relationship that varies across
quantile and therefore to detect the presence of interdependence asymmetries in the data.
       Starting from the linear model in equation (3), our purpose is to verify if the coefficient β1
is changing across quantiles of the dependent variable ∆CDSi,t .11 As the parameters might
be different over quantiles, the overall model is highly nonlinear. The quantile regression
parameters are estimated by solving the following minimization problem:
  11
    We stress that the coefficient β1 in equation (3) represents the link between the dependent variable ∆CDSi,t
and the explanatory ∆CDSj,t and thus represents the impact on country i of shocks originated in country j



                                                      13
                            T
                            X
                                  ρτ ∆CDSi,t − βij,0 − βij,1 ∆CDSj,t − γij0 Xt−1
                                                                                   
                    minΘτ                                                                            (9)
                            t=1

where ρτ (a) is the check function for quantile τ of the dependent variable ∆CDSi . This
function is defined as ρτ (a) = a × (τ − I (a < 0)). Moreover, we collect all quantile-dependent
parameters in the set Θτ = {β0,τ , β1,τ , γτ0 }, where again the subscript i and j are dropped for
the sake of brevity.
   The minimization of equation (9) leads to the estimation of the τ quantile for ∆CDSi,t .
This specific quantile linearly depends on ∆CDSj,t and Xt−1 , and is thus conditioned to the
evolution of the covariates and of the ∆CDSj . The conditional quantile is denoted as


                            \i,t (τ ) = βb0,τ + βb1,τ ∆CDSj,t + γb0 τ Xt−1
                           ∆CDS                                                                     (10)
           n                     o
      b τ = βb0,τ , βb1,τ , γbτ 0 are the τ quantile estimates of the model parameters. For details
where Θ
on the quantile regressions see Koenker (2005).
   The most relevant coefficient in our analysis is β̂1,τ , which represents the coefficient of the
propagation of shocks in ∆CDS of country j in the ∆CDS of country i, conditional on other
information in X, and at a certain quantile τ of the dependent variable. We explain how
contagion can be detected using equation (10). We are interested in understanding how the
propagation changes when ∆CDSi occurs in normal periods compared to what happens during
turbulent periods. For simplicity consider just two quantiles τ = 0.50 (∆CDSi in normal
periods) and τ = 0.99 (∆CDSi in turbulent times). Then, we statistically compare βb1,0.50
with βb1,0.99 and detect contagion when βb1,0.99 is significantly larger than βb1,0.50 ; in this case the
intensity of the propagation increases during turbulent periods. The contagion hypothesis is
rejected when βb1,τ is stable over quantiles.
   Compared to the evaluation of the coefficient linking CDSi and CDSj in a traditional linear
regression framework, quantile regression is more flexible and allows a more precise measure of
the risk associated with a given country. For example, the absence of contagion might be present


                                                   14
among just two quantiles (for example 0.50 versus 0.99) or for a large range of quantile levels
(0.50 versus 0.99 but also 0.95 and 0.90), leading to several different designs of the relationships
across countries. This measurament flexibility is worthwhile when there is evidence of different
βb1,τ among the quantiles. If the βb1,τ are not statistically different across quantiles, the quantile
regression shows evidence of linearity in the intensity of the propagation mechanism between
the two countries. These features make quantile regression a particularly good approach to
investigating contagion.
       To analyse the link between ∆CDS we estimated the quantile regressions in equation (9)
across any two ∆CDS variables, also conditioning on the lagged exogenous variables used in
equation (3).12 Given the estimates, we perform the these two evaluations: first, we graphically
analyse the variation of the coefficient β1,τ across different quantiles; second, we run the test
for quantile stability to verify that the coefficients are statistically stable across quantiles.
       Figure 6 reports the values of the β1,τ coefficient for French CDS across different quantile
levels for all the possible pairs of countries in our dataset. Each figure shows the coefficient
values for several quantiles and for each country. Note that each panel of each figure is obtained
from a different quantile regression (we are thus not considering system estimation, or the esti-
mation of quantile regressions with several ∆CDSj as explanatory variables). Furthermore, the
panels report the 95% confidence intervals obtained with the Markov Chain Marginal Bootstrap
of Kocherginsky et al. (2005). In drawing the graphs we evaluated the quantile regression for
the following quantile: τ = 0.01, 0.015, 0.02, 0.025, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9,
0.95, 0.975, 0.98, 0.985, 0.99.
       From a global evaluation of all the figures, two common features emerge. At first, the coeffi-
cients are almost flat across quantiles, suggesting that the dependence between the movements
of any two ∆CDS does not change as a function of the size and sign of the movements. In
  12
    The introduction of the covariates allows controlling for the impact coming from common information.
Lagged CDS changes are not included since we believe that the past information is either already included in
the actual δCDS or conveyed by the covariates.




                                                    15
particular, βb1,τ around the median ∆CDS (for example τ = 0.50) are very similar to those on
the extreme quantiles (τ = 0.95 or τ = 0.99). This indicates that the contagion hypothesis of
contagion is hardly acceptable (as we will see later on from the formal test). Instead, there is
strong evidence of linearity in the propagation of shocks among the CDS of the different coun-
tries, i.e. the linkages among the different countries are the same during normal or turbulent
times.13
    Secondly, as expected, the dispersion of each quantile regression coefficient is much larger
for extreme quantiles (below 0.1 and above 0.9). This is associated with the smaller number of
events falling in those quantiles. Furthermore, the impact is always statistically significant, as
the 95% confidence intervals do not include the zero.
    With respect to this study, the most interesting equivalence occurs across upper the quantiles
and can easily be tested. Table 5 reports the tests for equivalence across quantiles for the two
following null hypotheses: H0 : Θ
                                b 0.90 = Θ
                                         b 0.95 = Θ
                                                  b 0.99 and H0 : Θ
                                                                  b 0.98 = Θ
                                                                           b 0.985 = Θ
                                                                                     b 0.99 .

    Note that the test focuses on the entire set of coefficients. The Wald test statistic has a Chi-
square density and in the second test we maintain the 95% quantile given that it is estimated
on a somewhat larger number of points. Notably, in almost all the cases, the tests suggest the
validity of the null hypothesis; that is, the linear interdependence across the changes in the
CDS indices is not varying in its slope across the upper quantile.
    To summarize, in this subsection we find that the relationship across quantiles is remarkably
stable: sovereign risk propagation is largely a linear phenomenon, i.e.we are not able to find
significant evidence of contagion among European sovereign risks for the sample considered.
    One aspect that we have not considered, however, is the possibility that the quantile re-
gressions could be affected by the presence of heteroskedasticity. We explore this topic in the
following section.
   13
      Such a result suggests also that the use of linear models to capture the linkages among the different countries
is appropriate.




                                                         16
3.4     Bayesian Quantile with Heteroskedasticity

The absence of variability across quantiles suggests a linear interdependence across large changes
in the CDS. This difference might be due to the absence of the GARCH component in the
quantile regressions used in the previous subsection. Given that the model’s computational
complexity will sensibly increase, to reduce the estimation problems we resort to Bayesian
techniques.
   As mentioned before, quantile regression analysis offers a systematic strategy for examining
how the explanatory variables influence the location, scale, and shape of the entire response
distribution. Such methodologies can account for time-varying effects. However, when such
effects are not explicitly modeled in the quantile regression bias, or at the least inefficiencies,
may occur and incorrect conclusions may result. This will especially occur at low and high
quantile levels, where dynamic changes may be largely influenced by changes in volatility.
Therefore, as in Hiemstra and Jones (1994), Koenker and Zhao (1996), and Chen, Gerlack, and
Wei (2009), we allow for heteroskedasticity in equation (9).
   The changes in the CDS are assumed to follow a linear model with heteroskedasticity as
                                                                        2
described in equation (3), where the time-varying conditional variance σij,t is modeled as a
GARCH(1,1) specifications. Following Chen, Gerlack, and Wei (2009), the quantile effect is
estimated using an extension of the usual criterion function in equation (9) and is proposed to
minimize the following logical quantile criterion function:

                     T
                                                                                              !
                           ρτ ∆CDSi,t − βij,0 − βij,1 ∆CDSj,t − γij0 Xt−1
                                                                          
                     X
         minΘτ ,ατ                                                          + log(σij,t (τ ))        (11)
                     t=1
                                              σij,t (τ )

where σij,t (τ ) is the residual time-varying standard deviation computed using quantile τ esti-
mates of the parameters Θτ = {β0,τ , β1,τ , γτ0 } and ατ = {θij,0,τ , θij,1,τ , θij,2,τ }. For the sake of
notational simplicity the index ij has been suppressed in the following paragraphs. The extra
logarithmic term in this expression ensures that the parameters α do not converge to infinity.




                                                   17
See Xiao and Koenker (2010) for an alternative criterion function. The volatility parameters
α and the causal effect parameters Θ are estimated simultaneously resulting in a vector of
                         
parameters Φ̂τ = Θ̂τ , α̂τ with τ subscript identified the reference quantile. We choose a
Bayesian approach to estimate parameters because we believe this method has several advan-
tages including: (i) accounting for parameter uncertainty through simultaneous inference on
all model parameters; (ii) exact inference for finite samples; (iii) efficient and flexible handling
of complex model situations and nonstandard parameters; and (iv) efficient and valid inference
under parameter constraints.
   Bayesian inference requires the specification of prior distributions. We chose weak uninfor-
mative priors to allow the data to dominate inference. As is standard, we assume a normal
prior for Θτ ∼ N (Θ0,τ , Σ). Θ0,τ is set equal to frequentist estimates of model (9); Σ to be a
matrix with sufficiently “large” but finite numbers on the diagonal. The volatility parameters
ατ follow a jointly uniform prior, p(ατ ) ∝ I(S), constrained by the set S that is chosen to
ensure covariance stationarity and variance positivity, as in the frequentist case. These are
sufficient conditions to ensure that the conditional variance is strictly positive. See Nelson and
Cao (1992) for a discussion of sufficient and necessary conditions on GARCH coefficients. Such
restrictions reduce the role of the extra logarithmic term in equation (11).
   The model is estimated using the Metropolis-within-Gibbs MCMC algorithms. Similarly
to Chen, Gerlack, and Wei (2009), we combine Gibbs sampling steps with a random walk
Metropolis-Hastings (MH) algorithm to draw the GARCH parameters (see Vrontos, Dellapor-
tas, and Politis (2000) and So, Chen, and Chen (2005)). To speed the convergence and allow an
optimal mixing, we employ an adaptive MH-MCMC algorithm that combines a random walk
Metropolis (RW-M) and an independent kernel (IK)MH algorithm; see Appendix for estimation
details.
   The results for France and Germany are shown in figures 7–8. The median values are
very similar to the results of the quantile regression presented in the previous section where



                                                18
heteroskedasticity has not been taken into account. Moreover, the uncertainty is lower and the
confidence intervals are smaller than those estimated in the previous section, particularly for
smaller and larger quantiles, this indicating that linearity cannot be rejected. Therefore, as for
the previous analysis, the relationship across quantiles is remarkably stable and linear.
       The evidence is similar for the other countries14 , the only exception being Italy where the
parameters for France and Germany cases are subject to larger differences over the quantile.
Therefore, Italian CDS seems more sensitive to large changes in French and German CDS, see
figure 9.


3.5       Testing for Parameter Stability under Omitted Variables and

          Simultaneous Equations

Having shown that the coefficients are stable through the different quantiles should suggest that
the problems of omitted variables and simultaneous equations are not as severe as previously
thought. The reason is that the conditional volatility depends on the quantile. If there was a
problem in the linear estimation that would have biased the coefficients, such a bias is a function
of the relative variances of the shocks, and the bias tends to shift with the heteroskedasticity
in the data. This is, however, only merely suggestive evidence. To investigate this issue more
deeply, in this section we apply the DCC (Determinant of the Change in the Covariance matrix)
test highlighted in Rigobon (2001), and Dungey et al. (2005).
       The DCC is a simple test for parameter stability when the model suffers from biases related
to simultaneous equations and omitted variables. These are exactly the types of problems that
arise in the estimation of contagion and systemic risk. This test, however, only determines
if the relationship is stable, not its strength.15 In order to apply the DCC test, the only
necessary assumption is that some of the structural shocks are homoskedastic within a certain
  14
    Estimates of all parameters for all countries are available upon request.
  15
    For an evaluation of the properties of the DCC as compared to other parameter stability tests see Rigobon
(2000).




                                                     19
estimation window. In the case of Europe, it is reasonable to assume that when Greece is
heading toward a fiscal crisis and its shocks become more volatile, the shocks in Germany are
homoskedastic, which implies that all the observed heteroskedasticity in Germany is coming
from the heteroskedasticity in the shocks to the periphery.
       Assume that there are N endogenous stationary variables (xit ) that are described by the
following model:
                                             Xt A0 = zt Γ0 + εt ,                                     (12)

where Xt ≡ (x1t , . . . , xN t )0 , zt are K unobservable common shocks, and εt are the structural
shocks. Assume that all shocks are independent, but not necessarily identically distributed:


                                   E [εt ] = 0 E [εi,t εj,t ] = 0 ∀i 6= j

                                   E [zt ] = 0 E [zi,t zj,t ] = 0 ∀i 6= j                             (13)

                                 E [εt zt ] = 0

                                 E [ε0t εt ] = Ωεt E [zt0 zt ] = Ωzt


where both Ωzt and Ωεt are diagonal. Assume A and Γ are non triangular matrices that have
been normalized as follows:16

                                                                      
                                      1 a12 · · · a1N                 
                                                                      
                                      a21 1                           
                                   A= .                               ,                             (14)
                                                                      
                                      ..     ..    ..
                                                .   .                 
                                                                       
                                                                      
                                       aN 1  ···    1
  16
    This normalization is standard in macro applications. The only change is in the units which measure the
errors.




                                                     20
                                                                         
                                           1     1 ···      1            
                                                                         
                                           γ21 γ22 · · · γ2k             
                                        Γ= .                             .                   (15)
                                                                         
                                           ..    ..   ..    ..
                                                  .      .   .           
                                                                          
                                                                         
                                            γN 1 γN 2 · · · γN k

       Finally, without loss of generality, assume that Xt has a zero mean and is serially uncorre-
lated.17
       The problem of simultaneous equations is embedded in the assumption that A is not block
diagonal, the problem of omitted variables is modelled as the unobservable common shocks,
and the heteroskedasticity is built into the covariance matrix of both the structural and the
common shocks.
       In this model, the question of interest is the stability of the parameters (A or/and Γ).
However, it is well-known that equation (12) cannot be estimated. Hence, inference on the
coefficients cannot be performed without further information. Indeed, from equations (12) to
(15) the only statistic that can be computed is the covariance matrix of the reduced form of
Xt :
                                      Ωt = A−1 ΓΩzt Γ0 A0−1 + A−1 Ωεt A0−1 .                   (16)

Note that in the lack of heteroskedasticity, changes in the covariance matrix of the reduced
form are an indication that a shift in parameters has occurred. However, if the shocks are
heteroskedastic, these changes are uninformative regarding the stability of the coefficients.
       Assume that there is a shift in the variance of some of the idiosyncratic shocks (those from
 2       2
σε,i to σε,N ). The change in the covariance matrix is


                                  ∆Ωt = A−1 Γ ∆Ωzt Γ0 A0−1 + A−1 ∆Ωεt A0−1
  17
       If Xt is stationary, the results discussed here are independent of these assumptions.




                                                         21
In this example, ∆Ωzt = 0 and ∆Ωεt is

                                                                           
                                         0
                                                                           
                                            ..                             
                                   
                                                 .                         
                                                                            
                               ε
                                                                           
                             ∆Ωt = 
                                   
                                                        2
                                                      ∆σε,i                 
                                                                            
                                                              ...
                                                                           
                                                                           
                                                                           
                                                                           
                                                                      2
                                                                    ∆σε,N


Then,
             det ∆Ωt = det A−1 ∆Ωεt A0−1 = det A−1 det [∆Ωεt ] det A0−1 = 0
                                                                  


In fact, the conditions in which the determinant of the change is zero are easier to satisfy for
the multivariate case than for the bivariate case: if the heteroskedasticity only occurs in the
structural shocks (εt ), then if there are less than N shifts in their variances, the determinant is
zero. Similarly, if the heteroskedasticity is explained by the common shocks (zt ) that reflect the
systemic risk, then if there are less than K variances changing, the determinant is also zero.
   For the recent eurozone fiscal crisis, it is assumed that either the crisis is driven by shocks
to some of the countries – a subset of the structural shocks – or the crisis is driven by the
common shocks (the systemic shocks). In the end, however, if neither assumption is satisfied,
then the determinant of the change in the covariance matrix is going to be different than zero,
not because the parameters are unstable but because the assumption about the structure of the
heteroskedasticity is wrong. Therefore, we have the joint hypothesis that the heteroskedasticity
is produced by a subset of the structural shocks and that the parameters are stable.
   In our data we first estimate a simple VAR(5) where we control for the exogenous vari-
ables and lags. We recover the residuals from that regression and estimated the rolling average
variance, see Figure 10. We define a threshold for the different “regimes” (high and low volatil-
ity) and compute the determinant of the change in the variance-covariancematrix. The idea
is to split the data between high and low conditional volatility. One of the advantages of the


                                                      22
DCC is that the test is linear on the covariance matrices, so minor misspecifications on the
“regimes” only reduce the power of the test. In order to control for this possibility we try
different subsamples and thresholds.
   In Table 6 we present the results of the DCC test for several thresholds. We show the implied
T-stat from a block-bootstrap, as well as the one-sided test of the DCC. We present the results
for several thresholds, defined as the average conditional standard deviation of the change in
the CDS. Within each subsample, we bootstrap the residuals to compute the distribution of
the covariance matrix. We implement 1000 replications and use blocks of size 5.
   As shown in table 6, the results indicate that the parameters are stable and that the het-
eroskedasticity in the data is the outcome of the heteroskedasticity from a subset of the shocks.
The implied Tstats are all well below the 95 percent confidence intervals. Furthermore, the
one-sided test shows all the probabilities are larger than 2.5 percent, with the closest one being
at 20 percent.



3.6    Bond Spread Analysis

For the purpose of the present analysis, one disadvantage of the data we are using is the fact that
all our observations took place during what could be considered a tumultuous time: the world
was already experiencing a financial crisis when our data starts, and truly we are comparing
bad times to really bad times. It is quite possible that this explains why the propagation
mechanism is so stable. One way to address this issue is to use bond spreads instead of CDS
and use the methods derived here to study the propagation of shocks on bond spreads.
   The advantage of using CDS data is that it captures the sovereign risk and therefore enables
a very clean exercise. In contrast, there are drawbacks to using bond spreads. First, unlike
CDS bond spreads are affected by many other factors; for example, they are more sensitive to
monetary policy and the actions of the central bank and policymakers.
   Second, while the CDS spread is observable in the market, it is not obvious how to compute


                                                23
the appropriate government bond spread. We collect 5-year bond yields from Thomson-Reuters
for the eight European countries we consider and calculate the bond spreads relative to the 5-
year swap rates because interest rate swaps are commonly seen as the market participants’
preferred risk-free rate (see Beber et al., 2009). In addition, this approach guarantees a homo-
geneous benchmark across the euro area.18
       In this case the data run since 2003 and we perform the exact same exercise that we did for
the CDS but considering three different sample periods:(i) the pre-crisis period (2003–2006),
(ii) the post-crisis one (2008–2011) and the entire sample (2003–2011). The statistics for the
three samples are reported in table 7.
       The results for the post-crisis sample (2008–2011) for quantile regressions and Bayesian
quantile regressions for France are shown in Figures 11–12. The median values are very similar
to the results presented in the previous section on CDS. However, the confidence intervals (the
uncertainty) are larger than those estimated for the CDS because the time series are more
volatile.
       We still find that for smaller and larger quantiles in most cases we cannot reject the hypoth-
esis that the coefficients are equal, an indication that linearity cannot be rejected. Therefore,
as for the previous analysis, the relationship across quantiles is remarkably stable and linear.
Moreover, the coefficients are rather similar. These results indicate that the propagation of
shocks in bond markets is the same as for CDS in the same subsample.19
       We repeated the analysis for the pre-crisis period (2003–2006). The results for quantile
regressions and Bayesian quantile regressions for France are shown in figures 13–14. The pa-
rameter values are larger than those estimated on the post-crisis periods. Yet, we still find that
for smaller and larger quantiles in most cases we cannot reject that the coefficients are equal
(largely for the Bayesian analysis), indicating that linearity again cannot be rejected. It is
  18
     Another possible approach is to use the yield-to-maturity of the German Bund. However, this approach
has the disadvantage that the bond spread on Germany must be omitted from the analysis. Furthermore, the
benchmark role of Bunds may lead to the existence of a significant “convenience yield”.
  19
     Evidence is similar for the other countries. Results are provided upon request.




                                                   24
important to observe that the coefficients are quite similar among all the different countries ex-
cept for the United Kingdom where the coefficient is lower. This indicates that in the pre-crises
period the market regarded the government bonds issued by eurozone countries as being very
similar and a unique block distinct from the UK government bonds. In contrast, for the period
2008–2011 we do show that the UK coefficients are largely different for the different countries.
Therefore, the results indicate that there is a change in the intensity of the propagation of
shocks between the pre crisis period (2003–2006) and the post crisis one (2008–2011). How-
ever, the coefficients actually go down, not up! So there is no evidence of contagion. Moreover,
between 2008 and 2011 the propagation is quite stable and surprisingly the coefficients are very
similar between bond spreads and CDS.
       Despite the certainty that a structural break occurred in 2008, we perform the exact same
exercise over the entire sample, 2003–2011. The results for quantile regressions and Bayesian
quantile regressions for France are shown in Figures 15–16. We do not find a linear relationship:
for smaller and larger quantiles in most of the cases we reject that the coefficients are the same.
As we would expect by allowing for heteroscedasticity, the differences among quantiles are
larger for Bayesian estimates. The pattern, especially for the Bayesian coefficients, follow a
bell-shaped profile that confirms the results we obtain for the two different subsamples: on the
tail the coefficients are lower and assume values similar to the post-Lehman period, and for
the middle quantiles values are higher and similar to the pre-crisis period.This is particularly
evident for the coefficients associated with Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain, whereas
France’s relationship with Germany and the United Kingdom is more stable over time, such as
we also find in the analysis of the two subperiods. This result is encouraging because it clearly
                                                                                                        20
indicates that the (Bayesian) methodology has enough power to reject certain samples.
  20
    Our results is robust to different prior values, including priors centered around frequentist estimates with
very small variance.




                                                      25
4         Discussion

Recent European events have spurred a new discussion of contagion. In previous crises, the
United States in 1987, Mexico in 1994, Thailand in 1997, Russia in 1998, the United States
in 2001, etc. the “culprit” propagating the shock was relatively clear. This is not the case in
Europe right now. Several countries on the periphery entered a fiscal crisis at roughly the same
time and therefore several of the techniques that exist in the contagion literature are inadequate
to deal with the present situation. The purpose of this paper is to offer a assessment of contagion
risk based on quantile regressions that account for the possibility of heteroskedasticity when
extreme events occur.
    Our paper uses the definition of contagion as the change in the propagation mechanisms
when large shocks occur. We find that there is no change in the intensity of the transmission
of shocks among European countries during the onset of the current fiscal crisis — suggesting
that so far contagion in Europe has remained subdued. This does not mean that the situation
might not change, but indicates that so far the common shift in CDS spreads that we have
observed in the data is the outcome of the interdependence that has always been present —
the strength of the propagation mechanisms has not changed during the recent fiscal crisis.
    This finding has important implications for policymakers. Our methodology could be used
as a tool to provide information to policymakers regarding markets view and related risks. In
fact, the analysis suggests that the market was viewing the eurozone area as perfectly integrated
(living in a dream?) and considering sovereign bonds of the different countries as almost perfect
substitutes. Beginning in 2008, but largely after 2009 this view has been radically modified
and the market has started to distinguish between weak/peripheral countries and strong/central
countries such that transmission effects of country specific risks have been limited. Germany is
the only country that has almost the same transmission power as prior to the eurozone fiscal
crisis.
    This recognition does not mean that since there is no contagion or the transmission of large


                                                26
shocks is lower, strong central European countries can easily ignore the country-specific risk
of weak/peripheral countries. Transmission effects still remain present but the strength in the
propagation mechanism has not altered during the recent fiscal crisis. Therefore, the strong
eurozone countries should worry about risks that may come from large country-specific shocks
and perhaps try to mitigate them, but not be concerned about similar shocks propagated with
higher intensity across Europe.
   From the methodological viewpoint, our procedure has several advantages. First, it is a
very flexible method to detect changes in the transmission mechanisms conditional on the size
of the shocks. Second, it deals explicitly with heteroskedasticity in the data — a problem that
affects the validity of many measures proposed in the literature. Third, it is a reduced-form
approach that does not require knowing the specific formulation of the contagion channel before
the crisis occurs.
   It is important to highlight that our procedure does not predict changes in propagation, but
does measure such changes. It is possible that a sovereign default in the region will shift the
relationship across CDS, but so far this has not happened. We believe this methodology could
offer a vehicle to policymakers and market participants to detect such changes when the data
suffers from heteroskedasticy.
   Finally, the observed stability across different quantiles opens the door to the use of linear
models, like VAR, in the system’s analysis of cross-country interdependencies. Moreover, these
models could represent a relevant tool in the analysis of the transmission mechanism of shocks.
Such an extension is left to ongoing and future researches.




                                               27
Appendix

The relation between the CDS of country i with country j and other covariates is modelled as:


                                                            0
                         ∆CDSi,t = βij,0 + βij,1 ∆CDSj,t + γij, Xt−1 + σij,t εij,t                                                     (17)

                         εij,t |I t−1 ∼ D (0, 1)                                                                                       (18)
                               2
                              σij,t                                   2
                                    = θij,0 + θij,1 e2ij,t−1 + θij,2 σij,t−1                                                           (19)


The subscript ij is dropped for convenience in the the text below. The univariate SL location-
scale family SL(µ, δ, τ ) has the following density function:

                                                               
                                           τ (1 − τ )        z−µ
                                   f (z) =            exp −τ
                                                δ             δ

Chen, Gerlack, and Wei (2009) shows that if the residual εij,t−1 in equation (17) is assumed to
be skewed Laplace distributed, i.i.d., and has been standardized to have variance of one, the
likelihood of model (17)-(19) is:

                   √                   Q
                                            T                 −1
                                                                            P
                                                                              T
                                                                                    √
                                                                                        1−2τ +2τ 2 (∆CDSi,t −β0,τ −β1,τ ∆CDSj,t −γτ0 Xt−1 )
                                                                                                                                              
l(∆CDSi |Θ, α) =       1 − 2τ + 2τ 2        t=1 (ρτ (σij,t ))          exp    t=1                           ρτ (σij,t )

                                                                                                                                       (20)
where ρτ (a) is the check function for quantile τ defined as ρτ (a) = a × (τ − I (a < 0)),
Θ = {Θτ }τ = {β0,τ , β1,τ , γτ0 }τ and α = {ατ }τ = {θij,0,τ , θij,1,τ , θij,2,τ }τ . The maximum likeli-
hood estimates from equation (20) for Θτ are mathematically equivalent to the heteroskedastic
quantile estimators from equation (11).
   Then, define the vector Φτ = (β0,τ , β1,τ , γτ , θ0,τ , θ1,τ , θ2,τ ) and Φj,τ the j-th element of the
vector, the sampling scheme consists of the following iterative steps, where the subscription τ
is deleted to simplify the reading:




                                                                   28
   Step 1: at iteration i, generate a point Φ∗j from the random walk kernel (RW-M)


                                  Φ∗j = Φi−1
                                         j   + j  ∼ N (0, Σ)                              (21)


where Σ is a diagonal matrix and σj2 is its j-th diagonal element, and Φi−1 j    is the (i − 1)th
iteration of Φj . We accept Φ∗j as Φij with probability p = min 1, f (Φ∗j )/f (Φi−1
                                                                                    
                                                                                j ) , where f ()

is the likelihood in equation (20) multiplied by the priors. Otherwise, set Φ∗j = Φi−1
                                                                                   j . The

elements of Σ are turned by monitoring the acceptance rate to lie between 25% and 50%.
   Step 2: After M iterations, we apply the following independent kernel (IK)MH algorithm.
Generate Φ∗j from
                                 Φ∗j = µi−1
                                        Φj + j  ∼ N (0, ΣΦj )                             (22)

where µΦj and ΣΦj are respectively the sample mean and the sample covariance of the first M
iterations for Φj . Then accept Φ∗j as Φij with probability

                                            "                    #
                                                f (Φ∗j )g(Φi−1
                                                           j )
                                  p = min 1,                                                (23)
                                                f (Φi−1   ∗
                                                    j )g(Φj )



where g() is the Gaussian proposal density in (22).


                                       References


 Acharya V., I. Drechsler and P. Schnabl, (2011) “A Pyrrhic Victory? Bank Bailouts and
     Sovereign Credit Risk”, NYU working paper.

 Ang A. and F. Longstaff, (2011) “Systemic sovereign credit risk: lessons from the U.S. and
     Europe”, Columbia working paper.

 Beber, A., M.W. Brandt and K.A. Kavajecz, (2009), “Flight-to-quality or Flight-to-liquidity?
     Evidence from the Euro-Area Bond Market”, Review of Financial Studies, 22(3), 925-957.


                                                29
Chen, C., R. Gerlack and D.C.M. Wei (2009), “Bayesian causal effects in quantiles: accounting
    for heteroskedasticity ”, Computational Statistics and Data Analysis 53(6), 1993–2007.

Duffie, D. (1999), “Estimating the price of default risk”, Review of Financial Studies, 12,
    197-226.

Dungey, M., R. Fry, B. Gonzalez-Hermosillo and V.L. Martin (2005). “Empirical Modelling
    of Contagion: A Review of Methodologies”, Quantitative Finance, 5, 9-24.

Dungey, M. and D. Zhumabekova (2001), “Testing for contagion using correlation: Some words
    of caution”, Pacific Basin Working Paper Series No. PB0109, Federal Reserve Bank of
    San Francisco.

Eichengreen, B. and A. Mody (2000), “What Explains Changing Spreads on Emerging-Market
    Debt?”, in (Sebastian Edwards, ed.) The Economics of International Capital Flows,
    University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

Forbes, R. and R. Rigobon (2002), “No Contagion, Only Interdependence: Measuring Stock
    Market Comovements”, Journal of Finance, 57(5), 2223-2261.

Hiemstra, C. and J. D. Jones (1994), “Testing for Linear and Nonlinear Granger Causality in
    the Stock Price-Volume Relantion”, Journal of Finance, 49, 1639-1665.

Kallestrup, R., D. Lando and A. Murgoci (2012) “Financial Sector Linkages and the Dynamics
    of Bank and Sovereign Credit Spreads”, Copenhagen WP.

Kamin, S. and K. von Kleist (1999), “The Evolution and Determinants of Emerging Market
    Credit Spreads in the 1990s”, Working paper No. 68, Bank for International Settlements.

Koenker, R. (2005), “QuantileRegression”, Econometric Society Monographs, n. 38, Cam-
    bridge University Press, New York.




                                            30
Koenker, R. and Q. Zhao (1996), “Conditional quantile estimation and inference for ARCH
    models”, Econometric Theory, 12, 793-813.

Kocherginsky, M., X. He and Y. Mu (2005), “Practical Confidence Intervals for Regression
    Quantiles”, Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 14(1), 41-55.

Longin, F.M. and B. Solnik (2001), “Extreme correlation of international equity markets”,
    Journal of Finance 56, 649–676.

Longstaff, F.A., S. Mithal and E. Neis, (2005), “Corporate yield spreads: default risk or
    liquidity? New evidence from the credit default swap market”, Journal of Finance, 60(5),
    2213-2253.

Longstaff, F.A., J. Pan, L.H. Pedersen and K.J. Singleton (2011), “How Sovereign is Sovereign
    Credit Risk?”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcoming.

Mauro, P., N. Sussman and Y. Yafeh (2002), “Emerging Market Spreads: Then Versus Now”,
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 695-733.

Nelson, D.B. and C.Q. Cao, (1992), “Inequality constraints in the univariate GARCH model
    ”, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 10(2), 229-235.

Pan, J. and K.J. Singleton (2008) “Default and Recovery Implicit in the Term Structure of
    Sovereign CDS Spreads”, Journal of Finance 63, 2345-2384.

Pericoli, M. and M. Sbracia (2003), “A Primer on Financial Contagion”, Journal of Economic
    Surveys 17, 571-608.

Pesaran, H. and A. Pick (2007), “Econometric Issues in the Analysis of Contagion”, Journal
    of Economic Dynamics and Control 31, 1245-1277.




                                            31
Rigobon, R. (2001), “Contagion: How to measure it?”, In S. Edwards & J. Frankel (Eds.),
    Preventing currency crises in emerging markets, 269–334, Chicago: The University of
    Chicago Press.

Rigobon, R. (2000), “A simple test for stability of linear models under heteroskedasticity,
    omitted variable, and endogenous variable problems”, MIT Mimeo.

Rigobon, R. (2003) “On the measurement of the international propagation of shocks: is the
    transmission stable?”, Journal of International Economics, 61(2), 261-283.

Rodriguez, J. C. (2007) “Measuring Financial Contagion: A Copula Approach ”, Journal of
    Empirical Finance, 14(3), 401-423.

So, M. K.P., C. W.S. Chen and M. Chen (2005), “A Bayesian Threshold Nonlinearity Test for
    Financial Time Series”, Journal of Forecasting 24, 61-75.

Vrontos, I.D., P. Dellaportas and D.N. Politis (2000), “Full Bayesian Inference for GARCH
    and EGARCH Models”, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 18, 187-198.

Xiao, Z. and R. Koenker (2009), “Conditional Quantile Estimation for GARCH Models”,
    Journal of American Statistical Association, 104, 1696-1712.




                                            32
                                   Table 1: Summary Statistics


                                              CDS spreads
                              Mean      Standard Deviation Minimum          Maximum          Median
                FRANCE         57.28           24.88             21.00        149.81          55.65
              GERMANY          35.93           13.90             17.96         92.50          32.92
                GREECE        702.85          729.75             88.00       5398.18         428.15
               IRELAND        334.45          228.84             96.92       1191.16         220.62
                  ITALY       133.43          62.65              48.00       447.22          123.02
             PORTUGAL         280.36          264.65             37.00       1217.47         185.86
                  SPAIN       149.74           71.83             47.00       364.01          144.08
                     UK       280.36          264.65             37.00       1217.47         185.86
                                          Conditional variables
                               Mean     Standard Deviation Minimum          Maximum          Median
   D(EURIBOR-EONIA)            0.00             0.02             –0.18        0.14            0.00
   D(RISK APPETITE)            0.01            3.59             –28.07       15.49            0.33
         D(EURIBOR)            0.00             0.01             –0.12        0.06            0.00
                                        Changes in CDS spreads
                               Mean     Standard Deviation Minimum          Maximum       Median(Abs)
                FRANCE         0.15             3.12            –17.66        22.19          1.00
              GERMANY          0.04             2.28            –13.89        19.02          0.63
                GREECE         6.53            64.70           –462.83       764.06          6.36
               IRELAND         0.96            16.93           –137.21       101.18          5.00
                  ITALY        0.46            9.35             –79.98       63.91           2.98
             PORTUGAL          1.30            20.76           –199.91       174.71          4.00
                  SPAIN        0.37            10.14            –75.24       48.80           3.50
                     UK        0.03             3.25            –18.89        18.00          1.01


Notes: This table presents summary statistics for daily 5 years CDS spreads, daily changes in CDS spreads as
  well the conditional variables, Euribor, Euribor minus Eonia and Risk appetite, from November 2008 to
   September 2011. Risk appetite is defined as the difference between VSTOXX and the volatility of the
            EuroStoxx50 estimated by a GARCH(1,1) model. CDS are expressed in basis points.




                                                    33
                                                          Table 2: Correlations


                                                            Correlation Matrix
                                 FRANCE       GERMANY        GREECE IRELAND               ITALY      PORTUGAL         SPAIN
                 GERMANY          0.573
                   GREECE         0.283           0.190
                  IRELAND         0.495           0.378          0.399




34
                     ITALY        0.641           0.446          0.391         0.602
                PORTUGAL          0.498           0.374          0.490         0.741       0.701
                     SPAIN        0.606           0.456          0.361         0.629       0.857         0.730
                        UK        0.537           0.515          0.230         0.450       0.569         0.398         0.520

     Notes: This table reports the correlation matrix of daily five-year CDS spread changes. The sample consists of daily observations for
                                                  November 2008 to September 2011 period.
                        Table 3: Likelihood Ratio Test for Linearity


                  i               j                 P-value      β1       β2        β3
                  FRANCE          GERMANY            1.000     0.898      —         —
                  FRANCE          GREECE             0.000     0.036    0.000    0.000
                  FRANCE          IRELAND            0.015     0.102     —       0.000
                  FRANCE          ITALY              0.008     0.226    0.001       —
                  FRANCE          PORTUGAL           1.000     0.083      —      0.000
                  FRANCE          SPAIN              0.005     0.201    0.001     0.000
                  FRANCE          UK                 0.654     0.358      —        —
                  GERMANY         FRANCE             0.000     0.539      —      –0.001
                  GERMANY         GREECE             0.000     0.018      —       0.000
                  GERMANY         IRELAND            0.004     0.059      —       0.000
                  GERMANY         ITALY              0.001     0.144     —       0.000
                  GERMANY         PORTUGAL           0.000     0.063      —      0.000
                  GERMANY         SPAIN              0.050     0.119     —       0.000
                  GERMANY         UK                 0.955     0.370      —        —
                  GREECE          FRANCE             0.570     2.783      —        —
                  GREECE          GERMANY            0.000     3.251      —      –0.022
                  GREECE          IRELAND            0.000     0.541   –0.008    0.000
                  GREECE          ITALY              0.000     1.155   –0.010     0.000
                  GREECE          PORTUGAL           0.062     1.423   –0.002    0.000
                  GREECE          SPAIN              0.000     1.157      —      0.000
                  GREECE          UK                 0.000     1.624      —      –0.004
                  IRELAND         FRANCE             0.088     2.176   –0.039      —
                  IRELAND         GERMANY            0.000     3.234      —      –0.013
                  IRELAND         GREECE             0.000     0.223      —      0.000
                  IRELAND         ITALY              0.009     1.004   –0.004     0.000
                  IRELAND         PORTUGAL           0.000     0.610      —      0.000
                  IRELAND         SPAIN              0.000     0.885      —      0.000
                  IRELAND         UK                 0.455     1.726      —        —


Notes: This table reports the likelihood ratio test for linear relationship between the change in the CDS of
 country i and country j. P-Value denotes the P-Value of the likelihood ratio test and β1 , β2 , β3 are the
                   significant estimated coefficient of equation (6) at the 5 percent level.




                                                    35
                                          Table 3: continued


                  i                j                P-value      β1        β2        β3
                  ITALY            FRANCE            0.242     1.771    –0.022       —
                  ITALY            GERMANY           0.000     2.158      —       –0.008
                  ITALY            GREECE            0.000     0.125     0.000     0.000
                  ITALY            IRELAND           0.003     0.354     0.000     0.000
                  ITALY            PORTUGAL          0.000     0.438    –0.001     0.000
                  ITALY            SPAIN             0.000     0.669     0.001     0.000
                  ITALY            UK                0.001     1.158    –0.012    –0.002
                  PORTUGAL         FRANCE            0.162     1.346    –0.030      —
                  PORTUGAL         GERMANY           0.000     1.644    –0.022    –0.014
                  PORTUGAL         GREECE            0.000     0.306     0.000    0.000
                  PORTUGAL         IRELAND           0.000     0.280    –0.003     0.000
                  PORTUGAL         ITALY             0.000     0.658    –0.003     0.000
                  PORTUGAL         SPAIN             0.000     0.732     0.005     0.000
                  PORTUGAL         UK                0.328     0.791      —         —
                  SPAIN            FRANCE            0.587     1.885       —        —
                  SPAIN            GERMANY           0.000     2.265      —       –0.010
                  SPAIN            GREECE            0.000     0.143     0.000     0.000
                  SPAIN            IRELAND           0.015     0.387       —      0.000
                  SPAIN            ITALY             0.001     0.883    –0.003       —
                  SPAIN            PORTUGAL          1.000     0.447       —         —
                  SPAIN            UK                1.000     0.996       —        —
                  UK               FRANCE            0.001     0.520    –0.006    0.000
                  UK               GERMANY           0.000     1.015       —      –0.004
                  UK               GREECE            0.000     0.018     0.000       —
                  UK               IRELAND           0.000     0.088       —       0.000
                  UK               ITALY             0.001     0.211    –0.001     0.000
                  UK               PORTUGAL          0.003     0.064     0.000    0.000
                  UK               SPAIN             0.803     0.133       —        —


Notes: This table reports the likelihood ratio test for linear relationship between the change in the CDS of
 country i and country j. P-Value denotes the P-Value of the likelihood ratio test and β1 , β2 , β3 are the
                   significant estimated coefficient of equation (6) at the 5 percent level.




                                                    36
                                  Table 4: Economic Impact of Nonlinear Terms


                    quadratic       cubic          quadratic        cubic            quadratic      cubic      quadratic       cubic
                  f2 * DCDS2 f3 * DCDS3          f2 * DCDS2 f3 * DCDS3             f2 * DCDS2 f3 * DCDS3     f2 * DCDS2 f3 * DCDS3
                            France                         Germany                           Greece                    Ireland
        FRANCE          —             —                —             0.00                —            —          –0.04           —
      GERMANY           —             —                —              —                  —          –0.01          —            0.00
        GREECE         0.00          0.00              —             0.00                —            —            —            0.00
       IRELAND          —            0.00              —             0.00              –0.12         0.01          —             —
          ITALY       0.008           —                —             0.00              –0.02         0.00         0.00          0.00
     PORTUGAL           —            0.00              —             0.00              –0.10         0.04          —           –0.01
          SPAIN        0.01          0.00              —             0.00                —          –0.24          —           –0.08




37
             UK         —             —                —              —                  —           0.15          —            0.16
                              Italy                        Portugal                           Spain                      UK
        FRANCE        –0.02           —              –0.03            —                  —            —          –0.01          0.00
      GERMANY           —            0.00            –0.01           0.00                —           0.00          —            0.00
        GREECE         0.00          0.00             0.00           0.00               0.00         0.00         0.00           —
       IRELAND        –0.01          0.00            –0.03           0.00                —           0.00          —            0.00
          ITALY         —             —              –0.03           0.01              –0.03          —          –0.01          0.00
     PORTUGAL         0.04           0.01              —              —                  —            —           0.00          0.00
          SPAIN       –0.19         –0.12             0.07          –0.05                —            —            —             —
             UK       –1.20          0.65              —              —                  —            —            —             —

                        Notes: This table presents the economic impact of the quadratic and cubic factors.
                          Table 5: Test for Stability Across Quintile


                                        H0 : Θ
                                             b 0.90 = Θ
                                                      b 0.95 = Θ
                                                               b 0.99   H0 : Θ
                                                                             b 0.98 = Θ
                                                                                      b 0.985 = Θb 0.99
      Dependent        Explanatory      Test-stat       P-value         Test-stat        P-value
      FRANCE           GERMANY           10.074           0.260          5.668             0.932
      FRANCE           UK                18.293           0.019          2.650             0.998
      FRANCE           SPAIN              2.400           0.966          4.364             0.976
      FRANCE           ITALY              2.565           0.959          2.570             0.998
      FRANCE           IRELAND            3.064           0.930          0.784             0.999
      FRANCE           PORTUGAL           2.848           0.944          3.171             0.994
      FRANCE           GREECE             4.634           0.796          1.712             0.999
      GERMANY          FRANCE             2.708           0.951          3.827             0.986
      GERMANY          UK                12.136           0.145          8.391             0.754
      GERMANY          SPAIN              2.323           0.969          1.512             0.999
      GERMANY          ITALY              8.631           0.374          3.257             0.993
      GERMANY          IRELAND            4.469           0.813          4.346             0.976
      GERMANY          PORTUGAL           3.817           0.873          1.357             0.999
      GERMANY          GREECE             4.805           0.778          6.362             0.897
      UK               FRANCE             6.205           0.624          7.836             0.798
      UK               GERMANY           10.328           0.243          5.954             0.918
      UK               SPAIN              9.090           0.335          4.200             0.980
      UK               ITALY             13.614           0.092          6.959             0.860
      UK               IRELAND            8.609           0.376          4.402             0.975
      UK               PORTUGAL          11.985           0.152          6.189             0.906
      UK               GREECE             3.932           0.863          6.961             0.860
      SPAIN            FRANCE             7.893           0.444          1.748             0.999
      SPAIN            GERMANY            1.620           0.991          2.796             0.997
      SPAIN            UK                17.924           0.022          6.421             0.893
      SPAIN            ITALY              6.473           0.594          5.495             0.939
      SPAIN            IRELAND            1.759           0.988          0.936             0.999
      SPAIN            PORTUGAL          3.675            0.885          2.111             0.999
      SPAIN            GREECE             5.294           0.726          4.098             0.982


Notes: This table presents the test for stability across quintile in the relation between the CDS of country i
                                                 and country j.




                                                     38
                                           Table 5: continued


                                         H0 : Θ
                                              b 0.90 = Θ
                                                       b 0.95 = Θ
                                                                b 0.99   H0 : Θ
                                                                              b 0.98 = Θ
                                                                                       b 0.985 = Θb 0.99
      Dependent        Explanatory       Test-stat       P-value         Test-stat        P-value
      ITALY            FRANCE              9.692           0.287           3.011            0.995
      ITALY            GERMANY             3.961           0.861          2.397             0.999
      ITALY            UK                 18.560           0.017           3.569            0.990
      ITALY            SPAIN              3.990            0.858          7.585             0.817
      ITALY            IRELAND             0.526           0.999           2.371            0.999
      ITALY            PORTUGAL           2.805            0.946          1.459             0.999
      ITALY            GREECE              1.760           0.988           4.341            0.976
      IRELAND          FRANCE              2.892           0.941          4.955             0.959
      IRELAND          GERMANY            4.376            0.822          3.933             0.985
      IRELAND          UK                  2.262           0.972          4.664             0.968
      IRELAND          SPAIN              10.546           0.229           5.828            0.924
      IRELAND          ITALY               2.059           0.979           6.083            0.912
      IRELAND          PORTUGAL           29.008           0.001          15.913            0.195
      IRELAND          GREECE              6.202           0.625          3.695             0.988
      PORTUGAL         FRANCE              1.165           0.997           3.065            0.995
      PORTUGAL         GERMANY             6.576           0.583          1.897             0.999
      PORTUGAL         UK                 28.371           0.000           9.553            0.655
      PORTUGAL         SPAIN              6.952            0.542          12.66             0.394
      PORTUGAL         ITALY              3.984            0.859          6.008             0.916
      PORTUGAL         IRELAND             6.410           0.601           1.827            0.999
      PORTUGAL         GREECE              7.723           0.461           7.442            0.827
      GREECE           FRANCE              4.053           0.852          3.478             0.991
      GREECE           GERMANY             5.18            0.738          17.613            0.128
      GREECE           UK                 9.762            0.282          4.449             0.974
      GREECE           SPAIN               6.338           0.609           2.711            0.997
      GREECE           ITALY              15.941           0.043           8.082            0.779
      GREECE           IRELAND             4.490           0.810          2.241             0.999
      GREECE           PORTUGAL            8.298           0.405           2.921            0.996


Notes: This table presents the test for stability across quintile in the relation between the CDS of country i
                                                 and country j.




                                                     39
                         Table 6: DCC Test


                   Threshold      Tstat    Mass > 0
                     12.00        0.96      0.32
                     13.00        0.83      0.30
                     14.00        1.39      0.20
                     15.00        0.53      0.32
                     16.00        0.62      0.39
                     17.00        0.69      0.29
                     18.00        1.27      0.21
                     19.00        1.41      0.28
                     20.00        1.77      0.40
                     21.00        1.72      0.39
                     22.00        0.96      0.42
                     23.00        0.58      0.43
                     24.00        0.09      0.39


Notes: This table includes the DCC test across different threshold values.




                                   40
                   Table 7: Summary Statistics Bond Spreads


                               Changes in bond spreads
                         Mean   Standard Deviation Minimum              Maximum
                                 Full sample 2003–2011
             France       0.01           4.16           –20.75             23.23
           Germany      –0.03           4.14            –22.05             26.14
             Greece      1.20           25.48          –650.83            400.86
            Ireland      0.28           11.00          –139.00             97.94
               Italy     0.15            5.66           –91.46             61.23
           Portugal      0.55           14.08          –315.65            253.74
              Spain      0.12            5.96          –107.86             43.16
               U.K.     –0.02            4.57           –32.27             48.07
                                  pre-crisis 2003–2006
             France      0.017          2.612          –18.873            15.975
           Germany      0.015           2.298          –12.877            13.383
             Greece     0.023           2.727          –20.373            29.483
            Ireland     –0.009          2.972          –17.929            37.100
               Italy    0.011           2.522          –15.973            22.799
           Portugal     0.008           2.832          –17.773            52.283
              Spain      0.014          2.517          –14.473            34.883
               U.K.     0.004           1.708           –7.073             7.734
                                post-Lehman 2008–2011
             France       0.05           5.66           –20.75             23.23
           Germany      –0.03           5.75            –22.05             19.44
             Greece      3.48           44.04          –650.83            400.86
            Ireland      0.81           17.48          –139.00             97.94
               Italy     0.39            8.73           –91.46             61.23
           Portugal      1.65           24.03          –315.65            253.74
              Spain      0.38            9.36          –107.86             43.16
               U.K.      0.01            7.04           –19.66             48.07


Notes: This table presents the summary statistics for daily bond spreads for different samples.




                                              41
                                  Figure 1: CDS Spreads (Levels)




Notes: This figure shows the levels of the CDS spreads. Left axes for all series apart Greece which is reported
on the right axes.




                                                      42
     Figure 2: Changes in CDS Spreads




43
     Notes: This figure shows the changes in CDS spreads.
                                                                                                                                                                                                 44
                                                                                                        0.2
                                                                                                              0.3
                                                                                                                         0.4
                                                                                                                                                         0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                           0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.8




                                                                                              Jan-09
                                                                                             Feb-09
                                                                                             Mar-09
                                                                                             Mar-09
                                                                                             Apr-09
                                                                                             Apr-09
                                                                                             May-09
                                                                                             May-09
                                                                                              Jun-09
                                                                                              Jun-09
                                                                                               Jul-09
                                                                                               Jul-09
                                                                                             Aug-09
                                                                                             Sep-09
                                                                                             Sep-09
                                                                                             Oct-09
                                                                                             Oct-09
                                                                                             Nov-09
                                                                                             Nov-09
                                                                                             Dec-09
                                                                                             Dec-09
                                                                                              Jan-10
                                                                                             Feb-10
                                                                                             Feb-10
                                                                                             Mar-10
                                                                                             Mar-10
                                                                                             Apr-10
                                                                                             Apr-10
                                                                                             May-10
                                                                                             May-10
                                                                                              Jun-10
                                                                                               Jul-10
                                                                                               Jul-10
                                                                                             Aug-10
                                                                                             Aug-10
                                                                                             Sep-10
                                                                                             Sep-10
                                                                                             Oct-10
                                                                                             Oct-10
                                                                                             Nov-10
                                                                                             Dec-10
                                                                                             Dec-10
                                                                                              Jan-11
                                                                                              Jan-11
                                                                                             Feb-11
                                                                                             Feb-11
                                                                                             Mar-11
                                                                                             Mar-11
                                                                                             Apr-11
                                                                                             May-11
                                                                                             May-11
                                                                                              Jun-11
                                                                                              Jun-11
                                                                                               Jul-11
                                                                                               Jul-11
                                                                                             Aug-11
                                                                                             Aug-11
                                                                                             Sep-11




                                                                                                                    UK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 3: CDS Average Rolling Correlation Among Countries




                                                                                                                                            ITALY


                                                                                                                         SPAIN
                                                                                                                                                               GREECE
                                                                                                                                                                                  FRANCE




                                                                                                                                                    IRELAND
                                                                                                                                                                        GERMANY




                                                                                                                                 PORTUGAL




Notes: This figure depicts a 60-days rolling window average correlation among CDS spreads.
   Figure 4: CDS Rolling Correlations between France and the Other Countries




                    (a) D: GERMANY                                  (b) ES: SPAIN




                     (c) GR: GREECE                               (d) IR: IRELAND




                       (e) IT: ITALY                             (f) PT: PORTUGAL




                                       (g) UK: UNITED KINGDOM
Notes: This figure depicts a 60-days rolling window average correlation between the (F) French CDS spreads
                                         those of the other countries.




                                                   45
         Figure 5: Exceedence Correlations (60-days)




(a) D & F                      (b) GR & D                        (c) GR & F




(d) IE & D                      (e) IE & F                      (f) IE & GR




(g) IT & D                      (h) IT & F                      (i) IT & GR




(j) IT & IE                     (k) PT & F                       (l) PT & D
        Notes: This figure shows the 60-days exceedence correlations




                                    46
Figure 6: Quantile Regression Coefficients for French CDS




  Notes: This figure shows the quantile regression coefficients for France.




                                     47
Figure 7: Quantile Regression Coefficients with Heteroskedasticity for French CDS


                   D(GERMANY)                                        D(GREECE)                                         D(IRELAND)
   1.6                                              0.07                                              0.24
                                                                                                      0.20
   1.2                                              0.05
                                                                                                      0.16
   0.8                                              0.03                                              0.12

   0.4                                              0.01                                              0.08
                                                                                                      0.04
   0.0                                             −0.01
                                                                                                      0.00
  −0.4                                             −0.03                                             −0.04
         0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1           0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1           0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1


                      D(ITALY)                                      D(PORTUGAL)                                           D(SPAIN)
  0.40                                              0.14                                              0.30
  0.35                                              0.12                                              0.25
  0.30                                              0.10                                              0.20
  0.25                                              0.08
                                                                                                      0.15
  0.20                                              0.06
  0.15                                                                                                0.10
                                                    0.04
  0.10                                              0.02                                              0.05
  0.05                                              0.00                                              0.00
         0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1           0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1           0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1



                        D(UK)
   1.0

   0.8

   0.6

   0.4

   0.2
         0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1

         Notes: This figure shows the quantile regression coefficients with heteroskedasticity for France.




                                                                       48
Figure 8: Quantile Regression Coefficients with Heteroskedasticity for German CDS

                    D(FRANCE)                                       D(GREECE)                                        D(IRELAND)
   0.8                                             0.00                                             0.08

                                                   0.03
   0.6                                                                                              0.06
                                                   0.02
   0.4                                                                                              0.04
                                                   0.01

   0.2                                             0.00                                             0.02
         0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1          0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1          0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1




                      D(ITALY)                                     D(PORTUGAL)                                          D(SPAIN)
  0.25                                             0.08                                             0.20
  0.20                                             0.06                                             0.15
  0.15
                                                   0.06                                             0.10
  0.10
  0.05                                             0.04                                             0.05

  0.00                                             0.02                                             0.00
         0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1          0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1          0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1



                        D(UK)
   0.6

   0.5

   0.4

   0.3

   0.2
         0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1




     Notes: This Figure shows the quantile regression coefficients with heteroskedasticity for Germany.




                                                                     49
Figure 9: Quantile Regression Coefficients with Heteroskedasticity for Italian CDS


                      FRANCE                                        GERMANY                                            GREECE
   3.0                                             3.0                                             0.20

   2.5                                             2.5                                             0.15

   2.0                                             2.0                                             0.10

                                                   1.5                                             0.05
   1.5
                                                   1.0                                             0.00
   1.0                                                   0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1          0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
         0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1


                                                                    PORTUGAL                                             SPAIN
                     IRELAND                                                                        1.0
   0.5                                             0.5

                                                                                                    0.9
   0.4                                             0.4
                                                                                                    0.8

   0.3                                             0.3
                                                                                                    0.7

   0.2                                             0.2                                              0.6
         0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1         0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1          0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1



                         UK
  1.5

  1.0

  0.5

  0.0
        0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1




          Notes: This figure shows the quantile regression coefficients with heteroskedasticity for Italy.




                                                                    50
   Figure 10: Average Rolling Variance




Notes: This figure reports the average rolling variance




                          51
Figure 11: Quantile regression coefficients for French Bond Spreads, 2008–2011




 Notes: This figure shows the quantile regression coefficients for French bond spreads over the sample
                                              2008–2011.




                                                  52
Figure 12: Quantile Regression Coefficients with Heteroskedasticity for French Bond
Spreads, 2008–2011



                   D(GERMANY)                                          D(GREECE)                                        D(IRELAND)
    1.6                                              0.16                                              0.20
    1.4                                              0.12                                              0.15
                                                     0.08                                              0.10
    1.2
                                                     0.04                                              0.05
    1.0
                                                     0.00                                              0.00
    0.8                                             −0.04                                             −0.05
    0.6                                             −0.08                                             −0.10
    0.4                                             −0.12                                             −0.15
          0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1           0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1           0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1



                     D(ITALYR)                                       D(PORTUGAL)                                           D(SPAIN)
   0.6                                               0.20                                               0.8
   0.5                                               0.15                                               0.6
   0.4                                               0.10                                               0.4
   0.3                                               0.05
   0.2                                                                                                  0.2
                                                    −0.00
   0.1                                                                                                  0.0
   0.0                                              −0.05
                                                    −0.10                                              −0.2
  −0.1
                                                    −0.15                                              −0.4
  −0.2
  −0.3                                              −0.20                                              −0.6
         0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1            0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1           0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1



                     D(UNIKIN)
   1.0
   0.8
   0.6
   0.4
   0.2
  −0.0
  −0.2
  −0.4
  −0.6
  −0.8
         0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1




Notes: This figure shows the quantile regression coefficients with heteroskedasticity for Italian bond spreads
                                        over the sample 2008–2011.




                                                                        53
Figure 13: Quantile Regression Coefficients for French Bond Spreads, 2003–2006




 Notes: This Figure shows the quantile regression coefficients for French bond spreads over the sample
                                              2003–2006.




                                                  54
Figure 14: Quantile Regression Coefficients with Heteroskedasticity for French Bond
Spreads, 2003–2006


                     D(GERMANY)                                        D(GREECE)                                        D(IRELAND)
    1.6                                              1.2                                              1.0

    1.2                                              1.0                                              0.8

                                                     0.8                                              0.6
    0.8
                                                     0.6                                              0.4
    0.4
                                                     0.4                                              0.2
    0.0                                                                                               0.0
                                                     0.2
   −0.4                                              0.0                                             −0.2
          0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1          0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1          0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1



                       D(ITALYR)                                      D(PORTUGAL)                                         D(SPAIN)
    1.4                                              1.6                                             1.50
    1.2                                              1.2                                             1.25
    1.0                                                                                              1.00
                                                     0.8
    0.8                                                                                              0.75
                                                     0.4
    0.6                                                                                              0.50
    0.4                                              0.0                                             0.25
    0.2                                             −0.4                                             0.00
          0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1          0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1          0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1

                       D(UNIKIN)
   1.4
   1.2
   1.0
   0.8
   0.6
   0.4
   0.2
   0.0
         0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1




Notes: This figure shows the quantile regression coefficients with heteroskedasticity for Italian bond spreads
                                        over the sample 2003–2006.




                                                                      55
Figure 15: Quantile Regression Coefficients for French Bond Spreads, 2003–2011




  Notes: This figure shows the quantile regression coefficients for French bond spreads over the sample
                                               2003–2011.




                                                   56
Figure 16: Quantile Regression Coefficients with Heteroskedasticity for French Bond
Spreads, 2003–2011


                     D(GERMANY)                                          D(GREECE)                                         D(IRELAND)
    1.1                                              0.100                                              0.20
    1.0                                              0.075                                              0.15
    0.9                                              0.050                                              0.10
    0.8                                              0.025                                              0.05
    0.7                                              0.000                                              0.00
    0.6                                             −0.025                                             −0.05
    0.5                                             −0.050                                             −0.10
          0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1            0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1           0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1



                        D(ITALYR)                                    D(PORTUGAL)                                            D(SPAIN)
    0.8                                                0.6                                                1
    0.6                                                0.5
                                                       0.4
    0.4
                                                       0.3
                                                                                                        0.5
    0.2                                                0.2
                                                       0.1
    0.0
                                                       0.0
   −0.2                                               −0.1                                                0
          0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1            0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1          0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1


                       D(UNIKIN)
    0.5
    0.4
    0.3
    0.2
    0.1
    0.0
   −0.1
          0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1




Notes: This figure shows the quantile regression coefficients with heteroskedasticity for Italian bond spreads
                                        over the sample 2003–2011.




                                                                        57
