                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    INCENTIVE EFFECTS OF INHERITANCES AND OPTIMAL ESTATE TAXATION

                                         Wojciech Kopczuk

                                        Working Paper 18747
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18747


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2013




This paper is prepared for May 2013 issue of the American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings.
I am grateful to Russell James, Rob McClelland, Emmanuel Saez, Bernard Salanie and Dan Silverman
for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Wojciech Kopczuk. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Incentive Effects of Inheritances and Optimal Estate Taxation
Wojciech Kopczuk
NBER Working Paper No. 18747
February 2013
JEL No. E21,H2

                                                ABSTRACT

I consider nonlinear taxation of income and bequests with a joy-of-giving bequest motive and explicitly
characterize the estate tax rate structure that maximizes social planner's welfare function. The solution
trades off correction of externality from giving and discouraging effort of children due to income effect
generated by bequests. The analysis shows that optimality of a positive tax on bequests in this context
rests on the strength of the effect of bequests on behavior of future generations, and suggests that inheritance
rather than estate tax is better suited to implement the corresponding policy.


Wojciech Kopczuk
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, Rm. 1022 IAB
MC 3323
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
wk2110@columbia.edu
   Estate taxation is a policy topic of continued interest. Despite rumors of its demise in
the United States where it was put on life support as the result of partial repeal in 2010,
its future now seems more alive. However, the economic literature on taxation of estates
is surprisingly inconclusive (see Kopczuk, 2013, for a recent survey). When generations
are linked by altruism and the objective function respects dynastic preferences, taxation of
estates is analogous to taxation of saving with identical baseline result of no taxation. In
a recent paper, Farhi and Werning (2010) allow for the social planner to value welfare of
children generation separately from the dynastic welfare and show that the corresponding
externality due to insufficient giving should be addressed by policy that subsidizes bequests
(albeit in a “progressive” manner). In a very stylized model, Kopczuk (2001) focuses on
steady state policies in the presence of non-altruistic bequest motive and shows that the
estate tax is a useful instrument. Piketty and Saez (2012) analyze linear taxation and many
different extensions of a steady state setup and generally find a role for taxation of bequests.
My objective is to clarify the key mechanisms at play in this literature.
   I consider joy-of-giving bequest motive and two generations: parents and children. The
model captures two key considerations. First, within any particular family bequests have a
positive externality because they benefit both parents and children. One can view this aspect
as a manifestation of the source of the common argument against taxing estates: they reflect
generosity not just self-interest.
   At the same time, bequests generate inequality in the children’s generation. While in-
equality induced by bequests has its ultimate source in the initial conditions (skill distribution
of parents), the key point is that tax on bequests plays an independent redistributive role
within the offspring generation. This is made stark by the joy-of-giving model that eliminates
interactions between the two generations. In contrast, the standard altruistic model would
assume that parents internalize incentives of children so that there would be no meaningful
distinction between redistribution among dynasties, parents and children.
   The objective of this note is to clarify economic assumptions that that determine the
optimal tax treatment of bequests in this situation. I show that the optimal bequest tax
formula is simple and intuitive and it reflects these two forces: correction of an externality
that pushes toward subsidies, and relaxing of children’s incentive constraints due to income



                                                1
effect that pushes toward taxation. The relative strength of these two effects determines the
optimal sign and magnitude of the tax in this model. I speculate that the tax structure
that maximizes social welfare in this context may in fact involve subsidies at the bottom and
taxation at the top of the distribution. I further suggest that inheritance rather than estate
tax may be a more suitable instrument here, because all determinants of the optimal policy
reflect characteristics of a child.
        The results also highlight the key empirical parameters of interest. It is the magnitude
of the income effect due to bequests that that influences the optimal tax rate. In contrast,
under the simple structure assumed in this paper, the direct effect of taxation on bequests
does not enter the optimal tax formula.


1        Model

1.1       Individuals

Consider two generations: parents (P ) and children (C). Parents are endowed with ability of
w distributed according to some distribution function H(w). The core of the analysis focuses
on decisions of parents and does not require an assumption about correlation of abilities. I
will proceed though through most of the discussion as if parents’ and children’s abilities are
identical but will later comment on implications of a departure from this assumption.1
        Consumption, bequests and labor income of generation i are denoted by C i , Y i and
B i , respectively. The corresponding labor supply is Y i /w. Bequest represents net value
of receipts by the donee. I will write tax functions of parents and children as T P (·) and
T C (·) and comment on their arguments after introducing individual preferences and budget
constraints.
        I assume that children’s preferences are given by

                                                          YC
                                                                       
                             C   P     C    C               P    C
                            u (B + C , Y ; w) = u B + C ,                   ,
                                                          w

so that children receive a bequest from their parents but do not leave their own bequest. C C is
    1
    The optimal tax schedule does depend on child’s characteristic and hence the implementation of the
optimal policy may require a tax on child’s side when correlation is not perfect.




                                                  2
consumption net of bequests (and overall consumption is B P + C C ); expressing consumption
in this form will be notationally convenient in what follows. Children’s budget constraint is
given by
                   B P + C C = B P + Y C − T C (Y C ) =⇒ C C = Y C − T C (Y C )

   Parents’ preferences are given by

                                                           YP
                                                             
                            P   P   P    P         P   P
                          u (C , Y , B ; w) = v g(C , B ),      .                             (1)
                                                           w

In particular, I assume here that utility function is weakly separable between income (or labor
supply) and other goods: by Atkinson-Stiglitz theorem, this implies that bequest taxation
would not be optimal if one considered parents’ generation in isolation.
   The budget constraint for parents is


                                C P + B P = Y P − T P (Y P , B P ) .                          (2)


To simplify notation I assume the rate of return of zero throughout, but an extension is
straightforward.
   I am going to posit in what follows that both parental labor income and parental bequest
are increasing with wage. The former requires standard agent-monotonicity condition, the
latter follows from weak separability.


1.2   Tax schedules

I made specific assumptions about tax instruments. Tax liability of children was assumed
to be T C (Y C ) and that of the parents is T P (B P , Y P ). Putting bequest tax liability on the
parents’ side has subtle implications. It rules out an interaction of taxes on bequests and
child’s income, that may be useful in the presence of two-dimensional (bequests and wages)
heterogeneity among children. It also eliminates the possibility that behavioral response
of children may affect the actual net-of-tax transfer and hence warm-grow accruing to the
parents. While such strategic interactions are in general very interesting, the objective here is
to keep the model as simple as possible in order to make the key mechanism stark. I proceed
by ruling out the possibility of integration of inheritance and income taxation of donees.

                                                 3
    In practice, taxation that allows for interaction of inheritance and child’s income is not
common, but it is not inconceivable: inter vivos gifts are in some countries included in income
tax base and the short-lived 1894 U.S. income-and-inheritance tax integrated the two (see
Batchelder, 2009, for discussion).
    The solution method assumes that parents take children income as given and children
take bequests as given. In the presence of perfect correlation of ability this assumption is
not restrictive. When there is imperfect correlation in wages, the optimal tax formula will in
fact depend on children characteristics in a way that could not be implemented using a tax
on parents alone. Hence, one should interpret the results as applying strictly to the perfect
correlation case alone, but also as highlighting that a tax on children’s side is likely to be
necessary in general.
    In what follows, I will exploit the structure that weak separability imposes on the response
to marginal tax rates. In order to characterize the effect of changes in marginal tax rates,
consider tax schedule T̃ P (Y, B) = T (Y, B) + (τ Y − TY∗ )(Y − Y ∗ ) + (τ B − TB∗ )(B − B ∗ ) for some
                           ∂T (Y ∗ ,B ∗ )
(B ∗ , Y ∗ ) where TX∗ =       ∂X         ,   X ∈ {B, Y }. Weakly separable preferences in (1) imply that
given Y P an individual needs to maximize g(C P , B P ) subject to the budget constraint 2
(with T̃ in place of T ). Hence, we can write B P (τ B , τ Y , Y P (τ B , τ Y )).
                                       .
                                ∂Y P       ∂Y P
Lemma 1 Denote Γ ≡              ∂τ B       ∂τ Y
                                                  . Given weakly separable preferences (1), the effect of a
change in τ B on the size of bequest evaluated at (B ∗ , Y ∗ ) can be expressed as

                                               dB P   ∂B P   dB P
                                                    =      +      ·Γ
                                               dτ B   ∂τ B   dτ Y

and the effect on tax liability of parents is

                                              dT̃ P     B ∂B
                                                             P   dT̃ P
                                                    = τ        +       ·Γ
                                              dτ B        ∂τ B   dτ Y

PROOF:
                                         dB P       P    ∂B P ∂Y P              ∂ T̃ P
    Total effect of τ B on B P is        dτ B
                                               = ∂B
                                                 ∂τ B
                                                      + ∂Y   P ∂τ B . Note that ∂τ Y     = 0 when evaluated
                       ∂B P                    P    ∂B P ∂Y P
at Y = Y ∗ , so that    ∂τ Y
                                =0     and dB
                                            dτ Y
                                                 = ∂Y  P ∂τ Y . Combining the two        yields the first part.
                                                                                                P     dT̃ P ∂Y P
Analogously, the overall impact on revenue of changes in τ B and τ Y is τ B ∂B
                                                                            ∂τ B
                                                                                 +                    dY P ∂τ B




                                                            4
      dT̃ P ∂Y P
and   dY P ∂τ Y
                   , respectively, yielding the second part.
   This result is simply saying that under weak separability the effect of a modification
in marginal bequest tax rate may be decomposed into own price response holding labor
income constant and the effect of a change in the equivalent marginal labor income tax rate.
Furthermore, given a change in the marginal bequest tax rate ∆τ B , the corresponding change
in labor income tax is given by Γ · ∆τ B .


1.3      Government

I assume that government intends to maximize welfare given by

                                           Z
                                               uP + βuC dH(w)


with β representing social planner’s discounting of utility of future generations. Note that
the utility from giving is part of parents’ utility and hence is counted as part of the overall
welfare.
   I make the standard assumption in the optimal taxation literature that w is not observ-
able but that other variables (C P , Y P , B P , C C , Y C ) are. As discussed before, the overall tax
liability from a given dynasty is assumed to be T (Y P , B P , Y C ) = T P (Y P , B P ) + T C (Y C ).
The objective of the policy is to maximize welfare subject to the revenue constraint Q =
  T (Y P , B P , Y C ) dH(w) (where Q is the revenue requirement), and while respecting individ-
R

ual optimization.


1.4      Characterizing the optimum

I will provide a heuristic characterization of the solution. The obvious background result here
is the Atkinson-Stiglitz theorem. From the parent generation’s perspective, bequests are a
good like any other, so that maximization of welfare of that generation in isolation would
involve no tax on bequests when preferences are weakly separable between labor and other
goods.
   There are two departures from this way of thinking here. First, bequests benefit children
and therefore yield a positive externality. Second, bequests may change behavior of children
and hence affect welfare through fiscal externality.

                                                     5
       Consider some initial tax schedule for the parents, T P (Y, B), pick an individual w∗ with
                                                                                       ∂T P (Y,B)                 ∂T P (Y,B)
the corresponding optimal allocation (Y ∗ , B ∗ ) and denote τ B =                        ∂B         and τ Y =       ∂Y      .
       To derive the optimal tax formula, I consider a perturbation to the optimal tax schedule
for bequests. In particular, note that the argument does not require that the labor income
tax for parents and/or children is optimal (though they obviously could be). Although
the implementation is somewhat different, the whole approach is conceptually similar to
arguments of Saez (2002), Laroque (2005) and Kaplow (2006) who analyzed the Atkinson-
Stiglitz result.
       Let the set of individuals with bequests in (B ∗ , B ∗ +η) be given as (w∗ , w∗ +∆w), and the
corresponding range of incomes be (Y ∗ , Y ∗ + ξ). I will introduce two offsetting perturbations
to bequest and labor taxation.
       Consider a small positive change ∆τ in the marginal bequest tax rate and tie the change
in τ Y to it as ∆τ Y = ηξ ∆τ B to yield the perturbed tax schedule as follows:


  T̃ P (Y, B) = T (Y, B) + ∆τ B · (B − B ∗ ) · I{B ∈ (B ∗ , B ∗ + η)} + ∆τ B · η · I{B ≥ B ∗ + η}

                             −∆τ Y · (Y − Y ∗ ) · I{Y ∈ (Y ∗ , Y ∗ + ξ)} − ∆τ Y · ξ · I{Y ≥ Y ∗ + ξ}

The schedule is modified for individuals with wages in (w∗ , w∗ + ∆w) in the corresponding
ranges of B and Y . Within these small ranges (of size η and ξ respectively), the marginal tax
rate on bequests increases and the marginal tax rate on labor income declines. Note that the
perturbation implies that there is no change in statutory or actual (because perturbation is
inframarginal) tax liability at (B ∗ +η, Y ∗ +ξ) and for any individual with w 6∈ (w∗ , w∗ +∆w).
                                                     Y
                                                                     . P
                                                          η     ∂Y P
    One can also show that for small ∆τ B , ∆τ    ∆τ B
                                                       =  ξ  ≈  ∂τ B
                                                                      ∂Y
                                                                      ∂τ Y
                                                                           = Γ,2 as defined in
Lemma 1. Hence, decomposition in that Lemma turns out to be extremely useful for analyzing
the impact of the perturbation: for those affected, the effect of the simultaneous bequest-
   2
      Adapting proof of Lemma 1 in Saez (2002), for a given person w∗ define ∆τ̃ Y (Y −Y ∗ ) to be a perturbation
of a labor income tax schedule starting at (Y ∗ , B ∗ ) that yields exactly the same level of utility for any
Y as does the perturbation in bequest tax rate by ∆τ B starting at B ∗ . By construction, the same value
                                                                       P                         P
of Y is optimal for both perturbations so that we have to have ∂Y   ∂τ Y
                                                                         ∆τ̃ Y (Y − Y ∗ ) = ∂Y∂τ Y
                                                                                                   ∆τ B , and thus
    Y       P
              .    P
∆τ̃
∆τ B
       = ∂Y
         ∂τ Y
                ∂Y
                ∂τ Y
                     . Because both of these changes have to have exactly the same effect on maximized utility,
                                      dU P            dU P
we need to have for small changes     dτ B
                                             ∆τ B =   dτ Y
                                                             ∆τ̃ Y and an application of the envelope to both sides
                                                                        ∆τ̃ Y       Y −Y ∗
implies −uC (B − B )∆τ = −uC (Y − Y )∆τ̃ (Y − Y ∗ ) so that
                    ∗    B                   ∗   Y
                                                                        ∆τ B
                                                                                =   B−B ∗
                                                                                           .   Putting it together, it implies
                        . P
            −Y ∗   ∂Y P
that ηξ = YB−B ∗ = ∂τ Y
                         ∂Y
                         ∂τ Y
                              .




                                                             6
                                          P               
                                                   dB P                               ∂B P
labor perturbation on bequests is simply dB
                                          dτ B
                                               −   dτ Y
                                                        · Γ  ∆τ B =                   ∂τ B
                                                                                             ∆τ B and the effect on
                    P         P
                                                  P
parental revenue is dT
                     dτ B
                          − dT
                            dτ Y
                                 · Γ ∆τ B = τ B ∂B
                                                ∂τ B
                                                     ∆τ B .
    We are now in a position to evaluate the overall impact of this perturbation on welfare.
It can be decomposed into three effects: direct impact on welfare, direct impact on revenue
and a change in revenue due to behavioral response.
    For individuals outside the interval (w∗ , w∗ + ∆w), both perturbations have identical and
exactly offsetting lump-sum implications so that neither revenue nor welfare is affected.
    For individuals within (w∗ , w∗ + ∆w), the offsetting changes in marginal tax rates on
bequest and labor income imply canceling effects on welfare of parents. However, the size of
bequest is affected due to substitution response, so that the net effect on children’s welfare
         ∂uC       ∂B P
is β ·   ∂C    ·   ∂τ B
                          .
                                                                         P
    By Lemma 1 revenue from parents changes by τ B ∂B
                                                   ∂τ B
                                                        .
    Finally, bequests have also an effect on revenue from children: this effect is given by
   0               ∂Y C       ∂B P
T C (Y C ) ·       ∂B P
                          ·   ∂τ B
                                     , i.e. it reflects the response of parental bequest, its impact on child’s
effort and the revenue implications.


1.5      Result and interpretation

Recalling that at the optimum a perturbation of the tax schedule should have no welfare
impact, denoting the multiplier on the revenue constraint by ρ and putting it all together
implies
                        ∂uC ∂B P                 P             C    P
                                                                     
                                           B ∂B       C0 C ∂Y ∂B
                     β·    ·     ∆τ + ρ · τ ·      + T (Y )             ∆τ = 0
                        ∂C ∂τ B               ∂τ B          ∂B P ∂τ B

Simplifying yields the main result:

                                            ∂B P
Theorem 1 Suppose that                      ∂τ B
                                                   is nonzero and finite. The optimal marginal tax rate on
bequests is given by
                                                       ∂uC −1      0         ∂Y C
                                          τ B = −β ·      · ρ − T C (Y C ) ·      .
                                                       ∂C                    ∂B P

The first term on the right-hand side is the correction of an externality from giving and is
the sole effect present and studied in Farhi and Werning (2010). It is negative, reflecting
that a gift to children is double-blessed, because it provides both (internalized) utility to
the parent and (non-internalized) utility to the child. If one additionally assumed additive


                                                               7
                                    ∂uC
separability of the utility, then   ∂C    would be just a function of B P + C P and hence would
be unambiguously declining. This term is also different than the naı̈ve first-best Pigouvian
                                                      u0 (B P (w)+C C (w))
prescription which would call for a subsidy of               u0 (C P )
                                                                           .   This is because correcting
the externality is a project that is costly in terms of government’s funds and that cost is
uniformly equal to ρ for all individuals, so that correcting externality at high consumption
levels is not as worthwhile (this is precisely the mechanism that implies declining marginal
subsidies in Farhi and Werning, 2010).
   The second term is new. Expecting, as is natural, that the marginal income tax rate
                               0                                                               ∂Y C
for children is positive T C (Y ) > 0 and that income is a normal good so that                 ∂B P
                                                                                                      ≤ 0,
the contribution of the second term is unambiguously positive. This is intuitive. Bequests
have an income effect which makes lower-effort alternatives more attractive. This effect is
costly from the policy maker’s point of view because lower effort reduces revenue. Hence, the
optimal policy should counteract by taxing bequests.
   It is the interaction of these two effects that determines the overall rate. What might one
expect regarding their size? Recall that the result does not require that the children’s tax
                                                                                  0
schedule be optimal. Consider then a constant marginal tax rate T C (Y C ) > 0 and suppose
       ∂Y C
that   ∂B P
              = constant < 0. In such a case, because under natural assumptions marginal utility
of income declines to zero as skill level increases, for high enough skill type the second effect
will dominate and the optimal tax rate will become positive. At the same time, it is of course
possible to expect that the tax rate may be negative. Trivially, it will be the case when
there is no tax on the children side. It may also be the case for low-skilled dynasties with
corresponding strong externality effect, and when the incentive effect is weak. In general,
one could see subsidies in some parts of the distribution and taxation in others. There is
no reason to believe that these qualitative speculations would not apply in the fully optimal
tax scheme. In particular, since for high-skilled individuals the first term vanishes, then
whenever the optimal marginal income tax rate at the top is positive and income effect does
not disappear, the bequest tax would have to be positive as well.


1.6     Comments

There are a number of interesting observations in the context of this result.



                                                  8
    Somewhat surprisingly, the effect of taxation on the size of bequest does not enter the
formula. This is because all costs and benefits — the revenue loss due to response by parents,
the revenue loss due to disincentives for children and welfare gain due to higher bequests —
are proportional to the magnitude of parental response.
                                           ∂B P
    The proposition requires though that   ∂τ B
                                                  6= 0 (and finite). When it is not the case, the
whole formula need not apply. Inelastic bequests with the joy-of-giving model are a knife-
edge case, but there are of course alternative bequest motives, such as wealth-in-utility or
accidental bequests that straightforwardly generate inelastic bequests. In the wealth-in-utility
case, the optimal policy would call for confiscating bequests while the accidental bequest case
requires addressing the underlying market failure (Kopczuk, 2003).
    The crucial assumption that plays a role here is that parental bequests interact with
incentive constraints of the child. While the analysis here was based on variation to the
optimal policy and did not highlight incentive constraints explicitly, the mechanism is clear:
transfers weaken work incentives and hence make the incentive constraints tighter. It is
important to note that while the presence of this effect has a strong intuitive appeal, it
required deviating from the assumption of perfect altruism. It is ultimately an empirical
question of how important it is.
    All components of the optimal tax formula depend on information about a child. This
suggests that in this model a tax on the donee side — i.e., a tax on inheritances — may be
preferred to a tax on estates. An additively separable tax on the donee side is equivalent to
a tax on the parent side and hence covered by this analysis. More general tax on the donee
side would be necessary to allow for additional flexibility when wages of parents and children
are imperfectly correlated. Since the optimal bequest tax schedule in Theorem 1 depends on
both the size of a bequest and characteristics of the donee, a tax that does not incorporate
information about the donee will not be able to implement it unless observing donor provides
the same information. Explicitly considering such an extension is left for future work.


2    Conclusions

The analysis in this paper demonstrated that when incentives of children are not fully inter-
nalized by parents, there is a role for discouraging bequests through taxation. The argument


                                                  9
was made in the context of a joy-of-giving bequest motive but the key force is likely to be
much more general: when transfers have income effect on donee behavior, they make incentive
constraints tighter or, equivalently, have fiscal externality.
   The key element of the optimal tax formula in the model considered here is the effect
of bequests on behavior of donee. Its magnitude is an empirical question. Limited work on
this topic has found some evidence of adverse labor supply responsiveness using variation in
inheritances and other sources of wealth shocks (see Kopczuk, 2013, for references). Some
other channels through which inheritance affects donees such as liquidity, entrepreneurship
and firm-performance effects have also been analyzed and could be explicitly incorporated in
this framework.
   Finally, the paper considers only a very particular bequest motive. The leading alternative
— the altruistic motive — is not able to explain wealth accumulation at the top of the
distribution (and has mixed support elsewhere), and the analysis here shows that departing
from it changes significantly policy implications. As Kopczuk (2013) extensively discusses,
the evidence on bequest motives suggests that they are heterogeneous across individuals and
are not mutually exclusive for a given individual. Sorting out empirical explanations and
understanding their optimal policy implications remains an important research agenda.




                                                10
References

Batchelder, Lily L. 2009. “What Should Society Expect from Heirs? A Proposal for a
  Comprexensive Inheritance Tax.” Tax Law Review, 63(1): 1–111.

Farhi, Emmanuel, and Iván Werning. 2010. “Progressive Estate Taxation.” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 125(2): 635–73.

Kaplow, Louis. 2006. “On the Undesirability of Commodity Taxation Even When Income
  Taxation is Not Optimal.” Journal of Public Economics, 90(6-7): 1235–50.

Kopczuk, Wojciech. 2001. “Optimal Estate Taxation in the Steady State.” University of
  Michigan, mimeo.

Kopczuk, Wojciech. 2003. “The Trick is to Live: Is the Estate Tax Social Security for the
  Rich?” Journal of Political Economy, 111(6): 1318–1341.

Kopczuk, Wojciech. 2013. “Taxation of Intergenerational Transfers and Wealth.” In Hand-
  book of Public Economics. Vol. 5, , ed. Alan J. Auerbach, Raj Chetty and Emmanuel Saez.
  forthcoming.

Laroque, Guy. 2005. “Indirect Taxation is Superfluous under Separability and Taste Ho-
  mogeneity: A Simple Proof.” Economics Letters, 87(1): 141–44.

Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2012. “A Theory of Optimal Inheritance Taxa-
  tion.” Paris School of Economics and UC Berkeley, mimeo.

Saez, Emmanuel. 2002. “The Desirability of Commodity Taxation under Non-Linear In-
  come Taxation and Heterogeneous Tastes.” Journal of Public Economics, 83(2): 217–320.




                                           11
