                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      COLLEGE AS COUNTRY CLUB:
     DO COLLEGES CATER TO STUDENTS’ PREFERENCES FOR CONSUMPTION?

                                              Brian Jacob
                                             Brian McCall
                                            Kevin M. Stange

                                         Working Paper 18745
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18745


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2013




We would like to thank Jon Bartik, Michael Gelman, Jonathan Hershaff, Max Kapustin, Geoff Perrin,
Nathan Schwartz, Elias Walsh, and Tamara Wilder for their research assistance. We would also like
to recognize the valuable comments and suggestions provided by various seminar and conference participants.
We also thank Bridget Terry Long for sharing her data. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Brian Jacob, Brian McCall, and Kevin M. Stange. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
College as Country Club: Do Colleges Cater to Students’ Preferences for Consumption?
Brian Jacob, Brian McCall, and Kevin M. Stange
NBER Working Paper No. 18745
January 2013
JEL No. I20,I21,I23,J01,J18

                                                ABSTRACT

This paper investigates whether demand-side market pressure explains colleges’ decisions to provide
consumption amenities to their students. We estimate a discrete choice model of college demand using
micro data from the high school classes of 1992 and 2004, matched to extensive information on all
four-year colleges in the U.S. We find that most students do appear to value college consumption amenities,
including spending on student activities, sports, and dormitories. While this taste for amenities is broad-based,
the taste for academic quality is confined to high-achieving students. The heterogeneity in student
preferences implies that colleges face very different incentives depending on their current student body
and the students who the institution hopes to attract. We estimate that the elasticities implied by our
demand model can account for 16 percent of the total variation across colleges in the ratio of amenity
to academic spending, and including them on top of key observable characteristics (sector, state, size,
selectivity) increases the explained variation by twenty percent.


Brian Jacob                                             Kevin M. Stange
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy                  University of Michigan
University of Michigan                                  Ford School of Public Policy
735 South State Street                                  5236 Weill Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                                     735 S. State Street
and NBER                                                Ann Arbor, MI 48109-3091
bajacob@umich.edu                                       kstange@umich.edu

Brian McCall
2108B School of Education
University of Michigan
610 East University Ave.
Ann Arbor MI 48109-1259
bpmccall@umich.edu
          “Share of College Spending for Recreation is Rising” (New York Times 2010).
              “Colleges’ new rec centers lure students.” (Columbus Dispatch 2011)
                  “Resort Living Comes to College.” (Wall Street Journal 2012).


I. Introduction

         In line with the human capital framework developed by Becker (1964), economists

typically model education as an investment wherein individuals forgo current labor market

earnings and incur direct costs in return for higher future wages. While this framework does not

rule out that education may also provide immediate consumption, such consumption aspects

have received little attention in the literature. 1 Recently, however, there has been increasing

attention devoted to the recreation that accompanies investment in higher education, as

illustrated by the newspaper headlines above. 2                  The media attention coincides with an

accumulation of evidence on limited student learning (Arum and Roksa, 2011), diminished study

effort (Babcock and Marks, 2011), and declining graduation rates (Bound, Lovenhiem, and

Turner, 2010).

         While the evidence on whether colleges today devote a greater share of resources to

consumption and recreational amenities than they have in the past is inconclusive, it is clear that

there is substantial heterogeneity in the emphasis that institutions place on amenities (Jacob,

McCall and Stange 2013a). 3 In 2007, for example, the average ratio of amenity to academic

spending was 0.51 across the roughly 1,300 four-year public and private non-profit

1
  Exceptions include Schultz (1963) and Oreopoulos and Salvanes (2011). Some related literature describes the
benefits that education confers on subsequent household production as a “consumption aspect” of education in the
sense that it increases the efficiency of future consumption (see Michaels 1973). These benefits of education would
not count as consumption value in our framework as they accrue post-schooling.
2
  The focus on recreation is not new, as suggested by Tunis (1939, p.7): “Boys and girls and their parents too often
choose an educational institution for strange reasons: because it has lots of outdoor life; a good football team; a
lovely campus; because the president or the dean or some professor is such a nice man.”
3
  Throughout this paper, we use institutional spending in areas such as instruction, academic support, student
services and auxiliary services as proxies for the academic and consumption amenities offered by institutions.
While it is not obvious ex-ante that the spending measures we use are good proxies for “consumption” vs.
“academic” amenities, Section V presents several different pieces of evidence to support this assumption.



                                                         2
postsecondary institutions in the United States. The ratio varied tremendously, from .26 at the

10th percentile to .80 at the 90th percentile. Thus different institutions make very different choices

about the optimal level of consumption amenities to offer their students. While there are several

systematic patterns to this heterogeneity – for instance, public institutions spend relatively less

on consumption amenities– the sources of these patterns have not been previously explored.

       This paper investigates whether this spending variation is attributable to heterogeneity in

the demand-side pressure institutions face. Some observers have argued that increased market

pressure has compelled some colleges to cater to students’ desires for leisure (Kirp 2005),

possibly distracting students from college’s primary mission of education. To investigate this,

we estimate the demand consequences of each institution’s spending decisions and examine how

this demand-side pressure correlates with colleges’ provision of consumption amenities. Do

institutions that face a greater enrollment response to changes in consumption amenities devote

more of their resources to this attribute, as a simple revenue-maximizing model would predict?

       Institution-specific demand elasticities come from simulations of an estimated discrete

choice model of student demand where students care about net price, academic quality,

consumption amenities, proximity, and peer composition. This approach is in the spirit of the

standard differentiated product demand models used to study product demand (e.g. Berry,

Levinsohn, Pakes, 1995), residential choice (e.g. Bayer, Ferreira, McMillan, 2007), and school

choice (e.g. Hastings, Kane, and Staiger, 2009), among others. Student preference parameters are

inferred from observed college choices, where each college is a bundle of observed and

unobserved characteristics.

       We find that many students do appear to value college consumption amenities. More

importantly, we find significant heterogeneity of preferences across students, with higher




                                                  3
achieving students having a greater willingness-to-pay for academic quality than their less

academically-oriented peers and wealthier students much more willing to pay for consumption

amenities. This demand pattern holds after accounting for several shortcomings in much of the

prior work on college choice. Specifically, our estimation accounts for (i) unobserved choice set

variability created by selective admissions, (ii) fixed unobserved differences between schools,

(iii) price discounting, and (iv) preference heterogeneity, which permits more flexible

substitution patterns across institutions.

       Preference heterogeneity has important implications for the postsecondary market since it

results in different colleges facing very different resource allocation incentives depending on the

characteristics of students on their enrollment margin. More selective schools have a much

greater incentive to improve academic quality since this is the dimension most valued by their

marginal students. Less selective (but expensive) schools, by comparison, have a greater

incentive to focus on consumption amenities. The elasticities implied by our demand model can

account for sixteen percent of the total variation in the ratio of amenity to instructional spending

between colleges, and including them on top of key observable characteristics (sector, state, size,

selectivity) increases the explained variation by twenty percent. While the development and

estimation of a full general equilibrium model of postsecondary supply and demand is beyond

the scope of this paper, we conclude that higher education institutions do respond to the demand

pressure they face along this important non-price dimension.

       The importance of market pressure to the behavior of higher education institutions has

not been thoroughly examined. Our analysis is in the spirit of Hoxby (1997), who shows that

changes in the level of competition in the U.S. higher education market explain changes in

tuition and quality. This analysis, along with most of the rest of the literature, focuses on the role




                                                  4
of academic quality and cost, while we examine another dimension on which colleges compete.

Our demand model also expands the range of college characteristics examined in college choice

models, demonstrating that consumption amenities are an empirically important factor

determining the sorting of students to colleges and thus deserve more attention.

         Characterizing the incentive differences across colleges is a first step towards

understanding how student preferences may influence the functioning of the postsecondary

market. One important implication is that for many institutions, demand-side market pressure

may not compel investment in academic quality, but rather in consumption amenities. This is an

important finding given that quality assurance is primarily provided by demand-side pressure:

the fear of losing students is believed to compel colleges to provide high levels of academic

quality. Our findings call this accountability mechanism into question. A parallel finding has

started to emerge in the hospital market, where patient amenities are a much stronger driver of

hospital demand than clinical quality (Goldman and Romley, 2008, Goldman, Vaiana, Romley,

2010). However, our findings do not speak to the normative issue of whether consumption

amenities are good or bad for students and taxpayers. 4

         The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section reviews prior work on

the higher education market and on the consumption value of education. Section III presents a

simple model of college’s amenity decisions as related to demand pressure and describes how

differences in demand pressure across institutions stems from student preference heterogeneity.

Section IV introduces our empirical strategy and elaborates on the identification challenges. Our

data sources are discussed in Section V. The estimates of our choice model are presented in


4
  Spending on consumption amenities could actually have a positive impact on student outcomes (Webber and
Ehrenberg, 2010). There is also a vast literature that finds substantial returns to academic quality (Black and Smith,
2004; Hoekstra 2009), though none of these studies have attempted to separate the returns to academic quality from
the returns to consumption amenities, though these college attributes are positively correlated.



                                                          5
Section VI. Section VII uses the choice model to characterize the demand-side pressure faced by

colleges and its relation to colleges’ spending priorities. Section VIII concludes.

II. Prior literature

Despite the vast literature on the returns to education and college choice, there has been

relatively little analysis of the market for higher education. In the seminal model of the higher

education market, Rothschild and White (1993, 1995) stress complementarities between

students’ academic aptitude and colleges’ academic resources. Their key finding is that

complementarity results in vertical differentiation and efficient sorting of students to colleges.

Hoxby (1997, 2009) describes several important changes in the market structure and shows how

they have affected college price and quality. She demonstrates that the declining cost of air

travel and telecommunications along with the rise of standardized college admissions testing and

subsequent decline in colleges’ informational costs have made the undergraduate market more

competitive. Students are increasingly willing to consider schools outside of their immediate

geographic area or even state. As predicted by economic theory, this has increased the tuition,

subsidies and prices of colleges on average and led to greater between-college variation in

tuition, subsidies and student quality. Epple, Romano and Sieg (2006) develop an equilibrium

model of the market for higher education that incorporates student admissions, financial aid and

educational outcomes. Consistent with Hoxby, their model generates substantial between college

heterogeneity in student outcomes.

       While this existing literature demonstrates that colleges do respond to market incentives,

it has primarily focused on price, geographic location, and academic aspects of colleges. The

role of consumption amenities as a competitive dimension in the market has not been previously




                                                 6
investigated. We extend the existing models by allowing colleges to attract students with the

choice of different levels of academic versus amenity spending.

        The relative lack of attention to the market for higher education stands in contrast to the

larger literature on college choice. Since the seminal work of Manski and Wise (1983), many

empirical models of college choice have focused on estimating the importance of price, academic

quality and distance. For example, Long (2004) estimates a conditional logit model using data

on high school graduates in 1972, 1982 and 1992. She finds that the role of college costs and

distance became less important over this period while proxies for college academic quality such

as instructional expenditures per student became more important over time. 5

        Only a few studies have explored consumption aspects of college quantitatively. Using a

panel of NCAA Division 1 sports schools, Pope and Pope (2008, 2009) find that football and

basketball success increases the quantity of applications colleges receive and the number of

students sending SAT scores. Since the additional applications come from both high and low

SAT scoring students, colleges are able to increase both the number and quality of incoming

students following sports success. Alter and Reback (2012) find that changes in both academic

and quality-of-life reputations listed in two popular college guidebooks affect the number of

applicants received and the quality and geographic diversity of incoming students.

        Another literature attempts to quantify the consumption (and other non-pecuniary) value

of education. This research typically compares observed schooling to the financially optimal

amount or type, concluding that schooling itself must contribute directly to utility if individuals

consume a level or type of schooling that is not financially optimal (Lazear, 1977; Schaafsma,

1976; Kodde and Ritzen, 1984; Oosterbeek and Ophem, 2000; see also a related approach taken


5Other papers that estimate the willingness to pay for academic quality include McDuff (2007), Monks and
Ehrenberg (1999) and Griffith and Rask (2007).



                                                       7
by Heckman et al. 1999, Carniero et al. 2003 and Brand and Xie 2010, Alstadsæte, 2011,

Arcidiacono, 2004). Unfortunately, these approaches are not able to separate an individual’s

preference for a particular type of work from consumption value during schooling. The choice to

attend college or pursue a specific major implies a particular career path, which incorporates not

only monetary rewards, but different working conditions and, indeed, a different “type” of work

that may provide different direct utility to individuals.                  In this way, these studies differ

substantially from this paper in focus and approach. 6

    III. A Simple Model of College Expenditures by Type

        To illustrate how demand pressure may influence institutions’ amenity decisions, we

develop a simple model of college resource allocation. Let there be j =1 ,…, J colleges and i =

1,2, …, N college students. For simplicity we will assume that there are two (non-price) college

attributes: academic quality A and consumption amenities C. Colleges have a price equal to T.

For simplicity we will also assume that students are characterized by two characteristics

(preferences) for colleges denoted by α and γ along with their income I where α is a student’s

preference for academic quality and γ their preference for consumption amenities. Also denote

the preference parameter for income as β. We denote the distribution of these characteristics

across the population of college students by G, so N = ∫ dG ( β , α , γ , I )
                                                                                     .

        Assume that colleges maximize net revenues πj and for simplicity that the only revenues

that they receive are tuition revenues. Also assume for now that everybody pays the same

tuition. Finally assume, perhaps for historical reasons, that colleges have different technologies

(costs) in producing academic quality and consumption amenities. Denote this per student cost


6
 Our approach is somewhat related to the approach of Jacob and Lefgren (2007). They find that wealthy parents
want teachers that both teach and increase student satisfaction. This latter aspect could be considered “consumption
value” in our framework.



                                                          8
function by rj(Aj ,Cj ). So, college j will choose Aj , Cj and Tj to maximize

                           =π j N j (T j , Aj , C j ) × {T j − rj ( Aj , C j )}

where

                          =
                          Nj        ∫=
                                     P( y  j   1| T j , Aj , C j , β , α , γ , I )dG ( β , α , γ , I )

and P( y j = 1| T j , Aj , C j , β , α , γ , I ) represents the probability that a student with characteristics α,

γ, β and I attends college j and is a result of optimization decisions made by students. To simplify

matters we assume that this probability has a logit form. So,

                                      exp( β ( I − T j ) + α Aj + γ C j )
                           Nj = ∫    J
                                                                                 dG ( β , α , γ , I )
                                    ∑ exp(β ( I − T ) + α A
                                    k =1
                                                       k          k   + γ Ck )


If we further assume that costs are additively separable for the two amenities,

rj ( Aj ,=
         C j ) rjA Aj + rjC C j , then the first order conditions for maximizing πj expressed in terms of

elasticities are:

                            N            N                N
                        πξT = + N 0, πξ A −=
                                           rA N 0, and πξC −=
                                                            rC N 0
                            T            A                C

                                                           or

                                  πξT = −T , πξ A = ArA , and πξC = CrC ,

where ξT , ξ A and ξC are elasticities of enrollment with respect to price, academic quality and

                                                                                                         A* ξ A rC
consumption amenities respectively. Taking the ratio of the latter two gives                              =    × , and
                                                                                                         C * ξC rA

taking the logs of both sides of this equation yields an expression for the optimal ratio between

consumption and academic spending:




                                                            9
                                                C* 
                                            ln  *  = ln ξC − ln ξ A + ln rA − ln rC .          (1)
                                               A 

Thus the optimal ratio between consumption amenities and academic quality will depend

positively on the enrollment elasticity with respect to consumption and negatively on the

enrollment elasticity with respect to academic quality. 7

           Rather than specify ex-ante which institutions have enrollment that is more or less

sensitive to consumption amenities or academic quality, we instead estimate ξC and ξ A from a

discrete choice demand model. Variation in demand elasticities across institutions comes from

variation in preferences across students combined with differences across institutions in the

underlying distribution of students who are on their enrollment margin. If preferences differ

between groups of students (e.g. high SES vs. low SES), an institution’s total enrollment

elasticity is a weighted average of group-specific elasticities with weights proportional to each

group’s prevalence in the population and initial enrollment likelihood at that institution. Thus,

institutions operating in a market with many amenity-sensitive students or with a large share of

their enrollment coming from such students will experience large overall demand shifts in

response to changes in their amenity offerings. This insight motivates our focus on preference

heterogeneity as a source of heterogeneity in the demand pressure institutions face. Appendix A

provides a more formal derivation of this result. With these elasticities in hand, our approach is

essentially to estimate a version of equation (1) above including many observable college

characteristics to control for the possible correlation between elasticities and (ln rA − ln rC ) .




7
    Mathematical details of these models are available from the authors upon request.



                                                           10
IV. Empirical Strategy for Estimating Demand

        Our objective is to estimate student willingness to pay for various attributes of college in

order to calculate the demand elasticities that individual colleges face. To do so, we estimate a

discrete choice model of college choice, building on the approach taken by Manski and Wise

(1983) and Long (2004). We extend the prior work in four important ways, accounting for: (i)

choice set variability created by selective admissions, (ii) fixed unobserved differences between

schools, (iii) individual-specific price discounting, and (iv) preference heterogeneity. In this

section, we describe the basic setup, the innovations in our approach and the remaining

limitations.

A. Basic Setup

        Individuals choose from J total colleges, each with a variety of different attributes.

Individuals receive indirect utility from attending college j that is a function of the academic

quality of the school Aj , the consumption amenities of the institution, Cj, the distance from their

home to college j, Dij, (a proxy for the non-monetary commuting costs) and consumption of all

other goods (Yi – Tij ) where Yi is income and Tij is the price of college j to individual i:

                            U ij= α1i (Yi − Tij ) + α 2i Aj + α 3i C j + α 4i Dij + ε ij         (2)

where ε ij is an unobserved individual-specific taste preference for school j. Individuals compare

the potential utility received from attending each college and choose to attend the college that

maximizes their utility.

        We are interested in estimating the coefficients a1i, a2i, a3i, and a4i, which correspond to

the marginal utility individual i receives from each of the four college attributes. We assume the

random components in equation (2) are independent and identically distributed across

individuals and choices with the extreme value distribution, so that the probability that individual




                                                        11
i is observed choosing college j is given by the simple conditional logit formula:

                                                                   exp(δ ij )
                                          Pr( Enrollij= 1)=    J                                      (3)
                                                              ∑ exp(δ
                                                              k =1
                                                                            ik   )


where δ ij ≡ −α1iTij + α 2i Aj + α 3i C j + α 4i Dij   is the value function for school j as perceived by

individual i.

         Note that student characteristics that do not vary across their choices (e.g. income or race)

cannot enter independently into this basic model. In a cross-sectional sample, the parameters of

equation (3) are identified by differences in the enrollment shares across institutions and

subgroups that are related to the variables of interest. If students value instructional expenditure,

for example, then schools with more spending on instruction should have a greater share of all

postsecondary students than schools with less spending. Coefficients on attributes that vary

across students within schools will additionally be identified by within-school variation. For

example, students facing a higher price for a given school (e.g. out-of-state students) should be

less likely to attend if cost is a deterrent to enrollment.

B. Relaxing the IIA Assumption

         A well-known limitation of the standard conditional logit model with homogeneous

preference parameters is that if the error terms are assumed to be independent then the relative

choice probabilities for any two alternatives will not depend on the presence or characteristics of

any other alternatives. This property is known as the independence from irrelevant alternatives

(IIA). One implication of this assumption is that cross-elasticities will exhibit proportional

substitution; the substitutability of a pair of colleges is proportional to their initial enrollment

shares, which is unrealistic if students tend to substitute between colleges with similar

characteristics.




                                                         12
         To address this concern, we allow preference parameters to vary with student gender,

ability (as measured by 12th grade test scores) and socioeconomic status. In addition, we

estimate several specifications that allow for unobserved heterogeneity using a mixed (random

coefficients) logit model (Train 2009). We demonstrate that this additional flexibility of the

mixed logit does not qualitatively change the results of our estimated willingness-to-pay. Hence,

for the sake of computational ease, our preferred specification allows for interactions with

observable student characteristics but does not allow preferences to vary randomly across

individuals.

C. Addressing Omitted Variable Bias

         A second concern is omitted variable bias. If observed college characteristics are related

to unobserved college characteristics that also influence demand, then simple estimates of (3)

may suffer from omitted variable bias. Much of the existing college-choice literature does not

address this fundamental identification concern. 8 Importantly, this is not the case for college

characteristics that vary across students within an institution such as price or distance. The

coefficients on these variables are identified from differences in the likelihood of attendance

among students with different values of the characteristic. 9 Coefficients on interactions between

student and school characteristics are identified in a similar manner.

         In order to identify the importance of student-invariant college attributes, we stack data

from multiple cohorts and include institution fixed effects for the roughly 1,300 colleges in our




8  Structural equilibrium models of the college market (Epple, Romano, and Sieg, 2006) potentially address this
issue, but at a cost of stronger assumptions about the objective functions of colleges.
9
  For example, the coefficient on distance is identified by differences in enrollment shares among individuals living
closer to or farther away from a given institution. Similarly, the in-state versus out-state tuition difference helps
identify the coefficient on price by a comparison of the likelihood of in-state versus out-state students attending a
particular college. One limitation is that many public universities place a cap on the number of out-of-states students
they enroll, which may be correlated with in-/out-of-state tuition differentials.



                                                          13
analysis sample. 10 This approach exploits variation in attributes and enrollment within schools

across cohorts. If students are willing to pay for an attribute, schools with increasing levels of

this attribute should see their enrollment increasing over time and one should observe schools

with high values of this attribute entering the market. We estimate this model through an

iterative procedure in the spirit of Berry (1994) and Guimarães and Portugal (2009). 11

         In this model, our identifying assumption is that changes in college attributes are

uncorrelated with changes in unobserved tastes for individual colleges. For instance, if colleges

that increase spending on consumption amenities also strengthen other favorable attributes (e.g.,

desirable alumni network), then our estimates will overstate the causal effect of amenities on

colleges’ ability to attract students. Similarly, this model assumes that changes in college

characteristics are exogenous from the perspective of school administrators. While colleges

clearly have some discretion over characteristics such as amenities and tuition and could alter

them in anticipation of (or in response to) demand changes, we believe that the potential bias

introduced is minimal. 12

         Price discounting is another possible time-varying confounder. Our preferred

specifications use estimated net price rather than college sticker price to account for price

discounting across students, schools, and time. To implement this, we estimate a model with the

net price ratio (price minus grants over price) as the dependent variable using the 1996 and 2004


10 To our knowledge, the only other papers to take this fixed effects approach are Avery, Glickman, Hoxby, and
Metrick (2005) and Griffith and Rask (2007).
11
   Briefly, the approach iterates between estimating the main model parameters assuming a given set of fixed effects,
then updating the fixed effects to equate predicted and sample probabilities. Standard errors are found by inverting
the numerical Hessian for the entire coefficient vector (including the fixed effects).
12
   It should be noted that if the market responds to a demand for college amenities with the creation of new amenity
rich schools, then the inclusion of school fixed effects would tend to understate the value students place on
amenities. In practice, the entry and exit of colleges seems unlikely to be important in our analysis. Of the 2,853
college-years in our sample of “regular” four-year colleges, 46 were open only in 1992, 97 were open only in 2004
and the remaining 2,710 were open in both years. When we limit our sample to the 2,458 college-years that were
ever selected by individuals in our student-level data, 13 were only open in 1992 and 51 were only open in 2004.



                                                         14
National Postsecondary Student Aid Study. The model was estimated separately for six groups

(defined by race X sector X in-state) separately by year and with many interactions and estimates

were used to predict net price for all student-school pairs in our analysis sample. 13

           In some specifications we also control for other time-varying characteristics associated

with each college. For example, we control for the unemployment rate in the state in which a

college is located in the year in which the cohort would have been applying to college in order to

account for the fact that students may be reluctant to attend college in an economically depressed

area if they intend to reside in the area after graduation. In some specifications, we control for

binary indicators of whether the college is located in the same state and/or region in which the

student attended high school. This is meant to control for hard-to-observe factors such as family

connections that will influence a student’s college choice beyond the distance and cost variables

that we already have in the model.

           There are several other limitations to the panel model described above. While colleges

have some flexibility to adjust enrollment and tuition, neither of these factors is perfectly elastic

(in the short-run). For example, an individual college could not quadruple the size of its

incoming class to accommodate increased demand due to short-run constraints in physical

capital. Similarly, there are probably at least some barriers to entry in the college market. These

frictions will lead us to understate student preferences for college characteristics in the model.

D. Admissions Selectivity and Unobservable Choice Set Variation

           A third concern with the basic conditional logit model is that selective admissions

necessarily prevent some people from attending certain schools, even if they desire to do so. This

is a specific form of omitted variable bias caused by a misspecification of some students’ choice

set; we do not observe the actual full set of schools that a student could feasibly attend. The

13   Results are described in Appendix E.



                                                  15
consequence is that estimates will cofound school selectivity with student preferences, causing

us to overstate (understate) student WTP for attributes of less (more) selective schools. 14

         There are a number of ways that have been proposed to address this issue. First, one can

specify the choice set for each individual ex-ante. This approach inevitably causes errors: some

alternatives that are excluded from the choice set may be chosen. Conditioning on the set of

schools accepted to (Arcidiacono, 2004) addresses this problem, but loses all information

contained in students’ application decisions. This may bias preference parameter estimates since

some attributes that are important at the application stage may not important at the enrollment

stage. A second approach is to control for characteristics that determine choice set variation. In

this vein, Long (2004) includes flexible interactions between a college’s academic quality and

student ability (measured by test scores) to control for the likelihood that an individual would

have been admitted to the school. A limitation of this approach is that it cannot separately

identify admissions constraints from heterogeneity in preferences by student ability.

         A third possibility is to estimate a model of choice set determination explicitly. This is

the approach taken by Arcidiacono (2005) and advocated by Horowitz (1990), which is easiest to

implement when the choice set is actually observed. This is not feasible in our setting because,

like in many others, the choice set is partially unobserved since we do not know the full set of

schools applied and admitted to and do not know admissions outcomes for schools to which the

student did not apply. 15



14
   Such unobserved choice set variability is pervasive in many situations beyond education, including choice of
residence, job or occupation, and products that experience supply constraints and stock-outs. While the IO demand
estimation literature has primarily focused on settings where all products are available to all consumers, some
authors have addressed the issue of unobserved choice set variation (e.g., Conlon and Mortimer 2010).
15 Arcidiacano (2005) also observed a partial application set (3 schools) and for computational tractability restricted
the full set (from which the application set is drawn) to eight. This approach seemed undesirable in our context
given the considerable geographic integration of the higher education market between the time of his study (1972)
and ours and computationally infeasible with the inclusion of institution fixed effects.



                                                         16
         Our approach is to integrate out over the possible choice sets (Conlon and Mortimer,

2010; Desposato, 2005), but using a computationally feasible approximation provided by a

weighted conditional logit model where weights are equal to the likelihood that a given option is

contained in an individual’s choice set.              To begin, we estimate a probit model of college

admissions using micro data that includes information on colleges to which the student applied

as well as whether s/he was admitted to each school (regardless of whether s/he eventually

attended the institution). 16 In this model, the predictors include a very flexible function of

student and school characteristics and interactions, including student race, gender, SES, high

school GPA and standardized achievement scores along with measures of the school’s selectivity

such as the average SAT score of students in the school. For each student i and school j, we

calculate the predicted probability, ψij, that individual i would be admitted to school j if he or she

applied. We then use these predicted probabilities as weights in the conditional logit model,

estimating the probability that student i enrolls in school j as

                                                                 ψ ij exp (δ ij )
                                              Pr( Enrollij ) =                                                    (4)
                                                                 ∑ψ   ik   exp (δ ik )


Jacob, McCall and Stange (2013b) show that, if the number of possible schools is sufficiently

large, equation (4) will provide a good approximation of the true likelihood one would have

obtained if one observed the individual’s true choice set. 17

         The intuition is that the unconditional probability of enrolling in college j (which we

observe) is the product of the probability of attending conditional on being accepted and the


16
   See Appendix D for description of the sample used in this analysis and estimates of these probit models.
17
   For instance, simulation results available from the authors show that the correlation between the observation-level
likelihood implied by our weighted approach and that implied by a simulation-based approach which integrates out
the unobserved choice set is 0.9879 overall, with the approximation being better for individual-school observations
with a high likelihood of acceptance.



                                                         17
probability of being accepted. For the large number of nonselective institutions where the

probability of admissions is near one, the probability of enrollment is simply that estimated by

the standard conditional logit.     For schools that the students has little chance of being

admitted, ψij is very low, which means the probability of enrollment is also low. A key benefit

of this approach is that it allows preferences for a given school to be high at the same time the

empirical likelihood of observing a student at this school is extremely low.

       The identifying assumption in our approach is that, conditional on the detailed set of

student and school characteristics we include in the admission and enrollment models, there are

no unobservable factors that are simultaneously correlated with the likelihood of admissions and

enrollment. For example, if extraordinary unobserved talent in violin were correlated with the

probability of admissions and enrollment at Julliard, it would lead to an upward bias in the WTP

for fine arts programs. We recognize that such biases likely still exist, but as we show below, it

appears that this approach does account for many of the first-order concerns associated with

students not being able to gain admissions to selective schools with high levels of spending in

various areas.

E. Interpretation Issues

       It is worth noting several things when interpreting our estimates of student demand for

particular college attributes.   First, our interpretation of demand responses as preferences

necessarily assumes that students are informed about college characteristics. If information is

incomplete, we might misinterpret a lack of demand for an attribute with a lack of information

about the attribute. Second, variables we interpret as “consumption” may actually measure

something that provide labor market returns, and thus be properly categorized as “investment.”

For example, Webber and Ehrenberg (2010) find some evidence that student service




                                                18
expenditures are positively associated with graduation rates at an institution.    Moreover, it is

entirely possible that certain attributes have aspects of both consumption and investment.

Regardless of the interpretation, our estimates can still accurately reflect the effect of these

college attributes on students’ college choice.

V. Data

       In our analysis, we combine student-level data from two nationally representative cohorts

of high school seniors with college-level data on approximately all four-year colleges in the U.S.

This section briefly describes the key features of the data used, including the sample

construction. For additional detail, see Appendix B.

A. College-Level Data

       We combine data from a number of different sources to construct an unbalanced panel

dataset of postsecondary institutions for 1992 and 2004. We limit our sample in several ways to

facilitate our focus on amenities arguably related to direct, immediate consumption value. First,

we limit our sample to public and non-profit private undergraduate four-year schools only,

excluding all two-year (or less) schools, all for-profit schools, and schools offering professional

degrees only. Second, we drop specialized divinity, law, medical, specialized health (e.g.

nursing), and art colleges, though we keep engineering, teaching, military, and business colleges.

Finally, we drop schools with an average of fewer than 50 freshmen or 300 FTEs during our

analysis years in an effort to eliminate remaining specialized schools that are arguably not in

many students’ consideration set.

       We use institutional spending in various categories as our primary measures of academic

quality and consumption amenities. We use expenditures on instruction and academic support

per FTE as a measure of the institution’s academic quality. The expenditure data comes from the




                                                  19
IPEDS Finance survey assembled by the Delta Cost Project. 18                         These categories include

expenses for all forms of instruction (i.e., academic, occupational, vocational, adult basic

education and extension sessions, credit and non-credit) as well as spending on libraries,

museums, galleries, etc. Following the prior literature, in most specifications we also use the

average SAT score of students in the college as a second measure of academic quality. We

obtained the average SAT percentile score (or ACT equivalent) of the incoming student body

from Cass Barron’s Profiles of American Colleges (1992). 19 For 2004, we used the average of

the 25th and 75th SAT percentile, which we obtained from IPEDS.

           Our primary measure of consumption amenities is current spending on student services

and auxiliary enterprises.           Spending on student services includes spending on admissions,

registrar, student records, student activities, cultural events, student newspapers, intramural

athletics, and student organizations. Auxiliary expenditures include operating expenditures for

residence halls, food services, student health services, intercollegiate athletics, college unions

and college stores.          None of these categories includes interest payments or other capital

expenses, so this is likely to be a noisy measure of the full extent of amenities experienced by

students. All spending measures have been deflated by the CPI-U and are in 2009 dollars.

           Table 1 presents summary statistics of the college data, separately by sector for 1992 and

2004. Real tuition costs and spending on instruction and student services increased considerably

during the 1990s, though there are differences across sectors. Public institutions saw a greater

proportionate increase in tuition prices, while private institutions saw larger relative increases in

spending. Although spending increased in both categories, the average ratio of amenity (i.e.,




18
     This survey was changed considerably in 2000, but the spending categories are mostly comparable across years.
19
     We thank Bridget Terry Long for providing us this data, which was used in Long 2004.



                                                          20
student service + auxiliary) to academic (i.e., instruction + academic support) remained constant

over this period.

        Many of these measures are highly positively correlated (see Appendix Table B3). Log

per-student spending on instruction/academic support is correlated 0.55 with student

services/auxiliary spending. Tuition, expenditures and SAT percentile are all correlated at 0.49

or higher with each other. Schools that have high SAT-scoring students tend to spend more on

both instruction and amenities and also charge higher tuition. Because changes in college

attributes within institution over time (as opposed to levels) will identify the preference

parameters in our model, it is useful to also consider the correlation of changes.                        These

correlations are substantially smaller than the correlations in levels, which suggests we will have

sufficient independent variation to identify preferences for multiple attributes.

B. Student-Level Data

        We combine two nationally representative samples of the high school classes of 1992

(National Educational Longitudinal Study, NELS) and 2004 (Educational Longitudinal Survey,

ELS). 20 These longitudinal surveys follow students from high school into college. We limit our

sample to individuals who graduated from high school, attended a four-year institution within

two years of expected high school graduation, attended a college in our sample, and were not

missing key covariates (test scores, race, gender, family SES, college choice, etc).

        We assign out-of-state tuition levels to individuals residing in all states other than the one

in which the institution is located, so we do not take into account tuition reciprocity agreements

between neighboring states. Tuition does not vary by in-state status for private institutions. As a


20
  Prior work by Long (2004) has utilized data from two earlier cohorts, the high school classes of 1972 (National
Longitudinal Survey, NLS72) and 1980/82 (High School and Beyond, HSB82). We exclude these from our analysis
because they do not have sufficient information on college applications/admissions to properly account for the
limited choice set that many students will face.



                                                       21
proxy for the distance between a student’s home and a college, we calculate the distance between

the centroid of the zip code in which the student’s high school is located and the centroid of the

zip code in which each institution is located.

        Table 2 presents summary statistics for our analysis sample. The middle panel presents

statistics on the colleges attended by our sample. Over our analysis period, the real cost

(including tuition, fees, room & board) increased more than forty percent, from $14,801 in 1992

to $20,859 in 2004, while the average distance traveled to college increased from 196 to 219

miles. Schools attended by our sample increased spending on instruction 19 percent over the

period and spending on consumption amenities by roughly 14 percent.

        Each of these surveys asked high school seniors what factors they viewed as most

important in selecting a college, including courses, academic reputation, low cost, availability of

financial aid, athletics and social life. These self-reported preferences allow us to validate some

of our more objective college characteristics. We first standardize each item using the 1972

mean and standard deviation (students reported importance on a 4-point scale), and then

calculate a simple average of two items for each composite: academics (courses and reputation),

costs (low cost, financial aid), and social amenities (athletics, social life). 21 The summary

statistics for these composites shown in Table 2 are for the analysis sample, and show an

increasing value placed on all three factors. However, in the analysis below, we rely primarily

on the across-student variation in these measures rather than the across-cohort variation.

VI. Estimates of Demand Model

A. Preference Estimates: No Heterogeneity

        Table 3 presents estimates (odds ratios and standard errors) of the choice model pooling


21This normalization reflects our use of the 1972 cohort in earlier analysis. The normalization base will not
have any effect on our results.



                                                      22
the 1992 and 2004 cohorts and imposing homogeneity in student preferences. 22 Columns (1) and

(2) do not include college fixed effects and demonstrate patterns found in much of the previous

literature. Cost and distance are major predictors of where students choose to enroll, as is

spending on academics and peer quality. Conditional on these college attributes, we also find that

spending on consumption amenities is a significant predictor of college choice. As expected,

controlling for selective admissions in column (3) increases the estimated willingness-to-pay for

measures of academic quality such as instructional spending and school mean SAT. Better

accounting for the actual price faced by each student in column (4) reduces the importance of

school spending on consumption amenities as expected, but does not change estimated

importance of price or instructional quality.

        To control for unobserved characteristics that are correlated with size and the desirability

of the college, specification (5) includes college fixed effects, meaning that identification comes

from within-college changes over time in attributes that are associated with chances in

enrollment. The inclusion of college fixed effects changes the results in several important ways.

First, the importance of cost increases noticeably, with the odds ratio going from 0.158 in

column (4) to 0.05 in column (5). This suggests that expensive colleges also possess

unobservable qualities that are attractive to students.                    Not accounting for these fixed

unobservable attributes may cause cost to appear to be a less important consideration than it truly

is. 23 The coefficients on the other college attributes decline substantially and the coefficient on

instructional spending actually becomes negative.                    The coefficient on our measure of

22
   To provide a direct comparison with previous work, we also replicated and extended the analysis of Long (2004)
by including measures of college consumption amenities into her conditional logit specifications. These results are
reported in Appendix C. We find that several different types of “consumption amenities” are significant predictors
of student choice above and beyond the academic measures studied by Long (2004). Furthermore, the inclusion of
these measures diminishes the estimated importance of instructional expenditure. Comparable models estimated
separately by cohort, but using a specification that mirrors that used in our subsequent analysis are similar.
23 This is a finding that is common in the differentiated products literature: accounting for unobserved product

characteristics typically makes the effect of price more negative.



                                                        23
consumption amenities declines as well (odds ratio = 1.24), but remains statistically significant.

         Columns (6) and (7) include controls for other regional and geographic characteristics

that may be correlated with college amenities. Interestingly, the indicators for whether a college

is in the student’s home state and region in column (7) are large and significant predictors of

student choice, suggesting important non-linearities in preferences for proximity coupled with

changes in the geographic distribution of students over time. These controls reduce the estimated

importance of price considerably, perhaps because of out-of-state tuition differentials are no

longer used to identify price responsiveness. However, the inclusion of these controls does not

qualitatively change the estimated importance of the other college amenities, although the

estimated odds ratio for consumption spending is no longer statistically significant at

conventional levels.

         In order to help interpret the magnitude of these results and to quantify the relative

tradeoffs that students are making, the bottom panel of the table reports measures of

“willingness-to-pay” (WTP) for each college attribute. WTP is given by the (negative) ratio of

the estimated coefficient on that attribute to the estimated coefficient on log(total cost). For

example, the WTP of .162 for consumption amenities in the bottom panel of column (7)

indicates that students are willing to pay roughly 0.16 percent more to attend a school that spends

1 percent more on consumption amenities. The WTP of .009 on school mean SAT indicates that

a student would pay 0.9 percent more to attend a school whose mean SAT score is 1 percentage

point higher on the national distribution. In order to attend a top quartile school (in terms of

mean SAT measure) instead of a bottom quartile school, a student would be willing to pay 40

percent more (i.e., .009 x (79-34) ~ .40). 24


24
  We also estimated specifications that included controls for the cost of living (normalized within year) in each
college’s city, to absorb variation in spending due to higher prices which may not reflect differences in real



                                                         24
B. Preference Estimates: Heterogeneity by Observable Characteristics

         The results presented above suggest that, on average, students marginally value

institutions’ spending on consumption attributes and the academic ability of their peers, but do

not value spending on instruction. However, preferences are likely to differ between students for

many reasons and this preference heterogeneity will impact the elasticies that colleges face in

response to changes in their characteristics.

         To examine how preferences for college attributes vary with observable student

characteristics, we permit student preferences for college attributes to vary with sex, student

ability and family income.            Table 4 reports coefficient estimates for models that include

interactions between these three student characteristics and the five college attributes (odds ratios

are difficult to interpret with many interactions, so raw coefficients are presented). The first

specification accounts for selective admissions, net price, state unemployment rate, high school

cohort size, and dummies for in-state and in-region, but does not include college fixed effects.

Column (2) includes college fixed effects. Across both specifications, heterogeneity is

considerable. Wealthier students (higher SES) are substantially less sensitive to price and

distance and higher achieving students are less sensitive to distance. Male students are more

price sensitive than female students. 25

         High-ability students have a much greater preference for academic quality, both in the

form of instructional spending and mean SAT. Interestingly, this pattern changes little when

school fixed effects are included. Recall that these models account for the predicted probability


amenities. Estimates of students’ willingness to pay for college amenities are unaffected by this control. To address
multicolinearity concerns with including two distinct measures of academic quality (instructional spending per
student and average SAT scores), we also estimated specifications that exclude average SAT score. This has
virtually no impact on the other estimates and instructional expenditure remains insignificant. These results are
available from the authors upon request.
25
   One often cannot interpret the coefficients on interactions in non-linear choice models directly. The patterns
described here are confirmed through simulations.



                                                         25
of acceptance that incorporate the 12th grade test scores along with other measures of academic

aptitude so this finding is not simply an indication of the greater likelihood of acceptance to elite

institutions among such students. Interestingly, differences in valuation for consumption

amenities by student ability and income is less pronounced, though higher income students have

a greater preference for consumption amenities while higher achieving students place less value

on this.

           Figures 1 and 2 summarize the variation in predicted WTP across our sample, where

WTP is predicted using our preferred model that includes all controls and college fixed effects.

Figure 1 plots the overall distribution of WTP for each college attribute, demonstrating that there

is substantial predicted heterogeneity in students’ willingness to pay for all college

characteristics. 26 The WTP for consumption amenities is positive for most members of the

sample and positive for SAT for the majority of the sample, yet the same is only true for

instruction for a limited number of individuals. In fact, our estimates suggest that relatively few

students actually place a positive value on instructional spending. 27 Figure 2 presents comparable

distributions for certain sub-populations to better quantify the importance of preference

heterogeneity by observed student characteristics. These graphs demonstrate a strong variation in

preference for academic quality associated with academic preparation. Very high achieving

students tend to derive greater value from high academic quality. In fact, the distribution of

estimated preferences for instructional spending does not overlap between students in the top and


26 The distribution of estimated willingness-to-pay is continuous because two of the variables used to estimate each
preference parameter (math score and SES) are continuous.
27 Figure F1 in the appendix presents the distribution of WTP from the model without college fixed effects. In this
model, the qualitative finding that the WTP for marginal changes in consumption amenities is greater (more
positive) than that for instruction still holds: all students have a positive WTP for consumption amenities, but only
about half do for instructional spending, though the scale differs. Since the coefficient on cost is smaller (less
negative) in the model without fixed effects, the estimated willingness-to-pay for other college characteristics
(calculated with the cost coefficient as the denominator) are greater in magnitude. Thus the scale of the WTP
distribution is much larger without fixed effects (Figure F1) than with (Figure 1).



                                                         26
lowest test score terciles. SES does contribute to heterogeneity, particularly on the WTP for

consumption amenities. 28 Our estimates suggest that students with the greatest willingness-to-

pay for consumption amenities are low-ability, high-income students and that instructional

spending only has a positive WTP for high-ability, high-SES students. 29

C. Robustness and Unobserved Heterogeneity

In Table 5, we explore the robustness of our demand model to a different measure of academic

resources and to greater flexibility across institutional type. One concern is that instructional

spending is an imperfect (or not salient) measure of the resources institutions devote to academic

quality. Column (2) uses the log of number of full-time faculty per student as our measure of

academic resources, which is also common in the literature (e.g. Bound, Lovenheim, and Turner,

2010). This model produces results that are qualitatively identical (and for some coefficients,

quantitatively similar) to that using instructional and academic support. Given that four-year

colleges are quite heterogeneous, a second concern is that marginal spending at different types of

institutions may be used for very different purposes. For instance, PhD-granting institutions may

devote marginal increases in student services or instructional spending to very different activities

than small BA-granting institutions. Column (3) lets the marginal effect of the two spending

categories differ by the highest level of degree offered. We find no significant differences

between institutions offering different degrees, though estimates are not very precise.

Furthermore, estimates of the heterogeneity across individuals are not impacted nor is model fit

improved much by this added flexibility. Though we continue to rely on our main specification


28
  Preference variation by sex is minimal, as demonstrated in Appendix Figure F2.
29
  Appendix Figure F3 shows median WTP for nine subgroups defined by test scores and SES. Models without
college fixed effects demonstrate a very similar pattern of heterogeneity, though the non-fixed effects models
suggest more students respond favorably to instructional spending. In results not reported here and not included in
these specifications, we also find that students are substantially more likely to attend institutions that match their
background (e.g., Black students attending historically Black colleges, Catholic students attending Catholic colleges,
etc.), suggesting that campus life is an important factor in students’ enrollment decisions.



                                                         27
(Table 4, column 2) throughout the rest of our analysis, later we also report results using these

two alternative specifications to estimate the demand elasticities faced by institutions.

        A natural question is whether the few student characteristics we have interacted with

college characteristics capture a sufficient amount of the preference variation. To explore this,

we also estimated models that permit the coefficients on college attributes to vary randomly.

Table 6 presents results from random coefficient models that do not include school fixed

effects. 30 Specification (1) includes only the five college characteristics and permits the

coefficients on these attributes to vary in the population according to a normal distribution with

mean and variance to be estimated. The table reports the maximum simulated likelihood

estimates of the mean and standard deviation of this preference distribution. The coefficient

means are very consistent with those from the fixed coefficient specification (column 3 in Table

3, though coefficient estimates are not reported in that table), but the variance terms indicate

quite a bit of preference heterogeneity.

        Column (2) additionally controls for interactions between college attributes and male,

math score, and SES, and is the random coefficient analog of specification (1) from Table 4.

These observable student characteristics control for a substantial amount of preference

heterogeneity, reducing the residual preference variation quite a bit. Further controlling for

students’ stated reasons for choosing a college (column (3)) reduces this residual variation only

marginally more. Throughout all three specifications, our estimates suggest that preference for

consumption amenities is fairly broad-based across all students, while taste for academic quality

exhibits substantial heterogeneity across the population. Furthermore, our observed

30 Estimation of random coefficients models that also control for school fixed effects is computationally infeasible
given the number of colleges (1300) and our fixed effects estimation algorithm. However, given that the inclusion of
fixed effects did not impact the patterns of preference heterogeneity documented in Table 4, we expect that the
inclusion of fixed effects in the random coefficients model would not impact our conclusions about the importance
of unobserved preference heterogeneity.



                                                        28
characteristics (male, math score, and SES) do a good job characterizing this heterogeneity.

D. Interpretation as Consumption Amenities

       We have documented a substantial enrollment response to spending on student services

and auxiliary enterprises, which we interpret as reflective of the importance of consumption

considerations in students’ decisions. Evidence in favor of this interpretation is presented in

Table 7. Column (1) presents estimates from a model that includes interactions between our five

college attributes and the three self-reported student “preference” measures described earlier.

Recall that these measures are standardized composite variables that reflect how the students, as

12th graders, reported the importance of different college characteristics in their college

enrollment decision. We view this specification as a useful check on the validity of our college

attribute measures. For example, if spending on student services was really capturing something

about the consumption value of an institution, we would expect students who report that a

school’s social life is important to be more likely to attend these institutions. Similarly, if

instructional spending were a good proxy for academic quality, students who report academics to

be very important to them should be more likely to attend schools with higher spending on

instruction.

       Indeed, we find exactly these patterns. Additionally, students that report expenses to be

an important consideration in college choice are much more responsive (negatively) to cost and

distance and much less responsive (less positive) to other college characteristics. These estimates

account for selective admissions and financial aid so these patterns do not simply reflect

differences in acceptance or financial aid generosity at schools with different characteristics

between students reporting “social” vs. “academic” factors as being important to their decisions.

       Further evidence of this conclusion is found in column (2), which includes interactions




                                                29
between our five college attributes and these “preference” measures and interactions with the

three observable characteristics examined earlier (male, math score, and SES).              The point

estimates of the preference interactions change very little. Students seeking a college with a

strong social life respond favorably to spending on student services but negatively to spending on

academics. Students choosing colleges based on academics are attracted to colleges that spend

more on instruction, but are unresponsive to spending on student services. These patterns hold

even when the stronger preference that high achieving students (i.e. high math test scores) have

for colleges that spend more on instruction is held constant. Comparing specification (2) in Table

4 with specification (2) in Table 7, it is interesting to note that the pattern of interactions between

our college characteristics and sex, test scores, and SES are very similar with and without

controlling for these self-reported aspects of preferences.

           We further explore the consumption amenities interpretation of our main findings by

interacting our spending measures with other institution- and student-level characteristics. 31 For

instance, we’d expect campus spending on consumption amenities to be less important in areas

that have locational amenities that act as substitutes (e.g. vibrant urban life or access to beaches

and ski resorts). We tested this by interacting spending with an index of the “quality of life” of

the campus location, developed in Albouy (2012). While the negative point estimate on the

interaction between consumption amenity spending and QOL is consistent with this

interpretation, the estimate is sufficiently imprecise to rule out no effect. We also interact

spending by category with an index for whether the student plans to live at home during college.

Since amenities spending is directed primarily towards students spending significant amount of

time on campus, we’d expect it to be most important for students planning to live on or near

campus. We do find that students planning to live at home are less sensitive to spending on
31
     These results are reported in Table F1 in the Appendix.



                                                           30
consumption amenities than those planning to live on campus or on their own. Third, we interact

spending by category with the fraction of students living on campus in 1992, again testing

whether spending on consumption amenities is more important at institutions that already have a

large share of students residing on campus. We do not find evidence for this interpretation,

though again estimates are imprecise.

       Finally, in other work, we show that our college spending measures are correlated with

the subjective assessments of college “quality of life” and “quality of academics” presented in

the Princeton Review guidebooks (Jacob, McCall and Stange 2013a).               Students attending

colleges with more spending on student services and auxiliary enterprises rate the quality of life

of the institution much higher, whereas instructional spending has little correlation with

subjective quality of life. By contrast, students rate colleges with high instructional expenditure

or higher student services expenditure as having a better academic environment.

VII. Implications for the Postsecondary Market

   A. Variation in Demand-side Pressure

       We now use our estimated college demand model to characterize the consequences of

heterogeneous student preferences for institutions by simulating changes in patterns of demand if

colleges were to alter their characteristics. We took each individual college and altered a single

characteristic one at a time, holding all other characteristics of it and of all other colleges

constant. Then we recorded how the entire pattern of enrollment across all colleges changed.

These marginal responses are expected to vary across colleges due to variation in the preferences

of their marginal students and differences in the proximity of colleges with similar attributes (i.e.

competitors). For instance, colleges whose marginal students are wealthy but with low academic

aptitude will see particularly large enrollment responses to changes in consumption amenities




                                                 31
spending, though the opposite is true for colleges attracting many high-achieving, low-income

students.

         Figure 3 plots the distribution of predicted own total enrollment elasticities with respect

to each of the four college characteristics. These estimates come from the model that permits

preference parameters to vary by sex, math scores, and SES (specification (2) from Table 4). 32

Consider first the distribution of price elasticties shown in the top-left panel.                        The entire

distribution of elasticities falls to the left of zero, indicating that all schools experience a

downward sloping demand curve (i.e., a negative enrollment response to higher tuition). Overall

demand is price-elastic: the mean price elasticity among colleges is -1.6, indicating that a 1%

increase in tuition is associated with a 1.6% decrease in total enrollment. The panel in the top-

right corner shows that all colleges are estimated to have a positive total enrollment response to

marginal increases in consumption amenities spending. While most colleges are estimated to

have a positive total enrollment response to marginal improvements in average SAT score, some

institutions in our sample are estimated to have a negative elasticity of enrollment with respect to

improvements in mean SAT score. Consistent with the results presented in Table 4, the vast

majority of colleges appear to have a negative total enrollment response to increases in

instructional spending.

         Figure 4 plots the implied own-elasticities for enrollment of high SES (above the 75th

percentile, solid line) and of high achieving (above the 75th percentile of math test score, dashed

line) students. The total enrollment elasticity (bold line) is included for reference. High achieving

students are particularly responsive to improvements in academic quality, both in the form of

average SAT and instructional spending. In fact, high achieving students are the only subgroup

32 Simulations confirm that using the demand model with no preference heterogeneity generates limited variation in
responsiveness across colleges, with this variation due only to differences in the distribution of distances and costs
across students.



                                                         32
that responds positively to instructional spending; almost all colleges can attract more high

achieving students by increasing instructional spending, though this usually comes at a cost to

their ability to attract other students. On the other hand, marginal increases in consumption

amenities spending will have a greater impact on colleges’ enrollment of high SES students.

Most institutions can increase total or high SES enrollment by increasing consumption amenities,

though the response of high-achieving students is smaller. The implication is that most colleges

face a trade-off: increases in instructional spending will attract high achieving students, but may

deter enrollment from a broader student body. Increases in amenities spending, however, will

attract all types of students (though disproportionately lower-achieving and high income

students). 33

         Figure 5 depicts how demand-side pressure varies with one important observable college

characteristic: selectivity. The graph depicts the own-demand elasticity with respect to college

characteristics, by average student SAT score percentile at baseline. Though the own-price

elasticity is similar across institutions with very different levels of selectivity, there are clear

differences in responsiveness to other characteristics. The demand response to academic quality

is more positive at more selective schools. Students on the margin of attending more selective

schools tend to place greater value on academic quality and thus changes in academic quality

have a greater impact on overall enrollment. The pattern for consumption amenities spending is

less clear. Very low selectivity schools (i.e., schools with low average student SAT scores)

experience a slightly greater enrollment response to an increase in amenities spending than

moderately more selective schools, but responsiveness then increases with selectivity at higher

levels of selectivity. Appendix Figure F7 plots the elasticities for certain student groups by

33
  This same pattern is apparent in models that do not include fixed effects, use faculty-student ratio as the measure
of academic quality, or let the marginal effect of spending differ by type of institution. These are reported in
Appendix Figures F4-F6.



                                                         33
selectivity level. One finding is that institutions of very different selectivity face relatively

similar incentives for attracting the most high-achieving students, but very different incentives
                                                  34
when trying to attract students overall.               Figure 5 also demonstrates that there is substantial

variation in demand response to consumption amenities even among institutions with similar

levels of selectivity.

     B. Can Variation in Demand-side Pressure Explain Resource Allocation?

The previous section demonstrated that colleges face different enrollment consequences from

their spending decisions due to differences in the preferences of students at their enrollment

margin. But do colleges that face greater pressure to provide consumption amenities respond

accordingly? Figure 6 plots the ratio of consumption amenities spending to instructional

spending from 1992 to 2007 for four groups of colleges, categorized by their enrollment

elasticity with respect to these two categories of spending. 35 Colleges that face the highest

demand elasticity for consumption amenities and the lowest elasticity for instructional spending

(solid line) provide the highest level of spending on the latter, relative to the former. These

schools spend nearly $.90 on consumption amenities for every dollar spent on instruction. In

contrast, colleges that face the greatest pressure to spend resources on instruction only spend

$0.45 on consumption amenities for every dollar spent on instruction. These ratios have not

changed appreciably over time at the group level. It should be noted that this cross-institutional

variation is not used to estimate the parameters of our student demand model since our preferred

specifications include college fixed effects, which control for any time-invariant characteristics

34
   This result is qualitatively very similar with or without college fixed effects, but does depend strongly on the
inclusion of preference heterogeneity (Appendix Figure F7). Without it, the response to all characteristics appears to
be similar across institutions and student groups. This pattern can be quantitatively and even directionally incorrect
since some colleges may face negative enrollment responses when they increase academic quality, while other
colleges may see a positive response overall or for certain subgroups. Heterogeneity in institution-specific demand
pressure is masked without allowing for individual preference heterogeneity.
35
   In this figure, colleges were divided into terciles for each of the spending elasticities, but only four of the nine
resulting groups are displayed for clarity of presentation.



                                                          34
of colleges (including their average demand pressure over our sample period).

           To explore the correlates of spending patterns across institutions more systematically,

Table 8 presents OLS estimates of the cross-sectional relationship between the ratio of

consumption amenities spending to instructional spending in 2007 and various institutional

characteristics. Column (1) shows the relationship for several key observable characteristics,

which are likely to both proxy for institutions’ technologies (costs) in producing academic

quality and consumption amenities and to reflect differences in preference-induced demand

pressure. Public and larger institutions spend proportionately less on consumption amenities

(relative to instruction). More selective institutions also spend relatively more on instruction.

There is little evidence of a “wealth” effect; conditional on the other covariates, the spending

ratio is uncorrelated with an institution’s overall level of log spending. We also include state

fixed effects to capture any state-specific market characteristics that may correlate with spending

priorities. These five characteristics can explain 29% of the variation in the spending ratio. 36

           Columns (2) and (3) quantify the pattern demonstrated in Figure 6 by correlating

spending priorities with institutions’ estimated enrollment elasticities (which are standardized to

have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one). When both elasticities are included, a one

standard deviation increase in the consumption amenities (instructional) spending elasticity is

associated with a $0.11 increase ($0.09 decrease) in the spending ratio. By themselves, these

elasticities can explain 16% of the variation in the spending ratio, with the fit considerably better

when both elasticities are included. Controlling for institutional sector, selectivity, size, total

spending, and state fixed effects reduces the magnitude of these effects but changes the

qualitative finding very little (column (4)). In fact, including the elasticities on top of the key

observable institutional characteristics increases the explained variation in spending ratio twenty
36
     Sector is particularly important; the “public” dummy alone explains 17% of the variation.



                                                           35
percent. It is important to note that this figure actually understates the total contribution of the

demand elasticities to spending patterns since some of the variation “explained” by observable

characteristics such as sector and state could be operating through demand pressure.

         The last three columns of Table 8 probe the robustness of these findings to different

specifications of the demand model. Column (5) uses estimates of a demand model that does not

include college fixed effects to generate college-specific enrollment elasticities. Though we may

be concerned about endogeneity in this specification, it is reassuring that the results are

qualitatively very similar to our preferred specification. Columns (6) and (7) employ different

measure of academic resources and permit greater flexibility across institutional type,

respectively. These specifications largely support the findings from our preferred demand

model. 37

         We interpret the evidence in Figure 7 and Table 8 as suggesting that the demand

elasticities we estimate do characterize important features of the higher education market above

and beyond observable college characteristics. Importantly, colleges seem to respond to these

market pressures when choosing the optimal mix of consumption and academic attributes to

offer their students.

VIII. Conclusions

         In this paper we find that students do appear to value college attributes which we

categorize as “consumption” because their benefits arguably accrue only while actually enrolled.

Importantly, there is significant preference heterogeneity across students; wealthy students are

more willing to pay more for consumption amenities while high-achieving students have a



37 The elasticity with respect to number of FT faculty per student is not a good predictor of the spending ratio, but
specification (6) demonstrates that the consumption amenities elasticity is still a good predictor of spending patterns
even when FT faculty per student is used to construct a measure of elasticity with respect to academic resources.



                                                          36
greater willingness-to-pay for academic quality. This finding is robust to a number of alternative

specifications for demand and controls for several important sources of bias.

       The existence of significant preference heterogeneity has important implications for the

postsecondary market, since it results in different colleges facing very different incentives

depending on their current student body and those they are trying to attract. More selective

schools have a much greater incentive to improve academic quality since this is the dimension

most valued by its marginal students. Less selective schools (particularly privates), by

comparison, have a greater incentive to focus on consumption amenities, since this is what their

marginal students value. In fact, our estimates suggest that less selective schools will actually

harm enrollment by spending more on instruction. However, in the market for high achieving

students, this pattern is much more muted, with institutions having comparable incentives for

investing in academic quality. These demand pressures appear to have real consequences, as the

colleges facing greater pressure to spend on consumption amenities are much more likely to do

so. We estimate that a one standard deviation increase in colleges’ enrollment elasticity is

associated with a $0.09 increase in ratio of amenity to academic spending. Student preferences

do appear to alter how educational resources are spent. This preference-induced demand pressure

explains 16% the variation in spending priorities across four-year institutions.

       More generally, our results suggest that colleges compete for students on many

dimensions – price, distance, consumption amenities, academics – and that different students

respond differently to these attributes because preferences are so heterogeneous. The importance

of market pressure to the behavior of higher education institutions has not been thoroughly

examined and the slim prior literature on the topic has focused exclusively on the role of

academic quality and cost, ignoring other dimensions on which colleges compete. One important




                                                37
implication of our analysis is that for many institutions, demand-side market pressure may not

compel investment in academic quality, but rather in consumption amenities. This is an

important finding given that quality assurance is primarily provided by demand-side pressure:

the fear of losing students is believed to compel colleges to provide high levels of academic

quality. Our findings call this accountability mechanism into question. However, our findings do

not speak to the normative issue of whether consumption amenities are good or bad for students

and taxpayers.

       This discussion highlights four broad areas for future work. First, it would be natural to

extend this analysis to understand the objectives of colleges by comparing their actions to the

demand-side incentives they face. Our findings suggest that colleges respond to competitive

demand pressures as expected, but a complete theoretical and empirical analysis of the supply

side is beyond the scope of this paper. Previous work in this area has focused on colleges’

admissions and financial aid decisions, but has not modeled colleges’ provision of consumption

amenities. Second, the present analysis does not examine cross-elasticities between institutions,

but doing so would provide greater insight into the extent of the higher education market. Do

colleges have a single set of “competitor schools” with which they fight for enrollment on

several dimensions, or do schools face different competitors depending on the dimension (e.g.

price, amenities) they are altering? Third, our analysis could be extended to understand how

differences in preferences influence how students engage with college and persist. Variation in

preferences for consumption and academics between students is one possible explanation for

differences in college completion that has not been explored. Lastly, our analysis does not speak

to the welfare consequences of the strong link between consumption and educational investment.

Given the substantial amount of public investment in higher education – some of which funds




                                               38
consumption amenities – it is natural to ask whether this investment is sound. We leave these

questions for future researchers to answer.




                                              39
References
Albouy, David, 2012. “Are Big Cities Bad Places to Live? Estimating Quality of Life across
Metropolitan Areas.” University of Michigan. Mimeo.

Alstadsæter, A. (2011). “Measuring the Consumption Value of Higher Education, CESifo
Economic Studies, 57(3): 458-479.

Alter, Molly and Randal Reback. (2012). “True for Your School? How Changing Reputations
Alter Demand for Selective U.S. Colleges.” Barnard College, Columbia University. Mimeo.

Arcidiacono, Peter (2004). ”Ability sorting and the returns to college major.”Journal of
Econometrics 121, 343-375.

Arcidiacano, Peter (2005). "Affirmative Action in Higher Education: How Do Admission and
Financial Aid Rules Affect Future Earnings?" Econometrica, 73(5): 1477-1524.

Arum, Richard and Josipa Roksa (2011). Academically Adrift: Limited Learning on College
Campuses. University of Chicago Press: Chicago, IL.

Avery, Chris, Mark Glickman, Caroline Hoxby, and Andrew Metrick (2005). “A Revealed
Preference Ranking of U.S. Colleges and Universities.” NBER WP 10803.

Babcock, Philip and Minday Marks (forthcoming) The Falling Time Cost of College: Evidence
from Half a Century of Time Use Data , Review of Economics and Statistics.

Bayer, Patrick, Fernando Ferreira, and Robert McMillan (2007). “A Unified Framework for
Measuring Preferences for Schools and Neighborhoods.” Journal of Political Economy, August.

Becker, Gary (1964). Human Capital. New York: Columbia University Press.

Berry, Steven T. (1994). "Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Differentiation," RAND
Journal of Economics, 25(2): 242-262.

Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes (1995). "Automobile Prices in Market
Equilibrium," Econometrica, 63(4), pages 841-90, July.

Black, Dan, and Jeff Smith (2004). “How Robust Is the Evidence on the Effects of College
Quality? Evidence from Matching,” Journal of Econometrics, 121, 99–124.

Bound, John, Michael Lovenheim, and Sarah E. Turner (2010) "Why Have College Completion
Rates Declined? An Analysis of Changing Student Preparation and Collegiate Resources."
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(3): 1-31.

Brand, Jennie, and Yu Xie (2010). "Who benefits Most From College? Evidence for Negative
Selection in Heterogeneous Economic Returns to Higher Education." American Sociological
Review

Carneiro, P., K.T. Hansen, and J.J. Heckman (2003). ”Estimating distributions of treatment




                                               40
effects with and application to the returns to schooling and measurement of the effects of
uncertainty of college choice”, International Economic Review 44(2), 361-422.

Conlon, Christopher T. and Julie Holland Mortimer (2010). “Demand Estimation Under
Incomplete Product Availability.” NBER Working Paper No. 14315,September 2008, Revised
May 2010.

Desposato, Scott (2005). “A Model of Unordered Multiple Choice with Unobserved Choice Set
Selection” University of California San Diego, mimeo.

Epple, Dennis, Richard Romano, and Holger Sieg (2006). “Admission, Tuition, and Financial
Aid Policies in the Market for Higher Education.” Econometrica 74 (4): 885-928.

Goldman, Dana and John Romley (2008). “Hospitals as Hotels: The Role of Patient Amenities
in Hospital Demand.” NBER Working Paper 14619.

Goldman, Dana, Mary Vaiana, and John Romley (2010). “The Emerging Importance of Patient
Amenities in Hospital Care.” New England Journal of Medicine 363: 2185-2187.

Guimaraes, Paulo and Pedro Portugal (2009). "A Simple Feasible Alternative Procedure to
Estimate Models with High-Dimensional Fixed Effects," IZA Discussion Paper 3935.

Griffith, Amanda and Kevin Rask (2007). “The influence of the US News and World Report
collegiate rankings on the matriculation decision of high-ability students: 1995-2004. Economics
of Education Review, 26: 244-255.

Hastings, Justine S., Thomas J. Kane, and Doug O. Staiger, 2009. “Heterogeneous Preferences
and the Efficacy of Public School Choice.” Mimeo..

Heckman, J.J., L. Lochner, and C. Taber (1999). ”General-equilibrium cost-benefit analysis of
education and tax policies”, In: Ranis, G., L.K. Raut (Eds.): Trade, Growth, and Development.
Elsevier, Amsterdam, 291-349.

Hoekstra, Mark (2009). “The Effect of Attending the Flagship State University: A Regression
Discontinuity Approach.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(4): 717–724.

Horowitz, J L (1991). “Modeling the choice of choice set in discrete-choice random-utility
models.” Environment and Planning A, 23: 1237-1246.

Hoxby, Caroline (1997). “How the Changing Market Structure of U.S. Higher Education
Explains College Tuition.” NBER Working Paper 6323.

Hoxby, Caroline (2009). “The Changing Selectivity of American Colleges. “Journal of
Economic Perspectives. 23(4): 95-118.

Jacob, Brian and Lars Lefgren (2007). "What Do Parents Value in Education? An Empirical
Investigation of Parents' Revealed Preferences for Teachers," The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 122(4): 1603-1637.




                                                41
Jacob, Brian, Brian McCall, and Kevin Stange (2013a). “The Growth of Amenities in
Postsecondary Education.” Mimeo, University of Michigan.

Jacob, Brian, Brian McCall, and Kevin Stange (2013b). “Conditional Logit Estimation with
Unobserved Choice Sets.” Mimeo, University of Michigan.

Kirp, David L. (2005). “This little student goes to market.” In Declining by degrees of
mediocrity : higher education at risk / edited by Richard H. Hersch and John Merrow. New
York : Palgrave Macmillan, 2005.

Kodde, D.A. and J.M.M. Ritzen (1984), ”Integrating consumption and investment motives in a
neoclassical model of demand for education”, Kyklos 37(4), 598-605.

Lazear, Edward (1977). “Education: consumption or production?” Journal of Political
Economy 85(3).

Long, Bridget Terry (2004). “How have college decisions changed over time? An application of
the conditional logistic choice model.” Journal of Econometrics 121:271-296.

Manski, Charles F. and David A. Wise (1983). College choice in America. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1983.

McDuff, DeForest (2007). “Quality, tuition, and applications to in-state public colleges.”
Economics of Education Review. Vol. 26: 433-449.

Michael,R.T, (1973). “Education in nonmarket production,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol.
80.

Monks, James and Ronald G. Ehrenberg (1999). “The Impact of U.S News & World Report
College Rankings On Admission Outcomes and Pricing Decisions at Selective Private
Institutions.” NBER Working Paper No. 7227 July 1999

Oreopoulos, Philip and Kjell Salvanes (2011). “How large are returns to schooling? Hint: Money
isn’t everything.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(1): 159-184.

Oosterbeek, H. and H.V. Ophem (2000), ”Schooling choices: Preferences, discount rates, and
rates of return”, Empirical Economics 25, 15-34.

Pope, Devin G. and Jaren C. Pope (2008). “Understanding College Application Decisions: Why
College Sports Success Matters.” mimeo.

Pope, Devin G. and Jaren C. Pope (2009). “The Impact of College Sports Success on the
Quantity and Quality of Student Applications.” Southern Economic Journal 75(3): 750-780.

Rothschild, Michael, and Lawrence J. White (1993). “The University in the Marketplace: Some
Insights and Some Puzzles.” In Studies of Supply and Demand in Higher Education, ed. Charles
Clotfelter, 11–37. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.




                                                42
Rothschild, Michael, and Lawrence J. White (1995). “The Analytics of the Pricing of Higher
Education and Other Services in Which the Customers Are Inputs.” The Journal of Political
Economy, 10(3): 573–86

Schaafsma, J. (1976). “The consumption and investment aspects of the demand for education”,
Journal of Human Resources 11(2), 233-42.

Schultz, T. (1963) The Economic Value of Education. New York: Columbia Univ. Press.

Train, Kenneth E. (2003). Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation. New York: Cambridge
University Press.

Tunis, J.R. (1939). Choosing a college. New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company.

Webber, Douglas A. and Ronald G. Ehrenberg (2010). "Do expenditures other than instructional
expenditures affect graduation and persistence rates in American higher education?," Economics
of Education Review, 29(6): 947-958.




                                              43
  Frequency in Student Population
                                            Figure 1: Distribution of Willingness-to-Pay for College Attributes




                                    -1         -.8            -.6           -.4   -.2    -.2          0           .2           .4        .6
                                                      WTP for Distance                              WTP for Consumption Amenities




                                     -.05              0              .05         .1           -2     -1.5        -1         -.5     0        .5
                                                     WTP for mean SAT                               WTP for Instructional Spending

Notes: Notes: WTP for spending and distance can be interpreted as the percent increase in cost
students are willing to pay to attend a college with a 1% increase in spending or 1% further
away. Estimates come from the model in Table 4 (Specification 2) which includes interactions
between college characteristics and male, math score, and SES. Dashed line indicates value for
the WTP when heterogeneity is not permitted, estimated in Table 3 (Specification 7).




                                                                                    44
                                                    Figure 2: Distribution of Willingness-to-Pay for College Attribute

                                                                                            Panel A: by SES
     Density in Student Population




                                            -1          -.8             -.6           -.4           -.2    -.2          0           .2            .4                .6
                                                                WTP for Distance                                      WTP for Consumption Amenities

                                                               Low SES                 High SES                              Low SES                    High SeS




                                             -.05                0              .05                 .1           -2              -1                 0                    1
                                                               WTP for mean SAT                                        WTP for Instruction Spending

                                                               Low SES                 High SES                              Low SES                    High SES




                                                                                      Panel B: by Math Score
            Density in Student Population




                                            -1           -.8            -.6           -.4           -.2    -.2          0           .2            .4                .6
                                                                WTP for Distance                                      WTP for Consumption Amenities

                                                               Low Math                 High Math                            Low Math                   High Math




                                                 -.05            0              .05                 .1           -2              -1                 0                    1
                                                               WTP for mean SAT                                        WTP for Instruction Spending
                                                               Low Math                 High Math                            Low Math                   High Math


Notes: Notes: WTP for spending and distance can be interpreted as the percent increase in cost
students are willing to pay to attend a college with a 1% increase in spending or 1% further
away. Estimates come from the model in Table 4 (Specification 2) which includes interactions
between college characteristics and male, math score, and SES. In each panel, high and low
groups represent the top and bottom third by SES or math score, with middle third omitted.




                                                                                                      45
                         Figure 3: Distribution of Percent Change in Enrollment Share
                                  In response to change in own characteristic

                             Increase Cost by 1%                                   Increase Consumption Amenities by 1%




                                                                      150
              100




                                                                      100
              50




                                                                      50
              0




                                                                      0
                    -2        -1.5                     -1    -.5            -.05          0       .05             .1   .15   .2
  Frequency




                               %Change in Enrollment                                           %Change in Enrollment



                             Increase SAT by 1pt                                          Increase Instruction by 1%
              100




                                                                      100
              50




                                                                      50
              0




                                                                      0




                    -5         0                       5    10                       -1                     -.5              0
                               %Change in Enrollment                                           %Change in Enrollment


Notes: Each graph plots the distribution of the percent change in total enrollment at each
individual college if this college were to change a single characteristic. Enrollment response is
simulated using the estimates from the model Table 4 (Specification 2), which includes
interactions between college characteristics and male, math score, and SES. Top and bottom 1%
of observations are trimmed.




                                                                 46
  Figure 4: Distribution of Change in Enrollment Share for High Math and SES Students
                        In response to change in own characteristic


                                    Increase Cost by 1%                                              Increase Consumption Amenities by 1%




                                                                                         20
            15
            10




                                                                                         10
            5
            0




                                                                                         0
                       -2                  -1.5                -1           -.5                -.1          0            .1            .2           .3        .4
                                      % Change in Enrollment                                                        % Change in Enrollment

                            All Students            High Math            High SES                         All Students              High Math            High SES
  Density




                                    Increase SAT by 1pt                                                     Increase Instruction by 1%



                                                                                         10
            .4
            .2




                                                                                         5
            0




                                                                                         0




                 -10        -5              0          5            10        15              -1.5            -1              -.5               0             .5
                                      % Change in Enrollment                                                        % Change in Enrollment

                            All Students            High Math            High SES                         All Students              High Math            High SES




Notes: Each graph plots the distribution of the percent change in enrollment (all students, high
math students, high SES students) at each individual college if this college were to change a
single characteristic. Enrollment response is simulated using the estimates from the model in
Table 4 (Specification 2) which includes college fixed effects and interactions between college
characteristics and male, math score, and SES.




                                                                                    47
                                                 Figure 5: Total Enrollment Response to Change in Own College Characteristic
                                                                      by Institution Average Student SAT

                                                                 Increase Cost by 1%                                Increase Consumption Amenities by 1%
                                                 -.5




                                                                                                         .2
  Predicted Percent Change in Enrollment Share




                                                                                                         .15
                                                 -1




                                                                                                         .1
                                                 -1.5




                                                                                                         .05
                                                                                                         0
                                                 -2




                                                        0   20       40        60       80      100             0      20          40         60         80   100


                                                                 Increase SAT by 1pt                                        Increase Instruction by 1%
                                                 20




                                                                                                         0
                                                 10




                                                                                                         -.5
                                                 0




                                                                                                         -1
                                                                                                         -1.5
                                                 -10




                                                        0   20       40        60       80      100             0      20          40         60         80   100

                                                                                       SAT percentile of Institution

Notes: Each point represents a separate simulation where the characteristic of a single college is
changed in isolation. Enrollment response is simulated using the estimated choice model in Table
4 (Specification 2) which includes interactions between college and student characteristics.
Graph includes lowess smoothed prediction line using a bandwidth of 0.20.




                                                                                                   48
                                                    Figure 6: Trends in Spending Priority, by Estimated Elasticity to Spending Type
   Ratio of Consumption to Instructional Spending
                                                    .9
                                                    .8
                                                    .7
                                                    .6
                                                    .5
                                                    .4




                                                         1990                  1995                        2000               2005               2010
                                                            Estimated elasticity of enrollment w.r.t. spending on consumption and instruction
                                                                                  Cons: Low, Instr: High               Cons: High, Instr: High
                                                                                  Cons: Low, Instr: Low                Cons: High, Instr: Low

Notes: Enrollment elasticity to spending by type is simulated using the estimated choice model in
Table 4 (Specification 2) which includes college fixed effects and interactions between college
characteristics and male, math score, and SES. Spending ratios are calculated at the college-level
and then averaged across colleges in each group




                                                                                                          49
Table 1. College Summary Statistics
                                                                     1992                     2004
mean (std. dev.)                                             public     private        public     private
In‐State Tuition                                             3,584      14,712         5,560     20,827
                                                            (1,476)     (5,647)       (2,356)     (7,302)
Out‐of‐State Tuition                                         9,191      14,773        13,667     20,869
                                                            (3,177)     (5,575)       (4,504)    (7,246)
Room and Board                                               5,349           6,021     7,098      7,323
                                                            (1,643)         (1,844)   (1,504)    (1,776)
Freshmen Fall Enrollment                                     1,307           429       1,607       501
                                                            (1,051)         (448)     (1,436)     (504)
Full‐Time Equivalent Enrollment                              8,513           2,251     9,649      2,853
                                                            (7,695)         (2,950)   (8,989)    (3,552)
Instructional and Academic Support $ per FTE                 7,751           8,049     8,490     10,075
                                                            (3,574)         (4,548)   (3,647)    (5,359)
Student Services and Auxiliary Support $ per FTE             3,394           5,236     3,726      6,438
                                                            (1,565)         (2,624)   (1,794)    (2,880)
Median or mean SAT Ptile                                     57.97           64.47     51.77      58.79
                                                            (15.99)         (17.40)   (16.06)    (18.63)
Highest degree offered is BA                                 0.17            0.41      0.17        0.31
                                                            (0.38)          (0.49)    (0.37)      (0.46)
Highest degree offered is MA                                 0.47            0.43      0.42        0.46
                                                            (0.50)          (0.50)    (0.49)      (0.50)
Highest degree offered is PhD                                0.36            0.16      0.41        0.23
                                                            (0.48)          (0.37)    (0.49)      (0.42)

Number of Schools                                            530             879       570         887

Notes: All spending variables are deflated by the CPI-U and are in 2009 dollars.




                                                       50
Table 2: Student Characteristics

                                                               1992                     2004
Number of students in analysis sample                          4,088                    5,753

Background Characteristics of Analysis Sample         Mean             SD      Mean              SD
Male                                                  0.46             0.50    0.45              0.50
Standardized math score                               0.62             0.83    0.65              0.82
Standardized SES                                      0.41             0.97    0.48              0.97

Standardized composite measure of importance of
various college characteristics in analysis sample*
  Academics (courses, reputation)                      0.27            0.74     0.33             0.69
  Cost (low costs, availability of financial aid)     -0.14            0.65    -0.02             0.67
  Social Life (athletics, social life)                -0.03            0.83     0.18             0.87

Characteristics of institution student attended
 Cost (Tuition + Fees + Room and Board)               14,801           8,608   20,859           10,577
 Distance from institution to home (miles)             196              389      219             481
 School Mean SAT (percentile)                         67.57            17.28    62.08           17.14
 Spending on instruction/fte ($2009)                  9,990            6,836   11,855           9,061
 Spending on student services/fte ($2009)             4,646            2,630    5,286           3,438
 Log(enrollment)                                       7.10             0.97    7.34             0.95
 Predicted probability of admission                    0.71             0.15    0.81             0.18
 Predicted net price                                  11,404           6,573   14,892           7,430
 In state                                              0.74             0.44    0.73             0.44
 In region                                             0.82             0.39    0.82             0.38
Characteristics of institutions not attended
 Cost (Tuition + Fees + Room and Board)               18,694           6,948   26,014           8,396
 Distance from institution to home (miles)             954              709      996             778
 School Mean SAT (percentile)                         64.48            17.13    57.84           18.06
 Spending on instruction/fte ($2009)                  8,644            5,643   10,642           8,396
 Spending on student services/fte ($2009)             4,685            2,598    5,678           3,538
 Log(enrollment)                                       6.45             0.93    6.57             0.94
 Predicted probability of admission                    0.70             0.18    0.81             0.22
 Predicted net price                                  13,288           5,308   17,003           6,509
 In state                                              0.03             0.18    0.04             0.18
 In region                                             0.12             0.33    0.13             0.33


*Simple item average, standardized with 1972 mean and s.d.




                                                      51
Table 3: Estimates of the Predictors of College Choice, No Preference Heterogeneity (Odds Ratios Reported)

                                                                                        Dept Variable: College Chosen by High School Graduates in 1992 and 2004
                                                                          (1)                    (2)                    (3)                   (4)                  (5)                         (6)                   (7)
Log (Tuition, Fees, Room & Board)                                      0.106 ***              0.143 ***              0.145 ***             0.158 ***            0.053 ***                   0.054 ***             0.441 ***
                                                                    (0.0025)               (0.0041)               (0.0042)              (0.0055)             (0.0034)                    (0.0034)              (0.0294)
Log (Distance)                                                         0.331 ***               0.329 ***              0.331 ***              0.326 ***               0.309 ***              0.308 ***             0.472 ***
                                                                    (0.0019)                (0.0020)               (0.0020)               (0.0019)                (0.0027)               (0.0027)              (0.0050)
Log (Spending on Consumption Amenities/FTE)                            1.229 ***               1.854 ***              1.865 ***              1.581 ***               1.236 **               1.245 **              1.142
                                                                    (0.0269)                (0.0499)               (0.0509)               (0.0433)                (0.1133)               (0.1143)              (0.0963)
Log (Spending on Instruction/FTE)                                      1.753 ***               1.223 ***              1.512 ***              1.493 ***               0.760 **               0.758 **              0.832
                                                                    (0.0476)                (0.0392)               (0.0515)               (0.0509)                (0.1064)               (0.1061)              (0.1075)
School Mean SAT (percentile)                                           1.025 ***               1.014 ***              1.021 ***              1.022 ***               1.016 ***              1.016 ***             1.008 ***
                                                                    (0.0008)                (0.0009)               (0.0009)               (0.0009)                (0.0028)               (0.0029)              (0.0025)
Institution state unemployment rate                                                                                                                                                         0.970                 0.935 ***
                                                                                                                                                                                         (0.0224)              (0.0244)
Log(high school grads in institution state)                                                                                                                                                 1.165                 1.138
                                                                                                                                                                                         (0.2841)              (0.3253)
College located in the student's home state                                                                                                                                                                       8.242 ***
                                                                                                                                                                                                               (0.4078)
College located in the student's census region                                                                                                                                                                    2.047 ***
                                                                                                                                                                                                               (0.0920)
Log (Lagged first time freshman enrollment)                               No                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes                     No                      No                    No
Accounting for Probability of Admissions                                  No                     No                     Yes                    Yes                    Yes                     Yes                  Yes
Log (Predicted net price) used as cost measure                            No                     No                     No                     Yes                    Yes                     Yes                  Yes
College Fixed Effects                                                     No                     No                     No                      No                    Yes                     Yes                  Yes

Number of observations                                           10,350,115             10,350,115             10,350,115              10,350,115             10,350,115              10,350,115           10,350,115

Willingness-to-Pay (s.e.)
Log (Distance)                                                        -0.491                  -0.572                 -0.573                 -0.608                  -0.401                 -0.402                -0.917
                                                                    (0.0065)                (0.1010)               (0.0101)               (0.0041)                (0.0041)               (0.0107)              (0.0089)
Log (Spending on Consumption Amenities/FTE)                            0.092                   0.318                  0.323                  0.248                   0.072                  0.075                 0.162
                                                                    (0.0108)                (0.0144)               (0.0146)               (0.0179)                (0.0179)               (0.0338)              (0.0288)
Log (Spending on Instruction/FTE)                                      0.250                   0.104                  0.214                  0.217                  -0.094                 -0.095                -0.225
                                                                    (0.0130)                (0.0163)               (0.0169)               (0.0271)                (0.0270)               (0.0512)              (0.0440)
School Mean SAT (percentile)                                           0.011                   0.007                  0.011                  0.012                   0.005                  0.006                 0.009
                                                                    (0.0004)                (0.0004)               (0.0005)               (0.0005)                (0.0005)               (0.0010)              (0.0009)


Notes: Odds ratios are reported with robust standard errors in parentheses. Spending on consumption amenities includes student services and auxilary enterprises (primarily food service and dorms). Instructional
spending includes both instruction and academic support services. Selective admissions is accounded for by weighing each observation in the conditional logit model by the predicted probability that each student would
be admitted to the school in the given year. See text. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                             52
Table 4: Estimates of the Predictors of College Choice, Heterogeneity by Observable Student Characteristics

                                                           Dept Variable: College Chosen by High School Graduates in
                                                                                 1992 and 2004
                                                                         (1)                           (2)
                                                                        Est.         (S.E.)        Est.        (S.E.)
Log (Tuition, Fees, Room & Board)                                    -1.116 ***   (0.0591)      -1.785 *** (0.0925)
   X male                                                            -0.176 **    (0.0696)      -0.170 **   (0.0758)
   X math score (standardized)                                        0.013       (0.0480)      -0.038      (0.0560)
   X SES (standardized)                                               0.384 ***   (0.0401)       0.409 *** (0.0455)

Log (Distance)                                                         -0.807 ***   (0.0126)       -0.917 ***     (0.0139)
   X male                                                               0.013       (0.0136)        0.008         (0.0137)
   X math score (standardized)                                          0.097 ***   (0.0093)        0.114 ***     (0.0097)
   X SES (standardized)                                                 0.170 ***   (0.0078)        0.170 ***     (0.0081)

Log (Spending on Consumption Amenities/FTE)                             0.324 ***   (0.0404)        0.165   *     (0.0975)
   X male                                                              -0.082       (0.0524)       -0.105   *     (0.0572)
   X math score (standardized)                                         -0.008       (0.0341)       -0.074   *     (0.0411)
   X SES (standardized)                                                 0.130 ***   (0.0288)        0.148   ***   (0.0327)

Log (Spending on Instruction/FTE)                                      -0.323 ***   (0.0536)       -0.958 ***     (0.1447)
   X male                                                               0.071       (0.0622)        0.072         (0.0680)
   X math score (standardized)                                          0.499 ***   (0.0418)        0.622 ***     (0.0519)
   X SES (standardized)                                                 0.049       (0.0359)        0.061         (0.0410)

School Mean SAT (percentile)                                            0.000       (0.0013)       -0.009   ***   (0.0029)
   X male                                                              -0.005 ***   (0.0018)       -0.005   ***   (0.0020)
   X math score (standardized)                                          0.026 ***   (0.0012)        0.033   ***   (0.0015)
   X SES (standardized)                                                 0.010 ***   (0.0010)        0.012   ***   (0.0011)

Log (Lagged first time freshman enrollment)                               Yes                            No
Accounting for Probability of Admissions                                  Yes                            Yes
Log (Predicted net price) used as cost measure                            Yes                            Yes
College Fixed Effects                                                     No                             Yes
Unemployment rate, Log(HS grads), In-state, In-region                     Yes                            Yes

Number of observations                                               10,350,115                      10,350,115




Notes: Coefficients are reported with robust standard errors in parentheses. Spending on consumption amenities
includes student services and auxilary enterprises (primarily food service and dorms). Instructional spending includes
both instruction and academic support services. Selective admissions is accounded for by weighing each observation
in the conditional logit model by the predicted probability that each student would be admitted to the school in the given
year. Predicted net price is from auxilliary model estimated with other data. See text. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                  53
Table 5: Robustness of Main Demand Model

                                                                          Dept Variable: College Chosen by High School Graduates in 1992 and 2004
                                                                                                    FT faculty as academic                 Spending effects vary by
                                                                  Main model                          resource measure                         institution level
                                                                       (1)                                     (2)                                    (3)
                                                                   Est.       (S.E.)                     Est.          (S.E.)                   Est.             (S.E.)
Log (Tuition, Fees, Room & Board)                               -1.785 *** (0.0925)                   -1.834 ***    (0.0926)                 -1.784 ***      (0.0925)
   X male                                                       -0.170 **  (0.0758)                   -0.150 **     (0.0743)                 -0.170 **       (0.0758)
   X math score (standardized)                                  -0.038     (0.0560)                    0.050        (0.0548)                 -0.038          (0.0560)
   X SES (standardized)                                          0.409 *** (0.0455)                    0.414 ***    (0.0446)                  0.409 ***      (0.0455)

Log (Distance)                                                  -0.917 ***     (0.0139)               -0.905 ***     (0.0137)                 -0.917 ***     (0.0139)
   X male                                                        0.008         (0.0137)                0.007         (0.0134)                  0.008         (0.0137)
   X math score (standardized)                                   0.114 ***     (0.0097)                0.099 ***     (0.0095)                  0.114 ***     (0.0097)
   X SES (standardized)                                          0.170 ***     (0.0081)                0.170 ***     (0.0079)                  0.170 ***     (0.0081)

Log (Spending on Consumption Amenities/FTE)                      0.165   *     (0.0975)                0.059         (0.0946)                  0.291         (0.2563)
   X male                                                       -0.105   *     (0.0572)               -0.108 *       (0.0587)                 -0.105 *       (0.0571)
   X math score (standardized)                                  -0.074   *     (0.0411)               -0.038         (0.0417)                 -0.071 *       (0.0412)
   X SES (standardized)                                          0.148   ***   (0.0327)                0.147 ***     (0.0340)                  0.150 ***     (0.0327)
   X Masters-level institution                                                                                                                -0.072         (0.2582)
   X PhD-level institution                                                                                                                    -0.171         (0.2665)

Log (Spending on Instruction/FTE)                               -0.958 ***     (0.1447)                                                       -1.032 ***     (0.2553)
   X male                                                        0.072         (0.0680)                                                        0.072         (0.0679)
   X math score (standardized)                                   0.622 ***     (0.0519)                                                        0.619 ***     (0.0521)
   X SES (standardized)                                          0.061         (0.0410)                                                        0.060         (0.0409)
   X Masters-level institution                                                                                                                 0.048         (0.2463)
   X PhD-level institution                                                                                                                     0.140         (0.2533)

Log (FT faculty/fte)                                                                                  -0.504 ***     (0.1234)
   X male                                                                                              0.053         (0.0621)
   X math score (standardized)                                                                         0.360 ***     (0.0445)
   X SES (standardized)                                                                                0.049         (0.0366)

School Mean SAT (percentile)                                    -0.009   ***   (0.0029)               -0.012   ***   (0.0029)                 -0.009   ***   (0.0029)
   X male                                                       -0.005   ***   (0.0020)               -0.005   **    (0.0019)                 -0.005   ***   (0.0020)
   X math score (standardized)                                   0.033   ***   (0.0015)                0.037   ***   (0.0014)                  0.033   ***   (0.0015)
   X SES (standardized)                                          0.012   ***   (0.0011)                0.012   ***   (0.0011)                  0.012   ***   (0.0011)


Log likelihood                                                    -38142.4                                -38199.5                                -38141.0
Number of observations                                           10,350,115                              10,350,115                              10,350,115




Notes: All specifications account for probability of admissions, use predicted net price as the measure of cost, include college fixed effects, and control for
unemployment rate, log(number of high school graduates), and dummies for in-state and in-region. Coefficients are reported with robust standard errors in
parentheses. Spending on consumption amenities includes student services and auxilary enterprises (primarily food service and dorms). Instructional spending
includes both instruction and academic support services. Selective admissions is accounded for by weighing each observation in the conditional logit model by the
predicted probability that each student would be admitted to the school in the given year. Predicted net price is from auxilliary model estimated with other data. See
text. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



                                                                                                        54
Table 6. Parameter estimates from random coefficients model with no fixed effects

                                                       Dept Variable: College Chosen by High School Graduates in 1992 and 2004
                                                                      (1)                          (2)                                         (3)
Mean of coefficient on:
Log (Tuition, Fees, Room & Board)                                 -1.8182 ***                       -2.0289 ***                           -2.0814 ***
                                                                 (0.0346)                          (0.0527)                              (0.0545)
Log (Distance)                                                    -1.1427 ***                       -1.2683 ***                           -1.2671 ***
                                                                 (0.0072)                          (0.0111)                              (0.0111)
Log (Spending on Consumption Amenities/FTE)                        0.6014 ***                        0.6172 ***                            0.6364 ***
                                                                 (0.0290)                          (0.0420)                              (0.0444)
Log (Spending on Instruction/FTE)                                  0.2352 ***                       -0.3523 ***                           -0.4333 ***
                                                                 (0.0368)                          (0.0532)                              (0.0559)
School Mean SAT (percentile)                                       0.0209 ***                        0.0056 ***                            0.0056 ***
                                                                 (0.0010)                          (0.0013)                              (0.0014)
Standard deviation of coefficient on:
Log (Tuition, Fees, Room & Board)                                  1.2717 ***                        1.0556 ***                            0.9863 ***
                                                                 (0.0559)                          (0.0596)                              (0.0615)
Log (Distance)                                                     0.1605 ***                        0.0865 **                             0.0660 **
                                                                 (0.0193)                          (0.0430)                              (0.0300)
Log (Spending on Consumption Amenities/FTE)                        0.0266                            0.0558                                0.0348
                                                                 (0.0903)                          (0.0656)                              (0.0589)
Log (Spending on Instruction/FTE)                                  0.4454 ***                         0.044                                0.0255
                                                                 (0.0718)                          (0.0681)                              (0.0621)
School Mean SAT (percentile)                                       0.0122 ***                        0.0022                                0.0007
                                                                 (0.0033)                          (0.0025)                              (0.0024)

Accounting for Probability of Admissions                              Yes                               Yes                                   Yes
College Fixed Effects                                                  No                                No                                    No
                                                                                                                    Interactions with observable
                                                                                                                     characteristics (male, math,
                                                                                          Interactions with                 SES) and reason for
                                                                                                observable              choosing college (social,
                                                                                     characteristics (male,                  expense, academic
Other controls                                                       None                      math, SES)                              reputation)

Log likelihood value                                              -44,177                           -42,369                              -41,825



Notes: Coefficients are reported with robust standard errors in parentheses. Spending on consumption amenities includes student services and
auxilary enterprises (primarily food service and dorms). Instructional spending includes both instruction and academic support services.
Selective admissions is accounded for by weighing each observation in the conditional logit model by the predicted probability that each student
would be admitted to the school in the given year. See text. Stated preference is constructed by combining answers to several questions about
the importance of various factors in college decision into three categories: social life (including athletics), costs (low cost, availability of financial
aid), and academics (course offerings and reputation). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.. All specifications also control for log(enrollment). Model
is estimated using simulated maximum likelihood estimation with 20 Halton draws.




                                                                            55
Table 7: Conditional Logit Estimates of the Predictors of College Choice, Heterogeneity by Stated Preference

                                                                  Dept Var: College Chosen by High School Graduates in 1992 and 2004
Independent Variables                                                              (1)                               (2)
                                                                                 Est.           (S.E.)            Est.           (S.E.)
Log (Tuition, Fees, Room & Board)                                            -3.360    ***   (0.0691)          -4.086 *** (0.0921)
   X social life important (standardized)                                     0.100     **   (0.0485)           0.050         (0.0506)
   X expenses important (standardized)                                       -0.529    ***   (0.0670)          -0.498 *** (0.0698)
   X academics important (standardized)                                       0.252    ***   (0.0593)           0.230 *** (0.0607)
   X male                                                                                                      -0.157     * (0.0853)
   X math score (standardized)                                                                                 -0.071         (0.0631)
   X SES (standardized)                                                                                         0.230 *** (0.0515)

Log (Distance)                                                                 -1.209    ***    (0.0099)            -1.274    ***   (0.0137)
   X social life important (standardized)                                       0.092    ***    (0.0075)             0.099    ***   (0.0081)
   X expenses important (standardized)                                         -0.261    ***    (0.0106)            -0.191    ***   (0.0112)
   X academics important (standardized)                                         0.045    ***    (0.0097)             0.024     **   (0.0102)
   X male                                                                                                           -0.015          (0.0140)
   X math score (standardized)                                                                                       0.099    ***   (0.0099)
   X SES (standardized)                                                                                              0.111    ***   (0.0082)

Log (Spending on Consumption Amenities/FTE)                                     0.129           (0.0959)             0.176          (0.1084)
   X social life important (standardized)                                       0.162    ***    (0.0331)             0.128    ***   (0.0349)
   X expenses important (standardized)                                         -0.337    ***    (0.0472)            -0.248    ***   (0.0501)
   X academics important (standardized)                                         0.058           (0.0416)             0.052          (0.0435)
   X male                                                                                                           -0.142     **   (0.0611)
   X math score (standardized)                                                                                      -0.138    ***   (0.0438)
   X SES (standardized)                                                                                              0.239    ***   (0.0361)

Log (Spending on Instruction/FTE)                                              -0.317     **    (0.1450)            -1.102    ***   (0.1612)
   X social life important (standardized)                                      -0.120    ***    (0.0408)            -0.083      *   (0.0429)
   X expenses important (standardized)                                         -0.215    ***    (0.0572)            -0.112      *   (0.0606)
   X academics important (standardized)                                         0.249    ***    (0.0519)             0.215    ***   (0.0541)
   X male                                                                                                            0.142      *   (0.0736)
   X math score (standardized)                                                                                       0.637    ***   (0.0562)
   X SES (standardized)                                                                                              0.024          (0.0454)

School Mean SAT (percentile)                                                    0.015    ***    (0.0030)            -0.006          (0.0034)
   X social life important (standardized)                                      -0.001           (0.0012)             0.004    ***   (0.0012)
   X expenses important (standardized)                                         -0.022    ***    (0.0016)            -0.012    ***   (0.0017)
   X academics important (standardized)                                         0.005    ***    (0.0014)             0.001          (0.0015)
   X male                                                                                                           -0.007    ***   (0.0022)
   X math score (standardized)                                                                                       0.040    ***   (0.0016)
   X SES (standardized)                                                                                              0.011    ***   (0.0013)

Log likelihood                                                                 -41,046.41                            -39,135.82
Number of observations                                                         10,350,115                            10,350,115


Notes: All specifications account for probability of admissions, use predicted net price as the measure of cost, and include college fixed
effects. Coefficients are reported with robust standard errors in parentheses. Spending on consumption amenities includes student
services and auxilary enterprises (primarily food service and dorms). Instructional spending includes both instruction and academic support
services. Selective admissions is accounded for by weighing each observation in the conditional logit model by the predicted probability
that each student would be admitted to the school in the given year. See text. Stated preference is constructed by combining answers to
several questions about the importance of various factors in college decision into three categories: social life (including athletics), costs
(low cost, availability of financial aid), and academics (course offerings and reputation). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                    56
Table 8: Relationship between Demand Elasticity and Spending Priorities in 2007

                                                   Dependent variable: Ratio of Consumption Amenities to Instructional Spending
                                                                                                                        Robustness
                                                                                                                          FT faculty as Spending
                                                                                                                           academic     effects vary
                                                                   Main choice model                         No fixed      resource     by institution
                                                             (includes college fixed effects)                 effects      measure          level
                                                       (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)           (6)           (7)
Public institution                                  -0.166***                                -0.144***       -0.135***     -0.162***     -0.163***
                                                     (0.023)                                   (0.022)        (0.023)        (0.023)       (0.021)
Mean SAT of college                                 -0.002***                                 -0.002**         -0.001      -0.004***      -0.002**
                                                     (0.001)                                   (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)
Log(Enrollment)                                     -0.063***                                -0.048***       -0.044***     -0.062***        0.010
                                                     (0.012)                                   (0.012)        (0.012)        (0.012)       (0.012)
Log(Consumption + instructional spending)             0.010                                    -0.005           0.019       -0.058**        0.047
                                                     (0.028)                                   (0.030)        (0.031)        (0.029)       (0.029)
Elasticity w.r.t. spending on
  Consumption amenities (standardized)                            0.074***     0.112***     0.092***         0.106***       0.090***      0.110***
                                                                  (0.008)       (0.009)      (0.011)          (0.014)       (0.015)        (0.008)
  Instruction (standardized)                                                   -0.091***    -0.055***        -0.097***       0.001        -0.045***
                                                                                (0.010)      (0.018)          (0.023)       (0.019)        (0.017)

Constant                                             1.109***     0.612***     0.612***     1.137***         0.856***       1.893***        0.283
                                                     (0.256)      (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.299)          (0.309)        (0.284)        (0.285)

Observations                                          1,151        1,151        1,151         1,151            1,151         1,151          1,151
R-squared                                             0.288        0.070        0.157         0.346            0.326         0.325          0.400
State FE                                               Yes          No           No            Yes              Yes           Yes            Yes


Notes: Enrollment elasticities in columns (1) to (4) are estimated for each college using estimates from model in Table 6 (specification 4) which
includes interactions between college characteristics and student characteristics (male, math score, and SES), and adjustments for admissions
selectivity and net price. Enrollment elasticities are normalized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one. Specification (6) includes the
elasticity with respect to log(full-time faculty per student) in place of instructional spending elasticity. Robust standard errors reported in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                              57
                                                   Appendix - Not for Publication



                    Appendix A: Deriving Institution-specific Demand Elasticities

One source of variation in demand elasticities across institutions is variation in preferences
across students combined with differences across institutions in the underlying distribution of
student characteristics. Denote the elasticity of expected enrollment at college j with respect to
academic quality Aj by ξ j A . From the definition of elasticity we have:
                                           ∂N j         Aj                     1| T j , Aj , C j , β , α , γ , I )
                                                                      ∂P ( y j =
                              ξ jA =
                                           ∂Aj
                                                    ×
                                                        Nj
                                                              =   ∫                      ∂Aj
                                                                                                                     dG ( β ,α , γ , I )

                                                                                 Aj
                                       ×
                                           ∫ ∂P( y      j   1| T j , Aj , C j , β , α , γ , I )dG ( β , α , γ , I )
                                                            =
                                                                                               (1)
 To show the connection of ξ j to G we would like to analyze how ξ j changes for a “small”
                                               A                                                                 A


change in G. To keep the analytics simple we assume that students only differ according to
academic quality preferences α and that there are only two types in the population 1 and 2 where
the fraction of type 1 equals q. Given these simplifications, the elasticity becomes:
                                         qp ξ A + (1 − q ) p j 2ξ jA2
                                  ξ j A = j1 j1
                                           qp j1 + (1 − q ) p j 2
                                                                                                (2)
where pji equals the probability that an individual of type i attends college j and ξji equals the
                                                                                       A

elasticity of expected enrollment at college j for type i, i = 1,2. Thus the institution-specific
enrollment elasticity (with respect to a change in characteristic A) is a weighted average of type-
specific elasticities with weights proportional to each type’s prevalence in the population and
initial enrollment likelihood. 1 To see how ξ j A changes for a small change in the distribution of
student types in the population and their initial enrollment shares, we differentiate with respect to
q and pji separately:
                       ∂ξ j A     p j1 p j 2 (ξ jA1 − ξ jA2 )   ∂ξ j A q (1 − q ) p j 2 (ξ jA1 − ξ jA2 )
                              =                                       =                                  .
                                ( qp j1 − (1 − q) p j 2 ) and ∂p j1 ( qp j1 + (1 − q) p j 2 )
                                                              2                                      2
                        ∂q
                                                                                                           (3)
If we define group 1 as the group with a greater enrollment elasticity with respect to Aj
(ξ jA1 > ξ jA2 ) , then ξ j A is increasing with the prevalence of type 1 in the population and their initial
likelihood of enrolling at college j. This logic can be extended to many different types of
individuals and multiple dimensions of college characteristics.




1                               =
    When pji has a logit form then ξ ji    A
                                                   α i Aj (1 − p ji )     where αi is the preference parameter for type i, i=1,2.




                                                                  Appendix - 1
                                  Appendix - Not for Publication



                                 Appendix B: Data and Sample

        The student-level data for this analysis is drawn from two datasets collected by the U.S.
Department of Education: the National Educational Longitudinal Survey (NELS), which tracks
the high school graduating class of 1992 and the Educational Longitudinal Survey (ELS), which
tracks the high school graduating class of 2004. Both datasets provided detailed information on
student demographics, prior achievement, college application and admission decisions and
college enrollment.

Construction of Our Analysis Sample
We include in our analysis only students who we observe enrolled in an “eligible” four-year, not-
for-profit college within two years of expected high school graduation. As discussed in the
paper, we limit our college sample in several ways to facilitate our focus on amenities arguably
related to direct, immediate consumption value. First, we limit our sample to public and non-
profit private undergraduate four-year schools only, excluding all two-year (or less) schools, all
for-profit schools, and schools offering professional degrees only. Second, we drop specialized
divinity, law, medical, specialized health (e.g. nursing), and art schools, though we keep
engineering, teaching, military, and business schools. We drop schools with an average of fewer
than 50 freshmen or 300 FTEs over our four sample years in an effort to eliminate remaining
specialized schools which are arguably not in many students’ choice set. We drop from our
analysis any school for which we do not have information on instructional spending, student
service spending, tuition or room and board costs, zip code, enrollment, or average SAT score.
Finally, because they will not contribute at all to the estimation, colleges that were not attended
by at least one student in our micro-data sample are dropped (Table B1).

         Our data on enrollment school comes from student surveys administered in 1994 for the
NELS cohort and in 2006 for the ELS cohort. We define a student’s choice school as the first
institution she or he attended, according to NELS and ELS surveys. For NELS, students were
asked which schools they attended in a 1994 follow-up survey. This is separate from the
application survey questions in 1992 asking students in their senior year of high school which
post-secondary institutions they applied to and whether they were accepted. The ELS asked
students in 2006, two years after graduation, to which schools they applied, were accepted, and
attended.

        Using the enrollment dates provided in the data, we identify the first institution each
student attended. Note that it is possible that we dropped students who began their post-
secondary education at an ineligible school, but transferred to an eligible school – even as early
as the first Fall following the student’s senior year in high school. We plan to change this in
future versions of the paper. In the NELS (ELS), this was determined by the IPEDS code listed
in unitid1 (f2iiped1 if f2iattnd1=1).

         Our student sample begins with all of the students in the nationally representative set of
12th graders in 1992 (NELS) and 2004 (ELS). Note that the NELS (ELS) starts by surveying
students in 8th (10th) grade, but “freshen” their sample to obtain a nationally representative set of
12th graders in the years above. We first drop students who did not first attend one of the eligible
institutions in our sample. We then drop students who have missing information on high school




                                           Appendix - 2
                                  Appendix - Not for Publication



state, socioeconomic status, standardized math score, gender, or race. Next, we drop schools
from the students’ choice set which have missing covariates such as instructional and student
spending, tuition and room-and-board costs, enrollment, or average SAT score. Table B2 shows
how the sample size changes for each step in the process above.
         Finally, we drop from our analysis any student whose choice school was subsequently
dropped due to those aforementioned missing covariates. It is possible that a student
chose/attended an otherwise-eligible school which was missing a key covariate, such as mean
SAT or tuition costs. When this student’s choice school was dropped for missing these
variables, we dropped the student entirely from the analysis set.

Variable Construction
         Finally, for some of our analyses, we also use data on the quality of life and cost-of-living
in the geographic areas in which each college is located. Quality of life is measured both at the
county level and the consistent Public Use Micro Area (PUMA) level, and is calculated using
data from the 2000 census (Albouy 2012). In essence, these hedonic measures incorporate
information on local land values, wage levels and housing costs. For this analysis, we use the
consistent PUMA quality of life. The cost-of-living index is based on the cost of a weighted
bundle of consumer goods. The data is collected annually for a variety of cities across the
United States by the Council for Community and Economic Research and local Chambers of
Commerce.
         From IPEDS, we have a single zip code associated with each institution. For the most
part, the institution occupies a space inside the zip code. However, there are also “unique” zip
codes, which the US Post Office assigns to institutions (UCLA, for example) which receive large
amounts of mail. In these cases, the zip code is associated with a point, often an administrative
building or campus post office (http://www.census.gov/geo/ZCTA/zctafaq.html#Q10). We then
utilized the Missouri Data Center’s Dexter Database to link zip codes to Public Use Micro Areas
(PUMA), which were then aggregated into Consistent Public Use Micro Areas (CPUMA). The
QOL measure we used was an aggregate for the CPUMA.
         To get a measure of urban area for the institution, we utilize ArcGis and Census
Tiger/Line files, mapping the coordinates associated with the population-weighted center of the
institution’s zip code to the closest urban area or cluster, and micro- or metropolitan area.
Finally, we assign an institution as urban if the zip code center falls into an urban area or cluster.
Approximately 94% of schools were located in a metropolitan or micropolitan area. As noted
above, for the 17% of institutions that were not located in an urban area or cluster, we assign
them to the nearest urban area/cluster.
         Cost-of-living information was collected roughly at the city level. CCER denotes these
cities by assigning them the name of the Census-defined “urban area” that is located most closely
to the city. In addition, CCER identifies the “Core-based Statistical Area” (CBSA) within which
the city is located. First, we only include the quarterly cost-of-living composition measures for
1990-1992, 2002-2004. We then take four steps to match the cost of living to institutions. First,
we match urban area name from the CCER data to the urban area in which the college is located,
which we identified based on the latitude and longitude of the zip code centroid in which the
institution is located. Those institutions matching are then assigned the mean composite cost-of-
living over the relevant time period. Second, for those not matching via urban area name, we
then aggregate the cost of living over the CBSA and match via the CBSA code. There are,
however, a number of CBSA that have no measures for cost of living, as well as institutions




                                            Appendix - 3
                                Appendix - Not for Publication



which are not located in a CBSA. Third, for those not matching via CBSA code, we match to the
mean composite cost of living over the state. Finally, there are no cost-of-living measures for
Maine (1992 and 2004) or Rhode Island (1992). Institutions in these states are assigned the
mean composite over all New England states.




                                         Appendix - 4
                                        Appendix - Not for Publication

Table B1: Number of institutions (starting with constructed sample)
                                            NELS (1992)        ELS (2004)
Total schools in sample                        1,409              1457
No fallout for missing zip code, student       1,409              1457
or instructional spending
After dropping schools with missing             1,401               1452
tuition or room and board costs
No fallout for missing enrollment or mean       1,401               1452
SAT information
After dropping schools that no student in        977                1108
sample chose

Table B2: Summary Statistics on Sample Construction
Number of students                      NELS (1992)              ELS (2004)
Total students in survey                  28,622                   16,197
After dropping students not enrolled in   17,959                   13,370
   th
12 grade at time of the 1992 or 2004
survey
After dropping students who did not       16,409                   11,984
respond to the follow-up survey
After dropping students who did not        8,571                   9,466
attend any postsecondary school within
two years of expected high school
graduation
After dropping students who did not        5,104                   5,757
attend a sample school
After dropping students with missing       4,101                   5,757
information on key covariates
After dropping students whose choice       4,083                   5,741
college was missing information




                                                Appendix - 5
                                         Appendix - Not for Publication

Table B3. Pair‐wise Correlations of College Characteristics

                                                             Log Out-of-
                                              Log In-State     State          Log             Log
                                               Tuition +      Tuition +     Services     Instructional   Mean
                                                 RBR            RBR         Spending       Spending      SAT
                                                                       Correlations in 2004
Log In-State Tuition + RBR                        1.000
Log Out-of-State Tuition + RBR                    0.861        1.000
Log Services Spending                             0.633        0.588          1.000
Log Instructional Spending                        0.513        0.648          0.597           1.000
Mean SAT                                          0.492        0.608          0.489           0.634       1.000


                                                                       Correlations in 1992
Log In-State Tuition + RBR                        1.000
Log Out-of-State Tuition + RBR                    0.889        1.000
Log Services Spending                             0.580        0.592          1.000
Log Instructional Spending                        0.434        0.602          0.547           1.000
Mean SAT                                          0.483        0.564          0.491           0.588       1.000


                                                              Correlation of difference 2004-1992
Log In-State Tuition + RBR                       1.000
Log Out-of-State Tuition + RBR                   0.845         1.000
Log Services Spending                            0.111         0.086          1.000
Log Instructional Spending                       0.091         0.076          0.457           1.000
Mean SAT                                         0.019         0.019          0.019           0.067       1.000



Notes: Each cell is the college-level pair-wise (unweighted) correlation between each pair of variables.
Correlations where observations are weighted based on the number of individuals choosing the school in our
sample are very similar, both qualitatively and quantitatively. Estimates in italics indicate correlation is not
significant at the 95% level. All other correlations are significant.




                                                   Appendix - 6
                                  Appendix - Not for Publication



           Appendix C: Extension of Long (2004) and Cohort-Specific Estimates

         To provide a direct comparison with previous work, we first extend the analysis of Long
(2004) by including measures of college consumption amenities into her conditional logit
specifications. In Table C1, the first two columns for each cohort year show her results (BTL)
and our results (JMS) for a comparable specification side by side, indicating that we are able to
successfully replicate her findings. It should be noted that our results should not be exactly
comparable to hers since her estimation includes two-year colleges and students (which we
exclude) and not all variables are interacted with sector in her model. The third column for each
cohort adds three measures of consumption amenities to this basic model. We find that spending
on student services and auxiliary enterprises have a large and statistically significant relationship
with the likelihood of choosing a particular college, as does the presence of a division 1
basketball or football team and the fraction of students who join fraternities or sororities. The
inclusion of these measures diminished the estimated importance of instructional expenditure.
         Table C2 presents results from comparable models estimated separately by cohort, but
using a specification that mirrors that used in main analysis. Table B2 shows the odds ratios and
standard errors from our conditional logit model described above, separately for the 1992 and
2004 cohort. Following the prior literature, we include log enrollment to control for school size.
Given the cross-sectional identification concerns raised in the previous section, we do not
interpret these specifications as providing good estimates of preference parameters for student-
invariant characteristics. Rather, this analysis provides a benchmark for subsequent analysis and
illustrates the importance of including consumption amenities and accounting for selective
admissions when estimating college choice models.
         In columns 1 and 5, we see that tuition and distance are negatively associated with
student choice while enrollment, instructional spending and mean SAT score are positively
associated with choice. In columns 2 and 6, we add the log of per pupil spending on student
services and auxiliary enterprises, which we argue measures the level of consumption amenities
at the college. Conditional on the measures of cost, distance and academic quality, we see that
spending on student services is a significant predictor of enrollment. Specifically, the odds ratio
of 2.45 in column (2) indicates that a doubling of spending on student services is associated with
a 145 percent increase in the likelihood a student will attend a given school in 1992. Note that
the magnitude of this effect is even larger than the effect of instructional spending. Because
school mean SAT and instructional spending are arguably closely related proxies for academic
quality, in columns 3 and 7 we show results for a model that excludes school mean SAT. The
odds ratio on instructional spending does increase, but spending on student services still remains
a stronger predictor of enrollment than instructional spending.
         As noted earlier, however, failing to account for whether a student would be accepted to a
given school may bias estimates of the importance of college attributes. To account for
selective admissions, the models shown in columns 4 and 8 weight each student-college
observation by the predicted probability that the student would have been accepted to the
college. As expected, the coefficients on both measures of academic quality – instructional
spending and mean SAT – increase considerably. Failing to adequately account for selective
admissions may bias estimates of students’ preferences for college attributes that are also related
to admissions difficulty.




                                           Appendix - 7
                                                                                  Appendix - Not for Publication

Table C1: College choice conditional on attendance
Dependent variable: attended college j within 2 years of high school graduation (odds ratios)
                                                                         1972                                                  1980                                                 1992
                                                            Long             JMS           JMS                   Long        JMS            JMS                   Long            JMS               JMS
                                                             (1)              (2)           (3)                   (4)         (5)            (6)                   (7)             (8)               (9)
                           Tuition & Fees ($1000)        0.4686**          0.543***      0.523***             0.5809**     0.573***       0.555***              .6548**         0.755***          0.738***
                                                          [32.32]         (0.00979)       (0.010)              [26.68]     (0.0114)       (0.0117)              [39.21]        (0.00639)         (0.00656)
                        Tuition & Fees ($1000) sq        1.0485∗∗          1.030***      1.030***             1.0328**     1.030***       1.030***             1.0147**         1.008***          1.008***
                                                          [24.87]         (0.00116)       (0.001)              [21.98]    (0.00128)      (0.00138)              [31.91]       (0.000292)        (0.000308)
                                 Distance (100mi)         .1665**          0.213***      0.208***             0.1954**     0.204***       0.196***              .2668**         0.235***          0.235***
                                                          [65.29]         (0.00522)       (0.005)              [60.91]    (0.00583)      (0.00571)              [64.66]        (0.00525)         (0.00526)
                         Instruct expend. ($1000)          1.038           1.053***        0.992               1.0303      1.071***         1.029              1.1035**         1.040***           1.023**
                                                           [1.46]          (0.0200)       (0.019)               [1.27]     (0.0191)       (0.0184)               [6.08]        (0.00929)         (0.00992)
                               % Faculty with PhD        1.0050**          1.233***        1.106              1.0048**       0.950          0.903              1.0060**         1.266***          1.222***
                                                           [7.18]          (0.0752)       (0.068)               [5.46]     (0.0656)       (0.0629)               [6.20]         (0.0918)          (0.0902)
                                  Enrollment (100)           not           1.052***      1.048***                 not      1.045***       1.040***                 not          1.070***          1.062***
                                                         reported         (0.00333)       (0.004)             reported    (0.00349)      (0.00417)             reported        (0.00401)         (0.00506)
                               Enrollment (100) sq           not           1.000***      1.000***                 not      1.000***       1.000***                 not          0.999***          1.000***
                                                         reported        (4.71e-05)       (0.000)             reported    (4.33e-05)     (4.95e-05)            reported       (6.71e-05)        (7.56e-05)
           Student - School test score ptile (pos)       0.6525**          0.805***      0.815***             0.8662**     0.858***       0.883***              .7129**         0.850***          0.875***
                                                          [10.26]          (0.0285)       (0.029)               [4.64]     (0.0357)       (0.0370)              [11.26]         (0.0385)          (0.0398)
           Student - School test score ptile (neg)         0.995           0.899***      0.898***             0.8324**     0.886***       0.885***             1.1809**         0.808***          0.784***
                                                           [0.16]          (0.0338)       (0.034)               [5.75]     (0.0352)       (0.0352)               [4.78]         (0.0324)          (0.0317)
     Student services + auxilary expend. ($1000)                                         1.457***                                         1.371***                                                1.209***
                                                                                          (0.045)                                         (0.0496)                                                (0.0281)
                    Has Div1 Basketball/Football                                         1.202***                                         1.200***                                                1.212***
                                                                                          (0.054)                                         (0.0629)                                                (0.0593)
                 % of Students who join Frat/Sor                                         2.421***                                         2.095***                                                2.052***
                                                                                          (0.322)                                          (0.358)                                                 (0.293)

                                           Individuals      5,666                                                   4881                                           5,693
                                        Observations        12,118,588        4,108,256      4,108,256           9,651,768 2,566,527          2,566,527          15,011,370        4,006,240         4,006,240
Notes: [z-statistics] or (standard errors) reported below odds ratio. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All specifications also include a square and cubic in distance, square in cost, expenditure squared,
and student-school match variables squared. Long does not interact % faculty with PhD or student-school match variables with sector (2-year or 4-year), so our estimates for 4-year college students
only are not directly comparable.




                                                                                                Appendix - 8
                                                                       Appendix - Not for Publication

Table C2: Conditional Logit Estimates of the Predictors of College Choice, Separate Cross-sections (Odds ratios reported)


                                                               High School Graduates in 1992                                        High School Graduates in 2004

Independent Variables                                 (1)               (2)             (3)             (4)                (5)            (6)             (7)             (8)
Log (Tuition, Fees, Room & Board)                  0.164***          0.132***        0.147***        0.139***           0.162***       0.148***        0.166***        0.146***
                                                   (0.007)           (0.006)         (0.006)         (0.006)            (0.007)        (0.006)         (0.007)         (0.006)
Log (Distance)                                     0.322***          0.318***        0.316***        0.320***           0.340***       0.337***        0.336***        0.339***
                                                   (0.003)           (0.003)         (0.003)         (0.003)            (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.003)         (0.003)
Log (Spending on Student Services/fte)                               2.452***        2.673***        2.508***                          1.611***        1.819***        1.607***
                                                                     (0.118)         (0.128)         (0.123)                           (0.053)         (0.058)         (0.053)
Log (Spending on Instruction/fte)                  1.987***          1.295***        1.471***        1.453***           1.506***       1.192***        1.444***        1.559***
                                                   (0.088)           (0.068)         (0.074)         (0.079)            (0.055)        (0.049)         (0.056)         (0.069)
School Mean SAT (percentile)                       1.017***          1.012***                        1.018***           1.019***       1.015***                        1.023***
                                                   (0.001)           (0.001)                         (0.001)            (0.001)        (0.001)                         (0.001)
Log (Lagged first time freshman enrollment)        1.659***          1.819***        1.899***        1.787***           1.893***       2.036***        2.200***        2.046***
                                                   (0.037)           (0.042)         (0.043)         (0.040)            (0.032)        (0.037)         (0.040)         (0.036)
Institution state unemployment rate                0.965***           0.978*         0.970**          0.989              1.004          0.989           0.967*          0.970
                                                   (0.012)           (0.013)         (0.012)         (0.013)            (0.019)        (0.019)         (0.018)         (0.019)


Accounting for probability of admissions              No                No              No             Yes                No              No              No             Yes

Number of observations                            3,989,091         3,989,091       3,989,091      3,989,087          6,361,028       6,361,028       6,361,028       6,361,028


Notes: Odds ratios are reported with robust standard errors in parentheses. Spending on student services also includes spending on auxilary enterprises (primarily food service and
dorms). Instruction includes both instruction and academic support services. Selective admissions is accounded for by weighing each observation in the conditional logit model by
the predicted probability that each student would be admitted to the school in the given year. See text. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                  Appendix - 9
                                 Appendix - Not for Publication



               Appendix D: Estimating the Probability of College Admissions

Both the NELS and ELS ask students to list colleges to which they applied and whether they
were admitted to each college. We restrict our attention to student applications to the set of
“regular” four-year colleges or universities in our main analysis sample. The resulting data set
contains 22,934 (12,155) student-college observations from 2004 (1992). To determine the
probability that individual i would be admitted to school j, we estimate probit models where the
dependent variable is a binary indicator for admitted and the independent variables include
student and school characteristics (and student x school interactions), including student race,
gender, SES, high school GPA and standardized achievement scores along with measures of the
school’s selectivity such as the average SAT score of students in the school. Admissions models
are estimated separately by the triple interaction of race, sector, and in-state status. Using the
coefficient estimates from these models, we predict the likelihood that student i would be
admitted to each of the college in our sample (regardless of whether or not the student actually
applied to the college).
        In order to separate admissions from enrollment decisions, we must first estimate the
probability that student i would have been admitted to college j (conditional on applying).
        NELS and ELS both ask students to report which colleges they applied to and, among
these, to which colleges they were admitted. In the NELS, students were asked in 1992 (when
they were high school seniors) to list up to 2 schools to which they had applied and to indicate
whether or not they had been accepted to each school. In the 1994 follow-up survey, students
were asked to list up to 5 schools they had attended since the 1992 survey. In order to capture a
more complete set of schools to which the student may have applied, we combine information
from both of these surveys. Specifically, we include all schools the student listed in the 1992
survey as well as the first two schools we observe the students attending based on the
information reported in the 1994 survey (this survey provides enrollment dates which allow us to
identify the first two schools). In this way, we observe a maximum of four application schools
for each student. Also note that, by construction, a student will have been accepted to any school
we observe him or her attending by 1994. Table D1 (D2) shows the distribution of applications
and acceptances for the NELS (ELS) sample. Note that for this analysis we are incorporating
information on all schools to which a student applied, including many two-year colleges that are
not included in our analysis sample of colleges.
        In the ELS, students were asked in 2006 (two years after expected high school
graduation) to list up to 20 schools to which they applied, and whether they were accepted and/or
attended. It also allows them to list the start and end dates of attendance.
        Note that less than 0.1% of students listed the maximum possible number of schools in
ELS, suggesting that we are capturing the full set of application schools for most students. In
NELS, by contrast, over half of the students listed two different application schools in the 1992
survey, suggesting that even by including the extra information from the 1994 survey, we are
likely missing at least some information on student application behavior.
        We then estimate Probit models of the probability that student i was admitted to school j.
In order to allow the admission function to vary across groups, we estimate separate models for
each cohort year, and then within cohort year, we estimate separate models for six mutually
exclusive set of student-school observations: 1) White or Asian students applying to in-state
public colleges, 2) White or Asian students applying to out-state public colleges, 3) White or
Asian students applying to private colleges, 4) other students applying to in-state public




                                         Appendix - 10
                                 Appendix - Not for Publication



colleges, 5) other students applying to out-state public colleges, 6) other students applying to
private colleges. We estimate separate models for racial minorities to allow for affirmative
action policies. We estimate separate models for different school types to allow for admission
preferences for in-state students in public universities and different admissions procedures in
private colleges.
        As predictors, we include several different measures of student academic ability,
including high school GPA, 12th grade math score and the interaction between GPA and math
score, a measure of student socioeconomic status, several measures of college selectivity,
including the average SAT/ACT score of students in the college, the fraction of students
admitted to the college and the log(enrollment). We also include a series of interactions between
student ability and college selectivity. Finally, in order to allow for college preferences with
regard to the geographic diversity of their students, we include a series of fixed effects for the
region of the country in which the student went to high school (i.e., Northeast, South, Midwest,
West) x the region in which the college is located.
        Tables D3 and D4 show the results of these regressions. Because of the large number of
higher-order terms and interactions, it is not productive to examine coefficients on specific
predictors to assess the fit of the model. Instead, Tables C5 and C6 present summary statistics
on the resulting predicted probabilities, broken out by various subgroups. The results all go in
the expected direction and suggest that our predicted probabilities will provide good estimates.




                                         Appendix - 11
                                            Appendix - Not for Publication


Table D1: Application and Acceptance Rates for NELS Cohort (High School Class of 1992)

Panel A: Applications to 4-year institutions
                                                          Number of different 4-year institutions to
Number of different 4-year institutions to Proportion        which the student was accepted
     which the student applied             of sample         1           2           3           4

                                   1           35.7%     100.0%        0.0%        0.0%        0.0%
                                   2           49.1%      40.4%       59.6%        0.0%        0.0%
                                   3           13.9%      35.5%       34.6%       29.9%        0.0%
                                   4           1.2%        0.0%       55.1%       32.7%       12.2%


Panel B: Applications to all institutions
                                                         Number of different institutions (any type) to
  Number of different institutions (any     Proportion        which the student was accepted
   type) to which the student applied       of sample       1           2             3          4

                                   1           27.9%     100.0%        0.0%        0.0%        0.0%

                                   2           50.7%      37.0%       63.0%        0.0%        0.0%

                                   3           19.0%      26.9%       38.5%       34.6%        0.0%

                                   4           2.4%        0.0%       46.4%       29.9%       23.7%




                                                      Appendix - 12
                                                           Appendix - Not for Publication


Table D2: Application and Acceptance Rates for ELS (High School Class of 2004)

Restricted to eligible institutions Number of schools accepted to
Number of different      Proportion
schools applied to        of sample         1          2          3          4        5         6       7       8       9     10+
                      1     22.2%     100.0%       0.0%       0.0%        0.0%     0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%
                      2     23.4%      25.0%      75.0%       0.0%        0.0%     0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%
                      3     18.8%      11.7%      29.5%      58.8%        0.0%     0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%
                      4     12.9%       6.6%      20.8%      27.1%       45.6%     0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%
                      5      8.9%       3.3%      11.4%      21.4%       30.8%    33.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%
                      6      5.5%       1.9%       5.1%      17.1%       25.9%    25.9%     24.1%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%
                      7      3.5%       1.5%      11.3%       8.9%       17.7%    19.7%     20.7%   20.2%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%
                      8      1.7%       2.0%       3.0%       5.1%       24.2%    17.2%     19.2%   20.2%    9.1%    0.0%    0.0%
                      9      1.3%       2.7%       1.3%       2.7%        8.0%    13.3%     20.0%   16.0%   24.0%   12.0%    0.0%
                   10+       1.8%       1.0%       3.0%       3.0%        7.9%    11.9%     19.8%   10.9%   14.9%   10.9%   16.8%




Unrestricted by institution         Number of schools accepted to
Number of different      Proportion
schools applied to        of sample         1          2          3          4        5         6       7       8       9    10+
                      1     16.3%     100.0%       0.0%       0.0%        0.0%     0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%   0.0%
                      2     22.1%      18.6%      81.4%       0.0%        0.0%     0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%   0.0%
                      3     20.6%       9.2%      29.6%      61.2%        0.0%     0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%   0.0%
                      4     15.2%       4.5%      17.6%      28.3%       49.6%     0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%   0.0%
                      5     10.1%       3.1%      10.7%      21.8%       30.1%    34.3%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%   0.0%
                      6      6.3%       1.9%       4.7%      14.2%       25.3%    26.4%     27.5%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%   0.0%
                      7      3.9%       1.4%       9.0%       7.7%       21.2%    22.1%     20.7%   18.0%    0.0%    0.0%   0.0%
                      8      2.1%       1.7%       8.3%      18.2%       19.8%    18.2%     20.7%   13.2%    0.0%    0.0%   0.0%
                      9      1.5%       1.1%       2.3%       2.3%        6.8%    17.0%     18.2%   20.5%   20.5%   11.4%   0.0%
                  10+        1.9%       3.6%       5.5%       9.1%       13.6%    21.8%     15.5%   13.6%   10.9%    4.5%   1.8%




                                                                      Appendix - 13
                                                         Appendix - Not for Publication



Table D3: Probit Estimation for Predicted Probabilities of Admission - NELS 1992
                                                                                         White or Asian                             All Others
                                                                                       Public            Private                Public            Private
                                                                              In State   Out of State Both             In State    Out of State Both
                                                                                   (1)         (2)         (3)              (4)         (5)          (6)
                                VARIABLES                                       accepted    accepted    accepted         accepted    accepted    accepted

                       Student Grade Point Average                                -0.391         4.473       -4.173        8.982**         5.948       -5.321
                                                                                 (2.294)       (5.531)      (2.840)        (3.802)      (11.612)      (3.728)
                                Missing GPA                                      0.241**      0.579***      0.291***         0.012        -0.554        0.209
                                                                                 (0.106)       (0.211)      (0.102)        (0.188)       (0.849)      (0.233)
                     Student Standardized Math Score                             1.841**         0.964        0.613          1.061        -3.143        1.249
                                                                                 (0.735)       (1.723)      (0.873)        (1.191)       (3.498)      (1.046)
                    Student Math Score * Student GPA                               0.132       1.527**       -0.413          0.369        -0.473        0.428
                                                                                 (0.248)       (0.600)      (0.277)        (0.615)       (2.229)      (0.522)
                      Student Socioeconomic Status                                 0.229        -0.133        0.026         -0.145        -0.643        0.173
                                                                                 (0.211)       (0.452)      (0.227)        (0.333)       (0.993)      (0.398)
                               Log Enrollment                                    -0.060*        -0.051        0.018       -0.153**         0.036       -0.085
                                                                                 (0.036)       (0.068)      (0.030)        (0.063)       (0.174)      (0.075)
                         Mean College SAT Score                                   -0.001       -0.054*      -0.024*        -0.022         -0.064       -0.012
                                                                                 (0.014)       (0.031)      (0.014)        (0.024)       (0.092)      (0.022)
                          College Admission Rate                                   1.515        -2.562       -0.147        -1.035          1.174        1.758
                                                                                 (1.325)       (3.195)      (1.559)        (2.159)       (6.538)      (2.256)
                     School Mean SAT * Student GPA                                -0.011        -0.061        0.048       -0.124**        -0.257        0.044
                                                                                 (0.030)       (0.063)      (0.031)        (0.052)       (0.213)      (0.047)
                 School Mean SAT * Student Math Score                             -0.015        -0.005       -0.012         -0.009         0.059       -0.014
                                                                                 (0.011)       (0.024)      (0.011)        (0.016)       (0.046)      (0.013)
             School Mean SAT * Student Math * StudentGPA                          -0.002      -0.009**        0.001          0.001        -0.018      -0.009*
                                                                                 (0.002)       (0.005)      (0.002)        (0.004)       (0.021)      (0.004)
                     School Mean SAT * Student SES                                -0.003         0.001       -0.000         -0.001         0.000       -0.001
                                                                                 (0.002)       (0.004)      (0.002)        (0.003)       (0.007)      (0.003)
                  College Admission Rate * Student GPA                            -0.861        -6.093        3.781      -11.391**      -15.309        6.204
                                                                                 (2.885)       (6.749)      (3.589)        (4.628)      (14.996)      (4.823)
              College Admission Rate * Student Math Score                       -1.977**        -0.682       -0.113        -1.502          6.633       -1.472
                                                                                 (0.870)       (2.093)      (1.101)        (1.485)       (4.779)      (1.372)
       College Admission Rate * Student Math Score * Student GPA                  -0.091      -1.146**       0.271         -0.486         2.232        0.166
                                                                                 (0.205)       (0.505)      (0.236)        (0.588)       (1.599)      (0.550)
                  College Admission Rate * Student SES                            -0.013         0.074        0.046          0.394         1.216       -0.021
                                                                                 (0.164)       (0.330)      (0.154)        (0.307)       (0.946)      (0.348)
                           Squared Student GPA                                     0.663        -1.798        1.508       -3.911**        -2.412        2.326
                                                                                 (1.006)       (2.641)      (1.294)        (1.722)       (5.596)      (1.677)
                       Squared Student Math Score                                  0.064         0.684       -0.363         -1.028        -0.444       -1.469
                                                                                 (0.606)       (1.275)      (0.763)        (1.024)       (2.747)      (0.994)
               School Mean SAT * College Admission Rate                           -0.001         0.045        0.017         0.025          0.138       -0.005
                                                                                 (0.018)       (0.039)      (0.019)        (0.030)       (0.127)      (0.030)
    School Mean SAT * College Admission Rate * Student Math Score                0.021*          0.006        0.013         0.023        -0.111*        0.021
                                                                                 (0.013)       (0.030)      (0.015)        (0.020)       (0.065)      (0.018)
       School Mean SAT * College Admission Rate * Student GPA                      0.028         0.062       -0.046        0.153**        0.486*       -0.047
                                                                                 (0.039)       (0.078)      (0.040)        (0.067)       (0.291)      (0.064)
  School Mean SAT * College Admission Rate * Squared Student GPA                  -0.003        -0.017       0.011        -0.073**       -0.240*       0.023
                                                                                 (0.017)       (0.037)      (0.018)        (0.030)       (0.143)      (0.028)
School Mean SAT * College Admission Rate * Squared Student Math Score              0.004         0.010       -0.010         -0.009         0.015       -0.017
                                                                                 (0.010)       (0.019)      (0.011)        (0.017)       (0.056)      (0.016)
                School Mean SAT * Squared Student GPA                             -0.002         0.021       -0.015        0.057**         0.124       -0.019
                                                                                 (0.013)       (0.029)      (0.014)        (0.024)       (0.104)      (0.021)
              College Admission Rate * Squared Student GPA                        -0.253         2.330       -1.092        5.125**         6.982       -2.749
                                                                                 (1.252)       (3.226)      (1.629)        (2.088)       (7.283)      (2.173)
             School Mean SAT * Squared Student Math Score                         -0.001        -0.007        0.008         0.011         -0.006        0.019
                                                                                 (0.008)       (0.016)      (0.009)        (0.013)       (0.040)      (0.012)
          College Admission Rate * Squared Student Math Score                     -0.271        -0.927       0.358          0.965          0.568        1.389
                                                                                 (0.721)       (1.524)      (0.968)        (1.260)       (3.739)      (1.277)
                                  Constant                                        -0.394         3.544        0.952          2.657        -2.507        0.412
                                                                                 (1.077)       (2.657)      (1.243)        (1.798)       (5.187)      (1.815)

                                Observations                                      4990         1335           3873         1124            212           621
Coefficient Estimates, Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Variables included but not presented: Interactions between Student and Institution Census (4) Region.
Out-of-State specification (2,3,5,6), combine non-Northeast Institution region to account for relatively few students traveling to out-of-state public schools




                                                                      Appendix - 14
                                                        Appendix - Not for Publication



Table D4: Probit Estimation for Predicted Probabilities of Admission - ELS 2004
                                                                                         White or Asian                             All Others
                                                                                       Public            Private                Public            Private
                                                                              In State    Out of State Both            In State    Out of State Both
                                                                                   (1)         (2)          (3)             (4)         (5)          (6)
                                VARIABLES                                       accepted    accepted    accepted         accepted    accepted    accepted

                       Student Grade Point Average                      1.115**               4.407***       1.717**        -0.054        0.634         0.923
                                                                        (0.560)                (1.668)       (0.753)       (0.464)      (0.933)       (0.783)
                              Missing GPA                              0.393***               0.373***      0.229***         0.060        0.071         0.140
                                                                        (0.079)                (0.135)       (0.080)       (0.094)      (0.199)       (0.128)
                    Student Standardized Math Score                       0.596                  0.519         0.595      1.270***       -0.682        -0.163
                                                                        (0.481)                (1.516)       (0.679)       (0.459)      (0.890)       (0.764)
                   Student Math Score * Student GPA                      -0.514                 -0.052        -0.170        -0.118     -1.194**        0.823*
                                                                        (0.317)                (0.863)       (0.439)       (0.329)      (0.564)       (0.435)
                     Student Socioeconomic Status                         0.044                -0.711*         0.084         0.162        0.092         0.131
                                                                        (0.136)                (0.395)       (0.229)       (0.154)      (0.291)       (0.238)
                             Log Enrollment                           -0.129***                -0.125*     -0.081***      -0.093**       -0.103      -0.115**
                                                                        (0.037)                (0.064)       (0.028)       (0.046)      (0.083)       (0.047)
                        Mean College SAT Score                        -0.039***                 -0.028     -0.043***     -0.046***     -0.026**     -0.041***
                                                                        (0.008)                (0.019)       (0.009)       (0.007)      (0.012)       (0.008)
                        College Admission Rate                          1.241*                   0.749         0.558        -0.789       -0.184        -1.434
                                                                        (0.723)                (1.828)       (0.951)       (0.649)      (1.193)       (0.909)
                    School Mean SAT * Student GPA                        -0.012               -0.053**      -0.026**         0.005       -0.015        -0.005
                                                                        (0.009)                (0.024)       (0.010)       (0.007)      (0.014)       (0.010)
                 School Mean SAT * Student Math Score                    -0.007                 -0.010        -0.007       -0.013*        0.015         0.006
                                                                        (0.008)                (0.022)       (0.009)       (0.007)      (0.013)       (0.009)
            School Mean SAT * Student Math * StudentGPA                   0.005                  0.001         0.002        -0.003     0.014***        -0.003
                                                                        (0.003)                (0.008)       (0.004)       (0.003)      (0.005)       (0.004)
                    School Mean SAT * Student SES                        -0.002                  0.004         0.000        -0.001        0.003        -0.001
                                                                        (0.001)                (0.004)       (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.003)       (0.002)
                 College Admission Rate * Student GPA                    -1.021               -4.985**      -2.131**        0.278        -0.666        -0.465
                                                                        (0.803)                (2.182)       (0.998)       (0.696)      (1.420)       (1.121)
              College Admission Rate * Student Math Score                -0.202                 0.071         -0.406       -1.216*       1.432          1.045
                                                                        (0.700)                (1.956)       (0.904)       (0.695)      (1.349)       (1.096)
      College Admission Rate * Student Math Score * Student GPA           0.288                 -0.158         0.031         0.417        0.512       -0.709*
                                                                        (0.272)                (0.627)       (0.300)       (0.343)      (0.685)       (0.419)
                 College Admission Rate * Student SES                  0.268**                0.739***         0.092        -0.012       -0.162         0.177
                                                                        (0.118)                (0.281)       (0.148)       (0.152)      (0.339)       (0.202)
                         Squared Student GPA                            -0.725*                 -0.111         0.216         0.013      1.119*          0.363
                                                                        (0.415)                (1.449)       (0.595)       (0.317)      (0.584)       (0.508)
                      Squared Student Math Score                         -0.168                 -1.544         0.699        -0.309       -0.023        -0.794
                                                                        (0.352)                (1.007)       (0.507)       (0.388)      (0.725)       (0.537)
               School Mean SAT * College Admission Rate                   0.013                  0.011         0.020      0.040***        0.018       0.031**
                                                                        (0.012)                (0.025)       (0.012)       (0.012)      (0.021)       (0.012)
    School Mean SAT * College Admission Rate * Student Math Score         0.008                  0.010         0.012         0.018       -0.020        -0.013
                                                                        (0.012)                (0.029)       (0.012)       (0.011)      (0.020)       (0.014)
       School Mean SAT * College Admission Rate * Student GPA             0.021                0.074**      0.041***         0.002        0.024         0.004
                                                                        (0.014)                (0.033)       (0.014)       (0.012)      (0.023)       (0.015)
  School Mean SAT * College Admission Rate * Squared Student GPA       -0.020**                 -0.013         0.003        -0.002        0.020         0.012
                                                                        (0.010)                (0.023)       (0.009)       (0.008)      (0.014)       (0.009)
School Mean SAT * College Admission Rate * Squared Student Math Score     0.002                 -0.022         0.009        -0.005       -0.008        -0.003
                                                                        (0.008)                (0.016)       (0.007)       (0.009)      (0.015)       (0.009)
                School Mean SAT * Squared Student GPA                  0.019***                  0.008         0.003         0.005      -0.015*        -0.009
                                                                        (0.006)                (0.018)       (0.007)       (0.005)      (0.008)       (0.006)
             College Admission Rate * Squared Student GPA                 0.654                  0.292        -0.711        -0.133      -1.510*        -0.442
                                                                        (0.595)                (1.780)       (0.738)       (0.465)      (0.908)       (0.702)
            School Mean SAT * Squared Student Math Score                  0.004                  0.020        -0.005         0.006        0.001         0.004
                                                                        (0.005)                (0.012)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.010)       (0.006)
         College Admission Rate * Squared Student Math Score             -0.250                  1.695       -1.060*         0.181        0.582         0.921
                                                                        (0.508)                (1.253)       (0.623)       (0.572)      (1.093)       (0.777)
                               Constant                                2.663***                  2.291      2.603***      2.907***      1.843**      3.608***
                                                                        (0.535)                (1.465)       (0.722)       (0.509)      (0.933)       (0.697)

                               Observations                                     7893           2175          6733          3266           826           2041
Coefficient Estimates, Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Variables included but not presented: Interactions between Student and Institution Census (4) Region.
Specification (5), however, combines non-Northeast Institution regions to account for relatively few minority students traveling to out-of-state public schools




                                                                     Appendix - 15
                                                       Appendix - Not for Publication

Table D5: Summary Statistics for Predicted Probability of Admission - NELS 1992 only
                                                                                   Percentile
                                                                                                                  Unique
                                                          min       10th        50th     90th     max    mean    Students Stu x Sch
White/Asian, Public, In-state School                    7.5%      59.5%     80.0%       89.4%   99.3%    76.9%     7,478     6,110
White/Asian, Public, Out-of-state School                0.0%      50.5%     77.9%       89.6%   100.0%   73.8%               1,682
White/Asian, Private School                             8.2%      46.1%     74.0%       88.9%   99.9%    70.5%               4,848
Minority, Public, In-state School                      10.0%      45.5%     70.7%       89.5%   99.6%    68.8%     1,469     1,370
Minority, Public, Out-of-state School                   0.0%      24.2%     74.5%       99.5%   100.0%   68.4%                 284
Minority, Private School                                0.8%      34.5%     60.6%       79.0%   99.7%    58.6%                 759


All Races and Schools: Rank by Quartile

Top Students by Standardized Math Score                 0.0%      63.1%     83.3%       92.6%   100.0%   79.8%     1,022   102,200
Bottom Students by Standardized Math Score              0.0%      32.5%     58.9%       79.8%   100.0%   57.3%     1,022   102,200

Top Students by Standardized Grade 12 GPA               0.0%      40.4%     71.5%       92.4%   100.0%   68.4%     1,265   126,500
Bottom Students by Standardized Grade 12 GPA            0.0%      39.8%     69.8%       87.3%   100.0%   66.5%     1,043   104,300

Top Schools by Mean SAT Score                           0.0%      28.8%     57.8%       76.8%   100.0%   55.1%     1,038   102,572
Bottom Schools by Mean SAT Score                        0.0%      65.1%     84.8%       93.5%   100.0%   81.2%     1,172   117,444

Top Schools by Lowest Admit Rate                        0.0%      27.7%     59.1%       83.6%   100.0%   57.2%     1,038   101,734
Bottom Schools by Lowest Admit Rate                     0.0%      60.5%     82.1%       92.1%   100.0%   78.6%     1,028   102,781

Top Students (Math) and Top Schools (SAT)               0.0%      41.5%     68.8%       81.3%   100.0%   65.1%      269     25,823
Top Students (Math) and Bottom Schools (SAT)           10.5%      78.2%     89.7%       96.2%   100.0%   88.3%      286     29,289

Bottom Students (Math) and Top Schools (SAT)            0.0%      23.9%     42.2%       64.5%   100.0%   43.7%      257     25,564
Bottom Students (Math) and Bottom Schools (SAT)         0.0%      48.3%     71.6%       84.5%   100.0%   68.3%      280     29,515




                                                                Appendix - 16
                                                       Appendix - Not for Publication

Table D6: Summary Statistics for Predicted Probability of Admission - ELS 2004 only
                                                                                      Percentile
                                                                                                                     Unique
                                                         min       10th        50th        90th      max    mean    Students Stu x Sch
White/Asian, Public, In-state School                    3.8%     59.8%     85.1%         93.7%     99.5%    80.2%     5,737     7,893
White/Asian, Public, Out-of-state School                0.0%     55.4%     86.4%         96.1%     100.0%   80.5%               2,175
White/Asian, Private School                             0.3%     41.2%     88.0%         95.9%     100.0%   78.3%               6,733
Minority, Public, In-state School                       3.8%     38.5%     74.7%         89.5%     99.7%    69.1%     2,127     3,266
Minority, Public, Out-of-state School                   1.8%     39.2%     69.8%         90.3%     100.0%   67.0%                 826
Minority, Private School                                0.0%     36.1%     78.1%         97.5%     100.0%   71.8%               2,041


All Races and Schools: Rank by Quartile

Top Students by Standardized Math Score                 0.0%     71.3%     91.7%         97.9%     100.0%   86.9%     1,437   143,700
Bottom Students by Standardized Math Score              0.0%     27.5%     66.3%         89.3%     100.0%   62.2%     1,436   143,600

Top Students by Standardized Grade 12 GPA               0.7%     76.2%     92.7%         98.3%     100.0%   88.5%     1,469   146,900
Bottom Students by Standardized Grade 12 GPA            0.0%     27.5%     66.3%         89.2%     100.0%   62.1%     1,477   147,700

Top Schools by Mean SAT Score                           0.0%     17.8%     67.8%         95.1%     100.0%   61.9%     1,544   148,711
Bottom Schools by Mean SAT Score                        0.0%     67.4%     89.2%         97.6%     100.0%   85.1%     1,411   146,656

Top Schools by Lowest Admit Rate                        0.0%     17.0%     68.4%         96.8%     100.0%   62.4%     1,413   143,674
Bottom Schools by Lowest Admit Rate                     0.0%     65.4%     88.2%         96.0%     100.0%   84.0%     1,426   142,875

Top Students (Math) and Top Schools (SAT)               0.0%     39.3%     88.2%         98.1%     100.0%   78.3%      368     37,545
Top Students (Math) and Bottom Schools (SAT)            0.3%     76.2%     90.8%         98.7%     100.0%   88.4%      378     36,708

Bottom Students (Math) and Top Schools (SAT)            0.0%     10.9%     42.4%         76.8%      98.0%   43.3%      398     37,025
Bottom Students (Math) and Bottom Schools (SAT)         0.0%     50.5%     80.0%         93.4%     100.0%   75.4%      333     37,049




                                                               Appendix - 17
       Appendix - Not for Publication



Appendix E. Estimates of Predicted Net Price




               Appendix - 18
                                                                                            Appendix - Not for Publication



Table E1: OLS Estimation for Predicted Price Ratios - NPSAS
                                                                                         1996                                                                               2004
                                                                 White or Asian                          All Others                  White or Asian                           All Others
                                                               Public            Private           Public              Private       Public                      Private      Public                         Private
                                                     In State     Out of State Both       In State    Out of State Both              In State     Out of State   Both         In State        Out of State   Both
                                                          (1)          (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)          (6)         (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)             (5)            (6)
                                                      price_ratio price_ratio price_ratio price_ratio price_ratio    price_ratio     price_ratio price_ratio     price_ratio price_ratio      price_ratio    price_ratio

        Student Standardized Math Score                -0.166***      -0.287***     -0.184***      -0.121     -0.0718    -0.199***   -0.139***    -0.342***      -0.159***     -0.108         0.0381         0.0510
                                                        (0.0327)       (0.0669)      (0.0378)    (0.0744)     (0.208)    (0.0632)    (0.0455)     (0.124)        (0.0390)      (0.0753)       (0.239)        (0.0676)
          Student Standardized Income                   0.194***        0.118**      0.278***    0.234***     0.0650      0.259***   0.194***     -0.0717        0.140***      0.412***       0.0669         0.104*
                                                        (0.0321)       (0.0516)      (0.0327)    (0.0887)     (0.194)    (0.0718)    (0.0387)     (0.0862)       (0.0260)      (0.0778)       (0.202)        (0.0556)
            Mean College SAT Score                     0.0103***       0.0148**    -0.00677*     0.00480     0.0324*    0.0134***    0.0184***    0.0162         -0.0145***    0.00941*       0.0156         -0.00722*
                                                       (0.00280)      (0.00646)    (0.00354)    (0.00475)    (0.0171)   (0.00388)    (0.00461)    (0.0104)       (0.00308)     (0.00495)      (0.0170)       (0.00408)
        Student Math * School Mean SAT                0.00160***     0.00364***    0.00157***    0.000982    0.00204   0.00268***    0.00102      0.00434**      0.00120*      0.000731       0.000959       -0.00104
                                                      (0.000510)      (0.00101)   (0.000526)    (0.00102)   (0.00291)  (0.000841)    (0.000760) (0.00208)        (0.000614)    (0.00116)      (0.00361)      (0.000974)
         Student Math * Student Income                -0.0364***       0.00668      0.000529    -0.0884***    -0.113*    -0.00275    -0.0337*** -0.0207          -0.00608      0.0137         -0.0434        -0.0228
                                                       (0.00806)       (0.0151)    (0.00610)     (0.0295)    (0.0621)    (0.0221)    (0.00955)    (0.0200)       (0.00636)     (0.0257)       (0.0790)       (0.0167)
      School Mean SAT * Student Income                0.0000422       0.000224    -0.00161***    0.00134     0.00258    -0.000210    0.00119*     0.00238*       0.000158      -0.00142       0.00253        0.00158*
                                                      (0.000493)    (0.000758)    (0.000415)    (0.00120)   (0.00284)  (0.000976)    (0.000629) (0.00138)        (0.000376)    (0.00122)      (0.00326)      (0.000839)
          Squared Student Math Score                  -0.0309***     -0.0594***     -0.0150**    -0.00681     0.0164     -0.00533    -0.0217*** -0.0353*         -0.0172**     -0.0168        0.0219         0.0245*
                                                       (0.00573)       (0.0128)    (0.00593)     (0.0133)    (0.0396)    (0.0140)    (0.00741)    (0.0197)       (0.00727)     (0.0155)       (0.0710)       (0.0129)
            Squared Student Income                   -0.00597***    -0.00829***   -0.00406***   -0.0215***    -0.0374  -0.0202***    -0.0420*** -0.00830         -0.0160***    -0.0469***     -0.0638        -0.0277***
                                                      (0.000442)      (0.00127)   (0.000314)    (0.00345)    (0.0301)   (0.00563)    (0.00341)    (0.00654)      (0.00168)     (0.00719)      (0.0474)       (0.00437)
           Squared School Mean SAT                   -8.42e-05***    -9.02e-05*   7.31e-05***   -4.62e-05 -0.000260** -0.000117***   -0.000164*** -0.000124      0.000148***   -0.000115***   -0.000164      5.65e-05*
                                                      (2.24e-05)     (5.03e-05)    (2.55e-05)   (3.68e-05) (0.000130)  (3.05e-05)    (3.89e-05) (8.96e-05)       (2.45e-05)    (4.18e-05)     (0.000160)     (3.34e-05)
                    Constant                            0.336***         0.175       0.641***     0.346**      -0.250      0.132     0.0535       0.233          0.757***      0.282*         0.377          0.620***
                                                        (0.0847)        (0.203)       (0.120)     (0.154)     (0.531)     (0.121)    (0.134)      (0.301)        (0.0948)      (0.149)        (0.438)        (0.123)

                   Observations                         4679           781           3436         1029        121         646        2886         384            2507          788            87             569
Coefficient Estimates, Standard errors in parenthe
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                      Appendix - 19
                                                                     Appendix - Not for Publication

TableE2: Summary Statistics for Predicted Price Ratio - NELS 1992 and ELS 2004

                                                                              1992                                                2004
                                                                       Percentile                                          Percentile
                                                        min       10th      50th      90th     max    mean     min    10th      50th      90th     max    mean
White/Asian, Public, In-state School                   0.0%     41.1%      61.9%     81.3%   100.0%   61.5%   0.0%   21.9%   53.5%       75.7%   100.0%   50.9%
White/Asian, Public, Out-of-state School               0.0%     42.5%      68.2%     86.9%   100.0%   66.0%   0.0%   32.0%   62.4%       80.0%   98.1%    58.8%
White/Asian, Private School                            0.0%     34.2%      57.0%     74.7%   100.0%   55.5%   0.0%   25.1%   45.5%       67.5%   100.0%   45.8%
Minority, Public, In-state School                      0.0%      0.0%      39.0%     71.9%   100.0%   37.6%   0.0%   0.0%    42.7%       78.0%   100.0%   40.5%
Minority, Public, Out-of-state School                  0.0%     18.1%      68.4%     92.0%   100.0%   61.8%   0.0%   30.9%   74.3%       93.0%   100.0%   68.0%
Minority, Private School                               0.0%      1.6%      42.9%     72.7%   100.0%   40.8%   0.0%   11.3%   45.0%       63.8%   96.6%    41.5%


All Races and Schools: Rank by Quartile

Top Students by Standardized Math Score                0.0%     22.9%      48.3%     73.5%   100.0%   48.4%   0.0%   22.7%   48.2%       73.4%   100.0%   48.3%
Bottom Students by Standardized Math Score             0.0%     21.4%      59.8%     82.9%   100.0%   56.0%   0.0%   22.0%   59.8%       82.9%   100.0%   56.1%

Top Students by Standardized Grade 12 GPA              0.0%     25.5%      53.8%     79.1%   100.0%   52.8%   0.0%   23.4%   51.3%       77.0%   100.0%   50.6%
Bottom Students by Standardized Grade 12 GPA           0.0%     27.0%      59.0%     82.1%   100.0%   56.4%   0.0%   29.1%   58.7%       81.5%   100.0%   56.6%

Top Schools by Mean SAT Score                          0.0%     36.5%      64.7%     83.3%   100.0%   61.7%   0.0%   33.5%   61.9%       82.3%   100.0%   59.3%
Bottom Schools by Mean SAT Score                       0.0%     22.0%      49.3%     74.7%   100.0%   48.7%   0.0%   19.8%   47.3%       73.2%   100.0%   46.9%

Top Students (Math) and Top Schools (SAT)              0.0%     45.2%      65.2%     81.3%   100.0%   64.0%   0.0%   39.0%   61.4%       79.2%   100.0%   60.1%
Top Students (Math) and Bottom Schools (SAT)           0.0%     11.4%      35.7%     60.8%   100.0%   36.4%   0.0%    7.0%   32.6%       58.7%   100.0%   33.2%

Bottom Students (Math) and Top Schools (SAT)           0.0%     12.1%      60.7%     82.8%   100.0%   54.9%   0.0%   15.1%   59.3%       82.4%   100.0%   54.4%
Bottom Students (Math) and Bottom Schools (SAT)        0.0%     26.4%      61.0%     80.9%   100.0%   57.2%   0.0%   27.4%   60.3%       79.3%   100.0%   56.6%




                                                                                 Appendix - 20
      Appendix - Not for Publication



Appendix F. Additional Tables and Figures




              Appendix - 21
                                                                   Appendix - Not for Publication

Table F1. Interactions between Spending Measures and Campus Environment

                                                                                                          Interactions with….
                                                                                                                          Student plans to live      % Living on campus,
                                                                   Quality of life of campus location                          at home                       1992
                                                                       (1)                          (2)                              (3)                        (4)
                                                                Est.          (S.E.)         Est.          (S.E.)             Est.         (S.E.)        Est.          (S.E.)
Log (Tuition, Fees, Room & Board)                            ‐0.820 ***      (0.067)       ‐0.820 ***     (0.067)          ‐0.925 *** (0.068)         ‐0.817 ***      (0.067)
Log (Distance)                                               ‐0.752 ***      (0.011)       ‐0.752 ***     (0.011)          ‐0.750 *** (0.011)         ‐0.752 ***      (0.011)
Log (Spending on Consumption Amenities per FTE)               0.139 *        (0.084)        0.138         (0.085)          ‐0.128     (0.086)          0.155          (0.143)
   X Locational Quality of Life Index                        ‐0.744          (0.636)       ‐1.265         (1.443)
   X Student plans to live at home                                                                                         ‐0.640 *** (0.033)
   X % living on-campus in 1992                                                                                                                       ‐0.053          (0.332)
Log (Spending on Academics per FTE)                          ‐0.181          (0.129)       ‐0.176         (0.130)          ‐0.264 ** (0.130)          ‐0.273          (0.226)
   X Locational Quality of Life Index                                                       0.540         (1.409)
   X Student plans to live at home                                                                                         ‐0.195 *** (0.041)
   X % living on-campus in 1992                                                                                                                        0.179          (0.386)
School Mean SAT (percentile)                                  0.008 ***      (0.003)       0.008 ***      (0.003)           0.008 *** (0.003)          0.008 ***      (0.003)


Log likelihood                                                   ‐40291.5                      ‐40291.5                         ‐39924.8                   ‐40293.2
Number of observations                                          10,350,115                   10,350,115                       10,350,115                 10,350,115



Notes: All specifications account for probability of admissions, use predicted net price as the measure of cost, include college fixed effects, and control for
unemployment rate, log(number of high school graduates), and dummies for in-state and in-region. Coefficients are reported with robust standard errors in parentheses.
Spending on student services also includes spending on auxilary enterprises (primarily food service and dorms). Instruction includes both instruction and academic
support services. Selective admissions is accounded for by weighing each observation in the conditional logit model by the predicted probability that each student would
be admitted to the school in the given year. See text. Stated preference is constructed by combining answers to several questions about the importance of various
factors in college decision into three categories: social life (including athletics), costs (low cost, availability of financial aid), and academics (course offerings and




                                                                               Appendix - 22
                                                                                                      Appendix - Not for Publication



                                                                         Figure F1: Distribution of Willingness-to-Pay for College Attributes
                                                                                               No College Fixed Effects
     Frequency in Student Population




                                                                  -2.5          -2           -1.5          -1             -.5     0           1         2         3                4            5
                                                                                       WTP for Distance                                      WTP for Consumption Amenities




                                                                  -.2           0             .2              .4           .6           -2           0             2              4             6
                                                                                     WTP for mean SAT                                          WTP for Instruction Spending

Notes: Notes: WTP for spending and distance can be interpreted as the percent increase in cost
students are willing to pay to attend a college with a 1% increase in spending or 1% further
away. Estimates come from the model in Table 4 (Specification 1) which includes interactions
between college characteristics and male, math score, and SES.

                                                                  Figure F2: Distribution of Willingness-to-Pay for College Attribute, by Sex
                                  Density in Student Population




                                                                     -1          -.8            -.6           -.4          -.2   -.2           0           .2           .4             .6
                                                                                        WTP for Distance                                     WTP for Consumption Amenities
                                                                                          Male                Female                                   Male                   Female




                                                                         -.05            0              .05                .1          -2               -1                0                 1
                                                                                       WTP for mean SAT                                       WTP for Instruction Spending
                                                                                          Male                Female                                   Male                   Female


Notes: Notes: WTP for spending and distance can be interpreted as the percent increase in cost
students are willing to pay to attend a college with a 1% increase in spending or 1% further
away. Estimates come from the model in Table 4 (Specification 1) which includes interactions
between college characteristics and male, math score, and SES.



                                                                                                                       Appendix - 23
                                         Appendix - Not for Publication



   Figure F3: Median WTP for Consumption Amenities and Instructional Spending, by
                                     Group
                           No College Fixed Effects                                                College Fixed Effects

                Low SES                                                          Low SES


    Low Math    Med SES                                            Low Math      Med SES


                High SES                                                         High SES




                Low SES                                                          Low SES


    Med Math    Med SES                                            Med Math      Med SES


                High SES                                                         High SES




                Low SES                                                          Low SES


    High Math   Med SES                                            High Math     Med SES


                High SES                                                         High SES




                           -1    -.5     0        .5          1                             -1         -.5     0      .5   1

                                             Instruction                   Consumption Amenities


Notes: WTP is calculated as minus the ratio of the coefficients on the spending category and
cost. Estimates come from the model in Table 4 (Specification 2 on left, Specification 1 on right)
which includes interactions between college characteristics and male, math score, and SES. In
each panel, high, medium, and low groups represent terciles by SES and math score.




                                                           Appendix - 24
                                                       Appendix - Not for Publication



 Figure F4: Distribution of Change in Enrollment Share for High Math and SES Students
                        In response to change in own characteristic
                                 No College Fixed Effects

                                Increase Cost by 1%                                      Increase Consumption Amenities by 1%
            15




                                                                               40
            10




                                                                               20
            5
            0




                                                                               0
                 -1.4   -1.2           -1        -.8         -.6    -.4             .1             .2               .3               .4        .5
                                  % Change in Enrollment                                                  % Change in Enrollment

                        All Students             High Math          High SES                   All Students              High Math        High SES
  Density




                                Increase SAT by 1pt                                              Increase Instruction by 1%



                                                                               15
            .6




                                                                               10
            .4
            .2




                                                                               5
            0




                                                                               0




                 -5         0                5               10           15             -.5                         0                    .5
                                  % Change in Enrollment                                                  % Change in Enrollment

                        All Students             High Math          High SES                   All Students              High Math        High SES


Notes: Each graph plots the distribution of the percent change in enrollment (all students, high
math students, high SES students) at each individual college if this college were to change a
single characteristic. Enrollment response is simulated using the estimates from the model in
Table 4 (Specification 1) which does not include college fixed effects.




                                                                   Appendix - 25
                                                           Appendix - Not for Publication



 Figure F5: Distribution of Change in Enrollment Share for High Math and SES Students
                        In response to change in own characteristic
                   FT Faculty per Student is Measure of Academic Quality

                                    Increase Cost by 1%                                      Increase Consumption Amenities by 1%
            10




                                                                                  40
                                                                                  20
            5
            0




                                                                                  0
                       -2                  -1.5             -1           -.5           -.2       -.1             0           .1       .2        .3
                                      % Change in Enrollment                                                % Change in Enrollment

                            All Students            High Math          High SES                   All Students            High Math        High SES
  Density




                                    Increase SAT by 1pt                                        Increase FT Faculty/Student by 1%



                                                                                  15
            .4




                                                                                  10
            .2




                                                                                  5
            0




                                                                                  0




                 -10        -5               0         5         10        15          -.8       -.6             -.4        -.2       0         .2
                                      % Change in Enrollment                                                % Change in Enrollment

                            All Students            High Math          High SES                   All Students            High Math        High SES




Notes: Each graph plots the distribution of the percent change in enrollment (all students, high
math students, high SES students) at each individual college if this college were to change a
single characteristic. Enrollment response is simulated using the estimates from the model in
Table 5 (Specification 2) which includes college fixed effects and interactions between college
characteristics and male, math score, and SES.




                                                                      Appendix - 26
                                                           Appendix - Not for Publication



 Figure F6: Distribution of Change in Enrollment Share for High Math and SES Students
                        In response to change in own characteristic
                   Marginal Effect of Spending Differs by Institution Type

                                    Increase Cost by 1%                                         Increase Consumption Amenities by 1%
            15




                                                                                     6
            10




                                                                                     4
            5




                                                                                     2
            0




                                                                                     0
                       -2                  -1.5                -1            -.5         -.2             0               .2                .4        .6
                                      % Change in Enrollment                                                   % Change in Enrollment

                            All Students            High Math             High SES                   All Students              High Math        High SES
  Density




                                    Increase SAT by 1pt                                                Increase Instruction by 1%
            .4




                                                                                     6
                                                                                     4
            .2




                                                                                     2
            0




                                                                                     0




                 -10        -5              0          5            10         15        -1.5            -1              -.5               0         .5
                                      % Change in Enrollment                                                   % Change in Enrollment

                            All Students            High Math             High SES                   All Students              High Math        High SES




Notes: Each graph plots the distribution of the percent change in enrollment (all students, high
math students, high SES students) at each individual college if this college were to change a
single characteristic. Enrollment response is simulated using the estimates from the model in
Table 5 (Specification 3) which includes college fixed effects and interactions between college
characteristics and male, math score, and SES.




                                                                         Appendix - 27
                                                                                       Appendix - Not for Publication



Figure F7: Subgroup Enrollment Response to Change in Own College Characteristic
                      by Institution Average Student SAT
                           A. With College Fixed Effects
                                                                        Increase Cost by 1%                                           Increase Consumption Amenities by 1%




                                                                                                                        .4
                                                 -1
  Predicted Percent Change in Enrollment Share




                                                                                                                        .2
                                                 -1.5




                                                                                                                        0
                                                 -2




                                                                                                                        -.2
                                                           0   20          40            60           80          100             0    20               40           60       80        100
                                                                Total               High Math               High SES                     Total                   High Math         High SES


                                                                        Increase SAT by 1pt                                                      Increase Instruction by 1%
                                                 10 15




                                                                                                                        .5
                                                                                                                        0
                                                 5




                                                                                                                        -.5
                                                 0




                                                                                                                        -1.5 -1
                                                 -5




                                                           0   20          40            60           80         100              0    20               40           60       80        100
                                                                Total               High Math               High SES                     Total                   High Math         High SES



                                                                                                SAT percentile rank of Institution


                                                                                           B. No College Fixed Effects
                                                                        Increase Cost by 1%                                           Increase Consumption Amenities by 1%
                                                 -.4




                                                                                                                        .5
                                                 -.6
  Predicted Percent Change in Enrollment Share




                                                                                                                        .4
                                                 -.8




                                                                                                                        .3
                                                 -1.2 -1




                                                                                                                        .2




                                                           0   20          40           60           80          100              0    20               40           60       80        100
                                                                Total               High Math               High SES                     Total                   High Math         High SES


                                                                        Increase SAT by 1pt                                                      Increase Instruction by 1%
                                                 10




                                                                                                                        .5
                                                 5




                                                                                                                        0
                                                 0




                                                                                                                        -.5
                                                 -5




                                                           0   20          40           60           80          100              0    20               40           60       80        100
                                                                Total               High Math               High SES                     Total                   High Math         High SES



                                                                                                SAT percentile rank of Institution




                                                                                                       Appendix - 28
                                                                                                     Appendix - Not for Publication



                                                                                                        C. No Preference Heterogeneity
                                                                                      Increase Cost by 1%                                                           Increase Consumption Amenities by 1%


                                               -.81 -.8 -.79 -.78 -.77




                                                                                                                                     .132
Predicted Percent Change in Enrollment Share




                                                                                                                                     .13
                                                                                                                                     .126 .128
                                                                         0   20          40           60            80         100                              0    20               40           60       80        100
                                                                              Total               High Math               High SES                                     Total                   High Math         High SES


                                                                                      Increase SAT by 1pt                                                                      Increase Instruction by 1%




                                                                                                                                     -.182-.18-.178-.176-.174
                                               .73 .74 .75 .76 .77




                                                                         0   20          40           60           80          100                              0    20               40           60       80        100
                                                                              Total               High Math               High SES                                     Total                   High Math         High SES



                                                                                                              SAT percentile rank of Institution




                                                                                                                    Appendix - 29
