                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            AMBIGUITY AVERSION AND HOUSEHOLD PORTFOLIO CHOICE:
                            EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE

                                          Stephen G. Dimmock
                                            Roy Kouwenberg
                                            Olivia S. Mitchell
                                            Kim Peijnenburg

                                          Working Paper 18743
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w18743


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2013


This paper is part of the NBER’s Research Program on the Economics of Aging and the Working Group
on Household Portfolios. The authors gratefully acknowledge support from Netspar, the National Institute
on Aging, P30 AG-012836-18, the Pension Research Council/Boettner Center for Pensions and Retirement
Security, and National Institutes of Health–National Institute of Child Health and Development Population
Research Infrastructure Program R24 HD-044964-9, all at the University of Pennsylvania, and the
ALP teams at RAND and the University of Southern California, as well as the Wharton Behavioral
Labs. We thank Jawad Addoum, Sahil Bajaj, Laurent Calvet, Nicola Gennaioli, Luigi Guiso, Debrah
Meloso, Nicola Pavoni, Arno Riedl, Stefan Trautmann, Martijn van den Assem, Peter Wakker, and
participants at the American Economic Association, European Economic Association, European Finance
Association, European Household Finance, Financial Intermediation Research Society, Mitsui Finance
Symposium, Netspar Workshop, SFS Cavalcade, and Western Finance Association conferences for
helpful comments, and Tania Gutsche, Arie Kapteyn, Bart Orriens, and Bas Weerman for assistance
with the survey. Yong Yu provided outstanding programming assistance. The content is solely the
responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institute
of Aging, the National Institutes of Health, the National Bureau of Economic Research or of the other
institutions providing funding for this study or with which the authors are affiliated.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18743.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Stephen G. Dimmock, Roy Kouwenberg, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Kim Peijnenburg. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Ambiguity Aversion and Household Portfolio Choice: Empirical Evidence
Stephen G. Dimmock, Roy Kouwenberg, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Kim Peijnenburg
NBER Working Paper No. 18743
January 2013, Revised June 2014
JEL No. C83,D14,D81,G11

                                             ABSTRACT

We test the relation between ambiguity aversion and five household portfolio choice puzzles: non-
participation, low allocations to equity, home-bias, own-company stock ownership, and portfolio under-
diversification. In a representative U.S. household survey, we measure ambiguity aversion using custom-
designed questions based on Ellsberg urns. As theory predicts, ambiguity aversion is negatively associated
with stock market participation, the fraction of financial assets in stocks, and foreign stock ownership,
but positively related to own-company stock ownership. Conditional on stock ownership, ambiguity
aversion is related to portfolio under-diversification, and during the financial crisis, ambiguity-averse
respondents were more likely to sell stocks.


Stephen G. Dimmock                                  Olivia S. Mitchell
Division of Finance and Banking                     University of Pennsylvania
Nanyang Technological University                    Wharton School
Singapore, 639798                                   3620 Locust Walk, St 3000 SH-DH
dimmock@ntu.edu.sg                                  Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
                                                    and NBER
Roy Kouwenberg                                      mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu
College of Management
Mahidol University                                  Kim Peijnenburg
69 Vipawadee Rangsit Rd                             Bocconi University
Bangkok, 10400, Thailand                            Via Roentgen 1
and Erasmus University Rotterdam                    20135 Milan
cmroy@mahidol.ac.th                                 Italy
                                                    kim.peijnenburg@unibocconi.it
                                                                                                  1


1.   Introduction

       People must consider both the risk and the ambiguity of future outcomes when making

financial decisions. Risk refers to events for which the probabilities of the future outcomes are

known; ambiguity refers to events for which the probabilities of the future outcomes are

unknown. Ellsberg (1961) argues that most people are ambiguity averse, that is, they prefer a

lottery with known probabilities to a similar lottery with unknown probabilities, and numerous

theoretical studies explore the implications of ambiguity for economic behavior. In particular, a

large body of theory suggests that ambiguity aversion can explain several household portfolio

choice puzzles. Empirical tests for some of these theoretical explanations, however, derive

mainly from laboratory experiments rather than actual portfolio choices; in other cases, the

proposed theoretical explanations have not previously been empirically tested.

       In this paper, we provide non-laboratory empirical evidence that ambiguity aversion

relates to five household portfolio choice puzzles: non-participation in equity markets, low

portfolio fractions allocated to equity, home-bias, own-company stock ownership, and portfolio

under-diversification. Specifically, in a nationally-representative sample of U.S. households, we

use real rewards to elicit measures of individuals’ ambiguity aversion and then demonstrate that

these measures can explain actual portfolio choices. As theory predicts, ambiguity aversion is

negatively associated with stock market participation, the fraction of financial assets allocated to

stocks, and foreign stock ownership, but ambiguity aversion is positively related to own-

company stock ownership. Conditional on stock ownership, ambiguity aversion also helps to

explain portfolio under-diversification.

       We develop an internet survey module designed to elicit ambiguity aversion and fielded it

on more than 3,000 respondents in the American Life Panel (ALP). Following the classic
                                                                                                      2


Ellsberg urn problem, the module asks respondents to choose between a lottery with known

probabilities (the drawing of a ball from a box with 100 colored balls in known proportions),

versus a lottery with unknown probabilities. We vary the proportions of colored balls in the

lottery with known probabilities, so as to measure individual respondents’ ambiguity aversion.

All respondents were eligible to win real monetary incentives (a total of $23,850 was paid to

1,590 of the respondents), as previous studies show that rewards are crucial for eliciting

meaningful responses to questions involving economic preferences. Our results confirm prior

laboratory studies finding substantial heterogeneity in ambiguity aversion: a substantial fraction

of our respondents is ambiguity averse (52%), a small fraction ambiguity neutral (10%), and the

remainder ambiguity seeking (38%). Having elicited ambiguity aversion, we then test whether it

can help explain household portfolio choice puzzles.

       A large proportion of the U.S. population does not participate in the stock market, which

is puzzling given that theoretical models using standard expected utility functions predict that all

individuals will do so (Merton, 1969). For those who do participate, theory predicts they will

allocate a counterfactually high fraction of assets to equity (Heaton and Lucas, 1997). Several

theoretical papers suggest that ambiguity aversion can explain these puzzles, based on the

assumption that investors view stock returns as ambiguous.                    Bossaerts, Ghirardato,

Guarnaschelli, and Zame (2010), Cao, Wang, and Zhang (2005), Dow and Werlang (1992),

Easley and O’Hara (2009), and Epstein and Schneider (2010),1 among others, show that

ambiguity aversion can cause non-participation.          Garlappi, Uppal, and Wang (2007) and


1
  These papers model ambiguity aversion using the multiple prior model of Gilboa (1987), Gilboa and
Schmeidler (1989), and Schmeidler (1987). Bossaerts, Ghirardato, Guarnaschelli, and Zame (2010) use
an extension of the multiple prior model, the α-MaxMin model of Ghirardato, Maccheroni, and Marinacci
(2004), which distinguishes between preferences towards ambiguity and beliefs about the level of
ambiguity. In this paper, we do not take a stand on the “correct” underlying model of ambiguity, and our
measure of ambiguity aversion is valid under all commonly-used models.
                                                                                                  3


Peijnenburg (2014) show that ambiguity aversion can reduce the fraction of financial assets

allocated to equity.

       We test the predictions of these theoretical models and find that ambiguity aversion has a

significant negative relation with both stock market participation and portfolio allocations to

equity. Results indicate that a one standard deviation increase in ambiguity aversion implies an

8.6% decrease in the probability of stock market participation and a 7.1% decrease in the fraction

of financial assets allocated to equity.    The results are robust to controlling for numerous

variables that previous studies suggest might affect household portfolio choice, including wealth,

income, age, education, risk aversion, trust, and financial literacy, among others. The module

also includes two check questions to assess whether a respondent’s choices are consistent; we

find stronger results for respondents whose choices are consistent.

      In addition to explaining participation in and allocations to equities as a broad asset class,

theory suggests that ambiguity aversion can help explain portfolio puzzles related to particular

categories of equity: specifically, the home-bias and own-company stock puzzles. The home-

bias puzzle refers to the fact that households heavily overweight domestic equity relative to

mean-variance benchmarks (French and Poterba, 1991). The own-company stock puzzle refers

to the fact that households voluntarily hold significant amounts of their employers’ stock

(Benartzi, 2001; Meulbrook, 2005; Mitchell and Utkus, 2003). Several theoretical papers argue

that ambiguity aversion can explain these puzzles, because, relative to the domestic stock market,

foreign stocks are relatively ambiguous and own-company stock is relatively unambiguous (e.g.,

Boyle, Uppal, and Wang, 2003; Boyle, Garlappi, Uppal, and Wang, 2012; Cao, Han, Hirshleifer,

and Zhang, 2011; Epstein and Miao, 2003; Uppal and Wang, 2003). Thus the portfolio of an
                                                                                                4


ambiguity-averse investor is biased away from foreign stocks but toward own-company stock.

To our knowledge, we are the first to empirically test these predictions.

       We find evidence consistent with both predictions. Ambiguity aversion is negatively

related to foreign stock ownership, but positively related to own-company stock ownership. This

pattern holds both in the overall sample, and within the subset of equity holders. The results for

equity owners are of particular interest, as they demonstrate that ambiguity aversion helps to

explain the composition of equity portfolios, and not only the participation decision. Our results

also provide evidence that ambiguity aversion is not simply a proxy for risk aversion, since, for

foreign and own-company stock ownership, the theoretical effect of risk aversion is exactly

opposite to that of ambiguity aversion.

       The paper also tests Heath and Tversky’s (1991) competence hypothesis, which predicts

that the effect of ambiguity aversion depends on individuals’ domain-specific knowledge.

Although people are generally ambiguity averse towards tasks for which they do not feel

competent (e.g., guessing the composition of an Ellsberg urn), people are much less ambiguity

averse towards tasks for which they believe they have expertise. Hence, we expect that higher

stock market competence will moderate the relation between a respondent’s ambiguity aversion

towards Ellsberg urns and his ambiguity aversion towards stock investments. We measure stock

market competence in two ways: self-assessed stock market knowledge and financial literacy.

For both measures, we find that the negative effect of ambiguity aversion on stock market

participation is stronger for people with lower stock market competence, consistent with the

implications of the competence hypothesis.

       Furthermore, theory suggests that ambiguity aversion relates to portfolio under-

diversification, with the effect of ambiguity aversion depending on the relative ambiguity of the
                                                                                                    5


overall market compared to individual stocks. Boyle, Garlappi, Uppal, and Wang (2012) find

that an individual who views the overall stock market as highly ambiguous, relative to some

limited number of familiar individual stocks, will invest in the individual stocks, thereby holding

an under-diversified portfolio. Consistent with this hypothesis, we find that, conditional on

participation, the fraction of the portfolio allocated to individual stocks is increasing in ambiguity

aversion for individuals with low self-assessed knowledge about the overall stock market. These

individuals view the overall stock market as highly ambiguous, and thus conditional on

participation, hold only a few individual stocks.

       In most models of ambiguity, the effect of ambiguity aversion is stronger when the

perceived level of ambiguity is high. We therefore also test how equity owners reacted to the

recent financial crisis, a period when the perceived ambiguity of future asset returns increased

sharply (e.g., Bernanke, 2010; Caballero and Simsek, 2012). Our results show that respondents

with higher ambiguity aversion were significantly more likely to actively sell equities during the

crisis. To our knowledge, this is the first empirical test examining how ambiguity aversion

affects active changes in household portfolios during times of market turmoil.

       This paper contributes to the literature by testing the theoretical models that use

ambiguity aversion to explain household portfolio choice.           Aside from a few laboratory

experiments (e.g., Bossaerts, Ghirardato, Guarnaschelli, and Zame, 2010), we are the first to

show a significant relation between ambiguity aversion and stock-market participation.2

Dimmock, Kouwenberg, and Wakker (2014) develop and apply a method for eliciting ambiguity

attitudes in a Dutch household survey. Although their primary focus is on developing the


2
 Although not their main focus, Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008) include a control variable for
ambiguity aversion, measured using a hypothetical compound lottery with known probabilities, but they
do not find significant results.
                                                                                                     6


elicitation method, they also examine whether ambiguity aversion is related to stock market

participation. In their relatively small data set, they do not find a significant relation except for a

subset of respondents having low perceived knowledge about future asset returns. Because it is

not their main focus, and because their data set does not contain the necessary variables, they do

not test any other hypotheses related to household portfolio choice. Further, their measures of

ambiguity attitudes are based on a particular model of ambiguity, the source method of

Abdellaoui, Baillon, Placido, and Wakker (2011) and Chew and Sagi (2008), which differs from

the models of ambiguity used in the finance literature; thus their tests do not align with the

theoretical predictions in the literature. In contrast, in this paper, our measure of ambiguity

aversion is consistent with the underlying models of preferences used in the finance literature.

       Our data set contains detailed information about household portfolios, allowing us to test

a rich set of hypotheses. Specifically, our paper is the first non-laboratory test to show that

ambiguity aversion can help explain five household choice puzzles: equity non-participation, the

low fraction of assets allocated to equities, home-bias, own-company stock investment, and

portfolio under-diversification. We are also the first to show that ambiguity aversion relates to

active portfolio changes in response to the financial crisis. Our results are consistent with the

predictions of a large number of theoretical models, and we show that ambiguity aversion can

help explain numerous puzzling features of households’ portfolio choices.


2. Measuring ambiguity aversion

       We developed a series of questions to elicit ambiguity aversion and implemented these

questions using a special module in the ALP internet survey. Our questions are posed as choices
                                                                                                        7


between an ambiguous Box U (Unknown) 3 and an unambiguous Box K (Known), similar to the

famous Ellsberg (1961) two urn experiment.4 As shown in Figure 1, both boxes contain exactly

100 balls, which can be purple or orange. The respondent selects one of the boxes, and then a

ball is randomly drawn from that box; he wins $15 if that ball is purple and $0 if the ball is

orange. For Box K, the number of purple balls is explicitly stated (50 purple balls), as well as

the number of orange balls (50). For Box U, the number of purple balls is not given, and the

respondent only knows it is between 0 and 100. A respondent who prefers Box K over Box U is

ambiguity averse; that is, he prefers known probabilities to unknown probabilities. In the survey,

a respondent can also choose “Indifferent” instead of Box K or Box U. A choice of “Indifferent”

implies that the respondent considers Box K and Box U equally attractive, and so he is

ambiguity-neutral. An ambiguity-neutral subject treats the subjective probability of winning for

Box U as if it were equal to the 50% known probability of winning for Box K. For this reason,

we refer to 50% as Box U’s ambiguity-neutral probability of winning.

Figure 1 here

        To more precisely measure respondents’ ambiguity aversion, we follow an approach

similar to that of Baillon and Bleichrodt (2012), Baillon, Cabantous, and Wakker (2012), and

Dimmock, Kouwenberg, and Wakker (2014). Specifically, the question sequence takes the

respondent through a series of choices that are conditional on prior answers and converge toward

the point of indifference.5 For example, suppose a respondent displays ambiguity aversion in the

first round of the question, preferring Box K over Box U (see Figure 1). We then decrease Box


3
  Our survey module uses “box” instead of “urn,” as the word “urn” might be unfamiliar to some subjects.
4
  We elicit ambiguity with questions about urns, rather than stocks, to avoid biases or reverse causality.
5
  An alternative would be to directly elicit the known probability that makes the subject indifferent
between a known and an unknown lottery (e.g., Kahn and Sarin, 1988). We use a series of discrete
choices as prior studies show this produces more reliably measures of preferences (e.g., Bostic,
Herrnstein, and Luce, 1990; Noussair, Robbin, and Ruffieux, 2004).
                                                                                                 8


K’s known probability of winning to 25% in the second round (see Figure A.2. in Online

Appendix A). Alternatively, if the respondent chooses Box U in the first round, we then increase

the known probability of winning to 75%. This process is repeated for up to four rounds, until

the respondent’s indifference point is closely approximated.6 We refer to the known probability

of winning for Box K at which the respondent is indifferent between Box K and Box U as the

matching probability (Wakker, 2010). For example, a matching probability of 40% means the

respondent is indifferent between drawing a purple ball from Box K with a known probability of

winning equal to 40%, versus drawing a purple ball from Box U with an unknown probability.

          A key appeal of this approach is that matching probabilities measure ambiguity aversion

relative to risk aversion (because the alternative to the ambiguous choice is a risky choice, not a

certain outcome). As a result, all other features of utility, such as risk aversion or probability

weighting, are differenced out of the comparison. For example, different subjects might receive

different utilities from a prize of $15. But our matching probabilities measure a within-subject

comparison between a risky lottery and an ambiguous lottery, and because the prize is the same

for both boxes, the utility of $15 is differenced out of the comparison. Accordingly, cross-

subject differences in utility are irrelevant. Matching probabilities capture only differential

preferences for ambiguity relative to risk.7

          Because the ambiguity neutral probability of the ambiguous lottery is 50%, a respondent

with a matching probability below 50% is ambiguity averse. A respondent with a matching

probability equal to 50% is ambiguity neutral, and a respondent with a matching probability

above 50% is ambiguity seeking. In what follows, q denotes the matching probability and we

define our key measure as: Ambiguity Aversion = 50% - q. Thus positive values of this measure


6
    Online Appendix A provides additional details about the approximation method.
7
    A proof is provided by Dimmock, Kouwenberg, and Wakker (2014, Theorem 5.1).
                                                                                                        9


indicate ambiguity aversion, zero indicates ambiguity neutrality, and negative values indicate

ambiguity seeking. In some of the empirical tests we use two additional measures of ambiguity

aversion. The first is simply an indicator variable equal to one if the respondent indicates

ambiguity aversion for the first round of the question (i.e., if he selects Box K in the first round).8

The second is the rank transformation of the Ambiguity Aversion measure, with zero indicating

the lowest level of ambiguity aversion and one the highest.

        Importantly, subjects could win real rewards based on their choices, because prior studies

show that this produces more reliable estimates of preferences (Smith, 1976). The instructions at

the start of the survey told the subjects that one of their choices would be randomly selected and

played for a chance to win $15. We paid a total of $23,850 in real incentives to 1,590 of the

3,258 ALP subjects.9 The RAND Corporation’s ALP was responsible for determining the

incentives won by respondents and making payments; accordingly, suspicion about the

trustworthiness of the incentive scheme should play no role, as subjects regularly participate in

ALP surveys and receive incentive payments from RAND.

        In Ellsberg experiments, respondents can usually choose the winning color, to rule out

potential suspicion that the ambiguous urn is manipulated to contain fewer purple balls than

orange balls. In our survey we elected not to add an option to change the winning color, as we

sought to keep the survey as simple as possible for use in the general population. Further, the

survey was administered by RAND Corporation’s ALP, which should minimize distrust. Prior

studies have also demonstrated overwhelmingly that subjects are indifferent between betting on

8
  In theory, respondents could strategically increase the probability of winning $15 by choosing Box U in
the first round, thereby increasing Box K’s known probability of winning in the subsequent rounds. The
indicator variable is not subject to concerns about strategic answering as it depends only on the response
in the first round, before the respondent could know that there are multiple linked rounds. Further, there
are a maximum of four rounds, which limits the respondents’ ability to learn strategic behavior.
9
   Before including our survey module in the ALP panel, we piloted our questions in a laboratory
experiment at the Wharton Behavioral Lab. Results of the lab experiment are available on request.
                                                                                                         10


either color (e.g., Abdellaoui, Baillon, Placido, and Wakker 2011; Fox and Tversky, 1998). To

confirm this, we gave a separate group of 250 respondents the option to select the winning color

and found no significant differences in ambiguity aversion from the main survey sample.10

        Since elicited preferences likely contain measurement error,11 we also included two check

questions to test the consistency of subjects’ choices.             After each subject completed the

ambiguity questions, we estimated his matching probability: q. We then generated two check

questions by changing the known probability of winning for Box K to q + 10% in the first

question, and q − 10% in the second. Box U remains unchanged. A subject’s response is

deemed inconsistent if he prefers the ambiguous Box U in the first check question or the

unambiguous Box K in the second check question. (Online Appendix A details the elicitation

procedure including the consistency checks.)


3. Data and variables

        Our survey module to measure ambiguity aversion was implemented in the RAND

American Life Panel.12 The ALP consists of several thousand households that regularly answer

Internet surveys. Households lacking Internet access at the recruiting stage are provided with a

laptop and wireless service to limit selection biases.13            To further ensure the sample is

representative of the U.S. population, the ALP provides survey weights used for all statistics


10
   In August 2013 we fielded an additional survey with 500 respondents. In this survey, half of the
respondents could choose the winning color (purple or orange), while the other half could not (all other
aspects of this survey were identical to the original survey, including real incentives). The mean
matching probabilities of the ‘color choice’ and 'no color choice' groups are 0.479 and 0.459, respectively,
and the difference is not statistically significant (p-value = 0.31). Furthermore, the average matching
probability of the `color choice’ group is not significantly different from that in the main survey sample.
11
   See Harless and Camerer (1994) and Hey and Orme (1994) for further discussion of measurement error
in preference elicitation.
12
   See Online Appendix B for more information about the ALP.
13
    See https://mmicdata.rand.org/alp/index.php?page=comparison for a comparison of the ALP to
alternative data sources.
                                                                                                        11


reported in this paper. In addition to the ambiguity aversion variables derived from our module,

we use additional variables from the ALP surveys. Table 1 defines these variables and Table 2

provides summary statistics; the last column of Table 2 also indicates the number of valid

responses for each variable.

        The first seven variables in Table 2 summarize our dependent variables. These financial

variables were measured in different ALP survey modules, many of which included only a subset

of the ALP participants.       Accordingly, the sample sizes of the dependent variables differ

depending on the number of people surveyed in the specific modules. We do not find any

significant correlations between ambiguity aversion and inclusion in these modules, suggesting

that sample selection biases are unlikely.

        Stock Ownership is an indicator variable equal to one if the respondent holds stocks

(either individual stocks or equity mutual funds) in his personal portfolio. The participation rate

in our sample is 23%.14 The second row shows that the unconditional average fraction of

financial assets allocated to stocks is 12%; conditional on stock market participation, the average

fraction is 51%. For the subsequent dependent variables, the sample sizes are lower because our

survey module does not perfectly overlap with the modules that collected these variables.

Foreign Stock Ownership is an indicator variable equal to one if the respondent owns foreign

stocks or equity mutual funds; 13% of the sample owns foreign stocks. Own-Company Stock

ownership is an indicator variable equal to one if the respondent owns shares in his current or

previous employer (outside of his retirement account); 5% of the sample has own-company stock

ownership. For own-company stock, we restrict the sample to respondents that are employed.

14
  Our sample has a lower equity participation rate than that reported in some other studies, because we
exclude equity ownership in 401(k) plans. Such equity holdings might not reflect active choices by the
respondent, as a result of the U.S. Department of Labor’s introduction of target date funds as an
investment default; in this case, employees can hold equities by default, rather than due to active choice.
For more on 401(k) plan investment options, see Mitchell and Utkus (2012).
                                                                                                     12


Individual Stock Ownership is an indicator variable equal to one if the respondent owns

individual shares (not including own-company stock); 17% of the sample owns individual

shares. Conditional on non-zero equity ownership, the average fraction allocated to individual

stocks is 42%. For a subsample of the individual stock owners, we can observe the number of

individual shares that they own. Consistent with other studies of household portfolios, we find

that, conditional on owning individual stocks, the median number of individual stocks held is

two, which suggests that individual stock ownership is a reasonable proxy for under-

diversification. The variable “Stock Sales During the Financial Crisis” is derived from a survey

fielded in May 2009,15 and it is equal to one if the respondent actively sold stocks during the

financial crisis, conditional on owning stocks before the crisis.

Tables 1 and 2 here

       In all empirical tests we control for demographic and economic characteristics, including

age, gender, ethnicity, marital status, number of children, self-reported health status, education,

employment status, family income and wealth, and retirement plan type.16 Controlling for these

variables partials out the potential confounding effects that they might have on household

portfolio choice, thus providing cleaner estimates of the effect of ambiguity aversion.

       Our ALP survey module also included additional questions to measure trust, financial

literacy, and risk aversion. (Online Appendix B provides the exact wording of these questions

and additional details.) We include these variables to avoid omitted variable biases, as it is

plausible that these variables affect portfolio choice and could measure something conceptually


15
   Although, the crisis module was completed nearly three years prior to our module, it is unlikely that
investment choices made during the financial crisis would significantly affect respondents’ ambiguity
aversion preferences elicited in the urn domain three years later; as such, we do not believe reverse
causality is a concern.
16
   For prior studies using these variables see, among others, Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008),
Haliassos and Bertaut (1995), Rosen and Wu (2004), and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002).
                                                                                                         13


similar to ambiguity aversion. For example, it is possible that ambiguity aversion might be

influenced by trust (i.e., people who distrust others may assume that ambiguous events are

systematically biased against them). Following Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008), we use

the trust question from the World Values Survey.17

        We also control for financial literacy, as prior studies show it has a strong relation with

financial decisions (e.g., Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007; van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie, 2011). To

ensure that ambiguity aversion is not simply a proxy for low financial literacy, our survey

module included three questions similar to those devised by Lusardi and Mitchell (2007) for the

Health and Retirement Study. Our index of financial literacy is the number of correct responses

to these questions. Table 2 shows that, on average, respondents answer slightly more than two of

the questions correctly.

        Our methodology is designed to elicit ambiguity aversion in a manner unaffected by risk

aversion; nevertheless we control for risk aversion for two reasons. First, we seek to ensure that

our ambiguity aversion variable captures a distinct component of preferences, separate from risk

aversion. Second, ambiguity aversion and risk aversion could be correlated, in which case

ambiguity attitudes might provide little incremental information about preferences. To measure

risk aversion we modify Tanaka, Camerer, and Nguyen’s (2010) method. As shown in Figure 2,

we ask the respondent to choose between a certain outcome and a risky outcome. Based on the

response, the survey generates a new binary choice similar to the method for eliciting ambiguity

aversion described previously. Table 2 shows that the average respondent is risk averse, but

there is substantial variation and some people are risk seeking. The order of the risk and


17
   Although our question is the same as theirs, the ALP uses a different response scale: the ALP asks
subjects to select a response along a six-point Likert scale, with zero indicating strong agreement with the
statement that others can be trusted and five indicating strong disagreement; Guiso, Sapienza, and
Zingales (2008) use a binary variable indicating either agreement or disagreement with this statement.
                                                                                                          14


ambiguity elicitation questions was randomized in the survey; in the regressions we include a

dummy for the question order as a control.

Figure 2 here

        Table 3 summarizes ambiguity aversion in the ALP sample. Panel A shows that 52% of

the respondents are ambiguity averse, 10% are ambiguity neutral, and 38% are ambiguity

seeking. These results are roughly consistent with the findings from a targeted survey of Italian

households by Butler, Guiso, and Jappelli (2013),18 and they are within the range of results from

a large number of studies summarized in Oechssler and Roomets (2013) and Trautmann and van

de Kuilen (2013). Panel B summarizes the key ambiguity aversion measure. On average,

respondents are ambiguity averse, but there is strong heterogeneity in ambiguity preferences.

This finding is of importance for the finance literature, as Bossaerts, Ghirardato, Guarnaschelli,

and Zame (2010) show that heterogeneity in investors’ ambiguity aversion will result in

equilibrium asset prices that cannot be replicated by a standard representative agent model with

subjective expected utility.19 Panel C shows the results for the two check questions: the percent

of respondents giving inconsistent answers is 30.4% for the first question and 14.0% for the

second. These rates are similar to those found in laboratory studies of preferences (e.g., Harless

and Camerer, 1994).        In our regressions, we include a dummy variable for whether the

respondent made errors on the check questions as a control.20


18
   Butler, Guiso, and Jappelli (2013) elicit ambiguity aversion in a survey of Italian retail bank investors.
Their goal is to link decision making styles to ambiguity and risk attitudes, in contrast with our goals in
the present paper.
19
   The heterogeneity in ambiguity aversion is equally strong (comparable to full sample results in Table 3)
among sub-groups that matter most for financial markets, namely stockholders and wealthy individuals.
20
   Table C-1 of Online Appendix C shows the results of regressing the ambiguity aversion measure on the
control variables. Naturally, these regressions do not imply causality; rather regression is a convenient
tool to summarize the correlation structure of the data. We find that standard economic and demographic
characteristics explain little of the variation in ambiguity aversion, and thus the effect of ambiguity
aversion on economic decisions is not subsumed by commonly used control variables.
                                                                                                        15


Table 3 here


4. Ambiguity aversion: Participation and the fraction of financial assets allocated to equities

        This section tests the relation between ambiguity aversion and household financial

behavior, in particular stock market participation and the fraction of financial assets allocated

to stocks. All models reported in this section include controls for age, age squared, gender,

White, Hispanic, married, (ln) number of children (plus one), self-reported health status,

education, employment status, (ln) family income, wealth, defined contribution plan and

defined benefit plan participation dummies, financial literacy, trust, risk aversion, question

order, errors on the check questions, missing data dummies,21 and a constant term. For all

models, we report robust standard errors clustered at the household level.


4.1.    Ambiguity aversion and stock market participation

        Table 4 shows the results of probit models that test the relation between ambiguity

aversion and stock market participation.          The table reports marginal effects rather than

coefficients. The dependent variable is an indicator variable equal to one if the respondent

owns individual stocks or equity mutual funds, and zero otherwise.                 In column (1) the

independent variable is the (rescaled) matching probability, Ambiguity Aversion (50% - q). In

column (2) the ambiguity aversion variable is Ambiguity Aversion Dummy: this is an indicator

variable equal to one if the respondent’s choice indicates ambiguity aversion in the first round

of the question. In column (3) the independent variable is Ambiguity Aversion Rank, which is

simply a rank transformation of the main Ambiguity Aversion variable (zero indicating the

lowest level of ambiguity aversion and one the highest). We include this variable to show that

21
  Results are robust to excluding observations with missing data, rather than including these observations
and using missing-data dummy variables. In the interest of brevity we do not report the coefficients for
the missing data dummies (available on request).
                                                                                                  16


the significance of our main ambiguity aversion variable is not driven by outliers. The results

are similar for all three variables; accordingly, in subsequent tables we focus primarily on the

results for Ambiguity Aversion.

Table 4 here

       Consistent with the predictions of theory, there is a significant negative relation

between ambiguity aversion and stock market participation. Further, the economic magnitude

is large. The coefficient in column (1) of Panel A implies that a one standard deviation

increase in ambiguity aversion is associated with a 2.0 percentage point decrease in the

probability of participating in the stock market (8.6% relative to the baseline rate of 23%). To

put this in perspective, the implied economic magnitude of a one standard deviation change in

ambiguity aversion is equivalent to a change in wealth of 0.41 standard deviations ($238,000).

       Prior authors argue that modest participation costs can account for a sizeable fraction of

non-participation (Haliassos and Bertaut, 1995; Gomes and Michaelides, 2005; Vissing-

Jorgensen, 2002). Such costs cannot, however, explain non-participation among those with

moderate levels of financial assets (Andersen and Nielsen, 2011; Campbell, 2006). Thus,

participation by those with at least some financial assets is of particular interest. We explore

this issue in column (3) of Table 5, which shows results for the subset of respondents having

financial assets of at least $500 (as in Heaton and Lucas, 2000). In this restricted sample, both

the statistical and economic significance of ambiguity aversion rise. The marginal effect in

column (3) of Panel A of Table 5 implies a one standard deviation increase in ambiguity

aversion is associated with a 3.3 percentage point decrease in the probability of participating in

the stock market (8.8% relative to the baseline participation rate in this subsample of 37.3%).

Table 5 here
                                                                                                17


        Overall, our results confirm the predictions of theory - higher ambiguity aversion is

associated with lower stock market participation. Further, the results are stronger for households

with at least moderate amounts of financial assets, a group whose non-participation is

particularly difficult to explain.


4.2.    Measurement error in preference elicitation and other alternative explanations

        Although we find a significant relation between our measure of ambiguity aversion and

stock market participation, it is important to establish that our key independent variable is, in

fact, a valid measure of ambiguity aversion. The reliability of subjects’ responses is one of the

most common concerns that economists have with survey data. A large literature, beginning

with Harless and Camerer (1994) and Hey and Orme (1994), shows that subjects often provide

inconsistent responses to non-trivial questions about preferences. To empirically address this

issue, our module included two check questions to test the consistency of respondents’ choices,

as the estimated ambiguity aversion of the respondents whose answers are inconsistent may

contain greater measurement error. For this reason, columns (2) and (4) of Table 5 exclude

respondents who gave inconsistent answers to either check question.

        Among this subsample, ambiguity aversion is significantly higher: respondents who did

not make errors on the check questions have ambiguity aversion measures 2.9 percentage points

higher than the respondents who did make errors.22 The implied economic magnitude of the

effect of ambiguity aversion on portfolio choice is also considerably larger in this subsample

(i.e., for this subsample, the results are consistent with less attenuation bias due to measurement

error in the independent variable). For instance, in column (2) of Panel A, the estimated

marginal effect is nearly 29% larger than the corresponding marginal effect in column (1) for the

22
   Consistent with attenuation bias from measurement error, the ambiguity aversion variable is not
significantly different from zero for those respondents who made errors on the check questions.
                                                                                                       18


full sample. Finding stronger results for this subsample, in which our measure of ambiguity

aversion is more reliable, suggests two things. First, it supports our interpretation of the main

results, while it is inconsistent with alternative explanations based on misunderstandings of the

elicitation questions or measurement error. Second, our baseline estimates potentially understate

the true economic magnitude of the relation between ambiguity aversion and household portfolio

choice.

          Another concern could be that low education or cognitive skill drive both ambiguity

aversion and non-participation. In fact, ambiguity aversion is actually higher among the

college educated, a finding that is directionally inconsistent with this alternative explanation.23

Part of our sample also answered a module measuring cognitive ability. In robustness tests, we

find that including an index of cognitive ability does not alter the ambiguity aversion results.

Further, the correlation between cognitive ability and ambiguity aversion is not significant.24

          Similarly, it is possible that financial illiteracy could drive both non-participation and

ambiguity aversion. Ex ante, this seems unlikely, as education and financial literacy explain

little of the variation in ambiguity aversion (see Online Appendix C, Table C.1). But to guard

against this possibility, we control for financial literacy.         Consistent with prior studies,

financial literacy has a highly significant positive association with stock market participation

(van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie, 2011). Controlling for financial literacy, however, does not

diminish the negative relation between ambiguity aversion and stock market participation.

          Another potential concern is that ambiguity aversion might be correlated with risk

aversion, in which case our ambiguity aversion variables might capture little incremental


23
   This is detailed in Online Appendix, Table C-1. The positive relation between ambiguity aversion and
education is consistent with prior population studies, such as Butler, Guiso, and Jappelli (2013).
24
   The ALP data include measures of decision style, similar to those used in Butler, Guiso, and Jappelli
(2013). We find that including these measures does not alter the results for ambiguity aversion.
                                                                                                            19


information.25 To control for this possibility, all specifications include our elicited measure of

risk aversion. 26 In the full sample, risk aversion is significant at the 5% level and positively

related to equity market participation, but this effect dissipates in the subset of subjects having

at least $500 in financial assets. We find this odd relation is driven entirely by a small subset

of respondents who report extreme risk-seeking in their responses. If we eliminate these risk-

seeking respondents from the analysis, the relation between risk aversion and participation is

insignificantly negative.27 We note also, that our results for foreign and own-company stock

ownership, discussed in Section 5, are directionally inconsistent with the possibility that our

ambiguity aversion variable inadvertently measures risk aversion.

        All specifications also include a control variable for trust in other people, following

Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008). Trust is important, as the ambiguity aversion variable

could conceivably measure subjects’ distrust of the experiment: that is, subjects might believe

that ambiguous situations are systematically biased against them. In our sample, the relation

between trust and participation is directionally consistent with Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales

(2008). More importantly, the results for ambiguity aversion are robust to controlling for trust.


4.3.    Ambiguity aversion and the fraction of financial assets allocated to stocks

        Table 6 reports results from Tobit regressions that test the relation between ambiguity

aversion and the fraction of financial assets allocated to stocks. Column (1) presents results

25
   Although our elicitation method is designed to measure ambiguity aversion indepent of any effect from
risk aversion, it is still possible for ambiguity aversion and risk aversion to be correlated, for instance, if
individuals who are highly risk averse also have very strong preferences for risk over ambiguity.
26
    Puri and Robinson (2007) measure optimism based on peoples’ miscalibration of their life
expectancies, and argue that optimism significantly affects household portfolio choice. We do not have
all of the information they use to calculate optimism, but for some of our respondents we observe whether
they overestimate their probability of living past age 75. Our results do not change when adding this
variable as a control; results are available on request.
27
   Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008) also find an insignificant relationship between risk aversion and
portfolio holdings
                                                                                                         20


using the full sample; column (2) presents results for the subsample of respondents with non-zero

stock ownership.

Table 6 here

        As predicted by theory (e.g., Garlappi, Uppal, and Wang, 2007; Peijnenburg, 2014), all of

the columns show a negative relation between ambiguity aversion and the fraction of financial

assets allocated to equity.28 This relation holds both in the full sample, and for the portfolio

allocations of stockholders. In column (2), for an individual with non-zero ownership, the

implied decrease in portfolio allocations to equity from a one standard deviation increase in

ambiguity aversion is 3.6 percentage points (7.1% relative to the conditional average allocation

of 51.4%). Overall, the results show a strong negative relation between ambiguity aversion and

portfolio allocations to equity.


5. Ambiguity aversion, home-bias, and own-company stock ownership

        The previous section focused on investments in stocks as a broad asset category. In

contrast, this section tests the relation between ambiguity aversion and ownership of two specific

categories of stocks: foreign and own-company stocks. For an ambiguity averse investor, the

attractiveness of a particular category of stocks is partially determined by the investor’s

familiarity with that category. French and Poterba (1991, p. 225) suggest that the unfamiliarity

of foreign stocks could explain the home-bias puzzle. Several theoretical papers formalize this

idea, arguing that as ambiguity averse individuals are particularly reluctant to invest in foreign

stocks, which they perceive as having greater ambiguity (e.g., Boyle, Garlappi, Uppal, and



28
  The estimated effects of ambiguity aversion are similar if we use Heckman-style selection models. We
note, however, that these selection models are identified from the nonlinearity of the inverse Mill’s ratio,
as we do not have valid instruments for the first stage equation. And in the absence of valid instruments,
selection models are frequently severly misspecified (c.f., Lennox, Francis, and Wang, 2012).
                                                                                                      21


Wang, 2012; Cao, Han, Hirshleifer, and Zhang, 2011; Epstein and Miao, 2003; Uppal and Wang,

2003). Following similar logic, theory suggests that ambiguity aversion can explain the own-

company stock puzzle, as ambiguity averse individuals prefer to invest in their employer’s stock

which for them has relatively low ambiguity (Boyle, Garlappi, Uppal, and Wang, 2012; Boyle,

Uppal, and Wang, 2003; Cao, Han, Hirshleifer, and Zhang, 2011).

       Table 7 shows the results of probit models that test the relation between ambiguity

aversion and ownership of two specific categories of equity. In columns (1) and (2), the

dependent variable equals one if the individual owns foreign stocks outside of his 401(k) plan.

In columns (3) and (4), the dependent variable equals one if the individual owns shares of his

employer’s stock outside of his 401(k) plan.29            For the own-company stock ownership

regressions, we limit the sample to individuals employed by someone other than themselves (i.e.,

the retired, self-employed, and unemployed are excluded, as own-company stock ownership is

not meaningful for them). In columns (1) and (3), the sample includes all individuals for whom

we have data. In columns (2) and (4), we limit the sample to individuals with non-zero stock

ownership. All specifications include the same control variables as in Table 4, and the reported

standard errors are clustered by household. The data for both dependent variables come from

modules that do not perfectly overlap with our sample, so this table has fewer observations.

Table 7 here

       Consistent with the predictions of theory, we find a significant negative relation between

ambiguity aversion and foreign stock ownership, and a significant positive relation between

ambiguity aversion and own-company stock ownership. For foreign stocks, the marginal effects

reported in column (1), in which the sample includes both stock market participants and non-

29
   Although the prior literature largely focuses on own-company stock in 401(k) plans, we focus on
holdings in non-retirement accounts as our data do not allow us to distinguish whether ownership within a
retirement plan is voluntary or due to matching.
                                                                                               22


participants, imply that a one standard deviation increase in ambiguity aversion is associated

with a 2.6 percentage point decrease in the probability of owning foreign stocks. The results in

column (2) show that the negative relation between ambiguity aversion and foreign stock

ownership is not simply a result of the negative relation between ambiguity aversion and equity

ownership. Even among equity market participants, higher ambiguity aversion is negatively

associated with ownership of foreign stocks. Once again, the implied economic magnitude is

large.   A one standard deviation increase in ambiguity aversion is associated with a 6.9

percentage point decrease in the probability of foreign stock ownership.

         Consistent with the predictions of theory, we also find a significant positive relation

between ambiguity aversion and own-company stock ownership. The marginal effects reported

in column (3), in which the sample includes both stock market participants and non-participants,

imply that a one standard deviation increase in ambiguity aversion is associated with a 1.4

percentage point increase in the probability of own-company stock ownership. Although this

coefficient is significant at only the 10% level, the result is intriguing as it suggests that the

ambiguity averse are more likely to invest in own-company stock, even relative to the alternative

of non-participation in any form of equity. Furthermore, column (4) shows that the positive

relation between ambiguity aversion and own-company stock ownership is significant among the

sample of stock-market participants. Once again, the implied economic magnitude is large. A

one standard deviation increase in ambiguity aversion is associated with a 10.0 percentage point

increase in own-company stock ownership.

         Table 7 presents the first direct empirical evidence that ambiguity aversion is

significantly related to both the home-bias and the own-company stock puzzles. Further, these

results are inconsistent with the possibility that our measure of ambiguity aversion inadvertently
                                                                                               23


captures risk aversion. Higher risk aversion should increase the probability of foreign stock

ownership because of the diversification benefits and decrease the probability of own-company

stock ownership because of portfolio diversification and the background risk associated with

investing in one’s employer; for both foreign and own-company stock, the directional predictions

of ambiguity aversion are exactly the opposite. More generally, the results in Table 7 pose a

challenge to alternative interpretations of our ambiguity aversion measure; any alternative

interpretation would have to be consistent with both a negative relation between our measure and

most forms of equity, and a positive relation with own-company stock.


6. Ambiguity aversion and stock market competence: Participation and under-diversification


6.1.   Ambiguity aversion, stock market competence, and stock market participation

       The prior section tests the effect of ambiguity aversion on investment decisions for

unfamiliar assets (foreign stocks) and familiar assets (own-company stock). In this section, we

further test how the effect of ambiguity aversion differs across investors, depending on the

investors’ familiarity (or competence) with the overall stock market. These tests are motivated

by the competence hypothesis of Heath and Tversky (1991), which predicts that most people are

ambiguity averse towards decisions in areas that are unfamiliar or purely chance-based

ambiguity (like an Ellsberg urn), but the effect of ambiguity aversion is reduced for decisions in

areas for which the individual sees themselves as knowledgeable or competent.              Hence

individuals with high stock market competence would display less ambiguity aversion towards

financial decisions, compared to Ellsberg urns (a low competence task). Conversely, individuals

with low stock market competence would display similar ambiguity aversion towards financial

decisions and towards Ellsberg urns, as they do not feel competent in either setting. This implies
                                                                                                 24


that the relation between ambiguity aversion (based on Ellsberg urns) and portfolio choice

should be stronger for those with relatively low stock market competence.

       In this section, we use two direct measures of low stock market competence. First, we

identify respondents whose self-assessed financial knowledge is very low.30 Second, we

identify respondents who made errors on the financial literacy questions. We then separately

estimate the effect of ambiguity aversion within two sub-groups: those with high competence

and those with low competence. We acknowledge the possibility that these measures of stock

market competence could be endogenous. For example, individuals who own stocks may learn

from their experience, creating a reverse causality problem.          Alternatively, both stock

ownership and stock market competence could be determined by some other factor (for a lucid

discussion of potential endogeneity problems in studies of financial literacy, see van Rooij,

Lusardi, and Alessie, 2011). The potential endogeneity problems, however, primarily affect

the interpretation of the coefficients for the stock market competence variables, not the

interaction of stock market competence with ambiguity aversion.

       In Table 8 we test how ambiguity aversion and stock market competence interact to affect

stock market participation. For ease of comparison, the first column repeats the results from

Table 4, which shows the relation between ambiguity aversion and stock market participation

controlling for the level of stock market competence (proxied by the number of correct responses

on the financial literacy questions). In contrast, columns (2) and (3) also allow stock market

competence to affect the sensitivity of the relation between ambiguity aversion and stock market

participation. In these columns we estimate the effect of ambiguity aversion separately for the


30
  Our ALP survey includes the following question: “How would you rate your knowledge about the stock
market?” with answers measured on a 5-point scale (very low, low, moderate, high, very high). We use
`very low’ as a cutoff because more than 30% of respondents rate their knowledge as very low. The
results are qualitatively similar if we instead use `low’ as the cutoff.
                                                                                                    25


low and high self-assessed stock market knowledge (or financial literacy) groups. In these

specifications we also replace the financial literacy control variable with the variable used to

divide the sample (i.e., in column (2) the financial literacy control variable is replaced with self-

assessed stock market knowledge rather than the number of correct answers on the financial

literacy questions). Aside from these changes, the regressions are identical to those in Table 4.

Table 8 here

       Consistent with the Heath and Tversky (1991) competence hypothesis, Table 8 shows

that the effect of ambiguity aversion is always more statistically significant in the subset of

respondents reporting low stock market competence.           For both measures of stock market

competence, there is a stronger negative relation between ambiguity aversion and participation

for individuals with lower competence. For example, the results in column (2) imply that a one

standard deviation increase in ambiguity aversion is associated with a 4.6 percentage point

decrease in stock market participation for an individual with low stock market competence,

compared to an insignificant 1.2 percentage point decrease for an individual with high stock

market competence. Note, however, that the difference in the effect of ambiguity aversion

between the high and low competence groups is not statistically significantly, so we cannot

conclude that the effect of ambiguity aversion is different for the low and high competence

groups.


6.2.   Ambiguity aversion, stock market competence, and portfolio under-diversification

       Conditional on stock market participation, many households hold portfolios that are

extremely under-diversified relative to mean-variance efficient benchmarks (Blume and Friend,

1975; Goetzmann and Kumar, 2008; Polkovnichenko, 2005). The theoretical model of Boyle,

Garlappi, Uppal, and Wang (2012) suggests that ambiguity aversion can explain this puzzle. In
                                                                                                   26


their model, portfolio diversification is determined by the relative ambiguity of the overall

market versus that of a few undiversified, but potentially “familiar”, assets. An investor who is

ambiguity averse, and who views the overall market as more ambiguous than the familiar stocks,

will hold an undiversified portfolio of familiar stocks. An ambiguity averse investor who views

the overall market as highly ambiguous, and does not view any individual stocks as familiar, will

not participate at all. An ambiguity averse investor who does not view the overall market as

highly ambiguous will hold a diversified portfolio. In this section, we test these predictions

using our two measures of stock market competence (self-assessed stock market knowledge and

financial literacy) as measures of the investor’s perceived ambiguity of the overall stock market.

We then test whether the interaction of ambiguity aversion and perceived ambiguity can help to

explain the portfolio under-diversification puzzle.

         Table 9 presents the results. As our goal is to examine allocations of equity owners, we

limit the sample to only those who participate in the stock market. In columns (1) to (3), we

report probit estimates of models in which the dependent variable is equal to one for respondents

who own individual stocks, and zero otherwise. In columns (4) to (6), we report estimates from

a Tobit model in which the dependent variable is the fraction of equity allocated to individual

stocks.31 We include both specifications for completeness but focus our discussion on the Tobit

results, as Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini (2007, 2009) present evidence suggesting that the

proportion of equity held in individual stocks is a reasonable proxy for portfolio under-

diversification.32 Furthermore, the median individual stock owner in our sample owns only two

stocks, and over 86% hold fewer than eight stocks. Note that our measures of individual stock

ownership do not include foreign stocks or own-company stock. Our measures of stock market

31
   We have fewer observations for the Tobit models as we do not observe the amount of individual stock
ownership for all respondents.
32
   We thank Laurent Calvet for suggesting this measure to us.
                                                                                                27


competence concern knowledge about stocks in general (i.e., about the overall market) but we do

not have measures of whether there are certain “familiar” stocks available to the individual (and

if such a measure were available, reverse causality would be a concern).

Table 9 here

       Results in columns (1) and (4), in which we do not consider stock market competence,

show a significant negative relation between ambiguity aversion and ownership of individual

stocks. A one standard deviation increase in an individual’s ambiguity aversion implies a 7.7

percentage point reduction in the probability that an equity owner holds individual stocks and

implies a 9.7 percentage point lower portfolio allocation to individual stocks. The theoretical

direction of the effect of ambiguity aversion is conditional on the relative perceived ambiguity of

the overall market versus that of individual stocks. The negative relation that we find implies

that, in aggregate, investors perceive that the returns of individual stocks have greater ambiguity

than the returns of the overall market.

       In columns (2) and (5), we split the sample based on self-assessed stock market

knowledge, and in columns (3) and (6) we split the sample based on correct answers to the

financial literacy questions. Consistent with the model of Boyle, Garlappi, Uppal, and Wang

(2012), there is a negative relation between ambiguity aversion and individual stock ownership

for investors who do not view the overall market as highly ambiguous. Although theory predicts

a positive relation between ambiguity aversion and under-diversification for investors who view

the market as highly ambiguous, in the probit regressions the relation is not significant.

       The Tobit regression results in columns (5) and (6) provide the strongest evidence

supporting ambiguity aversion as an explanation for under-diversification. There is a negative

relation between ambiguity aversion and the fraction of equity allocated to individual stocks for
                                                                                                   28


investors with high stock market knowledge, but a positive relation for investors with low stock

market knowledge. Consistent with the predictions of theory, conditional on stock market

participation, people who are ambiguity averse and who view the overall market as highly

ambiguous hold highly under-diversified portfolios; for this group, the results in column (5)

imply that a one standard deviation increase in ambiguity aversion implies a 38.9 percentage

point increase in the fraction of equity allocated to individual stocks. In contrast, those who are

ambiguity averse but do not view the overall market as highly ambiguous allocate little to

individual stocks; for this group, a one standard deviation increase in ambiguity aversion implies

an 11.4 percentage point decrease in the fraction of equity allocated to individual stocks.33

Similar to the results for home-bias and own-company stock ownership, these results are

directionally inconsistent with the possibility that our measure of ambiguity aversion

inadvertently measures risk aversion: risk aversion would imply a negative relation with

portfolio under-diversification, regardless of stock market competence.

       For the low stock market knowledge results, the apparent inconsistency between the

probit and Tobit regressions is due to the bimodal nature of individual stock ownership: in

general, investors allocate either a small fraction of their total equity holdings to a few individual

stocks, or they allocate all of their equity to a few individual stocks. Hence the dummy variable

indicating ownership of individual stocks is not a good proxy for diversification, as it mixes

well-diversified investors that hold a few individual stocks on top of mutual funds, with very

undiversified investors. Investors with high ambiguity aversion and low competence tend to

invest all of their equity in a few stocks (conditional on participation).




33
  Barberis and Huang (2008) suggest that probability weighting drives under-diversication. In a
robustness test we include probability weighting as a control and the results do not change.
                                                                                                          29


        Overall, then, the results support the argument that ambiguity aversion relates to portfolio

under-diversification, but highlight the complexity of this relation, as the effect of ambiguity

aversion depends on the relative ambiguity of the overall market versus individual stocks.


7. Ambiguity aversion and investor behavior during the financial crisis

        In this section, we test how ambiguity aversion relates to investors’ reactions to the

financial crisis. The theoretical model of Mele and Sangiorgi (2013) shows that ambiguity

aversion can cause investors to exit the stock market when the perceived level of ambiguity

increases, which in turn causes large changes in prices.34 Several authors suggest that perceived

ambiguity increased sharply during the financial crisis (e.g., Bernanke, 2010; Caballero and

Simsek, 2013).      Accordingly, we test whether, conditional on owning equities before the

financial crisis, individuals with higher ambiguity aversion were more likely to actively sell

equities during the financial crisis.35 These tests are conceptually different from those in the

prior sections; rather than testing the cross-sectional relation between ambiguity aversion and

ownership, here we test whether ambiguity aversion can explain differential responses to

changes in aggregate uncertainty.

        The dependent variable in Table 10 is an indicator equal to one for respondents who

actively sold equities during the financial crisis. For respondents who both bought and sold

equities during this period, we count only the respondents who sold more than they bought. The

regressions include the same control variables as in Table 4. We report marginal effects rather

than coefficients, and standard errors are clustered by household.



34
   See Andersen, Ghysels, and Juergens (2009) for tests of the relation between time-varying uncertainty
and asset prices.
35
   Our tests are similar in spirit to those of Butler, Guiso, and Jappelli (2013) who show that intuitive and
deliberative investors reacted differently to the financial crisis.
                                                                                                  30


Table 10 here

       Our results support the idea that ambiguity aversion interacts with time-varying levels of

economic uncertainty: respondents with higher ambiguity aversion were more likely to actively

reduce their equity holdings during the financial crisis. The estimated coefficient implies that a

one standard deviation increase in ambiguity aversion is associated with a 4.1 percentage point

increase in the probability of selling stocks. Our results compliment the studies on time-varying

uncertainty and asset prices, by showing that, following an increase in perceived uncertainty,

variation in ambiguity aversion can explain cross-sectional differences in portfolio changes.


8. Conclusion

       Using real incentives, we measure ambiguity aversion in a large representative survey of

the U.S. population and test how ambiguity aversion relates to household portfolio choice. We

find that most Americans are ambiguity averse, yet there is substantial variation in ambiguity

preferences. The results show that ambiguity aversion can help to explain five household

portfolio choice puzzles: non-participation, low fractional portfolio allocations to equities, home-

bias, own-company stock ownership, and portfolio under-diversification.

       We find that ambiguity aversion is negatively associated with stock market participation

and with the fraction of financial assets allocated to equities, consistent with a large theoretical

literature. Our results are robust to controlling for many other factors that previous studies use to

explain household portfolio choice. Additionally, and consistent with theory, we find that

ambiguity aversion is negatively associated with foreign stock ownership, even among stock

market participants, and positively associated with own-company stock ownership. Furthermore,

we show that the relation between ambiguity aversion and household portfolio choice patterns is

stronger for respondents with lower self-assessed stock market knowledge, consistent with the
                                                                                              31


competence hypothesis. The interaction of ambiguity aversion and stock market knowledge

helps explain the empirically-observed fact of household portfolio under-diversification. We

also find that, conditional on non-zero stock ownership before the financial crisis, individuals

with greater ambiguity aversion were more likely to actively sell equities during the crisis. Our

findings suggest that policies designed to increase financial literacy and stock market

competence could improve financial decisionmaking, in part by reducing the effect of ambiguity

aversion.
                                                                                                32


References
Abdellaoui, M., A. Baillon, L. Placido, and P.P. Wakker. 2011. The Rich Domain of
       Uncertainty: Source Functions and Their Experimental Implementation. American
       Economic Review 101, 695-723.
Anderson, E.W., E. Ghysels, and J.L. Juergens. 2009. The Impact of Risk and Uncertainty on
      Expected Returns. Journal of Financial Economics 94, 233-263.
Andersen, S., and K.M. Nielsen. 2011. Participation Constraints in the Stock Market: Evidence
      from Unexpected Inheritance Due to Sudden Death. Review of Financial Studies 24,
      1667-1697.
Barberis, N., and M. Huang. 2008. Stocks as Lotteries: The Implications of Probability
       Weighting for Security Prices. American Economic Review 98, 2066-2100.
Baillon, A., and H. Bleichrodt. 2012. Testing Ambiguity Models through the Measurement of
       Probabilities for Gains and Losses. Working Paper, Erasmus University Rotterdam.
Baillon, A., L. Cabantous, and P.P. Wakker. 2012. Aggregating Imprecise or Conflicting Beliefs:
       An Experimental Investigation using Modern Ambiguity Theories. Journal of Risk and
       Uncertainty 44, 115-147.
Benartzi, S. 2001. Excessive Extrapolation and the Allocation of 401(k) Accounts to Company
       Stock. Journal of Finance 56, 1747-1764.
Bernanke, B.S. 2010. Implications of the Financial Crisis for Economics. Prepared remarks for
      the Princeton University Conference co-sponsored by the Bendheim Center for Finance
      and the Center for Economic Policy Studies.
      www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20100924a.pdf
Blume, M.E., and I. Friend. 1975. The Asset Structure of Individual Portfolios and Some
      Implications for Utility Functions. Journal of Finance 30, 585-603.
Bossaerts, P., P. Ghirardato, S. Guarnaschelli, and W. Zame. 2010. Ambiguity in Asset Markets:
       Theory and Experiment. Review of Financial Studies 23, 1325-1359.
Boyle, P., L. Garlappi, R. Uppal, and T. Wang. 2012. Keynes Meets Markowitz: The Trade-Off
       Between Familiarity and Diversification. Management Science 58, 253-272.
Boyle, P., R. Uppal, and T. Wang. 2003. Ambiguity Aversion and the Puzzle of Own-Company
       Stock in Pension Plans. Working Paper, University of Waterloo.
Bostic, R., R.J. Herrnstein, and R.D. Luce. 1990. The Effect on the Preference-Reversal
       Phenomenon of Using Choice Indifferences. Journal of Economic Behavior and
       Organization 13, 193-212.
Butler, J.V., L. Guiso, and T. Jappelli. 2013. The Role of Intuition and Reasoning in Driving
        Aversion to Risk and Ambiguity. Theory and Decision, forthcoming.
Caballero, R., and A. Simsek. 2013. Fire Sales in a Model of Complexity. Journal of Finance 68,
       2549-2587.
Calvet, L., J.Y. Campbell, and P. Sodini. 2007. Down or Out: Assessing the Welfare Costs of
       Household Investment Mistakes. Journal of Political Economy 115, 707-747.
                                                                                             33


Calvet, L., J.Y. Campbell, and P. Sodini. 2009. Measuring the Financial Sophistication of
       Households. American Economic Review 99, 393-398.
Campbell, J.Y. 2006. Household Finance. Journal of Finance 61, 1553-1604.
Cao, H.H., B. Han, D. Hirshleifer, and H.H. Zhang. 2011. Fear of the Unknown: Familiarity and
       Economic Decisions. Review of Finance 15, 173-206.
Cao, H.H., T. Wang, and H.H. Zhang. 2005. Model Uncertainty, Limited Market Participation,
      and Asset Prices. Review of Financial Studies 18, 1219–1251.
Chew, S.H., and J.S. Sagi. 2008. Small Worlds: Modeling Attitudes towards Sources of
      Uncertainty. Journal of Economic Theory 139, 1-24.
Dimmock, S.G., R. Kouwenberg, and P.P. Wakker. 2014. Ambiguity Attitudes in a Large
     Representative Sample. Working Paper, Erasmus University Rotterdam.
Dow, J., and S.R.C. Werlang. 1992. Uncertainty Aversion, Risk Aversion and the Optimal
      Choice of Portfolio. Econometrica 60, 197-204.
Easley, D., and M. O’Hara. 2009. Ambiguity and Nonparticipation: The Role of Regulation.
       Review of Financial Studies 22, 1817-1843.
Ellsberg, D. 1961. Risk, Ambiguity, and the Savage Axioms. Quarterly Journal of Economics
       75, 643-669.
Epstein, L.G., and J. Miao. 2003. A Two-Person Dynamic Equilibrium Under Ambiguity.
       Journal of Economic Dynamics and Controls 27, 1253-1288.
Epstein, L.G., and M. Schneider. 2010. Ambiguity and Asset Markets. Annual Review of
       Financial Economics 2, 315-346.
Fox, C.R., and A. Tversky. 1998. A Belief Based Account of Decision under Uncertainty.
      Management Science 44, 879-895.
French, K.R., and J.M. Poterba. 1991. Investor Diversification and International Equity Markets.
       American Economic Review 81, 222-226.
Garlappi, L., R. Uppal, and T. Wang. 2007. Portfolio Selection with Parameter and Model
       Uncertainty: A Multi-Prior Approach. Review of Financial Studies 20, 42-81.
Ghirardato, P., F. Maccheroni, and M. Marinacci. 2004. Differentiating Ambiguity and
       Ambiguity Attitude. Journal of Economic Theory 118, 133-173.
Gilboa, I. 1987. Expected Utility with Purely Subjective Non-Additive Probabilities. Journal of
       Mathematical Economics 16, 65-88.
Gilboa, I., and D. Schmeidler. 1989. Maxmin Expected Utility with Non-Unique Priors. Journal
       of Mathematical Economics 18, 141-153.
Goetzmann, W.N., and A. Kumar. 2008. Equity Portfolio Diversification. Review of Finance 12,
      433-463.
Gomes, F., and A. Michaelides. 2005. Optimal Life-Cycle Asset Allocation: Understanding the
      Empirical Evidence. Journal of Finance 60, 869-904.
                                                                                             34


Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales. 2008. Trusting the Stock Market. Journal of Finance 63,
       2557–2600.
Haliassos, M., and C.C. Bertaut. 1995. Why Do So Few Hold Stocks? Economic Journal 105,
       1110-1129.
Harless, D.W., and C.F. Camerer. 1994. The Predictive Utility of Generalized Expected Utility
       Theories. Econometrica 62, 1251-1289.
Heath, C., and A. Tversky. 1991. Preference and Belief: Ambiguity and Competence in Choice
       under Uncertainty. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 4, 5-28.
Heaton, J., and D. Lucas. 1997. Market Frictions, Savings Behavior, and Portfolio Choice.
      Macroeconomic Dynamics 1, 76-101.
Heaton, J., and D. Lucas. 2000. Portfolio Choice and Asset Prices: The Importance of
      Entrepreneurial Risk. Journal of Finance 55, 1163-1198.
Hey, J.D., and C. Orme. 1994. Investigating Generalizations of Expected Utility Theory Using
       Experimental Data. Econometrica 62, 1291-1326.
Kahn, B.E., and R.K. Sarin. 1988. Modeling Ambiguity in Decisions under Uncertainty. Journal
      of Consumer Research 15, 265–272.
Lennox, C.S., J.R. Francis, and Z. Wang. 2012. Selection Models in Accounting Research.
      Accounting Review 87, 589-616.
Lusardi, A., and O.S. Mitchell. 2007. Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The Roles of Planning,
       Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth. Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 205-224.
Mele, A., and F. Sangiorgi. 2013. Uncertainty, Information Acquisition and Price Swings in
      Asset Markets. Working Paper, Swiss Finance Institute.
Merton, R.C. 1969. Lifetime Portfolio Selection under Uncertainty: The Continuous-Time Case.
      Review of Economics and Statistics 51, 247-257.
Meulbrook, L. 2005. Company Stock in Pension Plans: How Costly Is It? Journal of Law and
      Economics 48, 443-474.
Mitchell, O.S., and S.P. Utkus. 2003. The Role of Company Stock in Defined Contribution
       Plans. In The Pension Challenge: Risk Transfers and Retirement Income Security. Eds.
       Olivia S. Mitchell and Kent Smetters. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press: 33-70.
Mitchell, Olivia S. and S. P. Utkus. 2012. Target-Date Funds and Portfolio Selection in 401(k)
       Plans. NBER Working Paper 17911.
Noussair, C., S. Robbin, and B. Ruffieux. 2004. Revealing Consumers’ Willingness-to-Pay: A
      Comparison of the BDM Mechanism and the Vickrey Auction. Journal of Economic
      Psychology 25, 725–741.
Oechssler, J., and A. Roomets. 2013. A Test of Mechanical Ambiguity. Working Paper,
      University of Heidelberg.
Peijnenburg, K. 2014. Life-Cycle Asset Allocation with Ambiguity Aversion and Learning.
       Working Paper, Bocconi University.
                                                                                        35


Polkovnichenko, V. 2005. Household Portfolio Diversification: A Case for Rank-Dependent
      Preferences. Review of Financial Studies 18, 1467-1502.
Puri, M., and D.T. Robinson. 2007. Optimism and Economic Choice. Journal of Financial
       Economics 86, 71-99.
van Rooij, M., A. Lusardi, and R. Alessie. 2011. Financial Literacy and Stock Market
      Participation. Journal of Financial Economics 101, 449-472.
Rosen, H.S., and S. Wu. 2004. Portfolio Choice and Health Status. Journal of Financial
      Economics 72, 457-484.
Schmeidler, D. 1989. Subjective Probability and Expected Utility without Additivity.
      Econometrica 57, 571-587.
Smith, V.L. 1976. Experimental Economics: Induced Value Theory. American Economic
       Review 66, 274-279.
Tanaka, T., C.F. Camerer, and Q. Nguyen. 2010. Risk and Time Preferences: Linking
      Experimental and Household Survey Data from Vietnam. American Economic Review
      100, 557-571.
Trautmann, S.T., and G. van de Kuilen. 2013. Ambiguity Attitudes. In Keren, G., and Wu, G.
      (Ed.), Handbook of Judgment and Decision Making. Oxford, United Kingdom,
      forthcoming.
Uppal, R., and T. Wang. 2003. Model Misspecification and Underdiversification. Journal of
       Finance 58, 2465-2486.
Vissing-Jorgensen, A. 2002. Towards an Explanation of Household Portfolio Choice
       Heterogeneity: Nonfinancial Income and Participation Cost Structures. NBER Working
       Paper 8884.
Wakker, P.P. 2010. Prospect Theory for Risk and Ambiguity. Cambridge University Press,
     Cambridge, United Kingdom.
                                                                                                                 36


Figure 1. Choosing between two boxes with purple and orange balls, one having a known
(50%) chance of winning and the other ambiguous
This figure shows a screen shot from our ALP module representing the first question in the ambiguity elicitation
sequence. Box K has a 50% initial known probability of winning; Box U has an unknown mix of purple and orange
balls. If the respondent selects "Box K", he is taken to a new question with a lower probability of winning in Box K
(fewer purple balls), while if he selects "Box U" the next question has a higher winning probability of winning in
Box K (more purple balls). If the respondent selects “Indifferent,” or after four rounds, the question sequence is
complete.
                                                                                                                 37


Figure 2. Choosing between two Boxes with purple and orange balls, one having a sure
(100%) chance of winning and the other having a risky but well-defined probability
distribution of outcomes
This Figure shows a screen shot from our ALP module in the probability risk sequence. If the respondent chooses
Box A, he wins with certainty; if he chooses Box B, winning is random. If he selects "Box A" the respondent gets a
new question with a higher probability of winning in Box B (more purple balls), while if he selects "Box B" the next
question has a lower winning probability in Box B. If he selects “Indifferent,” the question sequence is complete.
                                                                                                                     38


Table 1. Variable definitions
 Stock Ownership                   Indicator that respondent holds equities in his personal portfolio
                                   (stocks or stock mutual funds)
 Fraction Allocated to Stocks      Equity holdings as a % of financial assets
                                   (checking, saving, money market, bonds, CDs, mutual funds, and stocks)

 Foreign Stock Ownership           Indicator that respondent holds foreign stocks in his personal portfolio
 Own-Company Stock                 Indicator that respondent holds his employer’s stocks in his personal portfolio
 Ownership
 Individual Stock Ownership        Indicator that respondent holds individual stocks in his personal portfolio
 Fraction of Equity Allocated to   Individual stock holdings as a % of assets invested in stocks
 Individual Stocks
 Stock Sales during Crisis         Indicator if respondent actively sold stocks during financial crisis

 Age                               Age in years

 Male                              Indicator for male

 White                             Indicator if respondent considers himself primarily White

 Hispanic                          Indicator if respondent considers himself primarily Hispanic

 Married                           Indicator if respondent is married or has a partner
 Number of Children                Number of living children
 Health                            Self-reported health status ranging from 0-4; 0 indicates “Poor” and 4
                                   indicates “Excellent”
 LT High School                    Indicator if respondent did not complete high school
 High School Graduate              Indicator if respondent completed high school but not college
 College+                          Indicator if respondent completed college
 Employed                          Indicator if respondent is employed
 Family Income                     Total income for all household members older than 15, including from jobs,
                                   business, farm, rental, pension benefits, dividends, interest, social security,
                                   and other income
 Wealth                            The sum of net financial wealth, net housing assets, and imputed social
                                   security wealth using respondent self-reported claim ages, actual or estimated
                                   monthly benefits, and cohort life tables
 Defined Contribution              Indicator if respondent has a defined contribution pension plan
 Defined Benefit                   Indicator if respondent has a defined benefit pension plan
 Financial Literacy                Number of financial literacy questions answered correctly
                                   (out of 3 total; see Online Appendix C)
 Trust                             Ranges from 0 to 5; 0 corresponds to "most people can be trusted" and 5
                                   corresponds to "you can't be too careful"
 Risk Aversion                     Estimated coefficient of risk aversion based on lottery questions, > 0 if risk
                                   averse, = 0 if risk neutral, < 0 if risk seeking
 Question Order                    Indicator if subject answered the risk aversion question before
                                   the ambiguity questions (the question order was randomized)
                                                                                                        39




Table 2. Summary statistics of outcome and control variables
This table reports summary statistics of the variables used in our study; variable definitions are provided
in Table 1. The summary statistics for Fraction Allocated to Stocks are shown for all respondents and for
the subsample of respondents with a non-zero allocation to equity. The last column shows the number of
non-missing observations for each variable. All results use ALP survey weights and the sample omits
188 people who spent fewer than two minutes on the ambiguity questions.
                                        Mean     Std. Dev.        Min     Median          Max           N
 Stock Ownership (%)                     0.23         0.42          0          0            1       3,025
 Fraction Allocated to Stocks (%)        0.12         0.27          0          0            1       3,030
 Foreign Stock Ownership (%)             0.13         0.34          0          0            1         799
 Own-Company Stock                       0.05         0.22          0          0            1         670
 Ownership (%)
 Individual Stock Ownership (%)          0.17         0.38          0            0            1     2,757
 Fraction Allocated to Individual        0.42         0.44          0         0.24            1      321
 Stocks Conditional (%)
 Stock Sales during Crisis (%)           0.07         0.25          0            0            1      528
 Age                                   46.38        15.20          18          48           70      3,070
 Male (%)                               0.48         0.50           0           0            1      3,070
 White (%)                              0.81         0.39           0           1            1      3,066
 Hispanic (%)                           0.18         0.38           0           0            1      3,069
 Married (%)                            0.64         0.48           0           1            1      2,695
 Number of Children                     1.67         1.62           0           2           13      3,024
 Health                                 2.48         0.93           0           3            4      2,969
 LT High School (%)                     0.10         0.29           0           0            1      3,069
 High School (%)                        0.34         0.47           0           0            1      3,069
 College+ (%)                           0.56         0.50           0           1            1      3,069
 Employed (%)                           0.49         0.50           0           0            1      3,068
 Family Income ($)                    69,295       69,774       2,500      55,000      400,000      3,061
 Wealth ($)                          317,076      584,485     -88,743     112,928    4,188,110      2,969
 Defined Contribution                   0.47         0.50           0           0            1      2,991
 Defined Benefit                        0.10         0.31           0           0            1      2,991
 Financial Literacy                     2.18         0.93           0           2            3      3,070
 Trust                                  3.20         1.41           0           3            5      3,035
 Risk Aversion                          0.34         0.45       -0.50        0.41         0.98      3,036
 Question Order                         0.50         0.50           0           1            1      3,070
                                                                                                               40


Table 3. Ambiguity aversion of the U.S. population
This table shows ambiguity aversion in the U.S. population measured using our ALP survey module. Panel A
shows the proportion of respondents who are ambiguity averse, ambiguity seeking, or ambiguity neutral, as revealed
by their first-round choice between Box K and Box U (see text and Figure 1). Panel B summarizes the Ambiguity
Aversion measure. We define Ambiguity Aversion = 50% - q; q denotes the matching probability for Box U in
Figure 1 (with two ball colors, in unknown proportions). Panel C summarizes the percentage of respondents who
gave inconsistent answers to the two check questions.

 Panel A: Proportion of Respondents Ambiguity Averse, Neutral, and Seeking (%)
 Ambiguity Averse                 0.52
 Ambiguity Neutral                0.10
 Ambiguity Seeking                0.38
 Panel B: Summary Statistics Ambiguity Aversion Measure
                                Mean     Std. Dev.         Min                           Median           Max
 Ambiguity Aversion Measure     0.018        0.213      -0.440                            0.030          0.470
 Panel C: Check Question Responses
                                                       Not Inconsistent                           Inconsistent
 Check Question 1                                               69.6%                                  30.4%
 Check Question 2                                               86.0%                                  14.0%
                                                                                                              41


Table 4. Ambiguity aversion and stock market participation
This table shows results of probit regressions in which the dependent variable equals one if the respondent
participates in the stock market. In column (1), the key independent variable is the Ambiguity Aversion measure.
In column (2), the key independent variable is an indicator variable equal to one if the respondent is ambiguity
averse. In columns (3), the key independent variable is the rank transformation of Ambiguity Aversion. All models
include a constant term and controls for age, age-squared divided by a thousand, male, White, Hispanic, married,
(ln) number of children (plus one), health, education, employment status, (ln) family income, wealth divided by a
hundred thousand, participation in defined contribution or defined benefit plans, financial literacy, trust, risk
aversion, question order, check question score, and missing data dummies. The table reports marginal effects.
Standard errors are clustered by household and appear in brackets.
                                           (1)                        (2)                         (3)
Ambiguity Aversion                    -0.094 **
                                      [0.05]
Ambiguity Aversion Dummy                                         -0.039 **
                                                                 [0.02]
Ambiguity Aversion Rank                                                                      -0.073 **
                                                                                              [0.03]
Age                                   -0.002                     -0.002                      -0.002
                                      [0.01]                     [0.01]                      [0.01]
Age2                                   0.143                      0.121                        0.135
                                      [0.24]                      [0.24]                      [0.24]
Male                                    0.005                      0.006                       0.006
                                       [0.02]                     [0.02]                      [0.02]
White                                   0.045 *                    0.047 *                     0.045 *
                                       [0.02]                     [0.02]                      [0.02]
Hispanic                              -0.092 ***                 -0.092 ***                  -0.092 ***
                                       [0.03]                     [0.03]                      [0.03]
Married                                0.051 **                   0.052 **                     0.051 **
                                       [0.02]                     [0.02]                      [0.02]
Number of Children                    -0.039 **                  -0.039 **                   -0.039 **
                                       [0.02]                     [0.02]                      [0.02]
Health                                 0.024 **                   0.025 **                    0.025 **
                                       [0.01]                     [0.01]                      [0.01]
High School                           -0.020                     -0.021                      -0.020
                                       [0.06]                     [0.06]                      [0.06]
College+                                0.036                      0.034                       0.036
                                      [0.06]                      [0.06]                      [0.06]
Employed                                0.005                     0.005                       0.005
                                      [0.02]                      [0.02]                      [0.02]
Family Income                           0.053 ***                  0.052 ***                   0.053 ***
                                      [0.02]                      [0.02]                      [0.02]
Wealth                                 0.035 ***                  0.035 ***                    0.035 ***
                                      [0.01]                      [0.01]                      [0.01]
Defined Contribution                   0.056 **                   0.055 **                    0.055 **
                                      [0.02]                      [0.02]                      [0.02]
Defined Benefit                       -0.054                     -0.052 **                   -0.053 **
                                      [0.02]                      [0.02]                      [0.02]
Financial Literacy                     0.075 ***                   0.076 ***                   0.075 ***
                                      [0.02]                      [0.02]                      [0.02]
Trust                                 -0.004                     -0.004                      -0.004
                                      [0.01]                      [0.01]                      [0.01]
Risk Aversion                           0.044 **                   0.042 **                    0.044 **
                                      [0.02]                      [0.02]                      [0.02]
Question Order                          0.028                      0.029 *                     0.030 *
                                      [0.02]                      [0.02]                      [0.02]
Errors on Check                       -0.029                     -0.032 *                    -0.031
                                      [0.02]                      [0.02]                      [0.02]
Controls and Constant                     Yes                        Yes                         Yes
N                                       2,943                      2,943                       2,943
Notes: * significant at the 10%; ** 5%; and *** 1% level.
                                                                                                                       42


Table 5. Ambiguity aversion and portfolio choice: Check questions and financial assets
This table shows results of probit regressions in which the dependent variable equals one if the respondent
participates in the stock market. The main independent variable of interest in Panels A, B, and C are Ambiguity
Aversion, Ambiguity Aversion Dummy, and Ambiguity Aversion Rank, respectively. Columns (2) and (4) exclude
respondents whose answers to the check question were inconsistent with their earlier choices. Columns (3) and (4)
exclude respondents who report financial assets of less than $500. All models include a constant term and controls
for age, age-squared, male, White, Hispanic, married, (ln) number of children (plus one), health, education,
employment status, (ln) family income, wealth, participation in defined contribution or defined benefit plans,
financial literacy, trust, risk aversion, question order, a check question score equal to one if the subject got either of
the check questions wrong: meaning they chose Box U in the first check question or Box K in the second check
question, and missing data dummies. The table reports marginal effects. Standard errors and are clustered by
household and appear in brackets.


Panel A
                                               (1)                  (2)                 (3)                 (4)
Ambiguity Aversion                        -0.094 **            -0.121 *            -0.167 **           -0.225 **
                                           [0.05]               [0.07]              [0.07]              [0.10]
Consistent Responses Only                      No                 Yes                  No                 Yes
Financial Assets ≥ $500                        No                  No                 Yes                 Yes
Controls and Constant                         Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
N                                           2,943               1,746               1,881               1,199
Panel B
                                               (1)                  (2)                 (3)                 (4)
Ambiguity Aversion Dummy                  -0.039 **            -0.031              -0.072 ***          -0.058 *
                                           [0.02]               [0.02]              [0.03]              [0.03]
Consistent Responses Only                      No                 Yes                  No                 Yes
Financial Assets ≥ $500                        No                  No                 Yes                 Yes
Controls and Constant                         Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
N                                           2,943               1,746               1,881               1,199
Panel C
                                               (1)                  (2)                 (3)                 (4)
Ambiguity Aversion Rank                   -0.073 **            -0.080 *            -0.137 ***          -0.149 **
                                           [0.03]               [0.05]              [0.05]              [0.07]
Consistent Responses Only                      No                 Yes                  No                 Yes
Financial Assets ≥ $500                        No                  No                 Yes                 Yes
Controls and Constant                         Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
N                                           2,943               1,746               1,881               1,199
Notes: * significant at the 10%; ** 5%; and *** 1% level.
                                                                                                                       43


Table 6. Ambiguity aversion and the fraction of financial assets allocated to stocks
This table shows results for Tobit regression for which the dependent variable refers to the fraction of financial
assets allocated to equities. Column (2) excludes respondents who do not participate in the stock market. All
models include a constant term and controls for age, age-squared, male, White, Hispanic, married, (ln) number of
children (plus one), health, education, employment status, (ln) family income, wealth, participation in defined
contribution or defined benefit plans, financial literacy, trust, risk aversion, question order, check question score, and
missing data dummies. Standard errors are clustered by household and appear in brackets.

                                            (1)                   (2)
Ambiguity Aversion                     -0.379 **             -0.193 *
                                        [0.15]                [0.10]
Equity Ownership>0 Only                     No                  Yes
Controls and Constant                      Yes                  Yes
N                                        2,943                  731
Notes: * significant at the 10%; ** 5%; and *** 1% level.
                                                                                                                       44


Table 7. Ambiguity aversion: Foreign stocks and own-company stock ownership
This table shows results for probit regressions in which the dependent variable equals one if the respondent holds
foreign stock or own-company stock. Columns (1) and (2) show probit regression results for foreign stock
ownership. Columns (3) and (4) show probit regression results for own-company stock ownership. Columns (2)
and (4) exclude respondents who do not participate in the stock market. Columns (3) and (4) exclude respondents
who are not currently employed. All models include a constant term and controls for age, age-squared, male, White,
Hispanic, married, (ln) number of children (plus one), health, education, employment status, (ln) family income,
wealth, participation in defined contribution or defined benefit plans, financial literacy, trust, risk aversion, question
order, check question score, and missing data dummies. The table reports marginal effects. Standard errors are
clustered by household and appear in brackets.


                                           Foreign Stock Ownership                     Own-Company Stock
                                                                                            Ownership
                                              (1)                   (2)                 (3)            (4)
Ambiguity Aversion                        -0.126 **            -0.380 **            0.069 *        0.557 **
                                           [0.06]               [0.15]              [0.04]        [0.22]
Equity Ownership>0 Only                       No                  Yes                  No            Yes
Controls and Constant                        Yes                  Yes                 Yes            Yes
N                                            779                  258                 664            155
Notes: * significant at the 10%; ** 5%; and *** 1% level.
                                                                                                                    45




Table 8. Ambiguity aversion and stock market competence
This table shows results for probit regressions in which the dependent variable is equals one if the respondent
participates in the stock market. Column (1) includes no interaction term between stock market competence and
Ambiguity Aversion (AA). Column (2) includes interaction terms between the level of self-assessed stock market
knowledge and Ambiguity Aversion and column (3) includes interaction terms between the level of financial
literacy and Ambiguity Aversion (AA). Respondents have low literacy if their answer to one or more of the three
financial literacy questions is wrong. Respondents have low knowledge if they answered 'very low' to the question:
“How would you rate your knowledge about the stock market?” All models include a constant term and controls for
age, age-squared, male, White, Hispanic, married, (ln) number of children (plus one), health, education, employment
status, (ln) family income, wealth, participation in defined contribution or defined benefit plans, financial literacy,
trust, risk aversion, question order, check question score, and missing data dummies. The table reports marginal
effects. Standard errors are clustered by household and appear in brackets.
                                                                          Stock Market
                                                 No Interaction           Competence            Financial Literacy
                                                      (1)                      (2)                     (3)
Ambiguity Aversion                                -0.094 **
                                                   [0.05]
AA: Low Stock Market Competence                                             -0.219 ***              -0.157 **
                                                                            [0.08]                  [0.07]
AA: High Stock Market Competence                                            -0.055                  -0.041
                                                                            [0.05]                  [0.06]
Stock Market Competence                             0.075 ***                0.182 ***               0.122 ***
                                                   [0.02]                   [0.02]                  [0.02]
Controls and Constant                                 Yes                     Yes                     Yes
N                                                   2,943                   2,943                   2,943
Notes: * significant at the 10%; ** 5%; and *** 1% level.
                                                                                                                                                                  46




Table 9. Ambiguity aversion and under-diversification
This table shows results for regressions in which the dependent variables indicate ownership of individual stocks. Columns (1), (2), and (3) show probit
regression results in which the dependent variable equals one if the respondent reports ownership of individual stocks. Columns (4), (5), and (6) show Tobit
regression results in which the dependent variable is the fraction of equity invested in individual stocks. Columns (1) and (4) include no interaction term between
stock market competence and Ambiguity Aversion (AA). Column (2) and (5) include interaction terms between the level of self-assessed stock market
knowledge and Ambiguity Aversion and column (3) and (6) include interaction terms between the level of financial literacy and Ambiguity Aversion.
Respondents have low literacy if their answer to one or more of the three financial literacy questions is wrong. Respondents have low knowledge if they
answered 'very low' to the question: “How would you rate your knowledge about the stock market?” All models include a constant term and controls for age,
age-squared, male, White, Hispanic, married, (ln) number of children (plus one), health, education, employment status, (ln) family income, wealth, participation
in defined contribution or defined benefit plans, financial literacy, trust, risk aversion, question order, check question score, and missing data dummies. The table
reports marginal effects. Standard errors are clustered by household and appear in brackets.

                                                        Individual Stocks Ownership                              Fraction of Equity in Individual Stocks
                                                               Stock Market         Financial                                Stock Market           Financial
                                            No Interaction      Competence          Literacy             No Interaction       Competence             Literacy
                                                  (1)                (2)               (3)                     (4)                 (5)                  (6)
Ambiguity Aversion                            -0.413 ***                                                   -0.548 ***
                                              [0.11]                                                        [0.06]
AA: Low Stock Market Competence                                  -0.080           -0.212                                        2.189 ***           0.501 ***
                                                                 [0.26]            [0.19]                                      [0.23]              [0.08]
AA: High Stock Market Competence                                -0.456 ***        -0.479 ***                                   -0.639 ***          -0.815 ***
                                                                 [0.12]            [0.13]                                      [0.06]              [0.07]
Stock Market Competence                      -0.013               0.071           -0.032                    0.057 **            0.008               0.069
                                             [0.04]              [0.07]            [0.05]                  [0.03]              [0.08]              [0.07]
Controls and Constant                            Yes               Yes              Yes                       Yes                Yes                 Yes
N                                                701               701               701                       319               319                 319
                                                                                                                    47


Table 10. Ambiguity aversion and reactions to the financial crisis
This table shows results for a probit regression in which the dependent variable equals one if the respondent actively
sold equities during the financial crisis. The sample includes only those who owned equities prior to the crisis. The
model includes a constant term and controls for age, age-squared, male, White, Hispanic, married, ln number of
children, health, education, employment status, ln family income, wealth, participation in defined contribution or
defined benefit plans, financial literacy, trust, risk aversion, question order, check question score, and missing data
dummies. The table reports marginal effects. Standard errors are clustered by household and appear in brackets.

                                              (1)
Ambiguity Aversion                        0.215 ***
                                          [0.06]
Controls and Constant                       Yes
N                                           524
Notes: * significant at the 10%; ** 5%; and *** 1% level.
                                                                            48




Online Appendixes for “Ambiguity Aversion and Household
      Portfolio Choice Puzzles: Empirical Evidence”
 Stephen G. Dimmock, Roy Kouwenberg, Olivia Mitchell, and Kim Peijnenburg
                                                                                               49


Online Appendix A: Detailed description of the procedure for eliciting ambiguity aversion

This Appendix describes our procedure for measuring ambiguity aversion in the ALP survey.
The module starts with an introduction screen explaining the basic setup of the questions: see
Figure A-1. The introduction screen also explains that, after completing the survey, one of the
respondent’s choices in the set of thee ambiguity gain questions will be selected randomly by the
computer and played for a real reward of $15.
Figure A-1 here
In the next screen, shown in Figure 1 of the paper, the respondent is offered a choice between
Box K, containing 50 purple and 50 orange balls, and Box U, containing an unknown mix of 100
purple and orange balls. Three response options are available: Box K, Box U, and Indifferent. If
the respondent clicks the “Next” button before answering the question, the respondent is shown a
message that all responses are important and is asked to answer the question again.
        If the respondent selects “Indifferent”, the matching probability (q) is exactly 50% and
the procedure continues with the second ambiguity question, described further on. If the
respondent chooses Box K, she is ambiguity averse and we know that the matching probability is
less than 50% (0% ≤ q < 50%). In the following round, the number of winning balls in Box K is
reduced to 25: see Figure A-2. If the respondent selected Box U in the first round instead, she is
ambiguity seeking (0 ≥ q> 50%) and in the second round the number of winning balls in Box K
is increased to 75.
Figure A-2 here
        The bisection algorithm continues this way for an additional three rounds (four rounds in
total). In every round of the bisection algorithm, the difference between the lower bound and the
upper round on the matching probability is reduced by half. When the option “Indifferent” is
chosen, the algorithm stops earlier, as then the upper and lower bounds are equal. After a
maximum of four rounds, we take the average of the lower and upper bound, the midpoint, as the
estimate of the matching probability (q). Table A-1 shows all 27 possible outcome paths of the
bisection algorithm, with corresponding matching probabilities. For two paths representing
extremely ambiguity seeking attitudes (q > 75%, paths UUK and UUU) we require less
measurement accuracy and the algorithm stops after three rounds to save time.
Table A-1 here
2. Check questions to test for consistency of subjects’ answers
To test for the consistency of the answers we included two check questions. Using the answers
to the ambiguity question (two ball colors, 50% ambiguity-neutral) we calculated the matching
probability for each subject (q). To generate Check Question 1, we lowered the known
probability of winning for Box K to each subjects’ matching probability minus 10 percentage
points (q – 0.1). In that case, the subject should choose the ambiguous Box U. To generate
Check Question 2, we increased the known probability of winning of Box K to the matching
probability plus 10 percentage points (q + 0.1). In that case, the subject should choose the
unambiguous Box K. Note that the maximum known probability is set at 99 and the minimum is
set at 1, to avoid certainty.
                                                                                                      50


Table A-1: Responses and matching probabilities for the ambiguity question

This table shows the possible outcomes in the four rounds of the ambiguity question, with two ball colors
and initial 50% chance of winning for Box K. Panel A shows the transitions of the bisection algorithm,
starting at Q1a, offering a choice between Box K with known winning probability p=50% and ambiguous
Box U. If the respondent chooses Box K, then next question round is Q1b (with p=75%), while round
Q1i (with p=25%) follows after response Box U. After a choice of Indifferent, the algorithm always
stops. Panel B shows the list of 27 possible response paths in the four question rounds. The letter
combination in the column ‘Response’ summarizes one potential choices path, with K and U denoting the
boxes, and I for Indifferent. The column q shows the corresponding matching probability, which is exact
for paths ending with I and the average of the lower and upper bound for all other paths. For example,
“KUUK” means the respondent chose Box K, followed by U twice, and then K. For this path the bounds
on the matching probability are 38% and 44%, with midpoint q = 41%. The path “I” represents an
Indifferent choice in the first round (q = 50%). For paths UUK, UUI and UUU, extreme ambiguity
seeking, we require less accuracy and the algorithm stops after three rounds to save time.

 Panel A: Probability of Winning for Box K and Transitions
 Question       Purple balls      Orange balls         Next round after response
 Round         in Box K (p)        (100 - p)      Box K        Box U        Indifferent
 Q1a                50                50           Q1b          Q1i            stop
 Q1b                25                75           Q1c          Q1f            stop
 Q1c                12                88           Q1d          Q1e            stop
 Q1d                 6                94           stop         stop           stop
 Q1e                18                82           stop         stop           stop
 Q1f                38                62           Q1g          Q1h            stop
 Q1g                32                68           stop         stop           stop
 Q1h                44                56           stop         stop           stop
 Q1i                75                25           Q1j         Q1m             stop
 Q1j                62                38           Q1k          Q1l            stop
 Q1k                56                44           stop         stop           stop
 Q1l                68                32           stop         stop           stop
 Q1m                88                12           stop         stop           stop

 Panel B: Outcome Paths
 Response         q            Response       q        Response           q
 KKKK             3            KUKI          32        UKKU              59
 KKKI             6            KUKU          35        UKI               62
 KKKU             9            KUI           38        UKUK              65
 KKI              12           KUUK          41        UKUI              68
 KKUK             15           KUUI          44        UKUU             71.5
 KKUI             18           KUUU          47        UI                75
 KKUU            21.5          I             50        UUK              81.5
 KI               25           UKKK          53        UUI               88
 KUKK            28.5          UKKI          56        UUU               94
                                                                    51


Figure A-1: Screen shot: Text introducing the ambiguity questions
                                                                                                       52


Figure A-2: Screen shot: Second round of the ambiguity question after Choice K

This Figure shows a screen shot from our ALP module, representing the second round of the ambiguity
elicitation question. Box K now has a 25% known probability of winning; Box U has an unknown mix of
balls with two different colors. After answering this question, respondents are led to a new round of the
question. Selecting the "Indifferent" button finishes the question. If the respondent selects "Box K", he
gets a new question with a lower probability of winning in Box K (fewer purple balls), while if he selects
"Box U", the next question has a higher winning probability of winning in Box K (more purple balls).
                                                                                               53




Online Appendix B: The ALP survey and main control variables

1. Description of the American Life Panel
The American Life Panel (ALP) is an Internet panel of U.S. respondents age 18+; respondents
were recruited in one of four ways (https://mmicdata.rand.org/alp/). Most were recruited from
respondents to the Monthly Survey (MS) of the University of Michigan’s Survey Research
Center (SRC). The MS is the leading consumer sentiment survey that incorporates the long-
standing Survey of Consumer Attitudes and produces, among others, the widely used Index of
Consumer Expectations. Each month, the MS interviews approximately 500 households, of
which 300 households are a random-digit-dial (RDD) sample and 200 are re-interviewed from
the RDD sample surveyed six months previously. Until August 2008, SRC screened MS
respondents by asking them if they would be willing to participate in a long-term research
project (with approximate response categories “no, certainly not,” “probably not,” “maybe,”
“probably,” “yes, definitely”). If the response category is not “no, certainly not,” respondents
were told that the University of Michigan is undertaking a joint project with RAND. They were
asked if they would object to SRC sharing their information about them with RAND so that they
could be contacted later and asked if they would be willing to actually participate in an Internet
survey. Respondents who do not have Internet were told that RAND will provide them with free
Internet. Many MS-respondents are interviewed twice. At the end of the second interview, an
attempt was made to convert respondents who refused in the first round. This attempt includes
the mention of the fact that participation in follow-up research carries a reward of $20 for each
half-hour interview.
        Respondents from the Michigan monthly survey without Internet were provided with so-
called WebTVs (http://www.webtv.com/pc/), which allows them to access the Internet using
their television and a telephone line. The technology allows respondents who lacked Internet
access to participate in the panel and furthermore use the WebTVs for browsing the Internet or
email. The ALP has also recruited respondents through a snowball sample (respondents
suggesting friends or acquaintances who might also want to participate), but we do not use any
respondents recruited through the snowball sample in our paper. A new group of respondents
(approximately 500) was recruited after participating in the National Survey Project at Stanford
University. This sample was recruited in person, and at the end of their one-year participation,
they were asked whether they were interested in joining the RAND American Life Panel. Most
of these respondents were given a laptop and broadband Internet access.

2. Financial Literacy
The financial literacy questions we posed in the ALP module have been used in two dozen
countries and comparable results obtained (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011):

     Suppose you had $100 in a savings account and the interest rate was 2% per year. After 5
     years, how much do you think you would have in the account if you left the money to
     grow?
         1) More than $102
         2) Exactly $102
         3) Less than $102
         4) Don't know
                                                                                                         54


      Imagine that the interest rate on your savings account was 1% per year and inflation was
      2% per year. After 1 year, would you be able to buy more than, exactly the same as, or less
      than today with the money in this account?
           1) More than today
           2) Exactly the same as today
           3) Less than today
           4) Don't know

      Please tell us whether this statement is true or false. Buying a single company stock
      usually provides a safer return than a stock mutual fund.
          1) True
          2) False
          3) Don't know

3. Trust
The trust question we use was: “Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be
trusted, or that you can’t be too careful in dealing with people? Please indicate on a score of 0 to
5.”). For the answers, we employ a Likert scale ranging from 0 to 5, with 0 indicating strong
agreement and 5 indicating strong disagreement.

4. Risk Aversion
To measure risk aversion, we build on Tanaka, Camerer, and Nguyen (2010), who ask
respondents to select from a list consisting of 14 tradeoffs between two gambles. We modify
their approach and use a sequence of binary choices similar to the method for eliciting ambiguity
aversion described previously, as illustrated in Figure 2. If a respondent selects the certain
outcome, he is then shown another choice with a higher expected value for the risky outcome. If
he selects the risky outcome, he is then shown another choice with a lower expected value for the
risky outcome. This process is repeated until risk aversion is sufficiently well-approximated.
We use the responses to estimate each respondent’s risk aversion, measured as the coefficient of
relative risk aversion assuming a power utility function.36




36
   As in Tanaka, Camerer, and Nguyen (2010), the payoffs of the gambles are not integrated with total
wealth in the utility function, and the power coefficient is limited to the range from 0 to 1.5. Risk
aversion is defined as: 1 – power function coefficient, and varies from -0.5 (risk seeking) to +1 (strongest
level of risk aversion). A value of zero implies risk neutrality.
                                                                                              55


Online Appendix C: Additional results

To further explore ambiguity attitudes across demographic and economic characteristics,
Column (1) of Table C-1 shows the results from regressing the ambiguity aversion measures on
key control variables for the entire sample. Naturally the regressions do not imply any causal
relation; rather, multiple regression is a convenient tool to concisely summarize the correlation
structure of the data. In columns (2-4), we restrict the sample to certain groups of interest.
Column (2) includes only respondents whose check question answers did not contradict their
earlier choice. Column (3) includes only respondents with a college degree. Column (4)
includes only respondents with at least $500 in financial assets. The results are similar across
columns.
Table C-1 here
        The results show that men are more ambiguity averse than women. College-educated
respondents are more ambiguity averse than the less educated, suggesting that ambiguity
aversion measures preferences rather than cognitive errors (i.e., such as cognitive errors due to
using simplifying heuristics for complicated problems). There is also a positive relation between
ambiguity aversion and risk aversion, consistent with Bossaerts, Ghirardato, Guarnaschelli, and
Zame (2010).
        We also find that the survey question order matters: that is, measured ambiguity aversion
proves to be higher when the risk aversion questions are presented before the ambiguity aversion
questions. Such an order effect is consistent with the “comparative ignorance” hypothesis of Fox
and Tversky (1995), which posits that ambiguity aversion is magnified by comparisons to less
ambiguous events (in this case, the preceding risk questions with known probabilities). Because
of this issue, we randomized the order of the risk and ambiguity questions in the ALP survey,
and we also include an indicator variable for question order in the empirical analyses.
        Perhaps the most striking aspect of Table C-1 is that the adjusted R-square values are
consistently low; the controls explain less than eight percent of the variance in ambiguity
aversion. Even in column (2), in which the dependent variable likely contains less measurement
error, the adjusted R-square is low. This suggests that our measure of ambiguity aversion
captures new information about preferences which is not subsumed by standard demographic and
economic controls.
                                                                                                              56


Table C-1: Relation of ambiguity aversion with economic and demographic variables
This table shows the results of OLS regressions in which the dependent variable is Ambiguity Aversion
defined in Table 3 (50% - q). The independent variables are defined in Table 1. Constant terms and
retirement plan type indicator variables are included in the regressions, but not displayed in the interest of
brevity. The coefficients are multiplied by 100 to enhance readability. Column (3) excludes respondents
who gave inconsistent responses to either of the two check questions. Column (2) excludes respondents
without a college degree. Column (4) excludes respondents with less than $500 in financial wealth.
Standard errors are clustered by household and appear in brackets.

                             Full Sample         Not Inconsistent   College Educated     Fin. Wealth ≥ $500
                                  (1)                   (2)                 (3)                   (4)
Age                           -0.504 *              -0.436              -0.355                -0.963 **
                              [0.30]                 [0.34]             [0.34]                [0.40]
Age2                           0.004                 0.004               0.002                 0.010 **
                              [0.00]                 [0.00]             [0.00]                [0.00]
Male                           3.490 ***              3.811 ***          1.125                 2.859 **
                              [1.01]                 [1.05]             [1.18]                [1.13]
White                         -3.195 **             -1.155              -2.877                -4.264 **
                              [1.43]                 [1.42]             [1.75]                [1.98]
Hispanic                       0.661                  1.450              5.010 **             -0.443
                              [1.53]                 [1.62]             [2.46]                [1.97]
Married                        0.858                -0.059               0.665                 1.222
                              [1.31]                 [1.46]             [1.48]                [1.55]
Number of Children             0.322                  0.383             -0.224                 0.411
                              [0.92]                 [1.02]             [1.26]                [1.09]
Health                         0.141                -0.670               0.555                 0.242
                              [0.63]                 [0.74]             [0.73]                [0.82]
High School                    2.042                -2.612                                     3.237
                              [2.17]                 [2.45]                                   [4.20]
College                        4.455 *                0.590                                    5.541
                              [2.28]                 [2.58]                                   [4.12]
Employed                      -0.146                -0.352              2.620 *                0.401
                              [1.17]                 [1.18]            [1.43]                 [1.30]
Family Income                  1.004                  1.235             0.232                  0.977
                              [0.74]                 [0.85]            [0.97]                 [1.02]
Wealth                        -0.367                -1.008              1.736 **              -0.619
                              [0.81]                 [0.91]            [0.80]                 [0.87]
DC pension plan               -0.185                -0.565              0.831                  0.837
                              [1.27]                 [1.32]            [1.45]                 [1.40]
DB pension plan               -1.608                -2.150             -5.096 ***             -1.942
                              [1.56]                 [1.74]            [1.90]                 [1.67]
Financial Literacy            -0.228                 0.326              1.613 *               -0.016
                              [0.76]                 [0.80]            [0.98]                 [0.97]
Trust                          0.374                  0.284             0.605                  0.890 *
                              [0.40]                 [0.39]            [0.47]                 [0.46]
Risk Aversion                  8.521 ***              5.757 ***         6.951 ***              6.302 ***
                              [1.24]                 [1.24]            [1.49]                 [1.44]
Question Order                 6.708 ***              4.770 ***         6.883 ***              7.488 ***
                              [0.99]                 [1.04]            [1.19]                 [1.16]
Errors on Check               -5.969 ***                               -5.949 ***             -5.938 ***
                              [1.09]                                   [1.40]                 [1.28]
Adjusted-R2                    0.093                 0.052              0.105                  0.100
N                              2,972                 1,766              1,182                  1,884
Notes: * significant at the 10%; ** 5%; and *** 1% level.
                                                                                           57




Appendix References

Bossaerts, P., P. Ghirardato, S. Guarnaschelli, and W. Zame. 2010. Ambiguity in Asset Markets:
       Theory and Experiment. Review of Financial Studies 23, 1325-1359.
Fox, C.R., and A. Tversky. 1998. A Belief Based Account of Decision under Uncertainty.
      Management Science 44, 879-895.
Lusardi, A., and O.S. Mitchell. 2011. Financial Literacy around the World: An Overview.
       Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 10, 497-508.
Tanaka, T., C.F. Camerer, and Q. Nguyen. 2010. Risk and Time Preferences: Linking
      Experimental and Household Survey Data from Vietnam. American Economic Review
      100, 557-571.
