                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE IMPORTANCE OF BEING MARGINAL:
                           GENDER DIFFERENCES IN GENEROSITY

                                         Stefano DellaVigna
                                             John A. List
                                         Ulrike Malmendier
                                            Gautam Rao

                                        Working Paper 18748
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18748


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2013




This paper will appear as part of the American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings paper, May
2013. Many thanks to Alec Brandon, Sheng Li, David Novgorodsky, and Vera te Velde for able research
assistance. We are grateful to Rachel Croson and Yan Chen as well as to seminar participants at UC
Berkeley, CalTech, Chicago, and the ASSA 2013 and ESA 2012 meetings for valuable comments.
Funding for this research was obtained from funds of the Becker Friedman Institute at the University
of Chicago. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Stefano DellaVigna, John A. List, Ulrike Malmendier, and Gautam Rao. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Importance of Being Marginal: Gender Differences in Generosity
Stefano DellaVigna, John A. List, Ulrike Malmendier, and Gautam Rao
NBER Working Paper No. 18748
February 2013
JEL No. C93,D64,H4

                                              ABSTRACT

Do men and women have different social preferences? Previous findings are contradictory. We provide
a potential explanation using evidence from a field experiment. In a door-to-door solicitation, men
and women are equally generous, but women become less generous when it becomes easy to avoid
the solicitor. Our structural estimates of the social preference parameters suggest an explanation: women
are more likely to be on the margin of giving, partly because of a less dispersed distribution of altruism.
We find similar results for the willingness to complete an unpaid survey: women are more likely to
be on the margin of participation.


Stefano DellaVigna                                   Ulrike Malmendier
University of California, Berkeley                   Department of Economics
Department of Economics                              549 Evans Hall # 3880
549 Evans Hall #3880                                 University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                              Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER                                             and NBER
sdellavi@econ.berkeley.edu                           ulrike@econ.berkeley.edu

John A. List                                         Gautam Rao
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
University of Chicago                                549 Evans Hall # 3880
1126 East 59th                                       University of California, Berkeley
Chicago, IL 60637                                    Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER                                             grao@berkeley.edu
jlist@uchicago.edu
   In modern economies, private organizations are relied on to provide important public goods

and services. Indeed, since 1971 individual contributions to charitable causes have increased

from roughly $130 billion to nearly $300 billion, or about 2% of GDP. Despite much interest in

understanding the ‘whys?’ and ‘whats?’ of giving, however, fundraisers and academics alike

have faced some persistent puzzles when trying to predict which individual will give for which

cause. The predictive power of demographic and other individual characteristics varies widely

across data sets and studies. In the case of gender, the focus of our study, there are conflicting

views on which is the more charitable gender. In the laboratory, using variants of the dictator

game, Bolton and Katok (1995) find no evidence of gender differences in generosity, while

Eckel and Grossman (1998) find that women share twice as much on average.

   The same puzzle exists in field data. Looking at the statistics of blood donation, women

sometimes are overrepresented (e.g., among first-time Norwegian blood donors in Misje, Bosnes,

and Heier, 2010) and sometimes underrepresented (e.g., in most European countries in the meta

analysis of Bani and Guissani, 2010) relative to men.

   We provide new evidence from a field experiment that can help reconcile prior conflicting

findings. We argue that seeming inconsistencies in gender-specific patterns of pro-social

behavior reflect, at least partly, distributional differences in altruism between genders. Even in

cases where men and women do not differ in their mean inclination to give, differences in

heterogeneity can lead to a higher share of women being on the margin of giving. Hence, small

differences in the giving request (such as in the cost of saying no) can have sizeable effects on

women’s pro-social behavior relative to men. Hence, it is important to estimate the within-

gender heterogeneity in social preferences to better understand the gender differences.

   Our analysis builds on recent attempts to tie models of pro-social behavior more closely to



                                                1
empirical tests, obtaining structural estimates of the underlying preferences. Specifically,

DellaVigna et al. (2012) use a door-to-door fund-raising campaign and survey to disentangle the

importance of warm-glow altruism versus social pressure in charitable giving. Their estimates

suggest that the social pressure cost of saying no to a solicitor plays an important role in high-

pressure giving requests such as door-to-door campaigns. In this paper, we exploit the rich

design in DellaVigna et al. (2012) to estimate the distribution of social preferences by gender.

    DellaVigna et al. (2012) compare the incidence of giving in a control treatment, in which

subjects receive an unannounced door-to-door visit, to two flyer treatments, in which subjects are

notified a day in advance of the upcoming door-to-door campaign via a flyer on the door knob.

The flyer treatments allow donors who give due to altruistic motives to sort in; and they allow

donors who give due to social pressure to sort out. In one of the two flyer treatments, the flyer

also includes an opt-out box, which makes it easy to avoid the solicitor (the solicitor does not

contact the household if the box is checked). The main findings are that (i) the simple flyer

lowers the share answering the door, relative to the control group, but does not affect the share

giving; and that (ii) the opt-out option lowers both the share answering the door and the share of

individuals giving. These findings suggest that both altruism and social pressure are at play. The

desire to avoid social pressure explains the drop in giving in the opt-out treatment.

    In this paper, we decompose these findings by gender of the respondents. In Figure 1 we plot

for each treatment the share of households in which a male person answers and gives to the

charity out of all the households contacted; similarly, we compute a share of females answering

and giving to the charity. The sum of the two shares equals approximately the unconditional

share of givers out of all the individuals contacted.2 As Figure 1 shows, the shares of male and

2
 For a small fraction of respondents, gender was not recorded. Notice also that we do not observe the gender of the
potential giver in the case of households not answering the door.

                                                         2
female givers
       g      are ab
                   bout the sam
                              me in the basseline treatm
                                                       ment. Given that the shaares of males and

females answering the
                  t door (no
                           ot shown) are
                                     a also simiilar in this treatment, w
                                                                        we concludee that

generositty in the basseline treatm
                                  ment does no
                                             ot differ by ggender. The shares remaain similar iin the

simple fllyer treatmen
                     nt. In the op
                                 pt-out treatm
                                             ment, howeveer, women aare significanntly less likeely to

give. Thee decrease in
                     n male giving
                                 g in the opt-out treatmennt is instead small.




    Figurre 1. Share of househollds contacteed giving to a charity, b
                                                                    by gender an
                                                                               nd treatmen
                                                                                         nt

    Thesse results pro
                     ovide yet an
                                nother exam
                                          mple of the seeemingly innconsistent fi
                                                                               findings in ggiving

behavior: In a setting
                     g where indiv
                                 viduals cann
                                            not (easily) aavoid a givinng request, w
                                                                                   we find no geender

differencces; in a settting where in
                                   ndividuals can
                                              c sort out at a low cost, instead, tthe data sugggests

significan
         nt gender diifferences in
                                 n giving beh
                                            havior. Conssidering thesse findings jjointly, how
                                                                                             wever,

we concllude that wom
                    men are morre responsive to a simplee avoidance strategy, thee opt-out boxx.

    We estimate
       e        the social prefeerence param
                                           meters separrately by gennder. Using all the emppirical

momentss in the dataa (not just th
                                 hose displayeed in Figuree 1), and allowing the kkey parameteers to

differ by gender, we find a signifficant differeence not onlly in the meaan, but also iin the variannce of

                                                    3
the gender-specific altruism distributions. The implied distributions indicate that a higher share

of women is on the margin of giving, and hence responsive to a low-cost opportunity to opt out

(since marginal givers prefer not to be asked in the first place). We also find evidence of a

similar pattern with respect to the pro-social willingness to answer a survey request.

    Our findings point to the importance of considering differences in the overall distribution of

social preferences and, in particular, marginality. When put under pressure, women may give

more, and contribute more to public goods because they are more likely to be on the margin, and

hence sensitive to an extra push. But they may say no if given a simple option to do so.

    The finding in this paper are consistent with the hypothesis that women are more malleable

or more sensitive to social cues in determining appropriate behavior (see, e.g., Kahn et al., 1971;

Croson and Gneezy, 2009).3 Our findings are not inconsistent with the findings cited above that

suggest that women are more generous than men. A natural interpretation is that the presence of

a larger share of marginal givers leads women to give more in certain situations, but not in

others. We would like to emphasize, though, that the results in this paper should be seen as

suggestive and that more evidence will be necessary. Finally, this paper highlights the benefits of

the literature on Structural Behavioral Economics. While the reduced-form findings on gender

differences in giving are of first order importance, it is the estimation of the underlying giving

preferences which suggests a possible explanation of differences in giving across settings.


                                 I. Framework and Experimental Design




3
 Our findings also complement the price sensitivity of giving established by Andreoni and Vesterlund (2001), who
show that women are more generous than men when it is relatively expensive to give, but that men begin to give
more than women as the price of giving decreases.


                                                        4
        Framework. Consider a two-stage game between a solicitor and a potential giver

(solicitee).4 In the first stage, the solicitee may receive a warning of the upcoming solicitation via

a flyer at the door, which she notices with probability r ∈ (0,1]. In the second stage, the solicitor


visits the home. The solicitee opens the door with probability h ∈ [0,1]. If she did not notice the


flyer (or did not receive one), then h is equal to h0 ∈ (0,1). If she noticed the flyer, then she can

adjust the probability to h at a cost c(h), with c(h0) = 0, c′(h0) = 0, and c′′(·) > 0.

        If the solicitee opens the door, then she donates g ≥ 0. If she does not open the door, there

is no donation (g = 0). In our set-up, a solicitee of gender i ∈ {female, male} has utility given by:


         U i ( g ) = u i (W − g ) + a i v i ( g , G ) − s i ( g ).                       (1)


The overall utility U i of an individual of gender i is composed of three terms. (For simplicity,

we suppress the index for each individual.) First, private consumption is denoted by ui, which

includes wealth W minus the individual’s donation g. We model this private utility as satisfying

standard properties: (u i )′ > 0 and (u i )′′ ≤ 0 . The second term in (1), ai vi , allows for pure and

impure altruism (warm glow). In the case of pure altruism, the agent cares about the total

contributions to the charity, G + g, where G is the giving of others. In the case of impure

altruism, the agent cares about the warm glow from giving g, and vi does not depend on the

giving of others. The altruism parameter ai ≥ 0 captures the intensity of the warm glow (the case

ai < 0 captures the possibility of spite). Importantly, ai is assumed to be heterogeneous across

people of gender i, with a distribution Fi.


4
 We only summarize the framework here, directing the interested reader to the details and the slightly more general
model in DellaVigna et al. (2012).


                                                                     5
       The third component of (1) is social pressure. The solicitee absorbs a utility cost si(g) =

Si·(gn − g)·1g < gn ≥ 0 for not giving (or for giving a small amount), with this cost decreasing

linearly in g. The giver does not incur a social pressure cost if she is away from home during the

visit. The special case of Si = 0 (no social pressure) and ai = 0 (no altruism or warm glow)

represents the standard model.

       The model yields several testable implications. When altruism dominates social pressure,

the flyer increases home presence and giving relative to the control group since some agents seek

to meet the solicitor. When social pressure dominates, instead, the flyer treatments, and

especially the opt-out ones, lead to lower rates of answering the door and of donations. We allow

these effects to differ by gender.

       We also model the decision to respond to a survey request, which is a form of giving,

namely of giving time for a survey. We assume that individuals of gender i receive a utility svi

(which could be positive or negative) from completing a 10-minute survey for no monetary

payment. In addition, individuals receive utility from a payment mi for completing the survey,

and receive disutility from the time cost ti of the survey, both of which are deterministic. The

overall utility from completing a survey hence is sv + m - t. We assume that each individual has

a pro-social value svi drawn from a normal distribution.

       We structurally estimate the model to provide evidence on the social preference

parameters for men and women.

       Experimental Design. Our design combines two elements. First, we raise money in a

door-to-door fundraising drive for two charities: La Rabida Children's Hospital and the East

Carolina Hazard Center (ECU). Second, we conduct surveys of varying lengths (and varying




                                                6
monetary incentives as inducements) to estimate the elasticity of the presence at home and of the

response rate to incentives.

        In the control treatments, solicitors knock on the door or ring the bell and, if they reach a

person, proceed through the script. In case of the charity solicitation, they inform the household

about the charity (La Rabida or ECU) and ask if they are willing to make a donation. In case of

the survey solicitation, they inquire whether the household member is willing to answer a survey

about charitable giving. The solicitor informs the household member about the duration of the

survey (5 or 10 minutes) and about the payment for completing the survey, if any ($10, $5, or

none). In the flyer treatments, the solicitor's script is identical, but in addition a different solicitor

leaves a flyer on the doorknob the day before the solicitation. The professionally prepared flyer

indicates the time of the upcoming fund-raising (or survey) visit within a one-hour time interval.

In the treatments with opt-out, these flyers include a box that says: “Check this box if you do not

want to be disturbed.” If the solicitors find the box checked, they do not knock on the door.

        The field experiment took place on Saturdays and Sundays between April 2008 and

October 2008. We employed 92 solicitors and surveyors, mostly undergraduate students at the

University of Chicago.

                                        II. Structural Estimates

        We estimate the parameters of the model using a minimum distance estimator following

the same procedure as in DellaVigna et al. (2012), to which we refer for details. We allow some

of the key parameters to differ by gender, namely the parameters determining the distribution of

altruism a towards the charities: the mean and the standard deviation of altruism. We also allow

for a different social pressure cost of turning down a solicitor for males and females. Finally, we




                                                    7
model th
       he willingness to compllete an unpaaid 10-minutte survey ass a normal ddistribution, with

mean and
       d standard deeviation thatt differ by geender.

         The
         T resulting
                   g estimates are reported in
                                            i Table 1 oof the Onlinee Appendix. Among the most

relevant parameters, the standarrd deviation
                                           n of the altru
                                                       ruism distribbution is sm
                                                                               maller for woomen

(17.4) th
        han for men
                  n (19.5); in addition, th
                                          here is a sizzeable diffeerence in thhe mean altrruism

towards the out-of-sstate charity
                                y (ECU). Figure 2 ploots the impllied densityy of the altrruism

distributiion for the tw
                       wo charitiess, separately for each geender. Notedd is the thresshold for positive

          om giving.5 As
utility fro           A Figure 2 shows, for the
                                            t out-of-sttate charity ((ECU) the shhare of types that

are on the margin of giving – thaat is the types at the thresshold – is siggnificantly larger for woomen.

There is a smaller diifference forr the in-state charity. Thee larger dennsity of estim
                                                                                      mated types aat the

margin for
       f women implies thatt women wiill be more responsive to shifts inn features oof the

environm
       ment, or in th
                    he cost of sorrting out.




5
 The actuaal threshold forr giving is a = (1-S)G and thu
                                                       us depends on tthe estimated ssocial pressure cost which difffers
by charity and by gender; this threshold d lies between 0 (plotted in thhe figure) and G ( = 10), the tthreshold with no
social pressure.


                                                            8
         Figure 2. Implied distribution of altruism towards the two charities, by gender

         While the emphasis so far is on giving of money, what about giving of time? We use the

field experiment on door-to-door survey completion to estimate the willingness to complete an

unpaid 5-minute survey. Figure 1 in the Online Appendix shows that the share of women

completing the survey decreases significantly from the flyer treatment to the flyer with opt-out,

consistent with the charitable giving results. Table 1 in the Online Appendix shows that the

estimated standard deviation of the pro-social utility of completing a survey is again smaller for

females (26.3) than for males (34.0), although the difference is not statistically significant at

conventional levels. Figure 3 displays the implied distribution of pro-social utility from survey

completion, which again shows that women are more likely to be at the marginal point.6


                                         0.02
                                                                                                        Females
                                                                                                        Males

                                        0.015
            Probability Density, f(s)




                                         0.01



                                        0.005



                                           0
                                          -100   -50                   0                50                         100
                                                       Utility of $0, 10 min survey (s)

     Figure 3. Implied distribution of willingness to complete a 5-minute unpaid survey.


6
 As in the case of giving money, the figure plots the threshold for positive willingness to do a survey; the threshold
for survey completion is –S.


                                                            9
                                          III. Conclusions

         This study uncovers an important relationship between gender and giving patterns: there

are gender differences in social preferences, but it is important to go beyond considering

differences in means –important gender differences may be at the margin. This leads women to

give more in certain situations, but not in others, and also to be more sensitive to social cues.

         Our study revolves around an experimental design that is tightly linked to a theory of

altruism and social pressure. The results naturally permit to improve our understanding of the

quantitative importance of each determinant of charitable giving. Differentiating by gender

reveals a novel explanation for seemingly contradictory findings in previous literature, and our

methodology is applicable to other determinants of giving.

First, ever-
                                            References

Andreoni, Jim and Lise Vesterlund. 2001. “Which is the fair sex? Gender differences in
      altruism.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(4): 293-312.

Bani, Marco and Barbara Guissani. 2010. “Gender differences in giving blood: a review of the
       literature.” Blood Transfusion 8(4): 278-287.

Bolton, Gary and Elena Katok. 1995. “An experimental test for gender differences in beneficent
       behavior.” Economics Letters 48(1995): 287-292.

DellaVigna, Stefano, John List, and Ulrike Malmendier. 2012. “Testing for Altruism and Social
      Pressure in Charitable Giving”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127, 1-56.

Eckel, Catherine C. and Philip J. Grossman. 1998. “Are Women Less Selfish Than Men?:
       Evidence From Dictator Experiments.” Economic Journal 108(448): 726-735.

Misje, A. H., V. Bosnes, and H. E. Heier. 2010. “Gender differences in presentation rates,
       deferrals and return behaviour among Norwegian blood donors.” Vox Sanguinis 98: e241-
       e248.




                                                 10
Online Appendix for “The Importance of Being

   Marginal: Gender Diﬀerences in Generosity”

 Stefano DellaVigna, John List, Ulrike Malmendier, Gautam Rao

                              January 14, 2013


   This appendix describes the structural estimation procedure underlying the
quantitative estimates of gender-specific social preferences presented in the main
paper. The estimation procedure generalizes DellaVigna et al. (2012) to allow
for gender-specific parameters. In the theoretical model, we suppress gender
indicators for notational simplicity; we then spell out in the description of the
estimation procedure which estimates are gender-specific. We also report the
reduced form results by gender of completion of an unpaid survey.
   Completion of an unpaid survey. Figure 1 reports the reports the share
completing an unpaid 5-minute survey in 2009 for the three treatments — base-
line, flyer, and flyer with opt-out. The bars for each gender report the share of
all households contacted which answer the door, agree to compete the survey
and are of a specific gender. Hence, the sum of the male and female bars equals
(up to a small share of respondents with unreported gender) the unconditional
share completing the survey. The patterns in Figure 1 indicate that in the
control group women are less likely to complete the survey then male, but are
somewhat more likely to complete the survey in the flyer treatment, indicating a
higher share of women sorting in. Finally, in the opt-out treatment the share of



                                        1
women completing the survey is lower than the share of men, consistent with the
results of the charitable giving fund-raising. This latter result indicates higher
sorting out by women when the cost of doing so is small (checking a box).
   Theoretical Framework
   We consider a two-stage game between a potential giver and a solicitor. In
the first stage, the giver may receive a flyer of the upcoming visit and, if so,
notices the flyer with probability  ∈ (0 1]. In the second stage, the solicitor
visits the home. The giver opens the door with probability . If she did not
notice the flyer (or did not receive one),  is equal to a baseline probability
0 ∈ (0 1). If she noticed the flyer, she can adjust the probability to  ∈ [0 1]
at a cost  (), with (0 ) = 0 0 (0 ) = 0 and 00 (·)  0. That is, the marginal
cost of small adjustments is small, but larger adjustments have an increasingly
large cost.
   Charity donation solicitation. If the giver is present, she donates an amount
 ≥ 0. If she is absent, there is no donation ( = 0). A giver  of gender
 {  } has utility

                                                  ¡       ¢
                    ( ) =  ( −  ) +      −  ( )            (1)


In the discussion that follows, we suppress the indices for individual as well as
gender. The utility of private consumption, , is derived from the pre-giving
wealth  minus the donations given to the solicitor (). The private utility
satisfies standard properties: 0 (·)  0 and 00 (·) ≤ 0.
   The utility from giving to the charity is  (Γ + ), where the parameter Γ
governs the concavity of the altruism function. In the case of pure altruism, Γ ≡
 is the amount given by others to the charity. Then, we can think of  ( + )
as the production function of the charity, which is increasing in the donation 
but has decreasing returns: 0 (· ·)  0 
                                             00
                                                 (· ·)  0 and lim→∞ 0 ( ·) = 0


                                           2
The parameter  ≥ 0 denotes the level of altruism, and the overall utility from
giving is  ( + ). More generally, in the case of impure altruism (warm glow),
Γ need not equal .
   The third element in the utility function is social pressure. The giver of
gender  pays a utility cost () =  · (  − ) · 1 ≥ 0 for not giving or only
a giving small amount to the solicitor. The cost is highest for the case of no
donation ((0) =   ), decreases linearly in , and is zero for donations of   or
higher. The giver does not incur a social pressure cost if she is away from home
during the visit. The special case of  = 0 (no social pressure) and  = 0 (no
altruism or warm glow) represents the standard model. We further assume that
the giver is aware of her own preferences and rationally anticipates her response
to social pressure.
   Survey solicitation. Individuals receive a utility  (which could be positive
or negative) from completing a 10-minute survey for no monetary payment.
In addition, individuals receive utility from a payment  for completing the
survey, and receive disutility from the time cost  of the survey, both of which
are deterministic. Assuming (locally) linear utility, we add these terms to obtain
the overall utility from completing a survey:  +  − . We denote by   the
social pressure cost of saying no to a survey request. The agent undertakes the
survey if  +  −  is larger than −  . The threshold 
                                                           ¯  = −  − ( − )
is the lowest level of  such that individuals will agree to complete the survey
if asked. An increase in the social pressure   or in the pay  or a decrease
in the cost of time  will lower the threshold and hence increase the probability
of survey completion. The decision problem of staying at home conditional on
receiving a notice is

                                                         ( − 0 )2
                      max  max ( +  −  −  ) −                          (2)
                  ∈[01]                                   2



                                          3
Taking into account corner solutions for ∗  this leads to a solution for the prob-
ability of being at home: ∗ = max [min [0 +  max ( +  −  −  )  1]  0] 
    Assumptions. To estimate the model, we impose the following additional
assumptions.

   1. We assume that the homes approached are of either male or female “type”,
       with a share  of female homes. Thus, we abstract away from the presence
       of multiple household members who might engage in collective decision
       making about who should answer the solicitor’s knock. The parameter 
       is identified as the share of females answering the door when the solicitor’s
       visit is unanticipated. This same share  is assumed to apply to homes in
       all the treatments - in the opt-out flyer treatment, for example, we assume
       that a share  of the homes to which the flyer is delivered are of the female
       type.

   2. The private utility of consumption is linear,  ( − ) =  − . This
       assumption is justified by the local linearity implied by a model of expected
       utility.

   3. The parameter for altruism towards the charities, , comes from a normal
       distribution with mean  and variance  2 . In the estimation, the distribu-
       tions are allowed to diﬀer across genders by mean (reflecting the diﬀerent
       nature of the two charities) and variance; however, we impose that the
       variance of altruism be the same for the two charities.1

   4. The utility  of completing a 10-minute survey is assumed to be normally
       distributed with parameters  and    We allow  to be negative for
       households that dislike doing surveys without compensation. Both the
       mean and the variance are allowed to diﬀer across genders.
   1 Resultsof estimations allowing the variance of altruism to also diﬀer across charities are
available upon request. The results for La Rabida are similar to those reported below, but
the variance for ECU is imprecisely estimated.


                                              4
   5. The altruism function for charitable giving is  ( ) =  log (Γ + ),
      where the parameter Γ governs the concavity of the altruism function for
        0: a large Γ implies that the marginal utility of giving, given by
       (Γ + ), declines only slowly in the individual giving  consistent with
      pure altruism—the individual cares about the overall donation and her
      individual giving is only a small part. A small Γ instead indicates that
      the marginal utility diminishes steeply with the individual giving, more
      consistent with warm glow. For the results presented here, we fix the value
      of Γ = 10, close to the estimated value in DellaVigna et al (2012), and
      assumed identical across men and women.

   6. The social pressure cost  incurred from saying no to the solicitor is al-
      lowed to diﬀer across genders and charities, but is assumed to be homo-
      geneous within genders.

   7. The level of giving  from which on there is no social pressure cost is $10
      (the median donation), for both men and women.

   8. The cost of leaving home  () is symmetric around 0 and quadratic:
       () = ( − 0 )2 2 For the estimates presented in the paper, the elas-
      ticity  in assumed to be equal across genders.2

   Estimated Parameters. The vector of parameters  that we estimate are:
(i) , the share of female homes; (ii) 2008
                                        0    and 2009
                                                  0    —the probabilities of opening
the door in the 2008 and 2009 no-flyer treatments; (iii) —the probability of
observing (and remembering) the flyer, assumed equal across genders; (iv) —the
responsiveness of the probability of opening the door to the desirability of being
at home, assumed equal across genders; (v) 
                                             and   (where  =  )—

the mean and standard deviation of the normal distribution  from which the
  2 Preliminary estimations available upon request suggest that allowing  to vary across
gender does not change the main conclusions.


                                           5
altruism parameter  is drawn; we allow the mean 
                                                   to diﬀer across genders;

(vi) Γ—the curvature of the altruism function, which is assumed to be the same
for the two charities and for men and women; (vii)   ( =  )—the
social pressure cost associated with a donation request, allowed to diﬀer by
gender; the table displays the social pressure cost associated with giving zero,
  = 10; (viii)  and   —the mean and standard deviation of the utility
of completing an unpaid 10-minute survey, which diﬀer across genders; (ix)
  —the value of one hour of time spent completing a survey, assumed equal
across genders; and (x)   –the social pressure associated with saying no to
the survey request, diﬀering across men and women.
   Estimation Method. To estimate the model, we use a minimum-distance
estimator. Denote by  () the vector of moments predicted by the theory as
a function of the parameters , and by ̂ the vector of observed moments.
The minimum-distance estimator chooses the parameters ̂ that minimize the
distance ( () − ̂)0  ( () − ̂)  where  is a weighting matrix. As a
weighting matrix, we use the diagonal of the inverse of the variance-covariance
matrix. Hence, the estimator minimizes the sum of squared distances, weighted
by the inverse variance of each moment.3 To calculate the theoretical moments
for the probability of opening the door and the probability of giving, we use a
numerical integration algorithm based on adaptive Simpson quadrature, imple-
mented in Matlab as the quad routine.
   Moments. As moments  () we use the probabilities of taking the various
actions (answering the door, giving, completing the survey), each broken down
by gender. Note that we do not observe the gender for households who do not
answer the door, or who check the opt-out box. Therefore, as empirical moments
we use the share that has a certain gender, out of the whole population contacted
   3 Given the large number of moments, weighting the estimates by the inverse of the full

variance-covariance matrix is computationally diﬃcult.




                                            6
in that treatment. For example, the probability of a female answering the door
in treatment  is the number of households in which a female answered the door
                                                         4
out of all households contacted in treatment .
    The moments are as follows (where  =     and  =  ): (i)
                                                                                          
the probability of opening the door in the various charity treatments ( () );
                                                                                                  
(ii) the probability of checking the opt-out box in the Opt-Out treatment ( () );
(iii) the unconditional probability of giving in the various charity treatments
( ()
       ); (iv) the probability of giving an amount of money in diﬀerent ranges

( (0    10)                                                 
                ,  ( =  = 10) ,  (10   ≤ 20) ,  (20   ≤ 50) ,

and  (  50)
               ); (v) the probability of opening the door in the various sur-

vey treatments  (with varying dollar amounts, minutes, and flyer conditional),
       
 () , run in 2008 and in 2009; (vi) the unconditional probability of complet-
                                                                    
ing the survey in the various survey treatments,  ( ) , run in 2008 and in
2009; and (vii) the probability of checking the opt-out box in the survey Opt-Out
treatments ( ()
                   ). The corresponding empirical moments ̂ are estimated

in a first stage model using the same controls as in the reduced form regressions
in DellaVigna et al. (2012), including solicitor fixed eﬀects and day-time fixed
eﬀects.
    To calculate the method of minimum distance estimate, we employ a common
sequential quadratic programming algorithm (Powell, 1983) implemented in
Matlab as the fmincon routine. We impose the following constraints:      ≥
0 (social pressure non-negative),       0 (positive standard deviation of
altruism), 2008
            0     2009
                    0      ∈ [0 1]     (probabilities between zero and one), and
 ∈ [0 9999] (finite elasticity of home presence). We begin each run of the opti-
mization routine by randomly choosing a starting point, drawn from a uniform
   4 Since we do not observe the share opting out disaggregated by gender, the moment  ()
is not split by gender. Theoretically, it is calculated as the sum of the shares of females and
males choosing to opt out, weighted by the estimated shares  and 1 −  of female and male
households.




                                              7
distribution over the permitted parameter space. The algorithm determines
successive search directions by solving a quadratic programming sub-problem
based on an approximation of the Lagrangian of the optimization problem. To
avoid selecting a local minima, we choose the run with the minimum squared
distance of 500 runs.5
    Under standard conditions, the minimum-distance estimator using weighting
matrix  achieves asymptotic normality, with estimated variance


                     Var=(̂0  ̂)−1 (̂0  Λ̂ ̂)(̂0  ̂)−1 

                    P
where ̂ ≡  −1        =1   ∇  (̂) and Λ̂ ≡  [(̂)] (Wooldridge, 2002). We
calculate ∇ (̂) numerically in Matlab using an adaptive finite diﬀerence al-
gorithm.
    Identification. While the parameters are estimated jointly, it is possible to
describe the main sources of identification of individual parameters. The share
of female households  together with the baseline probabilities of answering the
door, 2008
       0    and 2009
                 0    , are identified by the observed probabilities of opening the
door in treatments without flyer. The probability of observing and remembering
the flyer, , is identified by two moments in the Opt-out treatment: the fraction
of households checking the opt-out box, and the fraction opening the door.
The elasticity of opening the door  with respect to incentives is identified by
the fraction opening the door in the survey treatments for diﬀerent payments
and survey durations. In addition,  is identified by the amounts given in the
diﬀerent charity treatments.
    The survey parameters are identified using the survey moments. The survey
completion rates for varying amounts of compensation identify the heterogeneity
in the willingness to complete the survey, and hence   . The survey completion
   5 For the results presented here, the best estimate is achieved in about 18 percent of all

runs.


                                             8
rate also identifies the mean willingness to complete a 10-minute survey,  .
The value of time   is identified from the comparison between pay increases for
the survey (from $0 to $5 to $10) and duration decreases (from 10 to 5 minutes).
Finally, the social pressure   is identified by the share of people answering the
door in the survey treatments. To see this, consider a respondent who dislikes
answering a survey and hence will say no and incur the social pressure cost   .
In the flyer treatment, she will choose to be at home with probability 0 − 
(barring corner solutions for ). Hence, knowing 0   and  it is possible to
identify   .
    Turning to the charity parameters, the information on the amounts given
identify the standard deviation of altruism                   
                                               , mean altruism  , and the

curvature parameter Γ. This is clearest for donations of     , where social
pressure plays no role. Without social pressure, an individual with altruism 
will give exactly  dollars if the marginal utility of giving,  0 () =  (Γ + ),
equals the private marginal utility of consumption, 1, and hence  = Γ + .
Thus, in this example without social pressure, the mass of households with
altruism higher than Γ + , i.e., 1 −  ( + Γ), has to equal the observed share
of households that give at least . This pins down the empirical distribution of
 for a given Γ. The identification of Γ depends on two sets of moments: the
sorting in of givers of larger amounts, and the giving of smaller amount. The
more concave the altruism function is (that is, smaller Γ), the more altruistic
individuals sort in because of higher infra-marginal utility of giving, and the
more frequent are small donations. Finally, the social pressure   is identified
from two main sources of variation: home presence in the flyer treatment (which,
to a first approximation, equals 0 − ) and the distribution of small giving
(the higher the social pressure, the more likely is small giving and in particular
bunching at   ).



                                         9
   Estimates. Table 1 reports the benchmark estimates of the parameters
along with standard errors. The probability of being at home 0 is precisely
estimated to be 392 percent in 2008 and 386 percent in 2009. The share  of
households that have read (and remember) the flyer is precisely estimated at
346 percent. While this estimate may appear low, many households may have
just disregarded the flyer, or another household member may have seen it, but
not informed the person opening the door. The elasticity of home presence 
is estimated to be 0034 (s.e. 0008), implying that the cost of increasing the
probability of being at home and answering the door by 10 percentage points is
012 2 = $015.
   We find that women and men have a very similar mean altruism for the first
charity, La Rabida ( = −1226 for women vs.  = −1135 for men). However,
women are substantially more altruistic on average towards the second charity,
ECU (  = −1029 (s.e. 1.31) for women vs.  = −2242 (s.e. 2.01) for men),
with the diﬀerence statistically significant at conventional levels.
   We estimate that women have a lower variance in their altruism distribution
(  = 1742 for women vs.   = 1954 for men), with the diﬀerence
statistically significant due to the highly precise estimates (p=0.02).
   The social pressure parameters are also quite precisely estimated. For women,
turning down a door-to-door giving request is associated with a social pressure
cost of $501 (s.e. $039) for La Rabida and $128 (s.e. $068) for ECU. For men,
the corresponding estimates are $302 (s.e. $034) for La Rabida and $238 (s.e.
$131) for ECU. Thus, we do not see a systematic relationship between gender
and social pressure: women experience higher social pressure when faced with
solicitors for La Rabida (the children’s hospital), while men face higher pressure
when they encounter solicitors for ECU (the out-of-state research facility).
   Finally, we construct a measure of “marginality” - the probability distribu-



                                        10
tion function of the altruism distribution, evaluated at the threshold of altruism
above which the solicitee chooses to donate a positive amount, if asked. We
find that women have insignificantly higher marginality for La Rabida than
men (0.014 vs. 0.013), but substantially higher marginality for ECU (0.013 vs
0.006), with the latter diﬀerence being highly statistically significant.
   Turning to the survey estimates, the average utility for survey completion
is estimated to equal −$2357 for women and −$3196 for men, although the
diﬀerence between the two is not statistically significant. There is significant
heterogeneity in survey completion utility for both genders (̂  = $2636 for
women and ̂ = $3401 for men). While the diﬀerence in standard devia-
tions is not statistically significant by itself, the point estimates are consistent
with men having greater variance in their utility for a doing a pro-social task
(completing an unpaid survey for a researcher). The value of time for one hour
of survey completion is imprecisely estimated to be $12410, indicative of the
wealthy neighborhoods we reached.6 The social pressure cost of turning down a
survey request,   , is estimated to be $425 for women and $1049 for men, siz-
able magnitudes. Interestingly, men are estimated to incur significantly greater
social pressure than women when faced with a surveyor. Finally, we again show
a measure of estimated “marginality” of men and women: the probability dis-
tribution function of the utility of completing the unpaid 10 minute survey,
                            ¯  above which the solicitee agrees to complete
evaluated at the threshold 
the survey, when asked. We estimate a higher marginality for women than men
(0.012 vs 0.010), but the diﬀerence is not statistically significant.




  6 At   an average income of about $100,000 per year, the implied hourly wage is $50.


                                             11
Figure 1. Frequency of Completing the Unpaid Survey: Male versus Female




10%
9%
8%
7%
6%
5%
4%                                                              Male
3%
2%                                                              Female

1%
0%
         Baseline      Flyer (N=1,703)   Flyer with Opt
        (N=1,420)                        Out (N=1,374 )
                                         Table 1. Minimum-Distance Estimates

Common Parameters                                                                              Females                         Males
Share of Female Households                                                                                       0.481
                                                                                                                (0.006)
Prob. of Home Presence (h) - Year 2008                                                                           0.392
                                                                                                                (0.005)
Prob. of Home Presence (h) - Year 2009                                                                           0.386
                                                                                                                (0.007)
Prob. of Observing Flyer (r)                                                                                     0.346
                                                                                                                (0.016)
Elasticity of Home Presence (eta)                                                                                0.034
                                                                                                                (0.008)
Implied Cost of Altering Prob. Home by 10 pp.                                                                    0.147
Survey Parameters
Mean Utility (in $) of Doing 10-Minute Survey                                                   -23.573                       -31.961
                                                                                                (4.438)                        (6.17)
Std. Dev. of Utility of Doing Survey                                                            26.356                        34.007
                                                                                                (5.971)                       (8.493)
Test of equality across gender: Svy Std Dev (p value)                                                            0.440

Social Pressure Cost if Saying No to Survey                                                       4.255                        10.491
                                                                                                 (1.303)                       (2.347)
Value of Time of One-Hour Survey                                                                                124.100
                                                                                                                (46.998)
                                                                                                  0.012                         0.010
 "Marginality" (pdf at altruism threshold for completing survey)                                 (0.003)                       (0.002)

Test of equality across gender: Svy "Marginality" (p
value)                                                                                                           0.580
                                                                                           La                            La
Charity Parameters                                                                       Rabida           ECU          Rabida            ECU
Mean of altruism distribution, μ                                                         -12.265       -10.292        -11.351         -22.419
                                                                                         (0.996)        (1.31)        (0.951)         (2.011)
Standard deviation of altruism, σ                                                                17.422                        19.540
                                                                                                 (0.764)                       (0.746)
Test of equality across gender: Std. Dev. Of Altruism (p value)                                                  0.04 **

Social Pressure Cost of Giving 0 in Person                                                5.016         1.286       3.020              2.380
                                                                                         (0.394)       (0.686)     (0.336)             (1.31)
Curvature of Altruism Function, Γ                                                                              10.000
                                                                                          0.014         0.013       0.013               0.006
"Marginality" (pdf at altruism threshold for donating                                    (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)             (0.001)
Test of equality across gender: "Marginality" (p value)                                    0.48        0.00 ***
SSE                                                                                                           178.330
Notes: Estimates from minimum-distance estimator with weights given by inverse of diagonal of variance-covariance matrix. Standard errors
are in parentheses. SSE reports the Weighted Sum of Squared Errors. “Marginality” for survey is reported for an unpaid survey of length 10
min. A solicitee will be willing to do such a survey if the utility of doing the survey exceeds the social pressure cost of saying no, i.e. s>-Ss.
The marginality is thus defined as f(-Ss, μs, σs), where f(x; μ, σ) is the pdf of the normal distribution with mean μ and variance σ2. Similarly,
DellaVigna et al (2012) show that a solicitee will donate a positive amount of money if she has altruism a>(1-Schar)* Γ. Marginality is thus
measured as f((1-Schar)* Γ, μchar, σchar), where char={la rabida, ecu} and f(.) is again the pdf of the normal distribution.
