                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE THEORY AND MEASUREMENT OF
                 MACROECONOMIC DISEQUILIBRIUM IN
                   CENTRALLY PLANNED ECONOMIES




                          Richard Portes




                      Working Paper No. 1875




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                             March 1986




The author is Director of the Centre for Economic Policy Research,
London; Professor of Economics, University of London; and Directeur
dEtudes Associe. Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales,
Paris. My research on this topic has been supported by the
Economic and Social Research Council, most recently under grant
B00230048.  I have benefited greatly from collaborative work on the
problems discussed here with Richard Quandt, David Winter,
and Stephen Yeo, none of whom bears any responsibility for this
paper. Nor do those who have commented on the paper, including Joe
Brada, Wojtek Charemza, Paul Hare, Ed Hewett, Alec Nove, and Tom
Wolf. The paper was written for a Festschrift in honor of Franklyn
Holzman. The present version is a revision of Birkbeck Discussion
Paper in Economics, No. 161, October 1984. The research reported
here is part of the NBER?s research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  Working Paper #1875
                                                  March 1986



                The Theory and Measurement of Macroeconomic
               Disequilibrium in Centrally Planned Economies



                                  ABSTRACT




 The paper considers issues in recent research on macroeconomic
 equilibrium j centrally planned economies. I defend the
explicit aggregatjve, mac roeconomic approach in theory,
 institutional relatjonshi PS and measurement   It has offered a
 fresh, coherent framework for the analysis 0 1' many CPE phenomena,
opened up a range of possibilit ies for empir ical investigation,
and generated severa 1 important spinoffs: wo rk on planners'
behaviour, insights into CPE P0 licy problems of the 1970s and
early 1980s, which centred on macroeconomic equilibrium and
threats to it, and some devel opments in market e conorny macro
theory and econometrics. The quantity—rationing macro model and
disequilibrium econometrics give a more useful as well as a more
nuanced view of macroeconomic reality in CPEs than the
conventional wI sdom characterizing them as perpetual "shortage
economies'•.




                                                   Richard Portes
                                                   tpartnent of Economics
                                                   Birkbeck College
                                                   7—15 Gresse   Street
                                                   london W1P 1PA
                                                   ENGtD
 The Theory and Measurement of Macroeconomic Disequilibrium in
                   Centrally Planned economies


                         Richard Portes

             Birkbeck College, University of London
                               and

               Centre for Economic Policy Research

                          January 1986


1. Introduction


The line of research I began several years ago into the
macroeconomics of the centrally planned economies (CPEs) relies
heavily on several important predecessors. Among these the work

of Franklyn Holzman (especially 1956, 1960, 1968) played a major
role.   This derived not only from the conceptual framework, but

also from the open and undogmatic spirit of inquiry underlying
it. Though not an econometrician, Holzman knew that theory had
to admit confrontation with the data; though not a mathematician,
he knew that his understanding of Soviet economic institutions
hadtobe representable in theoretical terms. His own         work


This paper was written for the conference on the Soviet Union and
Eastern Europe in the World Economy held at the Kennan Institute
in Washington, D.C. on 18—19 October 1984 and will appear in a
Festschrift for Franklyn Holzman. The present version has been
significantly revised.



                                1
quickly became part of the conventional wisdom, but more wise
than conventional, and certainly not inhibiting to younger
scholars seeking challenging problems. If he thought he had been
there before you, he would not hesitate to refer you to the
appropriate passage; but this was always good sense rather than

exaggerated sensitivity, professional rather than personal.                   His

arguments were vigorous and provocative but not intolerant.
This essay is offered in the same spirit.


The motiv atio n fo r this research on CPE macro economics wa s to
elucidate the gene ral problem of macroeconomic equilibrium and,

in a specific app lication, to eval uat       e   the evidence for repres sed

inflation in the Soviet—type econ omie 5 of Eastern Europe.                 T his

empirical te sting required a mor e elab orate and gene ra                        1

macroe con omi cs than was then            a va   ilable for t he CPEs.           A

prerequi 5 i    te   was to clarify the           app ro pr i ate   concept    of

"equilibri u         (see Muellbauer a nd Portes           1978,     for mar ke   t

economies, and Dlouhy, 1984, in th e CPE cont ext). An equilibr ium
with quant ity rationing is a state 1 n which markets d o not cle ar,
but the ec ono my is at rest, and we can in p rinciple measure the

magnitude of "di s equilibrium" in terms of the dist ance fro ma
market—c lear ing allocation or price vec tor.             Similarly, Kornai
(1980)   d   iscusses a self—reproducing eq          uili brium     state of an
economy       char act e rized   by   per va si ye    shortages which he
subsequent ly seeks to measure (1982).




                                       2
A corresponding theoretical framework is that of recent non—
Walrasian general equilibrium macroeconomics                which has stressed
the need for consistent microeconomic founda t ions.               To call this
the "Clower (1965) — Barro—Grossman (1971,                   1974) school" is
perhaps too selective and omits some key elements which appear in
the sequence Hansen (1951) — Benassy (1975) — Grandmont—Laroque
(1976)      —   Malinvaud   (1977) —   Muellbauer—portes       (1978) —   Neary-
Stiglitz (1983), such as the aggregation problem and expectations
of quantity constraints.



Any application to socialist CIPEs of contemporary neoclassical
theory, deve loped in and for capitali st market economies, must be
inf ormed by a thorou gh know ledge of East Euro pean economies and

their institutions. Tho se of us w ho, like Franklyn Holzm an,
served our apprenticeshi ps with detaile d studie s of particu lar
CPE s (and their language s) can well und ers tand that this i 5 a

maj or reason why this fie ld of e conomics attracts relatively few

you ng scholars. Without that b ackgroun d, howev er, one can not
sen sibly choose the simpl ifying assumpti ons requi red to get any

use ful theorizing off the ground               Even with it, one may tak e a
set of assumptions whi ch are not un iversal 1 y regarded as
 r e a   listic". But reasona ble an d well—i nformed economists c an
diff er (indeed, agree       to   d iffer)   on the i mport ant and justifiab le

simp lifications, These wi 11 in a ny case depend on the objectiv es
of t he particular model. One mo deller' s choice of assumptio ns

that seem prima facie inappropriate to another may not ref lect
ignorance or disregard of the relevant institutions.                    Serious



                                         3
criticism requires demonstrating rigorously either the
inconsistency of the assumptions or (with evidence) that they
lead to inappropr iat   e   conclus ions.



The macroeconomic s of CPEs has a ttracted more than its share of

uns upported asse rtions purely a priori rea soning, "stylized

fac ts" not based on the dat a        ,
                                          and   c   onfident, elaborate verbal
arguments founded on the most casual empiricis m.                   For a theorist

to use "obviously" in arg ument or to dismiss em pirical results or

"absurd" is only one          level       below      of fering   various general
qualitative consid erati ons to support an essent ially quantitative
proposition. Thi s is no lon ger acc eptable.                    We have for some
time had reasonably lo ng and fairly reliable macroeconomic time
series for s ever   a 1     CPEs. Empiri cal assertions about the
behaviour o f CPE hous eholds, planne rs, enterprises or markets
should not be taken s eriously unles s they are supported by the

data. Disagreements over empirical issues can be resolved only
by testing well—defined hypotheses.


All this does not deny but rather supports the validity of alter-

native approaches. One is a variety of institutionalism, seeking
distinctive general lessons in the specificities of socialist
planning, finding those generalities in a formalism which is not
primarily directed towards proving theorems or generating
testable hypotheses. The symbols used in this formalism are
often difficult to translate into measurable variables, and the
research strategy comes close to rejecting the standard model—



                                          4
hypotheses—tests procedure (Ko rnai 1980, less            so I n 1982). It
yields insights nevertheless,          as do a range of models         and
empirical work within the more standard neoclass ical canons          (see
below)



The following sections cons ider   issues    rais ed by my own research
programme on macroecon omic    equilibrium    in   CPEs   and comparisons
with   alternat ive views,   I defend the   explicit aggregative, mac-
roeconomic ap proach in th eory, instit utional relationships and
measurement.    It has offe red a fresh, coherent framework for the

analysis of many CPE         phenomena,      opened up a range of
possibilities for empirica 1 investiga tion, and generated sev era 1

important spi noffs:    work on planner s' behaviour insights into

CPE policy pr oblems of th e 1970s and early 1980s, which cen t red
on macroeconomic equilibrium and threats to it and some
developments in market economy macro theory and econometrics.




2. Theory


I take as common       ground for this survey that CPEs exhibit
behavioural    as we 11 as technological regularities; sta ble
economic behaviour of CPE households, planners and enterprises          is
                                                            to
part of our maintai ned hypothesis. I limit the discussion here
the consumer goods and labour markets, while recognising t hat
relations between enterprises and planners and disequilib ri a



                                   5
within the state productive sector have been the subj ect of much

interesting theory and empirical work (e.g .,         on investment

"cycles").   I accept the consensus from thi s work that CPEs
normally exhibit generalized excess real demand (quali fied by the
non—market character of transactions) in the state product ive
sector, for intermediate and investment goods. It is not relevant
here, however, to assess the relative importance of overly taut

initial plans (including systematic "optimism" about unknown data
and exogenous shocks) and systemic features 1ike an output—based

incentive system.


Both demand for and supply of consumption goods and labour will
depend on events in the state productive sector. Total demand
for consumption goods will be affected indirectly by events in
the labour market and directly by the demand from state enter-
prises for some consumption goods. The latter is probably of
secondary importance (Kornai, 1980, p. 497), but the interplay
between planners, enterprises and banks which determines wage
plan (over)fulfilment is a key element of the story (Holzman,
1956, 1960; Portes, 1983). We discuss it and the supply side
further below. Whether they do jointly yield excess demand is an
empirical question. To answer it does require specifying demand
and supply functions and hence the transmission of behaviour in
the state productive sector through those functions, but not the

internal processes wh ich generate th at behaviour.




                                 6
Although the labour market is equally important, both theory and
data are w eaker, so assessing the nature and                      extent of
diseq uilibri um there is much less advanced. This is particularly

regrettable since the spillovers from the consum ption goods
market onto labour supply could in principle reveal significant
information about the former. although eval ua t i ng it might be
difficult t 00 (Portes, 1974; Wiles and Ro stow ski, 1979).
Moreover,     one of the chief reasons why the pla nners t hemselves as

well as exter nal observers should be interes ted in consumpt ion
goods market d isequilibrium is this spillover on the incentive to

work (Hansen, 1951; Galbrai th, 1952).             Excess demand will also
typically result in an ineffi cient allo cation of goods and affect
the distribution of real income; both will concern the planners.


2.1. Definitions



What is macroeconomic disequilibrium and how do we recognize it?

When p rices are free to vary            eve n with some stickiness         we
expect movem ents of the price level        t   o provide e vidence of ex ces   S

demand or supply, even if such pr ice flexi bility may not
elimina te the dis equil ibrium (as it does not i n market eco nomy

hyperin fla tions and as Karna 1, 1980            expects for CPEs).     When
prices are endogenously stic ky or c ontrolled               we may ob serve
either hid den or repressed        i nfl at i   on (I con sider here only
positiv e e xcess demand).        Some car elessly c onflate the two
(Winiec ki,     1985), but this    unne c e 5   sarily gi yes up a us eful
conceptual and practical distinction.                A price index may be



                                     7
falsified, may cover an unrepresentative basket of goods, and may
not ref lect quali ty change any of these phenomena may "hide"
und e rlying   inf lat ion, i.e., a rise in an      accurately calculated,
appr opriatel y   weig hted, qualit y— corrected price index. Repressed
lull at ion,   on the other hand, is      simply "a   situation in which, at

exis ting wages and prices,        the aggregate       demands for current

outp Ut   and labo ur services exceed the cor responding aggregate
supp lies... [so]   pu r chases of goods and          labour services are
rat ion ed (Barro    an d Grossm an, 1974, p. 8 7)fl       This   excess real
demand (a flow)      th e "i nflati onary
                    is                       gap" whose consequences for

prices    are sup pres ed.5     But the      "gap     terminology can be
mislea ding,    and it   i5   at best unhelpful to say that rationing

"hides" inflation (rather than suppre sses it), since this
suggests that the price level, appr opriate ly defined as above, is

actually increasing. That usage als 0         obscures an important    point,
that repressed infla tion may cause        h idden inf lation.



Rat ioning is one consequence of     repressed inf lat ion. At the
aggregate   level,   ts mirror image is forced saving (note that as

a global    moneta ry magnitud e, this is inherenti y an aggreg ate
concept). This is a flow of saving rather than a stock (the so—
called "monetary overhang").       Flows are determined by desired and

actual stocks a nd by many ot her factors. When we investig ate
equilibrium on the consumpt ion goods market, we look at the
balance of flow demand and supply, of which the stocks of
household liquid assets and se llers' inventories a re only part ial
determinants.




                                      8
Simply put, forced saving is that part of their flow of disposa—
ble income which household s would like to spend but cannot.
Indeed, putting it so simply immediately promp ts the question why
it should ever occur —  forci ng people to save sounds odd, rather
like pushing on a   string    There are only tw o reasons: house—
holds voluntarily (maxim izing   subject to   available supplies of

goods) substitute (expec ted) future consu mption for unavailable
current consumption; or they involuntari ly supply more labour
than they would like) i .e., they are cons trained    fr om   reducing
their labour supply and hen c e income as m uch   as the   reduced (by
rationing) marginal uti lit y of income would otherwise induce.
Note, therefore, that if there actual ly has been c hroni           c,

sustained repressed inf lation since the beginning of central
planning and households rationally expect it to contin ue, the

"voluntary" component of forced saving wil 1 be negligib le, and
its only cause must be inhibitions on cutting labour supply.


Households can of course reduce their labour supply qualitatively

("effort") as well as quantitatively, or quantitatively in ways
that will not be recorded in the data. This in no way affects
the essential argument., nor theoretical modelling of it: Excess
demand for consumption goods should have a spillover effect in
reducing effective (quality—corrected) labour supply, and hence
output, this is the basis of the "supply multiplier".



How important is this effect?    Wiles and Rostowski (1979) query
it on mainly a priori grounds, except insofar as they claim that



                                 9
wage—elasticities of labour supply are observed to be low or
negative. A simple calculation from equation (4) of Portes
(1981) shows, however, that the response of labour supply to
(rationed) consumption will depend on the difference         between the
wage—elasticities of unconstrained and constrained labour supply
functions. These are likely to vary together, so the Wiles—
Rostowski claim shows nothing. Kornai recognizes that "the issue

is basically an empirical one," but then without examining
evidence asserts "that the intensity of shortage is not one of
the variables explaining labour supply either positively or
negatively (1980, p. 479)." My prejudice goes the opposite way,
along with Hansen and Gaibraith; but we should remain agnostic
until the evidence is in. Howard's (1976) results suggest a
significant effect, but I cannot accept them (nor his general
argument) for the reasons suggested in Katz (1979), Nissanke
(1979), and Portes and Winter (1980).



In theory,         then, how should we measure           macroeconomic
disequilibr ium in the consumption goods market?          The definitions

above sugge st trying to measure the difference between aggregate
demand and aggregate supply, or alternativel y, forced saving
(again, the difference between actual and desi red holdings of
f inanci al   as sets   is not   whatwe want, although it is one determi—
nant of exc e ss demand).        Three major questions im mediately arise
of whic h we mention two         and examine the third at length. First,
should we use "notional" or "effective" demand and supply? The

quantity—rat loning macro literature suggests the latter



                                        10
(Muellbauer and Portes 1978) but        there are counterarguments.
Second, the formal or informal rationing schemes used under
excess demand may be "manipulable", in the sense   that a household
may influence the amount it receives, in particular by presenting
a demand exceeding what it actually wants, knowing that the
probability of success or the fraction of revealed demand which
it will achieve is less than unity. This would exaggerate
measured excess demand.        Weinrich (1984) considers the
theoretically appropriate measure of excess demand in these
circumstances for the stochastic rationing case, but we have as

yet no practical procedure for making the correction (but see
Burkett, 1985, who deals e mpirically with the converse, the
"di scouraged consumer effect").

2.2. The Aggregation Problem


Much the most fundamental and important issue is th e aggregation
problem. Tartarin (1982) goes so far as to say, "Only micro
disequilibria are real, macro disequilibrium is an a rtifact which

exists only in the domain of the national acco unts." This
suggests not only that our measurement problem is in principle
insoluble — even the most ambitious assistant professor might

decline a research grant for measuring stat istica 1 artifacts —
but also that neither monetary theory nor macroeco nomic policy
are of any interest in considering disequilibria, at least in
CPEs. Having written on both (Portes, 1980, 1983), I clearly do
believe there are interesting theoretical propositions and policy




                                   11
interpretations in the aggregative economics of CPEs which
involve macroeconomic disequilibrium in essential ways.


Then how can we distinguish between distorted relative prices and
macroeconomi c—monetary causes of the phenomena we identify with

disequilibri urn in CPEs? We have suggested thought experiments to
clarify the theoretical distinction (Portes and Winter, 1980),
and in po licy terms we might consider the separate
respons ibi li ties of the Price Office and the Ministry of Finance

(monoba nk) and Ministry of Labour. Macroeconomic policy cannot
suffice   to   deal    with   problems created by the structure of
relative prices,      the system of incentives, etc.



Operationally, however, we must come to terms with the problem of

identifying aggregat e exce ss demand when at the micro level,
there are both positi ye and negative exces s demands, shortages
and slacks. Kornai i ns       is ts   that they must rernai n disaggregated,

as vectors, and that it woul d be a "grave mista ke...to           'net out'
shortage and slack ...(1980, p. 45)." He wou ld                accept that
"aggregate excess de mand" mi ght be well—define d           in an economy
whose "normal state" was not pervasive shortage               In a "chronic
shortage economy," however, "Buy ers         have adjusted   their attitudes
to chronic shortages...where mas sive fo rced substitution, forced
spending and queueing are to be found.. .aggregate excess demand
is not an operational category. ..( 1980, p. 477)."




                                        12
The key point in this argument is the change in buyers'
behaviour,         which w e interp ret to mean that their quantity
(constraint)        expect at ions are         dif ferent.   These expecta tions are

arguments        of their demand functions,                  but the   preferences
underlying those func tions ar e not alte red by chr onic shortage.
Consider t he case of long—run mass unem ployment.                     Workers will
adjust, in the sense of changing quant ity (cons traint)
expectations.  The " d isco uraged w orker" e ffect is one
man i f e s tat ion,,   so me   p eopl e wi 11 leave t he lab our market. Others
will substitu te (accept) inferior jobs for t hose preferred but
unavailable at existing rela tive wages. Li qui dity preference and

consumption b ehaviour are                   also affected      We do not normally
suppose, howe ver, that mdi vidual labour supply functions have
altered. Shou ld we say that aggregate exce ss supply of labour is
not in these c ircumstances an "operational category"? If so, how

do we charact erize macroe conomic relationshi ps in the 193Os?
Moreover, woul d not the "ye ctor of disaggregated indicators" with
which Kornai c ha        rac t e ri z e s   shortage also be affe cted by quantity

expectations?           We would agr ee that aggregate exce ss demand cannot
be defined md ependently of the "normal state" of the economy, on
the understan ding that th is includes the q u an tity constraint
expectations, if any) held by agents in the economy.


The existence of forced substitution with excess demand is not a

major theoretical problem. After all, at the aggregate level,
both forced saving and the response of                         labour supply to a
constraint in the goods market are examples of forced substitu—



                                               13
tion. Spillover effects of this kind have been modelled exten—
sively, and all quantity—rationing macro deals with transactions

taking plac e at "false" (disequilibrium) prices.   In practice,
forced subst itution is a cause for worry only if elasticities of

substitution in demand are low and it is nevertheless extensive.

Although it is always welfare— reducing, the importan ce of that
effect will depend on the elast icities, and it should not in any
case stop us from doing applied macroeconomics.



In seeking to measure aggregate excess demand, we cannot avoid
"netting out" shortages and slacks. This does indeed present a
problem in theory, as suggested by the Barro—Grossman definition
of repressed inflation quoted above. In a two—market model, they
require that both be in excess demand. This stipulation that the
vector of excess demands be semipositive (so no "netting out" at
false prices is necessary) goes back at least as far as Hansen
(1951), and it is reflected in the consistent usage of the
quantity—rationing macro literature: excess demand for goods
with excess supply of labour is "classical unemployment", a quite

different regime (the converse is "underconsumption"). In
practice, however, the early period of central planning, when
most goods were in excess demand and labour in excess supply, is
better characterised as "repressed inflation on the goods market"
(Kornai, 1980, Sec. 11.7; 1982, pp. 102—108).

We all need to use macroeconomic aggregates, even Janos Kornai

discussing CPEs (1980, Secs. 16.2—16.5, 17.6, 18.5, 21.1—21.2,



                               14
and Chap. 19    and the explicit macro modelling of 1982, passim).
Yet he would take th e aggregat Io n problem as sufficient reason to

reject the central c oncepts of q uantity—ratio ning macroeconomics:
the "5 hort—side rul e" (that all agents on th e short side of the

ma rke t achieve th eir desired transact io ns) , the "minimum
cond It ion" ( that     t he   aggregat e   quantity     transacted    is the
minimi mum of   supply and demand),        and "discret e   switching" between
excess    suppl y and     excess dema nd          Even for market
                                              regimes.
econom ies not subject to chronic shortages, however, it is quite

imposs ible to do applied macr oeconomics with a purist approach to
the ag gregati on problem (see Deaton and Mue llbauer, Chap. 6 and
Sec. 12.1).     Instead, one must simply do macroeconomics
caref ully. a lways remai ning open to empiri cal evidence (not a

priori assertion) that its results are con tradicted when one
allows explicitly for m icr o disequilibria. In fact, however,
Burkett 's (1985) s tudy usi ng Kornai's conc epts gives results
perfectly consistent with our own; see Sec. 3.4 below.


One internally consistent way of approaching   the problem in our
context is "smoothing by aggre gation", whose 1 engthy pedigree is
sketched by Muellbauer (1978).   If we aggregat e over many micro
labour markets, for example, s ome in excess s upply and some in
excess demand, we find that tota 1 demand is the sum of employment

and vacancies, total supply is the sum of employm ent and
unemployment, so total excess demand equals vacancies minus
unemployment; as the real wage rises, aggrega te excess demand
falls    in a continuous manner, with a smooth unemployment—



                                      15
vacancies tradeoff. Aggregate employment will always lie to the
left of the wedge formed by the aggregate demand and supply
curves



A diagra m in Portes         and    Winter (1980)            applies this to the
aggregate consumption goods market              in   CPEs.   Note that the larger
the elastic                                                            stronger is
forced subst itution, the closer will observed aggregate behaviour

approximate the underlying aggregate demand and supply curves
which would be observed in full Walrasian equi librium, and
cons equently the more suitable is the discrete—sw itching,                     mm—
condition e mpirical model.                The "smoothing by aggreg ion"
approach has been developed further by Malinva ud                 (   1981), Kooiman
(19 84), Gouri eroux and Laroq ue ( 1985) and Mar tin (19 86).                    It

app ears espec ially prom is       i ng   for   applications where t here are
dat a indicatin g the propo rtions of micro markets              in   exces s demand
and in excess supply.



2.3. Macroeconomic Models


I do no t   have   space to discuss in detail the alternative comp lete
models within which one might consider the theory and measurement

of mac roeconomic disequilibrium in CPEs.                I have set out my own
in Por tes (1979, 1981); Wolf (1985) discusses it and others.                    It
has on ly two aggregate markets, for consumption goods and labo ur;

only h ouseholds hold money; there is no "parallel" (flex—price)
market      there are only two categories of agents, households and



                                          16
planners, inventories and foreign trade are incorporated, but to
only a limited extent; households' quantity expectations are not
treated explicitly; and there is no attempt to specify a complete
macroeconometric model based on t his theoreti cal framework. It

nevertheless provides a coherent theoretical representation of
macroeconomic disequil ibrium and a n adequate ba sis for measuring
it in the consumption goods market        as we have done. Adding the

specification of the plan construc tion process developed further
in Fortes et al. ( 1983, 1984a), Dlouhy (1984        )   suggests three
major similarities between this model and that of Kornai (1982)
both are non—Walras ian general equi librium model s; both deal with
the "real" and the   con t   r o 1" spheres   and both have endogenous

mechanisms for adj ustment towards an equilibri um.         I would add
that Kornai (1980,           Secs. 19.4 19.6) gi yes a similar
representation of plan construction, especially in assuming that
the planners are rational and do try ex ante to avoid excess
demand, ceteris paribus. Stupnicki (1985)        carefully compares my
model with Kornai.



Several alternative models have been prop osed           with different
assumptions. Fickersgill(1980a), Duchene           (1984), Henin (1984)
and Nuti (1985) explore the implications o f a parallel market.
Hare (1982) incorporates some of Korna i's ideas into the
framework of Malinvaud (1977), which is similar to our own.
Brada (1982) assumes that enterprises also hold money. Hulyak

(1983) specifies a larger macroeconom etric model whose
consumption block resembles our treatment.          There remains much



                                    17
work to be do ne with quantity constraint expectations,
inventories, and foreign trade. For our purposes, however, I see
little advant age in breaking up the state productive sector into

planners and enterprises and modelling the interaction between
them. This is clearly essential in modelling investment
behaviour, b ut not for the consumption goods market. I follow
Campbell (1 970) in believing that "the state production
establishment [SPE] can best be considered as a single gigantic
firm under t he unified direction of the planners...intra—SPE
transactions ...lacking the market characteristics of those
between hous eholds and the SPE, are of less interest from the
point of view of pricing and macroeconomic equilibrium (pp. 255.
258) ."



There are n o general, a priori guidelines for the essential
elements of a CPE macro model.        All simplifyi ng assumptions are
"wrong", so one chooses a minimal cohere nt set sufficient for
one's objectives. Nine were to formalize some propositions and
to provide a basis for econometric hypothesis testing.        I would
claim that the institutional framework is just about rich enough
for the purpose and not seriously flawed. Some have queried the
basic strategy of applying to CPEs the neoc lassical macro theory,
in its quantity—rationing version, as we 11 as disequilibrium
econometrics.   I believe, however, that they and a simple mone—
tarism are often better suited to CPEs than to comparable market
economies.




                                 18
2.4. Behaviour of Households and Planners


Others take a similar line in this context.    Wiles and Rostowski

(1979) de scribe the institutional characteristics of CPEs that
"led him [Portes] correctly to suppose that Western micro— and
macroecon omics...would be fully applicable to households in CPEs

(p. 62)."      Pickersgill (1983) states, "The work I have done so
far incr eases my confidence in the similarity of behaviou ral
relation ships and therefore of the appropriateness of us ing
Western methodologies in the study of Soviet househ old
be ha vi our    and Asselain (1981) takes the same view of saving
behaviour in STEs.


Modelling the planners is more difficult      and there are no ob—

vious analogies in neoclassical theory.       We extend our basic

plan—construction process with an explici t pla nners' loss func—
tion (Portes et al., 1983), which incorpo rates a steady growth
objective like that in Kornai (1980, p. 490, and 1982). This
appears to be successful empirically


On the other ha nd, Kornai specifically rejects the analogy
between repressed inflation in a fix—price capitalist economy and
the "suction system" of a socialist economy, "for the latter has
different insti tutional conditions and its behavioral
regularities are therefore different, too (1980, p. 558)." Of
the differences he cites, however, all but one relate to aspects
of firms' behaviour not relevant to the consumption goods market,




                                 19
while the last concerns the adjustment of buyers' behaviour to
shortage, discussed above.         I therefore maintain that this
analogy is indeed instructive, and our intuition is not
misleading.


Although Kor nai does acc ep   t   the symme try   bet ween Keynesian

unemployment and repre ssed   i nf lation in a cap ital ist   economy, he

rejects any symmetry between the former in a capitalist economy
and the latter in a socialist economy (p. 478).           He maintains
that suction in a socialist economy is sui generis because its
"mode of operation, its management system, and the behavior of
the agents within it have adjusted t o chronic shortage which is
continuously maintained by the ins t itutional relationships (p.
478)." Again, we suggest above that similar adaptation occurs in
long—run mass unemployment, and one might think that Marxists
would go even further to say that the institutional relationships

of a capitalist economy are such as to maintain unemployment
substantially above the natural rate continuously.


Moreover, just as the rate of unemployment is useful though crude
as an index of excess supply in the labour markets of capitalist
countries and is usable in cross—country comparisons despite data
comparability problems, so we can construct a similar index for
excess demand on the consumption goods markets of CPEs. We take
the demand and supply functions obtained by disequilibrium
estimation (see below), calculate "fitted" demand and supply for
each year, and take their difference as a percentage of observed



                                   20
consumption (Portes and Winter. 1980 — an alternative version,
based on stochastic simulation of the fitted functions,         is

calculated in Portes et a1. 1983).       This measure can also be
used in mntertemporal and international comparisons.


Finally, the relations between CPE institutions and the th eory of

macroeconomi c equilibrium appear in my analysis of how excess
demand is ge nerated, reproduced and controlled (1977a. 1983).
The planners       objectives and the enterprise incentive system
generate taut plans in the state productive sector an d pressure
to overfulfil 1 them, and these forces are exacerbated by errors

and exogenous shocks. This may affect the demand for and supply
of consumer g oods, but less than is commonly thought.   Although 1

accept much of Kornai's analysis of plan constru ction for
consumption g oods (1980, Secs. 16.1—16.4), my model e xplicitly
admits the po ssibility of an ex ante "unbalanced" p1an. This
gives some ins ights but has no effect on the empirical work, nor

does   the precise source of consumption goods market
diseq uilibrium.



The view that consumption plans are chronically unrealistic (un—
balanced, optimistic) and hence underfulfilled (Winiecki, 1985)
is decisively rejected by aggreg ate time—series data for actual
and planned consumption in three CPE5. Some argue a priori that
supply (Cs) will always fall sh ort of the plan (C*) and demand
(CD) will always exceed it, so CS < C* < CD. Then C =     mm   (CD,

Cs) would suggest that actual C < C* always. In Poland, however,



                                  21
we find C > C' for 10 of the 19 years   19 57—7 5   until the Gierek
policies ensured C < C throughout the second half of the 1970s.
For Czec hoslovakia. C > C in 15 of th e 24 yea rs 1957—80, and in

Hungary, C > C in 11 of the 19 years 1 957—7 5, then once more in
the follo wing quinquennium. Similar ly, Kor nai's general view

that wage plans are fulfilled very cl osely ( 1980, Sec. 16.1) is
borne out by Farrell's (1975) study of Poland.      He shows that the
average amount by which the plan was exceed ed in 1957—70 was
2.6%, al though Poland is
lax in m onetary control.



I cannot accept Kornai's views, however, on the roles of relative

prices and of price rigidity in creating and maintaining
shortages. He cites for example. groups of products for which
the relationship between price and average cost goes in the
opposite sense of the intensity of shortage as "a new empirical
argument against the view that 'shortage exists when relative
prices are too low' (1980, p. 500)." That argument ignores the
demand side and is hence a glaring non—sequitur.        Equally, as
Gomulka (1985) points out, Kornaits assertion that "there is no
behavioral regularity ensuring that a rise in the price level of

consumption goods eliminates the shortage (p. 497)" simply does
not follow from the a priori arguments given (no evidence is
cited); and it is inconsistent with his view that the household
faces a "hard" budget constraint. Yet these are key elements in
his downgrading of the role of prices and            because of
systemic features and institutional regularities in a shortage



                              22
economy.     I regard them as unsupported assertions.


3. Measurement


Only empirical testing can ultimately resolve the basic issues to
which this analysis is directed. Assertion and casual empiricism
will not do.     To arrive (ideally) at an agreed interpretation of
the results of such tests, however, the theoretical framework
within which they are carried out must be broadly agreed as well.
The discussion above is intended to extend the area of agreement.




3.1. Econometric Results



Our own examination of the data, tests, results and conclusions
are set out in a series of papers (Portes, 1974, 1977a; with

Winter, 1977, 1978, 1980; et al.1 1983, 1984a, 1984b, 1985).
shall not attempt to summarize them, although I shall reply below

to the relatively few specific criticisms which they have
attracted.      There seems to be an irresistible temptation,
however, for those who reject our methods or our conclusions to
misrepresent both by setting up straw men which can easily be
tumbled without taking the effort to address specific issues of
theory, econometrics or data. It may therefore be useful simply
to quote for the record a few summary statements from these
papers:




                                 23
              1. "...there         was sign if icant inflation.) both repressed and
sometimes open, in the CPEs until that time [mid—1950 5]
Moreover, there may have been brief episodes in particular
countries during particula r periods since then.. [but] there is
no evidence of                sustained         repressed inflation in any of the
Soviet—type CPEs                  since   the in id—1950s   (Portes, 1974 )   U




              2.    "We have specified and estimated [in an equilibrium
framework]             hous ehold demand for money and s avings                   functions in
four CPEs.              The   5   uc cessful estimation...and the       pla usibility       of
the estimat es sup port    our underlying hy pothes is that the
behaviour of the ho us eh old s ector in CPEs ca n be an alysed using
the same me thods that are used for this sector in Western
countries... [and]                  test    ify to the quality of th e             data...The
residuals ca n tell us li ttle                  about the overa 11 degr ee of market
equilibrium during the                      pen od, however...[a nd] we can draw no
further                     repressed inflation until we treat both
                   concl us ions    about

sides o f the market in a disequilibrium framework (P—W 1978, p.
1   7)   ."


              3.    "...Begin with the estimated probabilities [that an
observation was generated by an excess demand                          regime] ...Simply
allocating each year...on the basis of                        the probability exceeding
or falling short of] 0.5...[indicates]                          excess supply was the
dominant regime in three out of the fo ur countries. This is a
very crude description of the results, however.                               More precise


                                                  24
efforts at hypothesis testing are made [below, from which...we
cannot draw strong, unambiguous empirical conclusions...[but]        we

be ii ev e   that the evidence.. .clearly ju St   if ies rejecting the
hypoth esis of sustained repr essed infla ti      on   in the market for
consum ption goods and service s since the mid- 1950s [to the mid—

1970s I   in our four CPEs (P—W 1980, pp. 1 49, 1 55—6)." Note that
we hay e not stated any such v jew for the pen od since the mid—

1970s     especially in respect of the USS R (t o which we cannot
ext end   our econometric analy sis because of d ata problems); and
other work suggests rising pressure of dem and on the Soviet

consumption goods market in recent years (see below).


Contrast our actual conclusions with Wiles and Rostowski's
mt erpretat ion     of them 'Yin Portes's view there is no demand
inf lationary       pressure in STEs because of successful
pla nning...(p.     61)." Tartarin (1982):         P—W "emphatically
con dude [that there was] general excess supply (p. 25)."
Kor nai (1982):           "I shall quote one of their important
fin dings...'On   th is   basis excess supply was the dominant regime
in   three    out of the four countries.' In my opinion [emphasis

added], the conclusion is absurd. All four countries should be
considered chronic—shortage economies...(p.35)" Such distortion
of serious empirical work, with the (widely quoted) dismissal of
it as "absurd", is not worthy of reply as such.




                                    25
3.2. Validity of Nacroeconometrics for CPEs


Let us now turn to substance. Kornai rejects from the outset all
macroeconometrics for CPE markets in which he believes shortages
to be chronic and widespread, f or in these circums tances no
econometric technique can work:          "the Inference       from y   [actual
trade} to d [initial demand] becos es Inadmissible (1980, p. 98)'"
it is a "vain effort" (1982, p. 98). Consider the             cont rap ositive
of this proposition    however: If we and others do obtain results
which satisfy a pri on restrictio ns drawn from the ory as             well   as

conventional econom etric criteria       then shortages must be either
not widespread or not chronic.        Yet this does       5   eem to be the
case.     The large CPE macroeconomet nc           models of Welfe,
Szakolczai, Sujan, Woifling and others are well-kn own and not
easily dismissible.     For care ful estimation and hypothe sis          test—
ing on a smaller sc ale which seems to yield coherent r esults on

consumption goods markets, we cite (only by way of                  example)
Charemza and Cronic ki (1983), Hulyak (1982), Klaus and Rudlovcek

(1982),   Podkaminer   (1982), an d Timmer (1982); this wo rk          covers
Hungary, Poland and    Czechoslovakia.



How do we and others obtain well—behaved functions, significant

and plausible parameter estimates, reasonable out—of—sample
performance, etc.? Are all these results merely statistical
artifacts? If one does admit they might have some validity,
however, even some of the most cherished "stylized facts" must be

queried. Podkaminer (1982), for example, using a model totally



                                 26
different from our own.. gets results which suggest aggregate
excess supply of consumption goods in Poland up to the early
1970s (revised estimates in Podkaminer 1984, still allow
equality of aggregate demand and supply in the late 1960s). The
conclusion may look rather less "absurd" if reached by various
routes with different data Sets. Klaus and Rudlovcek (1982)
summarize their results unambiguously: "We strongly believe that
global equilibrium at the consumption goods market was the
prevalent characteristic of the Czechoslovak economy in the last
quarter of the century." Others are simply not willing to accept
what Kornai regards as obvious: "...we do not find useful (and
even realistic) to accept the assumption of permanent (or
'normal')     shortage on these markets [consumption goods and
labour]...(Dlouhy, 1984)."


3.3.                lation and Forced Savings

We now take a few specific topics before passing to the contribu—
t Ions    of disequil ibrium macroeconometrics on the one h and and
indica tors      of sho rtage on the other. First, hidden inf lat ion.
Port es   (1977a)   cit es   estimates by others of slightly over 1% p.a.
for    th e USSR over   two decades. More recent work by Alton      et al.

(1981) shows thei r      "alternative" consumer price index g rowing
faster    than   the "o fflcial   implicit consumer price index" by 2.4%

p.a. f or   Bulgaria         1.6% p.a. for Czechoslovakia, 1.3%   p.a.   for
the GDR, 1.1% p.a. for Hungary, and 1.6% p.a. for Poland.            These



                                       27
are unlikely to be underesti mates.                 They should be contrasted
with unsupported remarks like that in Nove (1979) putting hidden
inflation in Poland in 1975 at 8% (whic h, with official estimates
of nominal incomes and the CPI              would suggest that real incomes
actually fell in that year!).



Savings   beh avi our     of CPE households has been investigated
extensiv ely    with c onventional me thods.                    Some    authors (e.g.,
Wi ni e ck 1   1985)      continue the             confus ions          arising from
theoret ically unjustifia ble me asu res like the r atlo                    of savings
(flow) to ch ange in i ncome                  0r    w ealt h      to     retail    sales
(consumption    f low),   long   after Port es      (   1974,    1977 a) and Asselain
(1981) have c learly dem ons t        ra   ted th a t     the y gi ye meaningless
answers. Thus Asselain shows          impeccabl y        tha    tac onstant       savings
rate implies a long period of                consi derab le         i ncrease     in the
wealth— incom e ratio, if in          itlal        st o cks are         low; and that
comparing two     economies with the same savi ng 5 rate                   and rate of
growth of real    income but dif fere nt inflation               ra tes, the economy
which is infl ating faster w ill            exhibit a lowe r            wealth—income
ratio. In the view of Wiles and             Rostowski, "He             [Portes]   rightly
ridicules   the   Soviet—type habit          of    quoting       savings! (ch ange in
income) as if     it were the Keynes ian           marginal       propensity. ..Port es
may even be on    secure grou nd in 5 et       t ing     up hi s judgment     against
Soviet—type bankers,       who are alarmed by the               ratio of the stock of
liquid savings to the flow of retail trade (1979,                       pp. 64—65).'




                                       28
Serious work on household assets and savings in CPEs seems
remarkably unanimous in not showing much e vidence of forced
saving.      Pickersg ill (1976) is clea r on this for the USSR, but
her lat er time—ser ies results (1980) in dicate t hat there may have

been a substantial up ward shi ft in t he HPS in the late 1960s and

early 1970s which could show some fo rced sa ving. Her cross—
sectio n work with Ofer (1980) "does no t      suppor t the   proposition
that S oviet househ olds save in ordina te ly large amounts of their

income for lack of consumer go ods an d services to purchase," and

she ex presses simi lar views in her later sur vey of both time
sen es      and budget study evidence (1983).            Asselain's (1981)
care ful    theoretical and empirical analysis lea ds him to conclude

for sev eral CPEs t hat "The full set of           cha racteristics of a

typ i cal    situation   of forced saving. ..are thus never found
tog ether     and one s hould not be surprise d   tha t econometric     work

see ks fi rst to test    the hypothesis of a     savin gs—income   relation
of    the 5 ame type as in Western market e conomi es (p. 43)." Klaus

and    Rudl ovcek (1982 ) get good results       for a   standard savings
fun ct ion for Czechos lovakia, 1965—81 the f o rec asting perf ormance

was good      and the s aving ratio was not      high by international
com paris on and di d not seem to depend         on su pply—side events.
Pee bles (1981), w ho constructs estima          tes 0 f   household cash
hol ding s in the US SR, finds an overall        trend of decline in    the

cur renc y to deposi t   ratio   (as elsewhere   in Eas tern Europe),   and

tha t "S oviet liqui dity is not excessive (p. 7 5)" by comparison

wit h ot her CPE 5.   There is no agreement among authors, however,

on whether we should expect savings rates in CPEs to be lower,



                                     29
higher, or about the same as in their market—economy
counterparts.   It should be stressed that none of these studies
pretends to test for excess demand, nor should they be so
interpreted. They and the work cited in Sec. 3.2 are simply
consistent with taking equilibrium as a working hypothesis.


Kornai (1980) asserts that the "Clower—Barro—crossman train of
thought" provides "theoretical background for the argument" that
the "time path of savings in the household sector [can indicate]
whether the consumer goods market on the macro—level is in a
state of aggregate excess demand or aggregate excess supply (pp.

477—8)." This is puzzling. He is presumably referring to our
work, yet the precise object of our analysis in Portes and Winter
(1978, 1980) is to use the quantity—rationing macro model to show
why and how in disequilibrium, this sort of argument may give
quite the wrong answer. Even more inexplicable, therefore, is
his own use of departures from trend of household savings as one
of his indicators of shortage (1982, p. 139) — an aggregate
indicator, at that!



3.4. Disequilibrturn Econometrics



Now we turn to disequilibrium econometrics (see Quandt, 1982, for
a survey).   Part of the maintained hypothesis is that one
observes only the quantity transacted, and that supply and demand
are latent variables to be estimated, along with the functions
which generate them. Kornai, too, believes that it is impossible



                                30
to separate consumption supply and demand in the observed data,
that they are latent variables, and that they combin e to det e               r—

mine actual consum ption. Yet he         co nc ludes   that there is only one

"consumption func tion", with b oth d emand—side and supply—s ide
variables on the right—hand si de.            It is diff icul t to just ify
such a quasi—reduc ed form if one real ly admits t he p Os sibility of

disequilibrium.        We believe it     is   pref erable    t   o es timate the

latent variables d irectly —     they    are in principle meas ureable, as

Kornai must agree, since he regards shortage as a latent variable
and seeks himself to measure it.



Proper hypothesis testing in this area requires a clear statement
of the maintained hypothesis, the null, and the alternative. The
maintained hypothesis must explicitly admit an alternative to
excess demand —     otherwise,   it is logically impossible to test for
its presence. This fundamental point leads us to reject Howard's
(1976) results and to find unhelpful the model of Brada (1982),
which in this respect begs the basic question. Our own main-
tained hypothesis does allow excess demand, equilibrium (on a set
of measure zero), and excess supply in the consumption goods
market.



In specify ing our consumption demand equation, however, we have
chosen a     K e   ynesian" form which implicitly assumes that
households are constrained in the labo ur market. This was not an

empirical jud gment.       We chose the H outhakke r—Taylor function
because we   ne e ded a specification whic h was easy to estimate, did




                                    31
not exhaust too many degrees of freedom or require great atten—
tion to the error structure, and gave a few clear prior restric-
tions on the coefficients, violation of which would tell us that

something was seriously wrong. This standard function permitted
ready international comparisons and avoided difficult data prob-
lems. If one were to reject it on the grounds that the estimates
will be biased unless there actually was excess supply of labour,
one would have also to reject almost all consumption function
estimates on Western economies which might ever have experienced

"full emp 1 oyment".


As remarked above, our est ima tes have not been challenged in
detail.   We ourselves reco gni ze important extensions to the
empirical model which sho uld be a high priority for futu re
research; to incorporate f ore ign trade and inventories.       To

dispel any misconceptions, we have never used inventory da ta
(which raise great problems     e.g., what is "saleable"?) in o ur
econometric work.


Ours are not the only versions of disequilibrium mod els for the

consumption good s markets of CPEs. Charemza and Qu andt (1982)
suggest several alternatives; and Charemza and Gron icki (1983)
implement a "qua si—disequilibrium" model for Poland.   Within the
models we use, however, we have performed a wide variety of
tests, and both our theoretical framework and our r esults seem

quite robust.    For example, it is possible to test the "Kornai
hypothesis" of continuous excess demand against our more general




                               32
alternative.      Our results clearly reject the restriction
(Portes, Quandt and Yeo, 1985). Kornai would doubtless reject
the test, because he believes that the aggregation problem
invalidates any discrete—switching, mm—condition model. As
suggested above, taken too seriously, the aggregation problem
invalidates all empirical macroeconomics. On his hypothesis,
however, we could never obtain information about the latent
consumption demand variable. But it is then inexplicable how we
(and others) continue to obtain well—identified, well—behaved
demand funct ions, if they do not exist or are in principle
unobservable.



John Burkett (1985) has made Kornai operational by ingeniously
developing methods fo r dealing with   the "discouraged consumer
effect" and with the coexistence     of shortage and slack. His
specification directly estimates po tential   demand (allowing for
the discouraged consumer effect)      total shortage, and total
slack, all sepa rately, allowing     for spillovers like forced
subs titution.    His results, co vering five East European
countries, are e ntirely consistent with those we obtained using
the category of aggregate excess demand. He finds that total
slack exceeds sh ortage throughout 1957—78 in the GDR and Hungary
and for 1956—80 (except 1972) in P oland, while shortage exceeds
slack for 13 of   the   24 years 195 5—78 in Czechoslovakia. His
direct estimates of shortage, net of slack, correlate remarkably

well with our estimates of agg regate excess demand.          Even

allowing for potential (but discouraged) demand     does not change


                                33
 this picture.



 Thus Burkett concludes "One cannot reject the discrete
                                                        switching
 hypothesis.          Shortages exist but except i n the case of
 Czechos lovaki a are usually overshadowed by sl ack.                  Potential
 consumer dema nd, purged of the discouraged consum              er   effect, is
 subs tant ially    greater than actual demand but seldon as great as
supply. Thus application of techniques sugges ted by Kornai's
theory ....        c an   yield conclusions consistent Wi th Portes's
evidence of p revalent aggregate excess supply ".                 Nuti    (1985)
claims that "t he spurious precision of advanced econometrics
almost    tautolo gically defines imbalance out of existence." This

cavalier ap proach to rigorous empiric al testing is
uns ubs tantiated by any dire ct criticism of the aggr
                                                       egate discrete
swi tching mode 1,         and it    is   a fortiori rejected by Burkett's
res ults from a no del which in cludes mba lances at
                                                     the micro as
wel 1 as the mac ro level.


Finally, we turn to Ko rnai 's indicators of shortage.                He says we
need many of them, at a di saggregated level, in orde rp
                                                         roperly
and comprehensively to char acterize shortage. Yet he exp ects the
individual indicat ors to be highly correlated (19 82,                   p. 15).
Moreover, he finds his "ma cro" (synthetic) index of shor tage for
Hungary close to o ur own series of estimated exc ess demands
(Portes and Winter, 198 0).          The simple correlation      is     in fact
r =   .604, and the tu mi ng        p oints are quite similar.     He regards
ours as "invalid", because they are derived from a discrete—



                                          34
switching macro model. We had argued previously however, on
"smoothing by aggregation" grounds, that one could expect a well—
defined correspondence of just this kind (P—W   1980), so   we were
not surprised. Burkett's (1985) results are further, perhaps
definitive confirmation that our approach using aggregate excess
demand produces results which, so far from being "invalid" or
"absurd",   are in fact consistent with and complementary to more
disaggregated methods.

We finish on thi s reassuring point of agreement. The theoretical
and empirical pr oblems of measuring macroeconomic disequilibrium
in CPEs may now be somewhat clearer, the areas of agreement and
disagreement bet ter defined. The main practical question, with
policy implicati ons, is still to distinguish between the effects
of excess aggre gate demand and distorted relative prices (or
other problems 1 ike the inadequacies of the distributive network
— see Pryor, 197 7, Skurski, 1972, and Turcan, 1977). We may be
getting closer.

4. Conclusion


The line of research surveyed here was originally motivated by
scepticism towards the conventional wisdom that the household
sector of CPEs has been subject to sustained repressed inflation
since central planning began. This conventional wisdom has since
been elaborated and defended by Kornai indeed elevated with
considerable flourish into a general characterisation of CPEs as



                                35
          economies". There is much which is stimulating in this
   ho r t a g e


 analysis, which has gai ned currency from the
                                                     worsening
 macroecon omic disequilibr ia in some CPEs (especially
                                                        Poland)
 since the early 1970s.           But   it distorts the facts over the whole
 period si nce        the early 195 Os    and thereby reinforces confused.
 incorrect        theorizing,   maccu rate forecasts and unjustified
                                                                     policy
 conclusio ns. As with most conventional wisdom, the underlying
 truths are belied by exagger ation and become immune to
                                                         challenge
 from the data.    This is buttressed by the evident political
 appeal in such a critique of central
                                      planning.


These are not just academic disputes. It is important to
                                                         get the
macroeconomi cs of thes e countries right.
                                                  Macroeconomic
developments h eavily cond itioned the evolution of the Hungarian
microeconomic          reforms.      Proper unde rstanding of internal and
external balance and the m acroeconomic
                                        bases of trade and foreign
borrowing was essential in foresee ing and interpreting CPE
external debt problems and the Polish
                                      crisis (Portes, 1977b and
Marer, 1985)   Those w ho took th e conventional view of
consumption as a "buff er" would have misunderstood CPE
macroeconomic adjustment of the earl y l980s. The proposition
that investm ent            cycles    are the primary cause of macro
disequilibria         in   the househ old sector would have been equally
misleading in interpreting the past several years.                  And as
Stupnicki (1985 ) concludes in his
                                   Kornai—portes comparison, "only
Portes presents clues how to improve the situation".




                                        36
I have set out the theoretical innovations in Fortes (1981.
1983). There are, however, equally significant practical lessons
to be learned from eschewing the simple certainties of the
"shortage  economy" in favour of a more complex, more nuanced and
better balanced view of the realities of CPE macroeconomics.




                               37
                          REFERENCES

Asselain, J. C., 1981, Mythe ou realit de l'pargne force dans
     les pays socialistes, in: M. Lavigne, ed., Travail et
     monnale en systeme socialiste (Paris, Economica).

Alton, T. et al., 1981, Official and alternative consumer price
     Indices in Eastern Europe, Research project on National
     Income in East Central Europe, OP—68.

Barro, R. and H. Grossman, 1971, A general disequilibrium model
     of income and employment, American Economic Review 61.
     62—83.

Barro, R. and H. Grossman, 1974, Suppressed inflation and the
     supply multiplier, Review of Economic Studies 41, 87—104.

Benassy, J. P., 1975, Neo—Keynesian disequilibrium theory in a
     monetary economy, Review of Economic Studies 42, 503—24.

Brada, J., 1982, Real and monetary approaches to foreign trade
     adjustment mechanisms in centrally planned economies
     European Economic Review 19, 229—244.
Burkett, J., 1985, Slack and shortage in socialist economies,
     mimeo, Brookings Institution.
Campbell, R., 1970, Macroeconomic models and central price—
     setting in the Soviet economy, in: Gehrels, F., et al.,
     Essays in economic analysis and policy (Bloomington, Indiana
     University Press), 253—270.
Charemza, W., and R. Quandt, 1982, Models and estimation of
     disequilibrium for centrally planned economies, Review of
     Economic Studies 49, 109—116.
Charemza, W. and M. Gronicki, 1983, Rational expectations wage
     illusion and consumption excess demand: an empirical
     investigation for Poland, Birkbeck College Discussion Paper
     in Economics no. 143.

Clower, R., 1965, The Keynesian counter—revolution a theoretical
     appraisal, in: Hahn, F.and F. Brechling eds., The theory
     of interest rates (London, Macmillan).
Deaton, A., and J. Muellbauer, 1980, Economics and consumer
     behaviour (Cambridge, C.U.P.).

Dlouhy, V., 1984, On the problem of macroeconomic equilibrium in
     centrally planned economies, paper presented to Econometric
     Society European Meetings, Madrid.
Duchene, G., 1984, Marchs parallles et d6squilibre dans les
     economies soclalistes, in: X. Richet, ed., Crises    l'Est


                                1
     (Lyon, Presses Universitaires de Lyon).

Farrell, J., 1975, Bank control of the wage fund in Poland: 1950—
     70, Soviet Studies 27, 265—287.

Galbraith, J. K., 1952, A theory of price control (Cambridge,
     Mass. Harvard University Press).
Gardner, R., and J. Strauss, 1981, Repressed inflation in the
     Soviet Union, European Economic Review 16, 387—404.

Goniulka, S., 1985, Kornai's soft budget constraint and the
     shortage phenomenon: a criticism and restatement, Economics
     of Planning 19, 1—11.
Gourieroux, C., and G. Laroque, 1985, The aggregation of
     commodities in quantity rationing models, International
     Economic Review 26, 681—700.

Grandmont, J. N., and C. Laroque, 1976, On temporary Keynesian
     equilibria, Review of Economic Studies 43, 53—67.

Hansen, B., 1951, A study in the theory of inflation (London,
     Allen and Unwin).

Hare, P., 1982, Review article: Economics of shortage and non—
     price control, Journal of Comparative Economics 6, 406—425.
                    V
Henin, P.—Y., 1984, Equilibres avec rationnement d'une conomie a
     planification centralise et secteur parallle: une analyse
     rnacroconomique. Document no. 90, UER Analyse et Politique
     Economique, Universit de Paris I.

Holzman, F., 1956, Financing Soviet development, in: Capital
     formation and economic growth (Princeton: Princeton
     University Press for the National Bureau of Economic
     Research).

Holzman, F., 1960, Soviet inflationary pressures, 1928—1957,
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 74, 167—188.

Holzman, F., 1968, Soviet central planning and its impact on
     foreign trade adjustment mechanisms, in: Brown, A. and
     E. Neuberger, eds., International trade and central
     planning (Berkeley: University of California Press).
Howard, D., 1976, The disequilibrium model in a controlled
     economy: an empirical test of the Barro—Grossman model,
     American Economic Review 66, 871—879.

Hulyak, K., 1982, Disequilibrium models for consumption goods in
     Hungary, paper presented to International Conference of
     Applied Econometrics, Budapest.



                                2
Hulyak, K., 1983, An experimental disequilibrium macromodel for
     Hungary, mimeo.
Katz, B., 1979, The disequilibrium model in a controlled economy:
     comment, American Economic Review 69, 721—25.

Klaus, V.. and V. Rudlovcek, 1982, Savings function as an inverse
     problem of disequilibrium consumption modelling: a case study
     of Czechoslovakia, paper presented to International
     Conference of Applied Econometrics, Budapest.
Kooiman, P., 1984, Smoothing the aggregate fix—price model and
     the use of business survey data, Economic Journal 94, 899—
     913.

Kornai, J., 1980, Economics of shortage (Amsterdam, North—
     Holland).

Kornai, J., 1982, Growth, shortage and efficiency (Oxford,
     Blackwell).

Malinvaud, E., 1977, The theory of unemployment reconsidered
     (Oxford, Blackwell).

Malinvaud, E., 1981, Econometric implications of disequilibrium
     theory, INSEE Working Paper no. 8114.
Marer, P.. 1985, Les relations commerciales Est—Ouest, Revue
     d'etudes comparatives Est—Ouest 16, no. 3, 5—16.

Martin, C., 1986, Disequilibrium models with dispersed trading,
     Ph.D thesis, Birkbeck College, University of London.

Muellbauer, J., 1978, Macro theory vs. macroeconometrics the
     treatment of disequilibrium in macroeconomic models,
     Birkbeck College Discussion Paper in Economics no. 59.

Muellbauer, J., and R. Portes, 1978, Macroeconomic models with
     quantity rationing, Economic Journal 88, 788—821.
Neary, J. P., and J. Stiglitz, 1983, Towards a reconstruction of
     Keynesian economics: expectations and constrained
     equilibria, Quarterly Journal of Economics 98, 199—228.

Nove, A., 1979, Inflation in communist countries, in: Political
     economy and Soviet socialism (London, Allen and Unwin), 178—
     191.

Nissanke, M. K., 1979, The disequilibrium model in a controlled
     economy: comment, American Economic Review 69, 726—32.

Nuti, D.M., 1985, Hidden and repressed inflation in Soviet—type
     economies: definitions, measurement and stabilization, mimeo.

Ofer, G., and J. Pickersgill, 1980, Soviet household saving: a

                               3
     cross—section study of Soviet emigrant families Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 94, 121—44.

Peebles. 0. 1981, Money incomes and expenditures of the
     population of the Soviet Union: a East European comparisonS
     Hong Kong Economic Papers 14, 53—78.
Pickersgill, J., 1976, Soviet household saving behaviour, Review
     of Economics and Statistics 18, 139—47.

Pickersgill, J., 1980a, Repressed inflation and price controls in
     the Soviet household sector, Kennan Institute conference
     paper.
Pickersgill, J., 1980b, Recent evidence on Soviet household saving
     behaviour, Review of Economics and Statistics 62, 628—33.

Pickersgill, J., 1983, Household saving in the USSR, in:
     Modigliani, F. and R. Hemming, eds., The determinants   of
     national saving and wealth (London, Macmillan).
Podkaminer, L., 1982, Estimates of the disequilibria in Poland's
     consumer markets 1965—1978, Review of Economics and
     Statistics 64, 423—431.

Podkaminer, L. 1984, The political economy of permanent
     disequilibrium in Poland's consumer markets, mimeo.

Portes, R., 1974, Macroeconomic equilibrium under central
     planning, Institute for International Economic Studies,
     University of Stockholm, Seminar Paper no. 40.
Portes, R., 1977a, The control of inflation: lessons from East
     European experience, Economica 44, 109—130.
Portes, R., 1977b, East Europe's debt to the West, Foreign
     Affairs 55, 751—782.

Portes, R., 1979, Internal and external balance in a centrally
     planned economy, Journal of Comparative Economics 3, 325—
     345.

Portes, R., 1980, Effects of the world economic crisis on the
     East European economies, The World Economy 3, 13—52.

Portes, R., 1981, Macroeconomic equilibrium and disequilibrium in
     centrally planned economies, Economic Inquiry 19, 559—78.
Portes, R., 1983, Central planning and monetarism: fellow
     travellers? in Desai, P. ed., Marxism, central planning and
     the Soviet economy (Cambridge, Mass., MIT Press), 149—65.

Portes, R., and D. Winter, 1977, The supply of consumption goods
     in centrally planned economies Journal of Comparative
     Economics 1, 351—365.

                                4
 Portes, R., and D. Winter, 1978, The demand for money and for
      consumption goods in centrally planned economies, Review of
      Economics and Statistics 60, 8—18.

Fortes, R. and P. Winter, 1980, Disequilibrium estimates for
     consumption goods markets in centrally planned economies,
     Review of Economic Studies 47, 137—159.

Fortes, R., R. Quandt, D. Winter, S. Yeo, 1983, Macroeconomic
     planning and disequilibrium: estimates for Poland, 1955—
     1980, NBER Working Paper no. 1182.

Fortes, R., R. Quandt, D. Winter, S. Yeo, 1984a, Planning the
     consumption goods market: preliminary disequilibrium
     estimates for Poland 1955—80, in: Nalgrange, P., and P.—A,
     Muet, eds., Contemporary macroeconomic modelling (Oxford,
     Blackwell), 254—271.

Fortes, R., R. Quandt, D. Winter, S. Yeo, 1984b, Estimating the
     size of plan errors, Princeton University Financial Research
     Center, Research memo no. 48, appeared (in French) in
     Annales de l'INSEE 55/56, 245—255.

Portes, R., R. Quandt, and S. Yeo, 1985, Testing the "all—excess—
     demand" hypothesis, mimeo.

Pryor, F.) 1977, Some costs and benefits of markets: an empirical
     study, Quarterly Journal of Economics 91, 81—102.
Quandt, R., 1978, Tests of the equilibrium vs. disequilibrium
     hypotheses, International Economic Review 19, 435—452.
Quandt, R., 1982, Econometric disequilibrium models, Econometric
     Reviews 1, 1—63.

Skurski, R., 1972, The buyers' market and Soviet consumer goods
     distribution, Slavic Review 31, 817—830.

Stupnicki, K., 1985, The disequilibrium theory: R. Fortes v. J.
     Kornai, a critical comparison, Working Paper 2, Inst itut
     Cybernetyki i Zarzadania, Szkola Glowna Planowania
     Statystyki, Warsaw.

Tartarin, R., 1982, La thorie du ds6quilibre applique aux
     gconomies du type socialiste, mimeo.
Timmer, J., 1982, Disequilibrium and buffer stocks, Erasmus
     University.

Turcan, J., 1977, Some observations on retail distribution in
     Poland, Soviet Studies 29, 128—136.

Weinrich, 0., 1984, On the size of disequilibrium in an
     equilibrium with quantity rationing, CORE Discussion Paper

                                5
     No. 8418.

Wiles, P., 1982, Inflation in USSR 1982, paper presented to
     NASEES Conference.

Wiles, P., and J. Rostowski, 1979, Soviet type inflation: an open
     debate, Est—Ouest 10:2/3, 59—75.

Winiecki, J., 1985, Portes ante portas. a critique of the
     revisionist interpretation of inflation under central
     planning, Comparative Economic Studies 27, 25—52.
Wolf, T., 1985, Economic stabilization in planned economies,
     International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, 32, 78—131.




                                6
