                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                          GOLD RETURNS

                                           Robert J. Barro
                                           Sanjay P. Misra

                                        Working Paper 18759
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18759


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2013




We have benefited from research assistance by Tao Jin and from comments by John Campbell, Xavier
Gabaix, Ian Martin, Jose Ursúa, and Adrien Verdelhan. We appreciate help with data from Chen Di,
Kai Guo, Mark Harrison, Elena Osokina, and Dwight Perkins. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Robert J. Barro and Sanjay P. Misra. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Gold Returns
Robert J. Barro and Sanjay P. Misra
NBER Working Paper No. 18759
February 2013
JEL No. E44,G12,N20

                                              ABSTRACT

From 1836 to 2011, the average real rate of price change for gold in the United States is 1.1% per
year and the standard deviation is 13.1%, implying a one-standard-deviation confidence band for the
mean of (0.1%, 2.1%). The covariances of gold’s real rate of price change with consumption and GDP
growth rates are small and statistically insignificantly different from zero. These negligible covariances
suggest that gold’s expected real rate of return—which includes an unobserved dividend yield—would
be close to the risk-free rate, estimated to be around 1%. We study these properties within an asset-pricing
model in which ordinary consumption and gold services are imperfect substitutes for the representative
household. Disaster and other shocks impinge directly on consumption and GDP but not on stocks
of gold. With a high elasticity of substitution between gold services and ordinary consumption, the
model can generate a mean real rate of price change within the (0.1%, 2.1%) confidence band along
with a small risk premium for gold. In this scenario, the bulk of gold’s expected return corresponds
to the unobserved dividend yield (the implicit rental income from holding gold) and only a small part
comprises expected real price appreciation. Nevertheless, the uncertainty in gold returns is concentrated
in the price-change component. The model can explain the time-varying volatility of real gold prices
if preference shocks for gold services are small under the classical gold standard but large in other
periods particularly because of shifting monetary roles for gold.


Robert J. Barro
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 218
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
rbarro@harvard.edu

Sanjay P. Misra
The Greatest Good
sanjaypmisra@post.harvard.edu
       Gold has dominated monetary systems for centuries, and it plays a prominent role in

transactions among financial institutions even in modern systems that rely on fiat money.

Private holdings of gold are also important, facilitated in recent years by the availability of liquid

futures contracts on commodity exchanges. Gold is often viewed as a hedge against disaster

scenarios, although the risk premium associated with gold is not well understood.

       The present analysis begins by studying returns on gold in a Lucas-tree model that

incorporates rare disasters associated with ordinary consumption. The baseline model is a two-

tree version with some reasonable restrictions that deliver tractability: ordinary consumption and

gold services are imperfect substitutes in an effective consumption flow, the outlay on gold

services is negligible compared to that on ordinary consumption, and disaster and other shocks

apply directly to ordinary consumption but not to gold. In this setting, the expected rate of return

on gold ranges between the risk-free rate and the expected rate of return on consumption-tree

equity if the elasticity of substitution between ordinary consumption and gold services is

between infinity and one. Extensions to the model allow for a monetary role for gold and

introduce shocks to preferences for ordinary consumption versus gold services. These shocks

relate particularly to the shifting monetary role of gold, corresponding historically to movements

off or on the gold standard.

       A later section relates the model to empirical properties of real returns on gold and other

assets in the United States since 1836. From 1836 to 2011, the average real rate of price change

for gold is 1.1% per year, the standard deviation is 13.1%, and the covariance with consumption

and GDP growth rates is small in magnitude and statistically insignificantly different from zero.

       A problem is that the data reveal changes in real gold prices but not the dividend yields

that correspond to service flows on gold holdings. We use the model to gauge the consequences



                                                  2
of these omissions and find that the measured real rates of price change for gold provide

substantial underestimates of expected total real rates of return. Nevertheless, the data on real

rates of price change should provide good measures of the uncertainty in real gold returns,

including the covariances between these returns and consumption and GDP growth rates.

       The baseline model accords with the long-term data on real rates of change of gold prices

if the elasticity of substitution between ordinary consumption and gold services is high.

Explaining the changing volatility of real gold prices over sub-periods requires that shocks to

preferences for gold services be minor under a serious gold standard, notably 1880-1913, but

large in other periods, such as 1975-2011.


I. A Baseline Model of Returns on Gold with Rare Disasters

       In the baseline model, the underlying demand for gold reflects a service value

proportional to the stock of gold. This perspective matches up with gold used as jewelry and

crafts or for electronics and medicine. As a short-hand, we refer to this array of functions as

“jewelry.” Gold also provides monetary services; that is, a transactions and liquid store-of-value

benefit of the sort usually considered in analyses of the demand for money. This monetary role

of gold is central in the operation of the world gold standard.

       An important difference in the two approaches is that jewelry relates to the quantity of

gold in physical units, whereas monetary services relate to the quantity of gold expressed in units

of value in terms of other goods. That is, the relative price of gold and other goods enters into

the monetary service flow and, hence, into household utility.

       The initial model takes the view of gold as jewelry, and a later discussion considers

differences resulting from the allowance for monetary services. In the initial model, “gold” can

be viewed as any durable commodity that provides consumption services to households. In


                                                 3
contrast, as stressed by Goldstein and Kestenbaum (2010), the commodities (specifically, the

naturally occurring elements) that can readily provide monetary services are limited to a few

precious metals, with gold emerging as the most attractive. That is, gold’s prominent monetary

role is not an historical accident.

           The baseline model has the following key assumptions:


       •   Ordinary consumption and gold services are imperfect substitutes in the effective

           consumption flow for the representative consumer, with a constant elasticity of

           substitution, σ.

       •   The outlay on gold services is always negligible compared to that on ordinary

           consumption.

       •   Disaster and other shocks apply directly to ordinary consumption and GDP but not to

           gold. Specifically, even during wars and depressions, the quantity of gold never falls

           precipitously.


           We assume that the representative household’s utility depends on an effective
                           ∗
consumption flow,              , which relates to ordinary consumption, ct, and the flow of services from

the gold stock, gt, in a CES form:


           (1)                          ∗
                                            =[   ∙      + (1 −      )∙        ]       ,


where we assume σ>0 and 0<αt<1.1 The variable αt can be viewed as a preference shock for

ordinary consumption compared to gold services. Given this functional form, the rental price,

       > 0, for gold equals the ratio of the marginal utility of gold services to the marginal utility of

ordinary consumption and is given by
1
    The limit of equation (1) as σ approaches one is the Cobb-Douglas form,       ∙       (   )
                                                                                                  .

                                                           4
         (2)                                      =(        )∙( )     /
                                                                              .


Hence, gold is relatively highly valued when ct/gt is high and αt is low. This rental price

determines the dividend flow accruing to holders of gold. We assume initially that αt equals the

constant α, where 0<α<1. In this case,              in equation (2) is proportional to ct/gt raised to the

power 1/σ:2


         (3)                                      =(       )∙( )     /
                                                                          .


         The stochastic process for per capita consumption, ct, viewed as the fruit from a Lucas

tree, takes the same form as in Barro (2006, 2009):


         (4)                         log(ct+1) = log(ct) + h + ut+1 + vt+1,


where h≥0 is exogenous productivity growth and ut+1 is an i.i.d. normal shock with mean 0 and

variance       . The number of trees is fixed, there is no possibility of loss of ownership, and the

economy is closed.

         The term vt+1 in equation (4) is a disaster shock, governed by a constant Poisson arrival

probability p≥0 (expressed per unit of time) and a proportionate disaster size, b≥0, which is

subject to a time-invariant probability distribution. Specifically, the disaster shock vt+1 equals

log(1-b), where b>0 in a disaster state and b=0 in a non-disaster state. The realization of b>0 can

be thought of as a sharp loss in productivity or as sudden depreciation or loss of trees. The

expected growth rate, h*, of ct is given from equation (4) by



2
 This result is reminiscent of the treatment of leverage in Campbell (1986, p. 796) and Abel (1999, p. 15). In their
representations, dividends on stocks are proportional to ct raised to the power λ, where λ>1 represents leverage. In
the present model, the dividend on gold is proportional to ct to the power 1/σ, which is less than one in the cases that
we emphasize (where σ>1).

                                                           5
          (5)                     ℎ∗ = ℎ +        !∙           − " ∙ #$ .


          Let Pt be the price of an unlevered equity claim on a tree. The gross, one-period return

on tree equity is given by

                                                           () '
          (6)                              & =         '
                                                           )
                                                                        .


                                                                                          ∗
          We assume that utility is time-additive3 and depends on                             in the usual iso-elastic way

with the curvature parameter (coefficient of relative risk aversion) γ>0 and time-preference rate

ρ≥0. A key (and reasonable) assumption that simplifies the asset-pricing analysis is that the

preference parameter, α, and the per capita quantities of gold, gt, and consumption, ct, are always

such that the outlay on gold services,             , is negligible compared to ct. This condition implies
                                                                                              *
that the marginal utility of ct can be approximated by the usual                                  . In this case, the first-order

condition for choosing ct over time and holding assets as equity claims on trees can be

approximated using equation (6) as:

                                     *                          *               () '
          (7)                            ≈,   -
                                                  ∙# .         (    ∙       '
                                                                                       !/ .
                                                                                )



          The consumption flow, ct, is the dividend accruing to the owner of tree equity. Because

the shocks to log(ct) in equation (4) are i.i.d., the ratio of the consumption dividend to the equity

price, ct/Pt, will be approximately constant in equilibrium at some value denoted by d>0. (The

approximation arises because we are neglecting effects on the first-order condition from

changing ratios of ct to gt.) Equations (7) and (4) imply a condition for d:


    (8)    1/(1 + 0) ≈ ,1" .(1 − 2) ∙ ℎ − 3 +                  ! (1 − 2)               / ∙ [1 − " + " ∙ #(1 − $)          *]
                                                                                                                               .

3
 With i.i.d. shocks, the main results will hold with Epstein-Zin-Weil preferences, introduced by Epstein and Zin
(1989) and Weil (1990).

                                                               6
         Define re to be the expectation of the rate of return on equity, Rt -1. Using equations (5),

(6), and (8), this expectation (constant in this model) is given, as the period length becomes

negligible, by:


         (9)      4 5 ≈ 3 + 2ℎ∗ − ∙ 2 ∙ (2 − 1) ∙               − " ∙ [#(1 − $)      *
                                                                                         − 1 − (2 − 1) ∙ #$] .


         We use the first-order condition for choosing ct over time and holding assets as risk-free

claims to determine the (constant) risk-free rate, denoted rf:


         (10)               4 6 ≈ 3 + 2ℎ∗ − 2(2 + 1)              − " ∙ [#(1 − $)        *
                                                                                             − 1 − 2 ∙ #$] .


This result also holds as an approximation as the length of the period becomes small.

         The equity premium follows (as an approximation for short periods) from equations (9)

and (10):


         (11)               45 − 46 ≈ 2        + " ∙ [#(1 − $)       *
                                                                         − #(1 − $)       *
                                                                                              − #$] .


As in previous applications of this result (such as Barro [2006] and Barro and Ursúa [2008]), we

use calibrations where the disaster term involving p on the far right is the main contributor to the

equity premium. The term involving                 is negligible, as in Mehra and Prescott (1985).4

         Consider now the pricing of gold. A unit of gold yields a dividend flow equal to the

rental price,       > 0, in equation (3). We assume that gold does not depreciate in a physical

sense, and there are no costs of storage or possibilities of loss of ownership. In particular, gold is


4
 Barro (2009) shows that the formula for the equity premium in equation (11) remains valid in this i.i.d. case with
Epstein-Zin-Weil preferences, with γ representing the coefficient of relative risk aversion and θ (which does not
enter into equation [11]) representing the reciprocal of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution. The other results
require a substitution for ρ by an effective rate of time preference, ρ*, given by
                                          9
3∗ = 3 − (2 − 7) ∙ 8ℎ∗ − ! 2 −              ! ∙ [#(1 − $) * − 1 − (2 − 1) ∙ #$]: . If γ=θ, utility is time-additive,
                                       *
and ρ*=ρ.

                                                            7
not subject directly to the kinds of disturbances that beset the consumption trees—the normal

shock, ut, and the disaster shock, vt, in equation (4). Let ; be the price of gold. The gross, one-

period return on holding gold is given by

                                                        =        =
                                                    < ' () '
        (12)                                & =        )
                                                         =            .


        The first-order condition for choosing ct over time and holding assets as gold can be

approximated, using equation (12), as

                                                                          =           =
                                      *                      *        < ' () '
        (13)                              ≈,   -
                                                   ∙# >     (        ∙?    =              @A .
                                                                         )



The assumption, as before, is that the outlay on gold is negligible compared to that on ordinary
                                                                                                               * 5
consumption, so that the marginal utility of consumption can be approximated by the usual                       .

Recall that the rental price on gold is given by


        (3)                                        =(       )∙( )             /
                                                                                  .


        We assume, for now, that the per capita gold stock, gt, grows deterministically at the

constant rate hg, which could be positive due to gold discoveries or negative due to population

growth and depreciation or loss of gold. In particular, we do not consider disaster or other

shocks that directly affect the quantity of gold or the services provided by the gold. Unlike

ordinary consumption, it is hard to see how the quantity of gold outstanding could change greatly



5
 Martin (2013) also emphasizes cases in which the shares of the dividends from some assets in total consumption are
negligible. However, he assumes that the dividends from all assets are perfect substitutes in consumption,
corresponding to σ being infinite in our model. Then he allows the dividends provided from the various assets to be
subject to distinct shocks, whereas gold does not experience these kinds of shocks in our model. Cochrane,
Longstaff, and Santa Clara (2008) also have a two-tree model in which the consumption flows are perfect
substitutes, and the trees are subject to distinct shocks.

                                                            8
in a short period—even during a war or a depression. However, large changes in preferences for

gold versus other consumption services are possible, and we explore these kinds of shocks later.

        In a later section, we get a rough estimate of hg based on the long-run growth rate of the

per capita world stock of gold. The results, summarized in Figure 1, imply that this long-run

growth rate (from 1875 to 2011) is between 0.4% and 0.9% per year if we neglect any loss or

depreciation of the gold stock.

        As with tree equity, the dividend-price ratio for gold,     /; , denoted by χ, will be

constant in this i.i.d. model. The constancy of this ratio means, from equation (3), that the real

gold price, ; , moves along with ( )     /
                                             . Thus, although the dividend from gold is not directly

subject to disasters or other shocks, its price ultimately reflects the shocks that affect

consumption trees, with the sensitivity of gold prices to these shocks depending on the elasticity

of substitution, σ.

        Equations (3), (4), and (13) imply that the condition for determining χ is:


(14)   1/(1 + B) ≈ ,1" .      − 2! ℎ −       ! ℎ − 3 + ( − 2)        / ∙ .1 − " + " ∙ #(1 − $)(     *)
                                                                                                         /.


Note that χ does not depend on the preference parameter, α. A change in α would affect gold’s

dividend,     , and price, ; , in the same proportion and, thereby, not affect the dividend-price

ratio, χ. As α approaches one, gold has no intrinsic service value, and        approaches zero in

equation (3). Since χ does not depend on α, the price of gold, ; must also approach zero as α

approaches one. In other words, in this model, a positive valuation of gold depends on its

intrinsic usefulness—the equilibrium does not allow gold to have positive value based on a

process for its real price that is unlinked to the underlying service value.



                                                    9
        Define 4 to be the expectation of the rate of return on gold, & -1. Using equations (3),

(12), and (14), this expectation is given by:


                                                                        *!
 (15)    4 ≈ 3 + 2ℎ∗ −            ∙ .2 ∙ (2 + 1 − )/ − " ∙ [#(1 − $)         − #(1 − $) − 2 ∙ #$] .


Again, this result holds as an approximation when the period length is short. Note that rg

(constant in this model) does not depend on the preference parameter, α, or the growth rate of the

gold stock, hg. (These results depend on the assumption that outlays on gold are negligible

compared to outlays on ordinary consumption.)

        The expected rate of return on gold, rg from equation (15), can be compared with the

expected rate of return on equity, re from equation (9), or the risk-free rate, rf from equation (10).

When compared to the return on equity, the result is:


 (16)    45 − 4 ≈ 2      ∙        ! + " ∙ [1 − #$ − #(1 − $)    *
                                                                    − #(1 − $) + #(1 − $)(         *)
                                                                                                        ].


When compared to the risk-free rate, the result is:


                             *                                          *!
        (17)   4 − 46 ≈          !∙   + " ∙ [#(1 − $) − #(1 − $)             − 1 + #(1 − $) * ].


Equations (16) and (17) remain valid in this i.i.d. setting with a switch to Epstein-Zin-Weil

preferences, with γ representing the coefficient of relative risk aversion (see n. 4).

        The behavior of gold returns compared to the others depends on σ, the elasticity of

substitution between gold services and ordinary consumption in the effective consumption flow

in equation (1). When σ=1, returns on gold mimic the returns on tree equity, so that 4 5 − 4 = 0

in equation (16), and 4 − 4 6 in equation (17) equals the equity premium, 4 5 − 4 6 , in

equation (11). As σ approaches infinity, the rental price of gold,       in equation (3), becomes


                                                  10
unresponsive to ct/gt, and gold becomes risk-free. Therefore, 4 − 4 6 = 0 in equation (17), and

4 5 − 4 in equation (16) equals the equity premium, 4 5 − 4 6 , in equation (11). In other words,

depending on the value of σ in the range where σ≥1, the expected rate of return on gold ranges

between the expected rate of return on (unlevered) equity, re, and the risk-free rate, rf.6 To put it

another way, given a measure of the expected rate of return on gold, rg—and assuming that this

value lies between rf and re—there is a value of σ>1 that makes that observation consistent with

the model.

            In the baseline model—with the demand for gold derived from its role in effective
                       ∗
consumption,               , in the form of equation (1)—there is no σ>0 that generates an expected rate of

return on gold, rg, below the risk-free rate, rf. That is, in this model, gold never serves as enough

of a disaster hedge so that its risk premium would be negative. In the next section, we show that

a particular pattern of shocks to preferences, αt, may generate rg<rf. However, since the

empirically observed covariance between consumption growth and the growth rate of real gold

prices turns out to be negligible, it is unclear that one wants a model that generates rg<rf.


II. Shocks to Preferences

            In the baseline model, the gold price, ; , is the constant multiple 1/χ of the rental price or

dividend,          , given in equation (3). Therefore, ; fluctuates along with ( )       /
                                                                                             . This linkage

between real gold prices and consumption (expressed relative to the stock of gold) suggests that,

for reasonable values of σ, the model will not generate the high volatility of real gold prices that




6
    If σ<1, gold is riskier than tree equity, and rg exceeds re.

                                                                   11
shows up in some periods, as discussed later.7 To remedy this shortcoming, we introduce shocks

to the preference parameter, αt, which affects the gold dividend in accordance with equation (2):


         (2)                                       =(        )∙( )           /
                                                                                 .


In a more general model (such as that considered below), a natural interpretation of a shift to αt is

that it represents a change in the monetary role of gold. In earlier periods—at least up to 1975—

these shifts may reflect movements off or on aspects of the gold standard in the United States or

the rest of the world.

         Under some specifications of the process for αt, the dividend-price ratio for gold,                           /; ,

will still be a constant, χ. Under these circumstances, equation (2), (12), and (13) imply that χ

must satisfy:

                                               -     !∙C=            (               )/
         (18)               1/(1 + B) ≈ ,                   ∙ # 8.               '        '
                                                                                              /∙(   '
                                                                                                        )(   *)
                                                                                                                  :.
                                                                         (           )/



         In the baseline model, the term involving α on the right-hand side of equation (18) equals

one. More generally, if the covariance of this term with the consumption-growth term is zero

and the mean of the α term equals one (implying no systematic drift in [1-αt]/αt), then χ will be

constant. In this case, the formula for χ will still be given by equation (14), and the formula for

the expected rate of return, rg, on gold will still be given by equation (15). However, the shocks

to αt will generate fluctuations in the real gold price (matching in proportionate terms the

fluctuations in the gold dividend given in equation [2], so that χ remains fixed).8 Thus, this


7
  The baseline model also has problems replicating the volatility of dividend-price ratios for stocks. This difficulty
can be alleviated by allowing for shifts to the parameters that describe uncertainty and expected growth—see Gabaix
(2012), Bansal and Yaron (2004), and Barro and Ursúa (2012).
8
  For stocks, this kind of result would be unsatisfactory because observed dividend-price or earnings-price ratios for
stocks are volatile (which can possibly be explained by shocks to the model’s parameters that govern uncertainty
and expected growth). For gold, the dividend is not directly observed, and it is unclear whether the dividend-price
ratio is volatile.

                                                            12
extended model—which leaves intact the formula for rg—may explain part of the observed

volatility of real gold prices in some periods. Moreover, this perspective may explain the low

volatility in the sub-period 1880-1913—the high point of the gold standard (as discussed

below)—where the fluctuations in the preference parameter, αt, were likely small.

        The extension to allow shocks to αt also explains how gold’s expected return may fall

below the risk-free rate if the covariance pattern between the preference term and the

consumption-growth term is nonzero. In bad times, when ct+1/ct is low, the term involving

consumption on the right-hand side of equation (18) tends to be high (if γ>1/σ). If the preference

for gold tends to be high at these bad times—that is, if αt+1 tends to be low compared to αt—the

term involving α on the right-hand side of equation (18) tends also to be high. This positive

covariance tends to lower the dividend-price ratio, χ, thereby lowering the expected rate of return

on gold, rg.

        However, if shocks to αt reflect particularly movements off or on the gold standard, it is

unclear that the postulated covariance pattern would apply. Movements away from the gold

standard tend to associate with bad economic times, notably wars and depressions. If these

movements correspond to decreased demand for gold—high values of αt—then the opposite

covariance relation tends to emerge. Or, perhaps, it is satisfactory to assume that the relevant

covariance is small (as turns out to be true, as discussed later, for the observed covariance

between changes in real gold prices and consumption and GDP growth rates over the long run).

In this case, shocks to αt would help to explain volatility in real gold returns—perhaps

differentially across sub-periods—without having major implications for the expected real rate of

return on gold.




                                                 13
III. Shocks to the Stock of Gold

         We considered how shocks to preferences, αt, affect the rental price of gold,                  , given by


         (2)                                     =(        )∙( )     /
                                                                         .


We can allow similarly for effects of shocks to the quantity of gold (per capita), gt. An increase

in gt affects      and, thereby, real gold prices, in the direction opposite to that from a rise in the

demand for gold (a fall in αt).

         A new consideration is that increases in              , caused by movements in ct or αt, tend to

stimulate expanded efforts in gold mining, as discussed in Barro (1979).9 This supply response

tends to offset the effects on real gold prices already discussed for changes in ct and αt.


IV. Monetary Demand for Gold

         We now allow for a monetary demand for gold. The total gold stock, gt, is divided into a
                                                                                                               D
part used, as before, to provide jewelry-like services,             , and another for monetary services,           :

                                                           D
         (19)                                   =     +        .


In our representative-household model, gold held for monetary purposes includes amounts held

as coins, etc. by individuals. However, we assume that the analysis applies also to official

reserves held by central banks and governments.

         Agents can move gold costlessly between its two functions, “jewelry” and monetary gold.

For individuals, monetary gold has a service or liquidity value akin to that normally considered

in analyses of the demand for money. We assume that an analogous service flow—

corresponding to liquidity benefits, possibly related to maintenance of exchange rates—attaches

9
 That paper also summarizes other features of classical approaches to the workings of the gold standard, as
developed by Thornton (1802), Ricardo (1819), Mill (1848), Fisher (1911), and Friedman (1951).

                                                          14
to monetary gold held as reserves by central banks and governments. However, the service flow
                                           D
from monetary gold depends not on              , the physical quantity of gold held for monetary

purposes, but rather on the real value of that quantity in units of consumption. Thus, the

                                           D
monetary service flow depends on               multiplied by the real gold price, ; . As before, in the

cases that we emphasize, ; ends up as a constant, 1/χ, times the dividend flow from holding

gold,    . In these cases, we can think of the monetary service flow as depending on the real

                                                                                                          D
rental income foregone by holding the monetary part of the gold stock,                                        .

                                                                                      ∗
        We can expand the concept of effective consumption,                               , from equation (1) to

incorporate monetary services from gold. An expanded CES form is:


                              (   )
        (20)     ∗
                     =[   ∙           +E ∙(         )(       )
                                                                 + (1 −          −E )∙(             D (
                                                                                                      )           )
                                                                                                                      ]   ,


where 0<αt<1, 0< βt<1, and αt+βt<1. This form assumes symmetry in the way that the three

goods enter into effective consumption; that is, σ is the elasticity of substitution between any of

the goods. We assume, as in the main previous analysis, that the preference parameters are

constant, now at α and β.

        As an analogue to equation (3), the rental price for gold used as “jewelry” satisfies:

                                                         F
        (21)                                     = ( ) ∙ ( G)            /
                                                                             .


Another margin of substitution is between gold used as jewelry or for monetary purposes. The

associated first-order condition, which factors in the presence of                              in the last term on the right-

hand side of equation (20), is

                                                                     G
                                       (        F) ∙
        (22)                      1=            F
                                                                 ∙   H   ! ∙ ( G )(        )/
                                                                                                .


                                                             15
This equation implies that, at the margin, the representative household gets the same contribution

to utility from a unit of gold held as jewelry or for monetary purposes.10 The same type of

condition would hold for official gold reserves of central banks and governments.
                                                                                                                      D
           If σ=1, equation (22) implies that variations in ct or gt do not affect the ratio of                 to        .
                                                                    D
However, if σ>1, a rise in ct reduces the ratio of             to       , whereas a rise in gt raises this ratio.

(These results are opposite if σ<1.) If we take σ>1 as the relevant case, the main new result is

that the rental price of gold,        in equation (21), becomes more sensitive to variations in ct

                                                      D
because of the tendency for monetary gold,                , to move along with ct (so that, for given gt, gold

held as jewelry,       , moves opposite to ct).

           Another result is that the equilibrium is not Pareto optimal, ultimately because of the

                                                                                        ∗
presence of the relative price,        , in the effective consumption flow,                 , in equation (20) and,

thereby, in utility. The utility attained by the representative household would rise if the

government taxed gold used for monetary purposes (and remitted the proceeds back to the

representative household). For example, the government could require households to buy a

durable certificate that has to be attached to gold to make it legitimate as “money.” The price of

the certificate would be in units of consumption per quantity of gold held as money. By

imposing this form of tax, the government induces a decrease in the gold content of money,

thereby freeing up more of the existing gold stock to be used for direct consumption purposes (as

“jewelry”). The optimal tax is high enough so that the value of money approximates the value of

the attached certificates, with the value of the associated monetary gold approximating zero. In

other words, the solution is a form of fiat money.
10
  We can show that the equilibrium implied by equations (19), (21), and (22) exists and is unique. One feature of
                                                  D                               F
the results is that the real-money-balance term,    , ends up equaling ∙ (          ) and is, therefore, independent
                                                                        D
of gt and positive even if β=0. As β approaches 0,    approaches 0,         approaches gt, and     approaches
     !∙(    )   > 0.

                                                          16
       One issue about the equilibrium is that, at any finite tax rate, the government is motivated

subsequently to raise the tax rate to raise revenue by imposing capital losses on existing holders

of monetary gold. That is, the government has a familiar form of time-consistency problem

whenever the quantity of gold held as money is positive. Since people would understand these

temptations, they would be reluctant to hold fractional-gold money. That is, the only full

equilibria may be either 100% gold money (where the government is somehow committed not to

tax this use of gold) or 0% gold money, which amounts to paper money.

       Another point is that, even with all gold driven out of monetary purposes and toward

jewelry, the solution is still not Pareto optimal because of the usual issues of the “optimal

quantity of fiat money,” as explored by Friedman (1969). A full Pareto optimum requires the

government to pay a rate of return on money either through explicit interest or through deflation

of the “general price level.” This setting also involves the usual time-consistency issues related

to effects of inflation on the real value of the outstanding stock of paper money.

       For the purposes of studying the real rate of return on gold, the most important

contribution from allowing for monetary gold is likely to be the introduction of a new preference

shock in the form of the term 1-αt-βt (expressed relative to αt and βt) that reflects monetary

services from gold. The volatility of this term and its association with movements off or on the

gold standard—including changes in the demand for official gold reserves by central banks and

governments—seem more compelling than fluctuations in preferences for gold jewelry versus

other forms of consumption (as in the initial model).

       Official gold reserves are quantitatively important when compared to the total world

stock of gold. Figure 2 shows that the share of the world’s gold stock held as official reserves by




                                                 17
central banks and governments was less than 10% in 1877 but rose to a peak of 50-60% at the

end of World War II in 1945. Then this share fell to around 20% in 2011.11

        A more comprehensive measure of monetary gold would include amounts held privately

as minted coins and bullion. As an example, gold in monetary circulation was roughly equal to

official gold reserves in 1903 and about half of these reserves in 1913 (using data from U.S.

Treasury Department, Bureau of the Mint [1904, p. 324; 1915, p. 454]). At present, we lack a

long time series on a broad concept of monetary gold that includes amounts held privately as

coins and bullion.


V. An Illustrative Calibration

        We use a calibration of the baseline model based on an updated version of the analysis in

Barro and Ursúa (2008). Thus, we assume the following:


        rf = 0.011 per year,
        re = 0.059 per year,
        h = 0.025 per year,
        hg=0,
        σu = 0.02 per year,
        p = 0.037 per year,
        γ = 3.34,
        ρ=0.027 per year,
        Eb = 0.208,
        E(1-b)-γ = 3.62,
        E(1-b)1-γ = 2.16.


        The values associated with disaster sizes, b, derive from the empirically observed size

distribution of macroeconomic disasters (conditional on b≥0.095) in the long-term history across

countries based on declines in real per capita GDP (as discussed in Barro and Ursúa [2008] and



11
 At present, our measure of official gold reserves is incomplete because holdings by some countries—notably
China and the Soviet Union in some periods—are excluded in standard estimates. We are working to expand the
data to include broader coverage by countries and years.

                                                     18
Barro and Jin [2011]).12 The value for p comes from the empirically observed probability per

year of entering into these disaster states. Equation (5) and the assumed parameter values imply

h*=0.0175 per year.

         The value γ=3.34 was chosen to match the formula in equation (11) with the assumed

(unlevered) equity premium, re-rf=0.048 per year. Matching rf=0.011 (a value discussed later) in

equation (10) turns out to require ρ=0.027 per year.13 We assume this value for ρ, although

comparisons among the various rates of return do not depend on ρ (or h*). We consider below

the extension of this calibration exercise to returns on gold.

         As mentioned before, we estimate the long-term per capita growth rate of the gold stock,

hg, by using data on world gold production, as described in the notes to Figure 1. The data

before 1875, including an estimate of cumulative world production from 1493 to 1875, are from

Soetbeer (1887). The reported cumulative stock of world gold production (assuming no

depreciation or loss) from 1493 to 2011 is 155,922 metric tons.

         The calculations of stocks of gold require an initial stock in 1492, which is apparently

subject to controversy, as noted in GoldMoney Foundation (2012). If we take this stock to be

close to zero, we end up with the time series for world gold per capita since 1875 shown by the

lower graph in Figure 1. To get a plausible range of possibilities, we assume as an alternative

that the world gold stock in 1493 equals the reported cumulative production from 1493 to 1875

(9528 metric tons). In this case, we get the upper graph in Figure 1.14



12
   Results are similar using declines in real per capita consumer expenditure, but the sample is smaller because of
missing data on consumer expenditure.
13
   With Epstein-Zin-Weil preferences, the parameter ρ corresponds to an effective rate of time preference, ρ*, given
in n.4.
14
   The numbers on the per capita gold stock since 1875 were calculated using a time series for world population
based on McEvedy and Jones (1978) and World Development Indicators. The WDI data were used for annual
numbers since 1960, and the McEvedy-Jones data at 25-year intervals were used before 1960. The growth rate of
world population from 1875 to 2011 is 1.17% per year.

                                                         19
         The average growth rate of world gold per capita from 1875 to 2011 is 0.88% per year

based on the lower graph in Figure 1 and 0.42% per year based on the upper graph. Hence,

0.4%-0.9% per year provides a reasonable range for the long-term per capita growth rate if we

maintain the assumption that gold stocks had zero depreciation and loss. However, even with

small rates of depreciation and loss, the long-term per capita growth rate of the world gold stock

could be zero or slightly negative. We take hg≈0 in our main calculations.


VI. Missing Data on Dividends

        A problem in matching the model with data on asset returns is that dividend yields are

missing for some categories of assets, notably gold and silver.15 To assess this issue

conceptually, consider first how the returns on consumption-tree equity divide up between a

dividend yield and a price-appreciation term.16 The gross return on equity is given by

                                                        () '
        (5)                                 & =     '
                                                                 .
                                                        )



Using the previous definition of the dividend-price ratio as d=ct/Pt, the rate of return, Rt–1, on

equity can be expressed as:


        (23)                       & −1=0∙              '
                                                            !+(      '
                                                                         − 1).


The first term on the right-hand side is the dividend yield, and the second term is the rate of price

change (because Pt always moves in the same proportion as ct). As the length of the period

becomes negligible, the first term on the right-hand side of equation (23) approaches d, the

15
   An analogous problem might apply to residential real estate, although the dividend could be approximated by the
explicit or imputed rental income on housing. However, the appropriate net rental income would have to subtract
maintenance costs and depreciation.
16
   Note that consumption-tree equity is an unlevered claim on the flow of consumption dividends. Therefore, a
match with observed equity returns requires an adjustment for leverage. Also, in the model, dividends correspond to
earnings because there is no possibility of retention of earnings by “firms.”

                                                            20
dividend-price ratio. The uncertainty about this term is negligible for short periods;17 that is, all

of the uncertainty about the rate of return is concentrated into the second term, which reflects

price changes.

        We know the expectation of the rate of return in equation (23) from the formula for re in

equation (9). The expectation of the first term on the right-hand side—the expected dividend

yield (which approximates the realized yield)—comes from the formula for d in equation (8).

The expectation of the second term—the expected growth rate of consumption—equals h*, given

by equation (5).

        In the calibration of the model, we had re=0.059 per year and h*=0.0175 per year. Hence,

the dividend yield was 0.0415 per year (a result that can be verified from the formula for d in

equation [8]). To put it another way, 30% of the overall expected rate of return on tree equity

reflects expected real price appreciation and 70% represents the dividend yield. Hence, omitting

the dividend yield in the data would be a major problem with respect to matching the expected

rate of return in the model. On the other hand, as already noted, all of the uncertainty in the

model is concentrated into the price-appreciation term, with none appearing in the dividend yield

(if the length of the period is negligible). Therefore, data on asset returns that omit dividend

yields should be satisfactory for gauging standard deviations of returns and covariances of

returns with consumption and GDP growth rates or among assets.

        We can check this theoretical reasoning against U.S. data on stock returns, as discussed

more fully later. Using a total-return stock-market index and a consumer price index (provided

by Global Financial Data), the average real rate of return from 1836 to 2011 was 7.4% per year,




17
 The dividend can jump in the model when a disaster occurs. However, the probability, p, of a jump occurring
during a period becomes negligible as the length of the period approaches zero.

                                                       21
with a standard deviation of 16.1%.18 (Note that these data refer to levered returns, rather than

the unlevered ones considered in the model.) In contrast, if one uses only stock-price-index data,

thereby omitting dividends, the average rate of return was 2.5% with a standard deviation of

15.4%. Therefore, the omission of dividends has a major effect on the average rate of return—

with only 2.5 percentage points of the total of 7.4 percentage points or 34% captured by real

price appreciation.19 On the other hand, the standard deviation of the price-change series, 15.4%,

is close to that for total returns, 16.1%. Moreover, the covariance of the growth rate of per capita

consumption (personal consumer expenditure) with the total-return series is 0.00224 (correlation

of 0.36),20 compared to 0.00229 (correlation of 0.39) with the price-change series. Therefore, the

covariance and correlation computed from the price-change series are close to those calculated

from total returns. Hence, as suggested theoretically, the price-change series captures well the

uncertainty in stock returns—and this result holds even though the dividend-price ratio is not

constant in the data (unlike in the baseline model), and the data are analyzed annually, rather

than at a higher frequency.

         The baseline model’s implications for dividend yield and price appreciation are

analogous for gold. The gross return on gold, & , is defined in equation (12), the dividend on

gold,     , is given by equation (3), and the dividend-price ratio, χ, is determined from

equation (14). Analogous to equation (23), the rate of return on gold, & − 1, can be broken

down into a dividend yield and a price-appreciation term:




18
   These results are based on stock-return indexes and CPI’s averaged over each year, as discussed later and
presented in Table 1.
19
   This kind of effect from the omission of dividends on measured mean real stock returns is well known; see, for
example, Jorion and Goetzmann (1999, Table III).
20
   See Table 1. The covariance of the growth rate of real per capita GDP with the total-return series is 0.00289
(correlation of 0.39), compared to 0.00282 (correlation of 0.39) with the price-change series.

                                                         22
                                                   =              =
                                                <'            <'
        (24)                    & −1=B∙?          =     @+(     =     − 1).
                                                <             <



As before, the first term on the right-hand side approaches the dividend-price ratio, χ, as the

length of the period becomes negligible. The second term, which reflects real gold-price

appreciation (because the ratio of dividend to price is constant), is more complicated than for

consumption-tree equity because        depends on ( )         /
                                                                  .

        Analogous to equity returns, when the length of the period is negligible, all of the

uncertainty about gold returns is concentrated into the price-appreciation term (the second part of

the right-hand side of equation [24]), and none appears in the dividend-yield term (the first term

on the right-hand side). Therefore, the available data on real gold-price appreciation should

provide good information about the standard deviation of gold returns and about the covariances

of these returns with consumption and GDP growth rates or with other asset returns.

        We know the expectation of the rate of return on gold in equation (24) from the formula

for rg in equation (15). The expectation of the first term on the right-hand side—the dividend

yield—comes from the formula for χ in equation (14). The expectation of the second term—the

expected growth rate of gold dividends (and, hence, of real gold prices)—can be determined as:

               =
           <
 (25)   # ? '=     − 1@ =   ! ∙ Iℎ∗ − ℎ J −    !        ∙ ∙           ! + " ∙ [ ∙ #$ − 1 + #(1 − $) ].
            <



Thus, if σ=1, the expected rate of real price change is h*-hg, whereas if σ is infinite, this rate is

zero.

        In the data discussed in the next section, the mean growth rate of real gold prices from

1836 to 2011 is 1.1% per year (based on the U.S. dollar gold price and CPI). This observation

provides an estimate of the expression on the right-hand side of equation (25). If we use the


                                                       23
parameter values assumed before, then this expected rate of real price change equals 1.1% if

σ=1.5. Correspondingly, the expected overall rate of return on gold, rg, is 4.7% (from equation

[15]), and the dividend yield on gold is 3.6% (from equation [14]). That is, the unobserved

dividend yield is 77% of the expected total real rate of return on gold, and the expected rate of

real price change is 23% of the total.

       A problem with this calculation is that the standard deviation of the observed growth rate

of real gold prices is 13.1% per year, which corresponds to a standard deviation for the mean

over 176 years of 1.0% per year. Therefore, a one-standard-deviation confidence interval for the

mean growth rate of real gold prices is roughly (0.1%, 2.1%). This range corresponds to an

interval for the estimated σ from 16 to 0.84. Correspondingly, rg ranges from 1.6% to 6.4%, and

the share of the dividend yield in this expected total return varies from 94% to 67%. In other

words, this method by itself does not provide a precise way to pin down the unobserved dividend

yield on gold and, thereby, the expected total real rate of return on gold. In the next section, we

bring in additional information related to the observed covariance between changes in real gold

prices and consumption growth.


VII. Empirical Regularities on Gold and other Asset Returns

       A. Means and standard deviations

       Table 1 shows means and standard deviations of U.S. real returns (computed

arithmetically) from 1836 to 2011 on gold, silver, stocks, T-Bills, and 10-year U.S. government

bonds, along with inflation rates and growth rates of real per capita consumption and GDP. The

starting date was chosen based on the available estimates of U.S. consumption (personal

consumer expenditure). The real returns are all computed from a U.S. perspective, including the

deflation of U.S. dollar gold and silver prices by the U.S. CPI. An important extension of this


                                                 24
analysis to the global economy would allow for real gold and silver returns calculated from the

perspective of various countries.

        As already noted, a serious problem is that we observe only the parts of returns on gold

and silver based on rates of change of real gold and silver prices, computed from nominal gold

and silver prices and consumer price indexes. That is, we do not observe the dividend yields,

corresponding to implicit rental incomes, on these precious metals. The table covers four sub-

periods, 1836-1879, 1880-1913, 1914-1974, and 1975-2011, chosen to reflect changes in the

regime for gold or silver.

        Figure 3 shows the U.S. dollar gold price from 1790 to 1971, the year in which the

United States dropped its commitment to buy from and sell gold to foreign central banks at a

fixed dollar price.21 Figure 4 shows the real gold price since 1800 (U.S. dollar price divided by

the U.S. CPI, with the real gold price in 1800 set to 1.0).

        Over the full sample, 1836-2011, the mean real rates of price change on gold and silver

are similar—1.1% and 1.2% per year, respectively, in columns 2 and 3 of Table 1. The mean

real stock return (based on total-return indexes for the S&P 500 and analogous measures

computed by Global Financial Data up to 1970) for 1836-2011 is 7.4% (column 4). Since the

available proxies for returns on short-term U.S. government securities (“T-Bills”) up to 1919 are

unreliable,22 it seems advisable to focus on the mean real rate of return, 1.0% per year, that

applies for 1920-2011 (column 5). For longer-term U.S. government bonds (roughly 10-year

maturity), the mean real rate of return for 1836-2011 is 2.9% (column 6). (The mean is similar,

2.8%, for 1920-2011, where the T-Bill data are available.)


21
   The data on dollar gold prices are from Global Financial Data. Their main sources are Warren and Pearson (1937)
and Commodity Research Bureau, Commodity Yearbook.
22
   Global Financial Data attempts to proxy U.S. T-Bill returns before 1919 by using nominal yields on commercial
paper or coupons on U.S. government bonds.

                                                       25
        In terms of volatilities, the standard deviation of the T-Bill return is the smallest among

the assets considered—4.3% from 1920 to 2011. This standard deviation is much larger for

1920-1974, which includes the Great Depression and World War II, than for 1975-2011. The

pattern in the changing volatility of real T-Bill returns reflects particularly the changing volatility

of inflation, shown in column 7 of Table 1.

        The standard deviation of real stock returns from 1836 to 2011 is high, 16.1% per year.

The means and standard deviations of real stock returns are reasonably stable over the sub-

periods, and the standard deviation is well above those on T-Bills and government bonds.

        For 1836-2011, the standard deviations of the real rates of price change for gold and

silver, 13.1% and 17.9%, respectively, are similar to those on stocks.23 As noted before, these

measures should be reasonable proxies for standard deviations of total returns even though the

dividend yields are not observed. However, the standard deviations depend a good deal on the

sub-period considered. For example, the standard deviation of real rates of price change for gold

for 1880-1913 (the peak of the world gold standard; see Figure 3) is only 2.6% per year, whereas

that for 1975-2011 is 20.7%, even higher than that for stocks. (The standard deviations of real

rates of price change for silver are 6.9% for 1880-1913 and 29.4% for 1975-2011.)


        B. Covariances with consumption and GDP growth rates

        Table 2 shows sample covariances and correlations of the various real asset returns and

the inflation rates with growth rates of real per capita consumption (personal consumer

expenditure) and GDP. Also included are 95% confidence intervals for these statistics, based on

bootstrap methods.


23
  According to data provided on Bob Shiller’s website (www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/data.htm), the mean of the real
rate of price change for U.S. residential housing from 1891 to 2011 was 0.4% per year, with a standard deviation of
7.3%.

                                                        26
        For 1920-2011, the sample covariance of the real T-Bill return with the growth rate of

real per capita consumption (based on personal consumer expenditure) is small in magnitude,

-0.0003 (with a correlation of -0.21), and is statistically insignificantly different from zero

(column 5). In a standard model with iso-elastic utility and i.i.d. normal shocks, the return

premium for T-Bills over a hypothetical risk-free claim equals the covariance of the real T-Bill

return with consumption growth multiplied by the coefficient of relative risk aversion, γ. Hence,

if we gauge the covariance between real bill returns and consumption growth by the sample

covariance of -0.0003, then a γ around 424 implies that the mean real bill return of 1.0% (for

1920-2011) would be about one-tenth of a percentage point below the risk-free rate; that is, the

(average) risk-free rate would be around 1.1%.

        The real stock return is clearly procyclical, gauged by the covariances with consumption

or GDP growth rates shown over the various sub-periods in Table 2 (column 4). For 1836-2011,

the sample covariance with consumption growth is 0.0022 (correlation of 0.36) and is

statistically significantly different from zero. The sample correlations over the sub-periods range

from 0.22 for 1836-1879 to 0.47 for 1914-1974 and all except for 1836-1879 are statistically

significantly different from zero.

        One reason that the annual correlations of stock returns with consumption or GDP growth

rates are strongly positive is that the data were assembled to achieve reasonably comparable

timing in the variables. The growth rates of consumption or GDP involve first differences of

annual flows observed each year. The comparable stock returns (and other returns considered in

Tables 1 and 2) involve averages of nominal total returns and CPI values for each year, based on




24
  A γ around 3-4 emerges in the analysis of stock and bill returns in Barro and Ursúa (2008) and Barro and
Jin (2011).

                                                        27
underlying daily or monthly values.25 A more common procedure computes annual real stock

returns (or other asset returns) based on year-end values of total-return indexes and price levels.

This approach yields the average real stock return experienced during each year but does not line

up with the available measures of annual consumption and GDP growth rates (because of the

lack of data for much of the sample on the macroeconomic aggregates applying close to the end

of each year). If the year-end procedure had been applied to calculating real stock returns, the

correlation with consumption growth for 1836-2011 turns out to be 0.17, rather than 0.36, and

the corresponding covariance turns out to be 0.00125, rather than 0.00224.26 That is, the sample

covariance would have been lower by a factor of two. (For GDP growth rates, the sample

covariance would have been lower by a factor of three.)

         In the standard model with iso-elastic utility and i.i.d. normal shocks, the equity premium

(excess of the expected real stock return over the risk-free rate) equals the covariance of the real

stock return with consumption growth multiplied by the coefficient of relative risk aversion, γ.

Hence, if we gauge the covariance between stock returns and consumption growth by the sample

value of 0.0022, a γ of 4 means that the model explains about 0.009 of the observed equity

premium of 0.063 (based on a mean stock return of 0.074 and a risk-free rate of 0.011). To put it

another way, the model requires γ=28 to explain the equity premium of 0.063. In contrast, if we

use the sample covariance of 0.0012 computed from year-end-return values, the model with γ=4

would explain only 0.005 of the observed equity premium, and γ=50 would be required to


25
   The available price-level data before 1875 are annual, but these data are probably satisfactory because they
approximate annual averages for each year. The data for 1875-1912 are rough estimates of monthly values from
Snyder (1924). The data since 1913 are the standard monthly CPI numbers for urban consumers from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics.
26
   The main effect comes from the timing of the stock-return data, not the price-level data. If we compute real stock
returns from averages of daily or monthly total-return indexes for stocks along with year-end data for price levels
(while retaining the available annual data before 1875), the covariance of the real stock return with consumption
growth is 0.00208, with a correlation of 0.35, not much different from the values in Table 2, which are based on
averages of monthly data on the price level since 1875.

                                                         28
generate the equity premium of 0.063. This last finding is reminiscent of the results stressed by

Mehra and Prescott (1985).

       The rare-disasters literature makes a major adjustment by noting that the assumed

normality of the shocks greatly understates the fatness of the tails for consumption growth and

stock returns. In this view, the observed covariance between stock returns and consumption

growth of 0.00224 substantially understates the risks associated with holding stocks. However,

the fat-tail or disaster effects cannot be satisfactorily estimated solely from the U.S. data

considered in Tables 1 and 2. Rather, the approach originated by Rietz (1988) and applied in

Barro (2006) and Barro and Ursúa (2008) relies on the broad history of macroeconomic disasters

observed for many countries over a century or more.

       As already noted, the mean real rate of price change for gold for 1836-2011 (column 2 of

Table 1) is 1.1%, with a standard deviation of 13.1%. In contrast, during the high point of the

world gold standard from 1880 to1913 (following the U.S. resumption in 1879), the average real

rate of price change was slightly negative, -1.0%, with a small standard deviation, 2.6%. Since

the nominal gold price was essentially constant (Figure 3), these patterns reflect the behavior of

inflation (Table 1, column 6).

       In the first sub-period, 1836-1879, the U.S. monetary system was linked to silver or gold

for much of the sample, but a suspension of monetary convertibility occurred near the beginning

of the U.S. Civil War in 1861, with full convertibility restored only in 1879 (see Figure 3). For

1914-1974, the United States maintained aspects of the gold standard, but a rise in the nominal

gold price and the prohibition of private holdings of monetary gold occurred in 1933 (Figure 3).

In 1971, the United States formally dropped its commitment to foreign central banks to convert

U.S. dollars into gold at a fixed dollar price. Then at the beginning of 1975, the prohibition on



                                                  29
private holdings of monetary gold in the United States was lifted. In the most recent sub-period,

1975-2011, gold retained a commodity-reserve role for central banks but one that was largely

divorced from domestic monetary systems.

       Table 1, column 2, shows that, for gold’s real rate of price change, the mean and standard

deviation vary substantially across the sub-periods. It is also clear, however, that focusing on a

period such as 1880-1913—the high point of the international gold standard—involves a strong

element of ex post selection. From an ex ante perspective, the 1880-1913 period likely shares

with the preceding and subsequent periods the possibility of moving off the gold standard in

certain circumstances, particularly associated with war. Examples are the U.S. movement off of

a gold/silver commodity standard in 1861 during the Civil War, movements of many countries

off gold with the start of World War I in 1914, and, much earlier, the British movement off gold

in 1797 during the long period of wars with France. At times of suspension, an important issue

was the prospect of eventual return to the gold or gold/silver standard, likely during peacetime,

and at what parity. The British resumption of the gold standard in 1821 was at the old parity (as

urged by David Ricardo), as was the U.S. resumption in 1879 (Figure 3). However, the British

return to gold in 1925 at the previous parity proved unsuccessful in the wake of the Great

Depression.

       When compared with earlier times, the most recent sub-period, 1975-2011, shows a

substantially higher mean and standard deviation of the real rate of price change for gold—4.0%

and 20.7%, respectively. For silver, the mean and standard deviation are even higher: 5.1% and

29.4%, respectively. Although the increase in volatility of these real rates of price change for the

most recent sub-period is clear, the change in the mean is less sure because it is hard to pin down

the expected value when the volatility is this high. For example, if the annual standard deviation



                                                30
were known to be 20.7% (the sample standard deviation for the real rate of price change for gold

for 1975-2011), the standard error of the mean over 37 years would be 3.4%. That is, the

observed mean real rate of price change of 4.0% is not statistically significantly different from

zero (or from the mean rates of change in earlier periods) at typical significance levels.27

        Given this last perspective and the sample-selection issues, it seems best to focus on

statistics for gold over the full sample, 1836-2011. In this context, the key points from Tables 1

and 2 are that the mean real rate of price change is 1.1% per year, the standard deviation is

13.1%, and the covariance with consumption growth is small, -0.0002 (with a correlation of

-0.05), and not statistically significantly different from zero. With a coefficient of relative risk

aversion, γ, around 4 (and with i.i.d. normal shocks), the observed covariance implies that the

expected real rate of return on gold should be close to the risk-free rate; as a point estimate,

about 1.0% if the risk-free rate is 1.1%.

        In the baseline model, it is impossible to get the expected real rate of return on gold, rg, to

fall below the risk-free rate, rf, although a high value of σ gets rg close to rf. Therefore, we need a

high value of σ to be consistent with the negligible covariance between gold’s real rate of price

change and consumption growth.

        We can combine the last observation with the finding from before that the long-term

sample mean of gold’s real rate of price change—1.1% per year, with a one-standard-deviation

confidence interval of roughly (0.1%, 2.1%)—corresponded in the baseline model to a range for

σ from 16 to 0.84. Low values of σ within this range are inconsistent with rg being close to rf.

For example, using equation (15), σ=1 implies rg = 5.9% (the same as the expected return on

unlevered equity), and σ=2 implies rg =4.0%. Therefore, with a risk-free rate around 1.1%, the

27
  We reach the same conclusion by noting that, with the standard deviation having to be estimated, the ratio of the
sample mean, 4.0%, to the sample standard deviation for the mean of 3.4% follows a t-distribution with 36 degrees
of freedom.

                                                        31
risk premia on gold implied by these values of σ are too high, given the negligible observed

covariance of gold’s real rate of price change with consumption growth.

       The high end of the range for σ produces more satisfactory results. For example, σ=10

generates rg=1.8%, with an expected rate of change of real gold prices of 0.2%, and σ=16

generates rg=1.6%, with an expected rate of change of real gold prices of 0.1%. Hence, these

specifications with high values of σ generate values of rg that are only small amounts above the

estimated risk-free rate of 1.1%, while also producing expected rates of change of real gold

prices that fall within the one-standard-error band for the long-run mean, (0.1%, 2.1%). A

notable feature of these results is that the bulk of gold’s expected rate of return comes from the

unobserved dividend yield, with only a small part reflecting the expected real rate of price

change.


       C. Covariances between gold returns and other asset returns

       In the baseline model, with only i.i.d. shocks to GDP and consumption, the covariance

between real gold returns and the growth rates of GDP and consumption is positive but small if

the elasticity of substitution, σ, is high. The same prediction applies to the covariance between

real gold returns and real stock returns.

       Table 3 shows covariances and correlations of real gold returns with other real asset

returns and inflation rates for 1836-2011 and the various sub-periods. For stock returns

(column 3), the covariance is significantly positive for 1836-1879 but otherwise small in

magnitude and statistically insignificantly different from zero. The results for the periods since

1880 are similar to those for the covariance between real gold returns and consumption or GDP

growth rates shown in Table 2 (column 1). As discussed before, these results accord reasonably

well with the model if σ is high.


                                                 32
       In the baseline model, which abstracts from inflation or default on government debt, the

real T-bill return is constant and equals the short-term risk-free rate, and the real term structure is

flat. Hence, the model predicts zero covariance between real gold returns and real returns on

T-Bills or 10-year government bonds. This prediction might change if we bring in effects of

inflation on the real returns on government securities or if we allow for stochastic shifts in

parameters, such as the disaster probability, p, or the preference parameter, α, that governs

demand for gold services versus ordinary consumption.

       In Table 3, columns 4 and 5, the covariance between real gold returns and real returns on

the two forms of government securities is positive for sub-periods between 1836 and 1974 and

negative for 1975-2011. These covariances are statistically significantly different from zero at

the 5% level for 10-year bonds for 1836-1879 and 1880-1913 and for T-Bills for 1920-1974 and

1975-2011. The results are nearly statistically significant at the 5% level for 10-year bonds for

1914-1974 and 1975-2011.

       The relation between real gold returns and real returns on government securities likely

derives from effects of inflation on the real returns on assets that are denominated in nominal

terms. The covariances between the real returns on the two forms of government securities and

inflation are strongly negative for the overall sample, 1836-2011, and the various sub-periods.

The covariances between real gold returns and inflation are also negative in periods where the

nominal gold price is virtually constant (1880-1913) or has some element of nominal pegging

(1836-1879 and 1914-1974)—as shown in Table 3, column 6. Therefore, variations in inflation

associate with movements in the same direction for real returns on government securities and

gold over the sub-periods from 1836 to 1974 (columns 4 and 5). From 1975 to 2011, there is no

longer any nominal pegging of the gold price, and the covariance between real gold returns and



                                                  33
inflation becomes positive, though not statistically significantly different from zero (column 6).

This changed pattern between real gold returns and inflation likely explains why the covariances

between real returns on gold and real returns on the two forms of government securities are

negative in this period.

         The covariance between real gold returns and real silver returns (Table 3, column 1) is

significantly positive except during the high point of the classical gold standard from 1880 to

1913. In this period, the nominal price of gold, but not silver, was essentially constant. For

1836-1879, the correlation between real gold and silver returns is close to one, because the ratio

of gold to silver prices changes little, reflecting the bimetallic standard that was partially

maintained in the United Kingdom and the United States. The ratio of gold to silver prices from

1790 to 2011 is shown in Figure 5. For 1836-1879, this ratio varies relatively little around the

median for that sub-period of 16.0.28

         Figure 5 also shows the ratio of world stocks of silver to world stocks of gold for

1790-2011. This ratio falls from 34 in 1840 to 19 in 1875 (partly due to gold discoveries), then

trends downward further to 9 in 2011.29 This pattern in the quantity ratio does not align in an

obvious way with the fluctuations in the price ratio. An interesting extension would relate the

price and quantity ratios to exogenous changes in the relative supplies of and demands for these

two precious metals.


VIII. Summary Observations

         Our main objective was to match empirical regularities for gold returns with the

predictions from a simple asset-pricing model. As to regularities, we observe first that, from
28
   Nevertheless, the changes in the U.S. mint ratio in 1834 and 1853 and the full demonetization of silver in 1873 (the
“crime of 1873”) received a lot of attention—see Laughlin (1894, Chs. IV, V, and VII).
29
   The corresponding stock of silver in 2011 is 1,371,239 metric tons.



                                                         34
1836 to 2011, the average real rate of price change for gold in the United States is 1.1% per year

with a standard deviation of 13.1%, implying a one-standard-deviation confidence band for the

mean of (0.1%, 2.1%). Second, over the same period, the covariances of gold’s real rate of price

change with consumption and GDP growth rates are small and statistically insignificantly

different from zero. These negligible covariances imply that gold should carry a small risk

premium; that is, gold’s expected real rate of return—which includes an unobserved dividend

yield—should be close to the risk-free rate, estimated from real returns on Treasury Bills to be

around 1.1%. Third, the volatility of the growth rate of real gold prices is small under the

classical gold standard from 1880 to 1913 but high—comparable to that on stocks—in other

periods, including 1975 to 2011.

       Key features of our baseline model are, first, ordinary consumption and gold services are

imperfect substitutes for the representative household; second, outlays on gold services (for

jewelry, crafts, electronics, medicine, monetary purposes, and so on) are always minor compared

to ordinary consumption; and third, disaster and other shocks impinge directly on consumption

and GDP but not on stocks of gold.

       With a high elasticity of substitution between gold services and ordinary consumption,

the model can generate a mean real rate of price change within the observed one-standard-

deviation confidence band, (0.1%, 2.1%), along with a small risk premium for gold. In this

scenario, the bulk of gold’s expected rate of return reflects the unobserved dividend yield and

only a small part comprises expected real price appreciation. Nevertheless, the uncertainty in

gold returns is concentrated in the price-change component. The model can explain the time-

varying volatility of real gold prices if preference shocks for gold services are small under the




                                                 35
classical gold standard but large in other periods particularly because of shifting monetary roles

for gold.

       One useful extension would consider gold as a tradable good in a world of open

economies. This framework would include tradable consumer goods and non-tradable goods

consumed within each country. The risk characteristics of gold from the perspective of each

country then depend on the quantity of world tradables and on country variables that determine

the real exchange rate, in the sense of the relative price of non-tradable home goods and tradable

goods, including gold.

       Other extensions would study empirically the shifting demands for gold, related

especially to official holdings by central banks and governments (Figure 2). From a data

standpoint, we may be able to estimate the quantity of the world’s gold held as coins and jewelry

and for other “non-monetary” purposes. The time series of world gold production can also be

analyzed, including incentive effects on gold mining from shifts in the real price of gold. This

analysis can be carried out jointly with silver (Figure 5).




                                                 36
                                         References

Abel, A.B. (1999). “Risk Premia and Term Premia in General Equilibrium,” Journal of
    Monetary Economics, February, 3-33.

Bansal, R. and A. Yaron (2004). “Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset
    Pricing Puzzles,” Journal of Finance, August, 1481-1509.

Barro, R.J. (1979). “Money and the Price Level under the Gold Standard,” Economic Journal,
       March, 13-33.

Barro, R.J. (2006). “Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century,” Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, August, 823–866.

Barro, R.J. (2009). “Rare Disasters, Asset Prices, and Welfare Costs,” American Economic
       Review, March, 243–264.

Barro, R.J. and T. Jin (2011). “On the Size Distribution of Macroeconomic Disasters,”
       Econometrica, September, 1567-1589.

Barro, R.J. and J.F. Ursúa (2008). “Macroeconomic Crises since 1870,” Brookings Papers on
       Economic Activity, 1, 255–335.

Barro, R.J. and J.F. Ursúa (2012). “Rare Macroeconomic Disasters,” Annual Review of
       Economics, 83-109.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1943). Banking and Monetary Statistics,
       Washington D.C., National Capital Press.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1976). Banking and Monetary Statistics,
       1941-1970, Washington D.C., U.S. Government Printing Office.

Campbell, J.Y. (1986). “Bond and Stock Returns in a Simple Exchange Model,” Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, November, 785-804.

Cochrane, J.H., F. Longstaff, and P. Santa-Clara (2008). “Two Trees,” Review of Financial
      Studies, January, 347-385.

Epstein, L.G. and S.E. Zin (1989). “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of
       Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework,” Econometrica, July,
       937-969.

Fisher, I. (1911). The Purchasing Power of Money, New York, Macmillan.

Friedman, M. (1951). “Commodity-Reserve Currency,” Journal of Political Economy, June,
      203-232.

                                              37
Friedman, M. (1969). The Optimum Quantity of Money and other Essays, Chicago, Aldine.

Gabaix, X. (2012). “Variable Rare Disasters: An Exactly Solved Framework for Ten Puzzles in
      Macro-Finance,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May, 645-700.

GoldMoney Foundation (2012). The Above-Ground Gold Stock: its Importance and its Size,
     available at www.goldmoney.com/goldmoney-foundation/home.html.

Goldstein, J. and D. Kestenbaum (2010). “A Chemist Explains Why Gold Beat Out Lithium,
       Osmium, Einsteinium, …,” NPR Planet Money, November 19, interview of Sanat
       Kumar.

Jorion, P. and W.N. Goetzmann (1999). “Global Stock Markets in the Twentieth Century,”
        Journal of Finance, June, 953-980.

Laughlin, J.L. (1894). The History of Bimetallism in the United States, New York, D. Appleton.

League of Nations (various years), Statistical Year-book of the League of Nations, available
      online at Geneva: Série de Publications de la Société des Nations.

Martin, I. (2013). “The Lucas Orchard,” Econometrica, forthcoming.

McEvedy, C. and R. Jones (1978). Atlas of World Population History, New York, Penguin.

Mehra, R. and E.C. Prescott (1985). “The Equity Premium: A Puzzle,” Journal of Monetary
       Economics, March, 145–161.

Mill, J.S. (1848). Principles of Political Economy, v.2, London, J.W. Parker.

Officer, L.H. (2008). “What Was the Price of Gold Then? Importance, Measurement, and History,”
        available at www.measuringworth.com/docs/Goldinterpretation.pdf.

Ricardo, D. (1819). The Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, 2nd ed., London, John
       Murray.

Rietz, T.A. (1988). “The Equity Risk Premium: A Solution,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
        July, 117–131.

Snyder, C. (1924). “A New Index of the General Price Level from 1875,” Journal of the
       American Statistical Association, June, 189-195.

Soetbeer, A.D. (1887). Materials toward the Elucidation of the Economic Conditions Affecting
       the Precious Metals and the Question of Standards, 2nd ed., translated by F.W. Taussig,
       in E. Atkins, Report to the President of the United States, upon the Present Status of
       Bimetallism in Europe, October, Washington D.C., U.S. Government Printing Office.



                                               38
Thornton, H. (1802). An Enquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of Great
       Britain, London, J. Hatchard.

U.S. Geological Survey (2010). Gold statistics, in T.D. Kelly and G.R. Matos, Historical
       Statistics for Mineral and Material Commodities in the United States, Data Series 140,
       available at www.minerals.usgs.gov/ds/2005/140/gold.pdf.

U.S. Geological Survey (2012). Mineral Commodity Summaries 2012, available at
       www.minerals.usgs.gov/minerals/pubs/mcs/2012/mcs2012.pdf.

U.S. Treasury Department, Bureau of the Mint (various years). Annual Report of the Secretary
       of the Treasury on the State of the Finances for the Fiscal Year ended …, Washington
       D.C, U.S. Government Printing Office, available at
       www.fraser.stlouisfed.org/docs/publications/treasar/AR_TREASURY.

Warren, G.F. and F.A. Pearson (1937). World Prices and the Building Industry; Index Numbers
      of Prices of 40 Basic Commodities for 14 Countries in Currency and in Gold, and
      Material on the Building Industry, New York, Wiley.

Weil, P. (1990). “Nonexpected Utility in Macroeconomics.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
       February, 29–42.




                                              39
                                            Table 1
                    U.S. Real Asset Returns: Means and Standard Deviations

   (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)        (7)         (8)        (9)
 Period      Gold       Silver    Stocks     T-Bills    10-Year    Inflation       C        GDP
                                                         Bonds       Rate       growth     growth
1836-2011     0.0112     0.0123    0.0740     0.0097†    0.0287     0.0225      0.0159     0.0191
            (0.1306)   (0.1788)   (0.1607)   (0.0431)   (0.0766)   (0.0542)    (0.0385)   (0.0467)
1836-1879    -0.0008    -0.0041    0.0760         --     0.0446     0.0067      0.0118     0.0143
            (0.0819)   (0.0808)   (0.1553)        --    (0.0887)   (0.0727)    (0.0484)   (0.0345)
1880-1913    -0.0102    -0.0261    0.0626         --     0.0262     0.0109      0.0129     0.0186
            (0.0257)   (0.0686)   (0.1251)        --    (0.0412)   (0.0263)    (0.0393)   (0.0453)
1914-1974     0.0145     0.0219    0.0779    0.0072††    0.0087     0.0283      0.0180     0.0239
            (0.1338)   (0.1792)   (0.1933)   (0.0523)   (0.0723)   (0.0580)    (0.0399)   (0.0641)
1975-2011     0.0398     0.0511    0.0753      0.0134    0.0450     0.0421      0.0201     0.0175
            (0.2074)   (0.2937)   (0.1410)   (0.0238)   (0.0871)   (0.0291)    (0.0163)   (0.0201)


    †1920-2011
    ††1920-1974




                                              40
                                        Notes to Table 1

        All asset returns are in real terms. Data on nominal asset returns, nominal gold and silver
prices, and CPI’s are from Global Financial Data (GFD).

        The return on gold refers to the growth rate of real gold prices, calculated arithmetically
for each year as: -1 + (gold price/CPI)/[gold price (-1)/CPI(-1)], where (-1) indicates an annual
lag. The U.S. dollar gold price reported by GFD up to 1933 is the official price set by the U.S
government, except for 1861-1878, when the data come from Commercial and Financial
Chronicle. Data after 1933 are from Commodity Research Bureau, Commodity Yearbook. The
CPI values reported by GFD derive from the BLS consumer price index for urban consumers
since 1913. Data before 1913 are based on information from the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, including monthly data since 1875 described in Snyder (1924). The gold price used for
each year is the average of daily or monthly values during the year. The CPI value used for each
year since 1875 is the average of monthly values during the year. Only annual data on consumer
prices are available before 1875.

       The real silver return is computed analogously, based on averages of daily or monthly
U.S. dollar silver prices. The silver prices reported by GFD come from Officer (2008), Warren
and Pearson (1937), and Commodity Research Bureau, Commodity Yearbook. Recent New York
quotes are from Handy and Harman.

      The real stock return is computed analogously, based on averages of daily or monthly
nominal total-return indexes computed by GFD for the S&P 500. Values before 1971 are based
on GFD estimates of total-return indexes comparable to the S&P 500.

        The real T-Bill return is computed analogously, based on averages of monthly nominal
total-return indexes for 90-day U.S. Treasury Bills. The estimates of total returns from GFD
since 1929 derive from yields on 90-day bills. Estimates from 1919 to 1928 are based on yields
on short-term U.S. Treasury bonds.

       The real return on 10-year U.S. government bonds is computed analogously, based on
averages of monthly nominal total-return indexes for U.S. government bonds with roughly
10-year remaining maturity. Values from 1919-1940 are based on the Federal Reserve’s 10-15
year Treasury bond index. Values before 1919 are based on various long-term U.S. government
bonds. (Data for 1836 to 1841 are from Boston city bonds.)

       The inflation rate is calculated as -1 + CPI/CPI(-1), using the CPI data described above.

       Consumption (C) and GDP growth are real per capita growth rates calculated
arithmetically from the Barro-Ursúa annual data on real per capita personal consumer
expenditure and GDP, available at www.rbarro.com/data-sets.




                                                41
                     Table 2: Covariances [Correlations] of Real Asset Returns
                             with Consumption and GDP Growth Rates

  (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)              (6)                (7)
 Period           Gold              Silver            Stock             T-Bill          10-Year           Inflation
                                                                                         Bond               rate
                                                   Results for C
1836-2011          -0.0002           0.0008            0.0022*          -0.0003†           0.0004            -0.0001
             (-.0086, .0036)    (-.0001, .0017)   (.0012, .0034)    (-.0009, .0002)   (-.0002, .0010)   (-.0005, .0003)
                    [-0.05]           [0.11]           [0.36*]           [-0.21]†           [0.12]            [-0.03]
                 (-.20, .10)       (-.03, .26)        (.23, .49)       (-.52, .20)       (-.07, .30)       (-.22, .17)
1836-1879           0.0002           0.0002             0.0016               --            0.0014            -0.0009
             (-.0009, .0014)    (-.0008, .0014)   (-.0007, .0041)                     (.0000, .0034)    (-.0019, .0002)
                    [0.05]            [0.04]            [0.22]            --                [0.34]            [-0.26]
                 (-.26, .32)       (-.27, .32)       (-.10, .53)                         (-.01, .59)       (-.50, .00)
1880-1913         -0.0004*           0.0004            0.0020*            --               0.0001            0.0004*
             (-.0009, -.0002)   (-.0005, .0013)    (.0004, .0036)                     (-.0005, .0007)    (.0000, .0010)
                   [-0.42*]           [0.14]           [0.42*]            --                [0.05]           [0.43*]
                 (-.67, -.10)      (-.21, .44)        (.10, .64)                         (-.30, .41)        (.02, .70)
1914-1974          -0.0001           0.0019            0.0036*         -0.0006††          -0.0002             0.0002
             (-.0013, .0011)    (-.0003, .0043)   (.0013, .0062)    (-.0015, .0003)   (-.0012, .0008)   (-.0006, .0010)
                    [-0.02]           [0.27]           [0.47*]          [-0.28]††          [-0.07]            [0.07]
                 (-.26, .23)       (-.05, .59)        (.20, .67)       (-.62, .19)       (-.39, .31)       (-.33, .42)
1975-2011          -0.0011          -0.0004            0.0010*           0.0001            0.0003            -0.0001
              (-.0027, .0002)   (-.0020, .0011)    (.0002, .0019)    (.0000, .0002)   (-.0002, .0008)   (-.0003, .0001)
                    [-0.33]          [-0.08]           [0.44*]            [0.31]            [0.21]            [-0.23]
                 (-.62, .07)       (-.41, .27)        (.13, .69)       (-.03, .59)       (-.18, .51)       (-.57, .20)
                                                  Results for GDP
1836-2011        -0.0005             0.0004            0.0029*          -0.0007†          -0.0002            0.0003
             (-.0012, .0003)    (-.0008, .0016)    (.0016, .0043)   (-.0015, .0000)   (-.0007, .0003)   (-.0002, .0007)
                  [-0.07]             [0.05]           [0.39*]           [-0.32]†          [-0.06]            [0.11]
                (-.19, .04)        (-.10, .21)        (.22, .54)       (-.59, .03)       (-.20, .09)       (-.07, .28)
1836-1879        -0.0001            -0.0001            0.0025*               --            0.0005           -0.0003
             (-.0011, .0011)    (-.0011, .0011)    (.0010, .0041)                     (-.0003, .0012)   (-.0011, .0005)
                  [-0.03]            [-0.02]           [0.47*]            --                [0.16]           [-0.14]
                (-.41, .33)        (-.41, .35)        (.25, .67)                         (-.11, .43)       (-.45, .20)
1880-1913        -0.0004             0.0008            0.0036*            --               0.0004            0.0004
             (-.0009, .0000)    (-.0004, .0020)    (.0017, .0055)                     (-.0003, .0010)    (.0000, .0009)
                  [-0.34]             [0.25]           [0.65*]            --                [0.20]            [0.34]
                (-.61, .01)        (-.15, .56)        (.43, .80)                         (-.16, .52)       (-.02, .61)
1914-1974        -0.0006             0.0008            0.0038*         -0.0012††          -0.0009            0.0008
             (-.0022, .0010)    (-.0025, .0041)    (.0004, .0079)   (-.0025, .0001)   (-.0022, .0003)   (-.0003, .0020)
                  [-0.07]             [0.07]           [0.32*]          [-0.36]††          [-0.20]            [0.21]
                (-.27, .13)        (-.21, .39)        (.03, .56)       (-.67, .02)       (-.46, .08)       (-.10, .50)
1975-2011        -0.0008            -0.0001            0.0012*           0.0001           -0.0001           -0.0001
             (-.0025, .0007)    (-.0019, .0016)    (.0002, .0022)   (-.0001, .0003)   (-.0006, .0005)   (-.0003, .0002)
                  [-0.19]            [-0.01]           [0.43*]            [0.16]           [-0.05]           [-0.10]
                (-.53, .19)        (-.34, .30)        (.10, .68)       (-.26, .55)       (-.39, .28)       (-.46, .32)

 *Statistically significant at 5% level.
 †1920-2011
 ††1920-1974



                                                         42
 Table 3: Covariances [Correlations] of Real Gold Returns with other Real Asset Returns

    (1)                (2)                 (3)               (4)               (5)                (6)
   Period             Silver              Stock             T-Bill           10-Year           Inflation
                                                                              Bond               rate
  1836-2011            0.0167*             0.0001           -0.0001†            0.0007             -0.0009
                   (.0089, .0260)    (-.0028, .0039)    (-.0013, .0011)    (-.0016, .0027)    (-.0023, .0008)
                       [0.71*]              [0.03]           [-0.01]†            [0.07]             [-0.13]
                      (.58, .81)        (-.13, .20)        (-.19, .16)        (-.14, .31)        (-.38, .09)
  1836-1879            0.0065*            0.0056*                --            0.0037*             -0.0024
                   (.0031, .0116)     (.0023, .0108)                       (.0011, .0063)     (-.0052, .0004)
                       [0.98*]            [0.44*]              --               [0.51*]             [-0.41]
                     (.95, .995)         (.21, .63)                           (.21, .75)         (-.83, .05)
  1880-1913            -0.0001            -0.0003              --              0.0006*            -0.0007*
                  (-.0006, .0004)    (-.0013, .0008)                       (.0003, .0009)    (-.0010, -.0004)
                        [-0.05]            [-0.09]             --               [0.60*]          [-0.999*]
                     (-.36, .28)        (-.41, .26)                           (.35, .80)     (-.9997, -.9992)
  1914-1974            0.0124*            -0.0003          0.0016*††            0.0026             -0.0020
                   (.0012, .0259)    (-.0089, .0078)     (.0002, .0031)    (-.0001, .0052)    (-.0042, .0004)
                       [0.52*]             [-0.01]          [0.23*]††            [0.27]             [-0.26]
                      (.09, .74)        (-.30, .35)         (.02, .53)        (.00, .66)         (-.66, .05)
  1975-2011            0.0505*            -0.0033           -0.0027*           -0.0061              0.0014
                   (.0227, .0810)    (-.0096, .0029)    (-.0045, -.0011)   (-.0153, .0017)    (-.0021, .0058)
                       [0.83*]             [-0.11]           [-0.55*]           [-0.34]              [0.24]
                      (.72, .91)        (-.36, .12)        (-.76, -.30)       (-.68, .12)        (-.54, .66)




*Statistically significant at 5% level.
†1920-2011
††1920-1974



                                          Notes to Tables 2 and 3

The data on real asset returns, inflation rates, and growth rates of consumption and GDP are
described in the notes to Table 1. The upper part of Table 2 applies to covariances and
correlations (shown in brackets) with the growth rate of consumption. The lower part applies to
the growth rate of GDP. 95% confidence intervals are in parentheses below each sample value
for covariance or correlation. These intervals were generated from percentile-method bootstraps
with 100,000 iterations. Table 3 shows the covariances and correlations (shown in brackets) of
real gold returns with other real asset returns and the inflation rate. 95% confidence intervals
were constructed as described above.




                                                       43
                                                                           Figure 1

                                               World Gold Stock per Person, 1875-2011

                                        25.0

                                        22.5
      metric tons per million persons




                                        20.0

                                        17.5

                                        15.0

                                        12.5
                                                                                            1492 stock = 0
                                        10.0                                                1492 stock = 9528 tons

                                         7.5

                                         5.0
                                               80

                                                     90

                                                           00

                                                                 10

                                                                       20

                                                                             30

                                                                                      40

                                                                                            50

                                                                                                  60

                                                                                                        70

                                                                                                              80

                                                                                                                    90

                                                                                                                          00

                                                                                                                                10
                                           18

                                                    18

                                                          19

                                                                19

                                                                      19

                                                                            19

                                                                                  19

                                                                                           19

                                                                                                 19

                                                                                                       19

                                                                                                             19

                                                                                                                   19

                                                                                                                         20

                                                                                                                               20

Note: The blue graph assumes that the gold stock in 1492 equals zero. The red graph assumes
that this stock equals 9528 tons, the reported cumulative production from 1493 to 1875. The
calculations for the stock after 1492 use the available gold production data (annual since 1876
and at longer intervals before 1876), assuming zero depreciation and loss on the existing stock.

Sources:
Gold production data. 1493-1884: Soetbeer (1887, Tables 1 and 2). 1885-1899: U.S. Treasury
Department, Bureau of the Mint (various years). 1900-2011: U.S. Geological Survey (2010;
2012, p. 67).

Population data. World population since 1960 is based on annual data from World Development
Indicators. Earlier numbers are based on data at 25-year intervals from McEvedy and Jones
(1978).


                                                                                 44
                                   Figure 2
                Share of Official Gold Reserves in World Stock

      .7


      .6


      .5


      .4


      .3


      .2
                                            1492 stock = 0
                                            1492 stock = 9528 tons
      .1


      .0
           80

                 90

                      00

                            10

                                 20

                                       30

                                             40

                                                   50

                                                        60

                                                              70

                                                                    80

                                                                          90

                                                                               00

                                                                                     10
        18

              18

                   19

                           19

                                19

                                     19

                                           19

                                                19

                                                      19

                                                             19

                                                                  19

                                                                       19

                                                                             20

                                                                                   20
Note: The graphs show the ratio of gold held by central banks and governments to the total
world stock. The blue graph assumes that the world gold stock in 1492 equals zero. The red
graph assumes that this stock equals 9528 tons, the reported cumulative production from 1493 to
1875 (see Figure 1).

Sources: The world gold stock comes from the sources detailed in the notes to Figure 1. Data on
official gold reserves of central banks and governments are from Soetbeer (1887); U.S. Treasury
Department, Bureau of the Mint (various years); Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System (1943, 1976); League of Nations (various years); and International Financial Statistics.
These sources exclude holdings over some periods at least by China and the Soviet Union. We
are working to fill these gaps and also to expand the coverage to years prior to 1877 and for
missing years between 1886 and 1908. In some of these years, the available data combine
official holdings with gold coins in circulation.




                                              45
                                                   Figure 3
                               U.S. Dollar Gold Price, annual average, 1790-1971

                               45


                               40
      U.S. dollars per ounce




                               35


                               30


                               25


                               20


                               15
                                    1800 1820 1840 1860 1880 1900 1920 1940 1960




Note: See the notes to Table 1 for the sources of data on annual-average U.S. dollar gold prices.
After 1971, the U.S. dollar gold price became highly variable, reaching an annual average of
$613 for 1980 and $1573 for 2011.




                                                      46
                                    Figure 4
           Real Gold Price, annual average, 1800-2011
               U.S. dollar price, divided by U.S. CPI


3.0


2.5


2.0                                       1800 = 1.0


1.5


1.0


0.5


0.0
  1800 1820 1840 1860 1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000


 Note: See the notes to Table 1 for the sources of data on annual average U.S. dollar gold
 prices and CPI.




                                        47
                                           Figure 5
                Ratios of Gold to Silver Prices and Quantities


      100

                      ratio of gold to silver price
       80             ratio of silver to gold quantity



       60



       40



       20



         0
             1800 1825 1850 1875 1900 1925 1950 1975 2000


Note: See the notes to Table 1 for the sources of data on annual average U.S. dollar gold and
silver prices for 1790-2011. The accumulated stock of world gold comes from the sources
detailed in the notes to Figure 1. Figure 5 uses the series corresponding to a world stock of zero
in 1492 (see Figure 1). The sources for the data on world production of silver since 1493 are the
same as those for gold. Figure 5 uses a series corresponding to a world stock of zero in 1492 and
assumes zero depreciation and loss on the existing stock. The underlying data on world gold and
silver production are annual since 1876 and at 5-, 10-, or 20-year intervals from 1790 to 1875.




                                               48
