NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EMPIRICAL DETERMINANTS OF INTERTEMPORAL CHOICE
Jeffrey R. Brown
Zoran Ivković
Scott Weisbenner
Working Paper 18755
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18755
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013

We thank Malcolm Baker, Victor Borgy, Stephen Brown, Joshua Coval, Steve Dimmock, Luigi Guiso,
Ravi Jagannathan, David Laibson, Lubos Pastor, Jeffrey Pontiff, Andrew Samwick, Clemens Sialm,
Chester Spatt, and Peter Tufano for helpful discussions. We also thank seminar participants at Boğaziçi
University, KAIST, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore Management University, UCLA,
University of Illinois at Chicago, University of Melbourne, University of New South Wales, and University
of Sydney for their feedback. Finally, we thank participants at the 2011 EFA Annual Meeting, the
2012 NBER Summer Institute Social Security Workshop, and the 2012 Financial Research Association
Meeting for their insights. This research was supported by the U.S. Social Security Administration
through grant #10-M-98363-1-02 to the National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the SSA
Retirement Research Consortium. The findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of the author(s)
and do not represent the views of the SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research. Institutional Review Board (IRB) permission was granted to conduct
this research at both Michigan State University and the University of Illinois.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Jeffrey R. Brown, Zoran Ivković, and Scott Weisbenner. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Empirical Determinants of Intertemporal Choice
Jeffrey R. Brown, Zoran Ivković, and Scott Weisbenner
NBER Working Paper No. 18755
February 2013
JEL No. D12,D91,H31,H55
ABSTRACT
We study the empirical determinants of intertemporal choice by analyzing a unique decision Croatian
retirees made recently about whether to accept an immediate pension payment or a larger stream of
delayed payments. Individual decisions are correlated in sensible ways with income, liquidity constraints,
longevity expectations, and other covariates. Attitudes toward government also matter: those less confident
that the government will honor its commitments are more likely to take the immediate stream of payments.
Those who believe it is important to receive “the full amount due, no matter how long it takes” are
substantially more likely to take the delayed payments.
Jeffrey R. Brown
Department of Finance
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
515 East Gregory Drive
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
brownjr@illinois.edu
Zoran Ivković
Department of Finance
Michigan State University
315 Eppley Center
East Lansing, MI 48824
ivkovich@bus.msu.edu

Scott Weisbenner
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Department of Finance
340 Wohlers Hall, MC-706
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
weisbenn@illinois.edu

The canonical consumption-based model, dating back to at least Samuelson
(1937), captures the determinants of intertemporal decisions primarily through a single
parameter—the discount rate. Discount rates are not directly observable, and many
studies have attempted to measure implicit discount rates, with widely varying results.
For example, whereas several efforts to measure discount rates from surveys and
experiments have found evidence of very low (and even negative) discount rates,1
several econometric studies of actual behavior have estimated discount rates that are
extremely large.2 Barsky et al. (1997) note that “one possible explanation of the finding
of high subjective discount rates in the econometric work is the difficulty of controlling
for features of the economic environment facing agents, such as liquidity constraints
and the need for precautionary savings.” A closely related focus of this literature is to
examine how discount rates vary with various demographic characteristics such as
income, education, and race.3 Many of these studies, however, have been hampered by
methodological concerns, ranging from sample selection, the hypothetical nature of the
choice (in the case of some surveys and experiments), and a host of omitted variables.
In this paper, we provide new evidence on the empirical determinants of intertemporal decisions and how they vary across the population. We examine an
exogenously imposed and economically large intertemporal decision made by a large
See, for example, Barsky et al. (1997), Loewenstein (1987), Loewenstein and Prelec (1991, 1992), and
Loewenstein and Thaler (1989).
2 Warner & Pleeter (2001) find discount rates from 0 to more than 30 percent. See also Hausman (1979)
and Lawrence (1991). Sawmick (1998) estimates the distribution of rates of time preference from wealth
data and finds wide dispersion, ranging from negative to more than 20 percent.
3 Studies that have examined how discount rates vary across the population include Gilman (1976), Black
(1984), and Lawrance (1991). These studies find that discount rates decline with income, education, and
age, and that blacks have higher discount rates than whites do. Samwick (1998) shows that the
distribution of rates varies with age and income. Warner and Pleeter (2001) find that military officers
exhibit lower discount rates than enlisted personnel do, that blacks exhibit a higher discount rate than
whites do, and that discount rates decline with education.
1

1

fraction of the entire retired population of Croatia. As the result of a 1998 ruling by the
Constitutional Court of Croatia, the government was ordered to make substantial
payments to retirees, and thereby compensate them for an unconstitutional benefit cut
that had occurred during, and immediately after, the war in the former Yugoslavia in
the early- to mid-1990s. In late 2005, eligible retirees were offered a one-time,
irrevocable choice (described in more detail below) between a more immediate and a
more deferred payment stream. Although the deferred payment option offered a
nominal internal rate-of-return in excess of 26 percent relative to the more immediate
payment option, approximately 70 percent of retirees chose the latter.
We empirically examine the determinants of this choice using micro data from a
nationally representative survey that we designed and fielded for this purpose in the
period from late 2008 to early 2009. This setting has several advantages over the prior
literature. First, like Warner and Pleeter (2001), who examine the separation choices
made by about 65,000 U.S. military personnel in the early 1990s, we are able to examine
actual choices over an amount of money large enough to be quite meaningful to the
typical retiree (on average, the monetary value of the settlements was roughly
equivalent to a year of household income for the average Croatian retiree). Thus, our
study does not suffer from the bias that may arise when studying hypothetical decisions
over small stakes, an issue that plagues many experimental studies.
Second, because the policy decision about the size of this repayment and the
population to receive it was determined by a Constitutional Court decision and a
subsequently passed law, we have a fairly clean experimental setting that is not
contaminated by concerns about self-selection. This is in contrast to Warner and Pleeter

2

(2001), who analyze the intertemporal decision made only by those who opted to
separate voluntarily from military service, a group that may differ from those who
chose to continue military service.4
Third, we examine a much broader range of determinants than any prior study.
Through data collected from a comprehensive survey, we combine economic,
demographic, preference, and attitudinal variables, while also controlling directly for
factors that have hampered many previous studies, such as liquidity constraints. Past
studies have found, for example, that younger individuals and individuals with less
income are less likely to defer consumption (i.e., they exhibit a higher discount rate).
However, factors such as liquidity constraints, bequest motives, health, and financial
literacy (often not available in the data used in prior studies) are correlated with age
and income, and are also potentially important factors in intertemporal decisions in
their own right. Our data allow us to disentangle carefully the effects or many
correlated, though distinct, characteristics and attitudes upon intertemporal choice.
Fourth, we use our setting to measure the extent to which survey-based
measures of inter-temporal preferences can predict an important, real-world
intertemporal choice. In particular, we test how a hypothetical choice between money
today and money in the future is correlated with an individual’s actual choice, and
whether the predictive power of that hypothetical choice varies with the individual’s
financial sophistication and experience.
Finally, our survey also allows us to explore a number of potential explanations,
including respondents’ beliefs about the economic environment and attitudes toward
4

Warner and Pleeter (2001) did account for this sample selection in their empirical methodology.

3

government, neither of which would have been observable from administrative data
alone. As we show below, several of these factors are quantitatively quite important.
Gauging the importance of these economic-environment and attitudes-towardgovernment variables is an essential step toward understanding how individuals might
respond to an intertemporal tradeoff of cash flows offered by the government.
We find that the willingness to defer payments in this setting correlates with a
number of demographic characteristics in sensible ways. For example, we find that
individuals are more likely to take the deferred payment (and thus exhibit a lower
discount rate) if they are younger, have children, express a bequest motive, and are in
good health. We also show that they are more willing to defer if they have higher
income and are not liquidity-constrained. We further show that individuals take the
broader macroeconomic environment into consideration: those more concerned about
future inflation and those more concerned about the possible devaluation of the Kuna
(the Croatian currency) were more likely to take the immediate payment option.
We also find that, at least in this choice setting, hypothetical choices like those
used in many survey settings are not predictive of the actual choices for most of the
population. Specifically, we elicit from the respondents the rate of return they would
require to be willing to invest their money with a highly reputable bank if it meant not
being able to access the money for one year. Responses to this question are not
significantly correlated with the actual payment choice, except for those individuals
who are not liquidity constrained and who are more financially sophisticated
(measured as having savings, particularly savings in foreign currencies). Put differently,

4

our proxy for the rate of time preference is informative of the actual behavior only for
the subset of individuals who have had actual experience with saving decisions.
We then turn to an analysis of factors related to attitudes toward government.
We begin with an analysis of political risk, a factor several authors document in the
context of the U.S. Social Security system (e.g., Luttmer and Samwick, 2011; Shoven and
Slavov, 2006). Our results are consistent with a role for political risk: individuals who
exhibit a lower level of confidence in the government are substantially more likely to
choose the more immediate payment option. We find this using both a positively
framed and a negatively framed question about the likelihood of the government
making good on its payment commitments.
Working in the opposite direction (i.e., in favor of encouraging individuals to
take the delayed payout) is a strong desire to receive the “full amount they were owed
no matter how long it takes.” Consistent with the psychological importance of reference
points in the decision-making process (Shefrin and Statman, 1979), these individuals
appear to have harbored strong feelings about the importance of getting back the full
nominal amount due.5 Our results indicate that individuals who believed it is important
to get the full amount due no matter how long it takes were 27 percentage points more
likely to accept the deferred payment option, and that most of them reported that they
would have chosen the deferred option even if payouts were hypothetically extended to
a 10-year (rather than a 6-year) horizon. To address concerns about measurement error
and endogeneity, we show that this finding is robust to using an individual’s region of

The focus on nominal amounts is also in line with the findings of Odean (1999), who finds that stock
investors seem to exhibit loss aversion around the nominal amount paid for a stock.

5

5

birth as an instrument for the desire to be made whole.6 The economic importance of
this desire is quite substantial. Our results suggest that, if no one had regarded “being
made whole” an important consideration, the fraction choosing the delayed payout
option would have fallen from 31% to only 12% of the affected population.
Although the institutional details of our setting are specific to Croatia, the
findings are of much more general interest. Nearly every developed country faces longterm shortfalls in the financing of old-age entitlement programs. This has led some
countries to consider ways of allowing participants voluntarily to opt out of a portion of
their benefits in exchange for a private account.7 Knowing which individual
characteristics are correlated with a willingness to accept a substantial reduction in the
present value of benefits in order to receive payments early is important for
understanding both the fiscal and distributional implications of such proposals. This is
also true at the sub-national level: the underfunded status of many of the U.S. public
defined benefit pension plans has led to an erosion in confidence that benefits will be
paid. For example, Novy-Marx and Rauh (2009) calculate that state public pensions are
under-funded by $3.23 trillion. The presence of political risk in such systems may lead
participants in these systems to discount future benefits at a higher rate (e.g., Luttmer
and Samwick, 2011; Shoven and Slavov, 2006). If so, the cost of these programs may
exceed the perceived value to the participants, and offering lump-sum options in return

Our instrument is motivated by Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2004) and Brown et al. (2008), both of
which show that an individual’s region of birth can have long-lasting effects on attitudes later in life—in
our context, attitudes toward the government. Our instrument is also motivated by work in the public
administration and organizational behavior literatures.
7 In the U.S., for example, the 2001 President’s Commission to Strengthen Social Security proposed
allowing individuals to redirect part of their payroll taxes into personal accounts in exchange for a future
reduction in their defined benefit income from Social Security.
6

6

for a substantial actuarial reduction in the present value of benefits may be a plausible
path to reform. Indeed, exactly this approach has been taken over the past year by a
number of large private sector defined benefit plans, including General Motors.
Understanding the distributional implications of such options requires an appreciation
of who is most likely to choose the expedited payout.
This paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 provides background on the Croatian
pension repayment plan. Our research methodology and summary statistics are
presented in Section 2. Section 3 presents empirical results, and Section 4 concludes.

1. Background on the Croatian Pension Choice
After declaring its independence from the former Yugoslavia in 1991, Croatia
became embroiled in a war until it signed the Dayton peace agreement with Bosnia &
Herzegovina and Serbia in 1995. During this period, the Croatian government operated
under considerable pressure and with a scarcity of resources as it faced the need to
finance the war effort, the effects of war destruction, a severely challenged economy, as
well as a simultaneous transition toward a market economy and democracy in the postcommunist era. Under these circumstances, one of the steps the government undertook
at the time to secure additional resources was altering the manner in which public
pension benefits were calculated. Essentially, the change in the benefit took the form of
a switch from wage-indexing to price-indexing of benefits, which had the effect of
lowering the amount of money retirees had received. This alteration was in place from
late 1993 to the end of 1998, at which point wage-indexing resumed.

7

Shortly after the Dayton peace agreement was signed in 1995, organized groups
representing the interests of affected pensioners filed a series of lawsuits questioning
the constitutionality of this pension change. In 1998, the Constitutional Court of Croatia
agreed that the benefit change was unconstitutional and ruled that the government
must reimburse retirees for the benefit shortfall. However, the Court did not prescribe
how this remediation program was to be implemented. Six years of political
negotiations followed, with legislation finally being passed on July 21, 2004.
The 2004 legislation stipulated that retirees should receive the difference between
what they were owed under the law and what they had actually received, along with
interest. The payments were to be made from an investment fund established solely for
this purpose, with funding guaranteed by the state. The amount of payment owed to
most retirees was substantial: for a large share of retirees, it was roughly a year or more
of household income. Table 1 shows the distribution of the pension repayment amount
for the full sample, as well as by income groups (both the pension repayment amount
and the income level are self-reported). We find that, as expected, higher-income
individuals are owed a higher pension-repayment amount because they likely had
bigger pensions to begin with. Further, the pension repayment amount roughly equates
to a year of household income for the typical respondent. For example, among
respondents in the 2,000-4,000 Kuna monthly income bracket (annual income of 24,000
to 48,000 Kuna), both the median and mean pension repayment amounts are around
36,000 (about $7,000 U.S. dollars, as measured at the time of the survey).
Another year had passed before the manner of the payment and the payment
options were fully developed. Finally, in December 2005, approximately 430,000

8

individuals (about one-tenth of the overall population of Croatia) were given a choice
between two payout options. Individuals who chose option A were promised four
semi-annual payments—totaling 50% of the nominal value of the calculated amount
owed—that were to commence in mid-2006 and terminate in December 2007. Those
who chose option B were promised six annual payments—totaling 100% of the nominal
calculated amount owed—that were to commence in December 2007 and terminate in
December 2012. Table 2 presents the breakdown and timing of the payments that would
be made under option A (the more immediate payments) and option B (the more
deferred payments) for someone with a pension repayment amount of 60,000 Kunas.
As shown in the bottom row of Table 2, the break-even discount rate that equates
these two payment streams is approximately 26.6%. Despite the high nominal return
from choosing option B, about 71% of participants chose option A, the earlier, smaller
stream of payments.8 To put this nominal 26.6% return into perspective, we consider
how this relates to inflation and to other rates of return available to Croatian citizens at
the time. Post-war inflation has been relatively stable, reaching a high of approximately
8% in 1998, and hovering around 4% for much of the past decade. However, this period
of relatively low and stable inflation is coming on the heels of a period of extremely
high inflation. Thus, while the 26.6% nominal return corresponds, ex post, to a very high
real return, it will be important to control for heterogeneity in individual views about
inflation risk (accomplished by using our survey instrument, as discussed below). The
26.6% return is also quite high in comparison with other savings instruments (Figure 1).
As reported by Večernji List on June 27, 2007, 299,910 retirees received their third payment under
Option A in late June 2007. As reported by Večernji List on December 16, 2008, 123,321 retirees received
their second payment under Option B in mid-December 2008.
8

9

In the years around the time of the pension choice, rates on certificates of deposit (CDs),
savings, and government bonds—be they denominated in Kunas or in foreign
currencies—were substantially below 26.6%. Thus, by virtually any measure, the
internal rate of return provided by delaying pension payments was substantial.9

2. Research Methodology and Summary Statistics
Fielding our own survey of retirees was both necessary and desirable for two
primary reasons. First, Croatia does not have a nationally-representative, household
data set that could be used for this purpose, and Croatian privacy laws rendered
administrative data unavailable. Second, all of the data needed for this study (e.g.,
pension choice, demographic data, and, particularly, data on liquidity constraints,
preferences, attitudes toward government, and the like) would not have been included
in standard data sets even if they had existed.
We hired a Croatian survey agency PULS (affiliated with the U.S. Gallup polling
organization) to conduct our own survey of retirees concerning their pension choice.
This survey was fielded from mid-November 2008 to mid-January 2009, at a time the
pension choice was still fresh in the respondents’ minds: those who had chosen option
A (the more immediate payment option) would have just about received their final
payment, whereas those who had chosen option B would have been early in the
repayment process. The survey, designed to be representative of the affected population
Given the high internal return on deferral, a natural question is why a formal market for financial
intermediation of these benefits did not arise. A more patient investor (such as a financial institution)
would have had an incentive to provide pensioners with money up front in return for receiving the
deferred payments, thus earning this exceptionally high return. Such institutional arrangements were
explicitly outlawed in the legislation creating this program. Of course, retirees could have made such
arrangements informally and privately with family members (such as children), suggesting that it is
important to control for whether the pensioner had children in our regression analysis.

9

10

and fielded accordingly, asked the respondents detailed questions about their pension
choice, demographics (e.g., age, income, gender, family status), and a range of questions
to assess knowledge, beliefs, and attitudes about economic and financial matters.
We collected 2,619 survey responses. Of these, 1,818 respondents, or 69.4% of the
sample, had selected option A, whereas 801 respondents, or 30.6% of the sample, had
selected option B. These proportions match the division of choice within the population
almost exactly (69.4% of the sample opting for option A, compared to 70.9% of the full
population). This suggests that our sampling was representative and that individuals
reported their pension choices truthfully.
The primary dependent variable for our analysis is a binary variable,
“OptionPicked,” set equal to one if the respondent selected option B (the larger, more
deferred payouts) and equal to zero is the respondent selected option B (the smaller,
more immediate payouts). If one were to interpret the choice of the repayment plan as
driven solely by a comparison of one’s discount rate to the internal-rate-of-return (an
interpretation that, as discussed below, is an over-simplification), those with the
dependent variable value of 1 (i.e., those who chose option B) should be viewed as
having a discount rate below 26.6%, whereas those with the value of 0 (i.e., those who
chose option A) should be viewed as having a discount rate in excess of 26.6%.
We regress this binary variable against a range of covariates.10 Given our
definition of the dependent variable, a positive coefficient associated with a covariate
should be interpreted as an increased willingness to defer consumption (i.e., a lower

For ease of interpretation, we report the coefficients from a linear probability model. Non-linear binary
choice models yield very similar marginal effects.

10

11

discount rate), whereas a negative coefficient should be interpreted as a decreased
willingness to defer consumption (i.e., a higher discount rate).
In Table 3, we report the summary statistics for the key covariates that we
include in our regressions of the pension repayment choice (our regressions also
include 24 indicator variables depicting the individual’s county of residence within
Croatia, as well as 10 indicator variables for the ethnicity of the individual, none of
which we tabulate in the table). For purposes of this summary table, as well as our later
regressions, we group variables into seven categories and present them in distinct
panels: (A) rate of time preference and risk aversion; (B) income, wealth, and liquidity
constraints; (C) education, financial literacy, and financial self-assessments;11 (D) family
structure and other demographics; (E) health and longevity; (F) views about
macroeconomic factors; and (G) beliefs concerning attitudes toward government.12
The tabulations presented in the table suggest that our survey respondents
exhibit substantial heterogeneity in terms of their attitudes towards risk, their financial
condition, their education and financial literacy, health status, and their views about
inflation and exchange rate fluctuations. For example, just over two-fifths of individuals

The three questions at the bottom of Panel C measure the respondents’ numeracy. We asked a Simple
Interest Compounding Question: how much will be in the bank account at the end of two years if the initial
balance is 10,000 and the interest rate is 5% with no withdrawals. An answer of “More than 11,000” is
recorded in the tables as “Correct”, while a response of “Exactly 11,000” is recorded in the tables as
“Almost Correct.” We also asked a Simple Inflation Question: how much they can buy a year from now if
the interest rate is 2% and inflation is 3%. An answer of “Less than today” is recorded in the tables as
“Correct”, while a response of “Exactly as much as today” is recorded in the tables as “Almost Correct.”
Finally, we asked a “Doubling” Compounding Question: how long it takes an account to double in value at
an annual interest rate of 10%. We group answers to this question in the tables as either a response of 5-10
years or “Wrong” (responses of less than 5 years or more than 10 years).
12 Individuals were asked to respond to most questions on a scale of “1” to “5,” with “1” typically
representing “not at all important” and “5” typically representing “extremely important.” We collapse
these five potential responses into three categories: “Not Important” (responses “1” or “2”), “Moderately
Important” (response “3”), and “Very Important” (responses “4” or “5”).
11

12

have savings (defined as owning a savings account or a certificate of deposit) either in
the local currency (Kuna) or a foreign currency (e.g., Euro), and just over one-quarter
have more than a high-school education. Roughly one-half of respondents reported an
immediate need to pay for something as a very or extremely important factor in their
repayment decision, while one-quarter reported that it was not important.
There is substantial heterogeneity in terms of attitudes toward government. For
example, whereas 32% of respondents state that they were very confident at the time of
their choice that the government would make all payments, 36.9% were not at all
confident. Roughly 3 of 5 individuals felt it was very important that they receive all the
money owed no matter how long it takes, while one out of five placed no importance on
this factor. Given the myriad of factors involved in making an intertemporal choice, we
turn to regression analysis to sort out their relative importance.

3. Empirical Analysis of the Determinants of Intertemporal Choice
In this section, we regress the pension repayment choice against a large number
of variables of interest. Our dependent variable is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the
respondent selected pension repayment option B (the more deferred payment stream)
and 0 if the respondent picked option A (the more immediate payment stream). We
estimate a linear regression by OLS with robust standard errors (effects are nearly
identical if we use a Probit with marginal effects evaluated at the mean of the
independent variables). For convenience, we multiply all coefficients in the table by 100
so that they can easily be interpreted as percentage points. All of the variables presented
in the summary statistics table (Table 3) are included in the regression, with explanatory

13

variables organized into the same seven groups for ease of readability and exposition.
In addition, we include in the full-specification regression 24 indicator variables
capturing the respondents’ county of residence,13 as well as 10 indicator variables for
the respondents’ ethnicity (e.g., Croat, Serb, Muslim/Bosniak). Results of our primary
specification are reported in Table 4.14

3.1 Rate of Time Preference and Risk Aversion
We begin by discussing the correlation between whether an individual decided
to defer consumption (i.e., selected repayment option B) and a proxy measure of an
individual’s pure rate of time preference. We next estimate a time preference parameter
in a manner similar to Kirby et al. (1999) and Chabris et al. (2008).15 We describe a
situation in which the individual has received 20,000 Kunas16 and is given a choice
between keeping the money and doing with it as they please, or depositing the money
with an “extremely reputable bank as a CD for one year, so that you will be promised a
certain annual interest rate, but will not be able to touch the money until the year
expires.” We then ask “If you would be willing to make such a deposit, what interest
rate would the extremely reputable bank need to offer to pay you so that you would
prefer to deposit the 20,000 Kunas as a CD for one year, rather than keep it and do with
it as you please?” If respondents did not provide a meaningful response (i.e., they

The county-of-residence indicators are jointly statistically significant in the regression at the 1% level.
We lose a total of 129 observations from our original sample of 2,619 because of missing values for
certain variables included in our regression, resulting in a final sample size of 2,490.
15 Kirby et al. (1999) and Chabris et al. (2008) ask subjects to choose between “smaller, immediate reward
(SIR) and a larger, delayed reward (LDR)” (e.g., “Would you prefer $54 today, or $55 in 117 days?”).
Additional questions vary the reward sizes and the time period of delay.
16 At the time of the survey, this amount was worth just under $4,000 U.S. dollars. Also, it is equal to
approximately one-third of the average annual wage in Croatia, and to about three-quarters of the
average annual pension in Croatia.
13
14

14

responded that they did not know), we took them through a branching series of
responses, asking whether they would deposit the money at various rates (5%, 10%,
15%, and 25%) to approximate their rate of time preference for a one-year bank deposit.
Respondents were also allowed to answer that “[T]here is absolutely no way I would do
it,” that is, that there is no rate at which they would take out the one-year CD.
Indeed, 29% of the respondents indicated that there was “no rate” at which they
would be willing to give up current access to the money for a higher future return,
suggesting that these individuals had a very high rate of discount. Of the 71% of
respondents who provided a rate (initially or through the “branching” questions), the
mean and median rates were 8.7% and 7%, respectively, with a quarter of this group
demanding an interest rate of 10% or more and a tenth of this group demanding an
interest rate of 15% or more. Therefore, there is substantial heterogeneity: whereas a
large fraction of the respondents report having a very high discount rate (i.e., would not
save at any rate), one-quarter of the respondents would postpone consumption for a
year for a bank-deposit return of 5% or less, while about one-third would do so for a
return in the 6-10% range. Thus, for those who provided a one-year interest rate, most
of the responses received were in the range of the actual Kuna-denominated CD rates
present in the decade preceding the pension-repayment choice (Figure 1).
As indicated in Panel A of Table 4, this proxy for the pure rate of time preference
is not significantly correlated with the choice of pension payments (the coefficient is
small in magnitude, -0.1, and is not statistically significant). There are at least two
possible reasons for this lack of significance: (1) because of the context of our question
(investing in a bank CD), our time preference measure may be very noisy for those with

15

limited investment experience, and (2) liquidity constraints may have confounded our
measure, as had been hypothesized in the context of understanding the difference in
estimated rates of time preference between the experimental and empirical literatures.
Further analysis is supportive of both of these reasons. In Figure 2, we report the
coefficients from a modified version of our baseline regression in which we interact the
time preference question with variables that capture these effects. The first bar
represents the coefficient from Table 4, that is, the baseline coefficient on our rate of
time preference question that shows the change in likelihood of selecting option B
resulting from a one-percentage point change in the rate of time preference. Subsequent
bars show the effect of the rate of time preference for various subgroups, each obtained
from a separate regression.
To test for liquidity constraints, we ask respondents to rate on a scale from 1 (not
at all important) to 5 (extremely important) the importance of the following statement
in influencing their decision: “An immediate need for money to help pay some
expenses, such as debts, medical expenses, bills, home or apartment repairs or
renovation, replacement of major appliances, or similar, for self, family, or friends.” One
quarter of the respondents answered that liquidity constraints were not important
(answers “1” or “2”), while one-half of the respondents answered that liquidity
constraints were very or extremely important (answers “4” or “5”). For individuals who
rated liquidity constraints as not important, the coefficient on our measure of their
subjective rate of time preference is significant, although the economic magnitude is
small. A higher rate is associated with a lower likelihood of picking the deferred
payment option; a one-percentage point increase in the subjective rate of preference is

16

associated with a 0.4 percentage-point decline in the likelihood of picking option B
(statistically significant at the 10-percent level). For the more liquidity constrained
respondents, the thought of deferring the pension repayment may not be considered a
possibility under any rate of return and, therefore, their rate of time preference is not
correlated with their decision (we discuss the direct effects of liquidity constraints, as
well as the interaction of liquidity constraints with other factors, below).
For respondents who have savings, a trait shared by just over two-fifths of the
sample respondents, we find that having a higher discount rate is also associated with a
significantly lower probability of choosing the more deferred payout option (option B).
As shown by the third bar in Figure 2, a one percentage-point increase in the discount
rate is associated with a statistically significant 0.6 percentage-point reduction in the
likelihood of choosing option B. For those who do not have savings (and, thus, for
whom our question is less salient), there is no relation. If we condition on individuals
who have savings in a foreign currency (such as Euro) and, thus, are likely to be more
financially sophisticated, a one percentage-point increase in the discount rate is now
associated with a highly significant 0.9 percentage-point reduction in the likelihood of
choosing option B. As shown in the final bar, the coefficient increases further to a 1.1
percentage-point reduction for the subsample of those who have savings in a foreign
currency and for whom liquidity constraints are not important. Although these effects
are all statistically significant, they are fairly small in magnitude in light of the
important role that the rate of time preference plays in theoretical models of
intertemporal choice.

17

In short, we find that our proxy for the pure rate of time preference is modestly
informative only for those individuals for whom it is most salient. These findings are
reminiscent of other research that has indicated the importance of focusing on the subpopulation for which a particular measure may have more meaning. For example,
Malloy, Moskowitz, and Vissing-Jørgensen (2008) show that consumption-based asset
pricing models perform better when focused on the consumption risk of stockholders,
rather than that of the overall population. In a different context, Brown (2001) shows
that forward-looking utility-based measures of the value of guaranteed income are
significantly correlated with annuity choice for individuals with longer planning
horizons, but not for those who are more myopic.
We also control for risk aversion in Panel A of Table 4, but do not find any
significant correlation with the pension payment choice.

3.2 Income, Wealth, and Liquidity Constraints
In Panel B of Table 4, we report the effects of various economic factors, many of
which are very consistent with the predictions generated by standard models of
intertemporal choice. We find that, consistent with prior research, respondents with
higher income and more wealth exhibit lower discount rates (as manifested by a greater
likelihood to accept the deferred payments). Specifically, we find evidence of income
and wealth gradients: middle- and higher-income individuals are each almost 7
percentage points more likely to defer payments than low-income individuals are.
For reasons of cultural sensitivity, we did not ask directly for measures of overall
net worth. Instead, we asked a series of “yes/no” questions about ownership of specific
types of assets. While many of these measures (e.g., ownership of real estate, mutual
18

funds, bonds) are not significant, we do find that individuals who own stocks are more
likely to defer payments, as are individuals with higher pension repayment amount
(i.e., more money at stake in the option A/B decision). Stock owners are 4.7 percentage
points more likely to pick the deferred payment option than those who do not own
stock are, while a doubling of the pension repayment amount is associated with a 1.7
percentage-point increase in the likelihood of selecting the deferred payment stream
(given the coefficient of 2.5 on the log of the pension repayment amount).
In

discussing

the

fact

that

econometric

studies

of

behavior

and

experimental/survey results come to very different conclusions regarding discount
rates, Barsky et al. (1997) note that “one possible explanation of the finding of high
subjective discount rates in the econometric work is the difficulty of controlling for
features of the economic environment facing agents, such as liquidity constraints and
the need for precautionary savings.” The fact that our income measures and stock
ownership measure are negatively correlated with discount rates is consistent with such
a liquidity-constraint explanation. We also measure liquidity constraints through the
direct question described in Section 3.1. The bottom part of Panel B of Table 4 suggests
that individuals who rate liquidity constraints as very important are 18.6 percentage
points more likely to take the immediate payment option than the individuals who rate
it as unimportant are.

3.3 Education, Financial Literacy, and Self-Assessments
As shown in the first row of Panel C, education, a potential proxy for financial
literacy, is only weakly related to payout choice. Specifically, individuals with more
than a high school education are 3.1 percentage points more likely to choose option B
19

than those with a high school education or less are, although this effect has a p-value of
0.11 and, therefore, is not significant at conventional levels.
The literature has emphasized that overall education is not a perfect proxy for
financial literacy, and that financial literacy has a direct effect on influencing financial
decision-making (e.g., Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007a, 2007b). Thus, in addition to the
overall education level, we also include numerous measures of financial literacy drawn
from the extant literature. None of these measures (e.g., education or work experience
in accounting, economics, or finance; self-reported assessment of numeracy; simple
compound interest and inflation questions) are significantly correlated with the deferral
decision, nor are they jointly significant (p-value = 0.50).

3.4 Family Structure and Other Demographics
We find that family structure matters. As shown in Panel D, there is a high
degree of within-couple correlation in the choice. For those couples in which both
spouses had made a pension choice, there is a 51 percentage-point difference in the
probability of choosing option B depending on whether one’s spouse chose A or B. Of
course, the high within-couple correlation should not be interpreted as a causal relation,
but, rather, as the likely outcome of a joint household decision. Nonetheless, we control
for this in all specifications, although the coefficients on other variables are virtually
unchanged if we exclude the spouse’s choice.
We also find that the presence of children in the household makes it 8.5
percentage points more likely that one will choose the higher-return, deferred payment
option. There are at least two possible reasons for this finding. First, this is consistent
with a view that those with children may have bequest motives (and thus the higher
20

total payments are more attractive, especially given that children are qualified to receive
the payments if the pensioner dies before the full series of payments has been received).
Consistent with this notion, we further find that those who indicated that leaving
money to heirs is very important to them were 8.5 percentage points more likely to pick
option B relative to those for whom this was not an important consideration in their
choice. Second, because of the inheritability of these payments, children and parents
could engage in an informal exchange whereby the children could loan to the parents
the amount promised through option A (or an even higher amount) early on, and then
get paid back from the deferred payments, thus earning the high internal return.
We also note that among those for whom receiving the most money while they
were still alive was very important were 5.2 percentage points more likely to take the
more immediate payment option (less likely to pick option B) relative to those for
whom this was not important.

3.5 Health and Longevity
Individuals rationally discount the future not only because of the pure rate of
time preference, but also because they recognize that they may not live long enough to
receive payments. This is a particularly relevant consideration in a sample of elderly
individuals such as pensioners. Indeed, in standard consumption models, one can think
about discounting by the sum of the pure discount rate and the mortality rate.
However, in most studies of discount rate behavior, researchers have not had access to
information about longevity expectations aside from a respondent’s age, which does not
encapsulate within-cohort heterogeneity in mortality expectations.

21

In our survey, we find that beliefs about health and life expectancy (as reported
in Panel E of Table 4) are quite important determinants of the intertemporal choice.
First, for each additional year of age at the time the pension repayment choice was
made, an individual is one percentage point less likely to defer consumption. Even after
conditioning for age, individuals who rated their own health as good or excellent
relative to peers were significantly more likely to defer payments. In addition, those
who were not confident at the time of the choice that they would live at least 7 years
(the time required to receive all payments under option B) were 8-9 percentage points
more likely to take immediate payments. This suggests that there is substantial
heterogeneity in health and longevity expectations within age groups, and that this
heterogeneity is important for understanding intertemporal decision-making.

3.6 Macroeconomic Factors
Given Croatia’s political and economic history, a natural concern that pensioners
might have had was whether the government would be committed to maintaining the
purchasing power of the promised future stream of benefits. Simply put, in their
lifetimes, Croatian retirees eligible for compensation have “seen it all”—war and its
related destruction (twice), high inflationary periods lasting several years, featuring
years with annual inflation exceeding 100% and accompanied by “stabilization”
attempts and recession (multiple times), and hyperinflation during the pre-war and war
period of the late 1980s and early 1990s. However, as discussed earlier, the decade prior
to the pension repayment choice was marked by fairly mild inflation.
Our survey asked individuals “at the time you were making your A or B choice,
how high did you think that annual inflation would be (that is, by how much would
22

prices rise each year) over the period of the next several years from that time?” They
were given several choices (0–4%, 5-8%, 9-12%, 13-16%, more than 16%), which we
collapsed into three ranges (0-8%, 9-16%, more than 16%). Whereas only 2% of sample
respondents expected inflation to be more than 16% per year, these individuals were
10.3 percentage points less likely to choose the deferred payment option than those who
believed it will be 8% or less per year were.
Croatia is a relatively small, open economy, and even average citizens are aware
of the importance of maintaining the Kuna’s purchasing power relative to other
currencies (especially the Euro). Thus, we also asked “at the time you were making
your A or B choice, what was your opinion about the movement of the Kuna relative to
the Euro over the period of the next several years from that time?” Those who thought
that the Kuna would decline relative to the Euro were 4.5 percentage points less likely
to take the deferred payment option.

3.7 Attitudes Toward Government
3.7.1 Confidence that the Government will Honor its Payment Commitment
Croatia’s political history, including the very event that led to this study (the
government’s decision to renege partially on pension promises), makes Croatia a
fruitful environment in which to study political risk. Through our informal discussions
with Croatian retirees prior to fielding our survey, it became clear that there were
important differences in the population regarding the extent to which they had
confidence that the government will actually “make good” on its commitment to make
all future payouts. Such skepticism is understandable because the initial basis of the
Constitutional Court decision that led to the pension choice in the first place was that
23

the government essentially had reneged on part of its promised pension payments to
retirees in the early- and mid-1990s. Thus, some retirees continued to express a degree
of skepticism about whether the government would be willing or able to follow through
on these payments for the life of the program.
To the extent to which individuals did not exhibit strong confidence that future
payments indeed will be made, they may have behaved as if they were discounting the
future more steeply. Such behavior would have numerous economic and policy
implications, especially in closely related contexts, in which future pension benefits for
current workers are perceived as risky. For example, if political risk prompts
individuals not to fully value future benefits, then public services could be more
expensive to provide because the political risk would limit the extent to which the cost
of pension benefits is offset by lower wage costs. A political discount could also increase
labor supply distortions and thus create efficiency costs if it reduces the perceived
linkage between current taxes paid and expected future benefits (Summers, 1989).
Another implication of a “political risk premium” is that a public pension system might
be able to reduce its long-run liabilities by offering individuals an opportunity to
exchange future benefits for (more steeply discounted) near-term benefits. Luttmer and
Samwick (2011) provide evidence of a willingness to accept reduced benefits in the U.S.
context where, using survey data, they estimate that, on average, U.S. households
would be willing to forego 4 to 6 percent of their scheduled Social Security benefits to
remove the associated political uncertainty. Our study advances this idea by examining
the extent to which these factors related to a real and economically meaningful choice
that was exogenously imposed on the entire eligible retiree population in Croatia.

24

We tested for the influence of political risk in two ways that differ primarily in
terms of whether the issue was raised in a more positive or a more negative frame. In
the more positive frame, we asked individuals “at the time you were making your A or
B choice, how confident were you that the government would make all of the payments
to all the retirees who selected option B?” They were given a 5-point scale, where 1 was
“not at all confident” and 5 was “extremely confident.” We find that this has a
quantitatively and statistically important effect on people’s decisions. Those who rated
this factor as a 4 or 5 on the confidence scale (grouped into the “very confident”
category in the table) were 14.7 percentage points more likely to choose the delayed
payout option than those who expressed little confidence in the Croatia government’s
ability to make all the payments it promised were.
We also asked a more negatively-framed question. Specifically, in our list of
factors that respondents were asked to rate in terms of importance in their decisionmaking (a 5-point scale, on which 1 is “not at all important” and 5 is “extremely
important”), we asked respondents to rate the importance of a “concern that the
government might not honor its commitment to pay out all of the money owed.” We
find that, even after controlling for the confidence question above, the importance of
this factor also has a significant effect. Those who rated this concern as a 4 or 5 on the
importance scale (grouped into the “very important” category in the table) were 7.5
percentage points more likely to choose the more immediate payment option than those
who rated it as not an important factor were.
A natural concern about these two political-risk questions is that individuals may
have answered them on the basis of the beliefs they held at the time of the survey, rather

25

than at the time of the choice (as we asked them to do). The evidence, however, is
consistent with respondents taking the “at the time you were making your A versus B
choice” request seriously while responding to our survey. We are able to test this
hypothesis because approximately one-half of our respondents had been interviewed
before the Croatian Postal Bank (HPB), the entity that administered the payments,
announced and paid out the second B payment, and the other half of our respondents
were interviewed after the second B payment had been deposited.17 If individuals’
responses reflected their beliefs at the time of the survey, the reported confidence in
receiving all the payments should have increased after the second payment of the six
payments had been announced and deposited (i.e., when surveyed, respondents who
had seen 1/6 of all payments under option B made would likely have had less
confidence in all of the payments being made than those who had seen 2/6 of payments
made). However, a comparison of the distribution of responses to the questions
regarding confidence in all the B payments made and concern about government
reneging on its promises offered by those interviewed before the announcement of the
second payment to those interviewed after the second payment reveals no change.18
This is consistent with individuals answering based on their confidence in government
at the time of choice.
The Croatian Postal Bank (HPB) announced the second payment under Option B on December 16, 2008
and deposited it in retirees’ accounts on December 17, 2008; 46.3% of the sample was interviewed before
December 16 and 48.6% of the sample was interviewed after December 17.
18 Of those interviewed after only one B payment had been made, 30.5% were very confident all six of the
B payments would be made, while 38.0% were not confident this would happen. Of those interviewed
after two of the B payments had been made, 33.6% were very confident all six of the B payments would
be made, while 36.0% were not confident (with none of these figures statistically different across the two
groups). Similarly, of those interviewed after only one B payment had been made (two had been made),
43.6% (44.8%) rated the concern that government might not honor its commitment as very important,
with 26.4% (26.0%) rating that concern as not important.
17

26

A second concern is that individuals might have engaged in ex-post
rationalization of their decision to take the early payment. That is, after seeing the
government follow through on the earliest payments of the deferred-payment option,
individuals may have come to believe they had made a mistake in choosing the more
immediate payment option and thus, ex post, have rationalized their decision by
blaming a lack of trust in government. This ex-post justification hypothesis could
potentially explain the coefficients obtained on our two political-risk variables: Choice
Time Confidence All B Payments Will Be Made and Concern Gov’t Might Not Honor Its
Commitment. There are two reasons, however, why we do not believe this possibility is
driving our results. First, if embarrassment about making the “wrong” choice were a
factor, one might expect some of the individuals who had chosen option A simply to
state incorrectly that they had chosen option B instead. However, as noted earlier, the
sample proportion matches nearly exactly the proportion of the population that chose
option A versus option B (and this further holds whether people were interviewed
before or after the second B payment was announced and deposited). Second, if
individuals were more likely to regret their decision and blame the government as it
became clearer that all the deferred payments would actually be made, we would
expect that the magnitude of the coefficient on our confidence in government measures
would increase after the second payment was made. However, this is not the case: in
unreported analyses, the coefficients on Choice Time Confidence All B Payments Will Be
Made and Concern Gov’t Might Not Honor Its Commitment are virtually indistinguishable
between those who took the survey before or after the second payment was made.19
19

Among survey respondents interviewed before the second B payment was announced, those who

27

3.7.2 The Importance of Receiving “What is Owed No Matter How Long It Takes”
Another issue that came out of our pre-survey qualitative research was that a
sizeable fraction of respondents expressed a strong desire to be “made whole no matter
how long it takes.” Qualitatively, it appeared that these individuals were placing
tremendous weight on receiving the full nominal amount they were owed, suggesting
that the nominal value owed served as an important reference point. Averting this
sense of loss seemed more important to these individuals than the specific timing of the
payments or the present value of the payments. Our qualitative research, carried out
prior to our survey, suggests that this factor is tightly linked with the fact that it was the
government who had originally failed to pay people what they were due, and the fact
that they now wanted the government to make them “whole” again.
To test for this possibility, we asked individuals to rate on a 5-point scale the
relative importance of the factor “desire that the full amount of the debt that you were
due would be paid out, no matter how long it took.” Three-fifths of the population
ranked this factor as very important (4 or 5 on a 5-point scale), while less than one-fifth
rated it as not important to them (1 or 2 on a 5-point scale).
As shown at the bottom of Table 4, Panel G, those who believed that receiving
the full amount due no matter how long it takes is very important were 27 percentage
points more likely to take the deferred payment relative to those who believed this is

expressed they were very confident at the time of choice that all B payments would be made were 16.6
percentage points more likely to select option B than those who were not confident of this, while that
figure was 13.3 percentage points for those interviewed after the second B payment was made. The pvalue of the difference between these two coefficients is an insignificant 0.40. The difference in the
coefficient on Concern Gov’t Might Not Honor Its Commitment, based on when the individual was
interviewed, is also small in magnitude and highly insignificant. These results were obtained from
augmenting our baseline regression in Table 4 with an interaction of our political-risk variables with
whether the individual was interviewed after the second B payment was made.

28

not important. To give a sense for the economic magnitude of this attitude, if the entire
population had shifted from their current beliefs regarding the importance of receiving
the full amount due no matter how long it takes (i.e., 61% believing this is very
important and 13% believing this is moderately important) to everyone believing this is
not an important consideration, the selection of the deferred-payment option B would
have fallen from 30.6 percentage points to 11.7 percentage points (the light grey portion
of the leftmost bar in Figure 3). Put another way, a move from everyone believing
“being made whole” is not important to the actual distribution of beliefs observed in the
sample (i.e., 61% believing it is very important and 13% believing it is moderately
important) increases the selection of option B by 18.9 percentage points. Indeed, this
effect is larger than virtually any other variable in our regression.
To the extent that this focus on the full amount owed is important, it ought to be
the case that the individuals for whom this was an important factor are fairly insensitive
to the internal return offered by the choice of option B over A. Even if the payments
were spread out over a longer period of time, thus lowering the internal rate of return,
the individuals focused on receiving the full nominal amount should still desire option
B. A confounding factor, of course, is that the median age of the individuals our sample
is 68 and, if the payment were spread out over too long of a period, they might be
concerned that they would not receive the full amount due while still alive. The
remaining bars of Figure 3 illustrate these effects by also making use of a question that
asks individuals what pension choice they would have made if the payments had been
spread over 10 years instead of 6 years (which implies a 16.6% rate of return, down
from 26.6%).

29

In this hypothetical, 10-year deferral scenario, 17.4% of individuals would pick
the deferred money (the “being made whole” component, calculated as above, accounts
for 12.2 percentage points or 70% of this total). Part of the decline in the selection of the
deferred-payment stream likely reflects that many of our respondents might be
concerned about whether they would still be alive at the end of the payment stream. To
help account for this, the right-half of Figure 3 shows the results of the actual 6-year
deferral and the hypothetical 10-year deferral for respondents who would be no more
than 70 years old when they would receive their final payment under the deferredpayment stream. For this younger population, 39% actually selected option B, and
31.6% would have selected option B even if payments had been spread out longer. The
“being made whole” component, calculated from regression estimates in the same way
it was in the leftmost bars, is nearly identical in the two scenarios, even though the
second scenario (i.e., deferred payments spread out over 10 years) results in a much
lower implicit return from deferring payments. Thus, for this segment of the
population, the nominal reference point is a very important factor in explaining the
choice of option B.
We recognize that our question is a noisy proxy for whether the individual is
focused on the nominal reference point. As a result, that measurement error may cause
attenuation bias. Potentially biasing in the opposite direction is the possibility that we
may have the causality reversed, that is, that individuals who chose the delayed option
subsequently report their desire to be made whole as an ex-post rationalization
(although, given that their choice appeared to have provided a 26% return, it is not clear
why they would feel the need to rationalize it).

30

To address both of these potential concerns, we turn to an instrumental variables
strategy. Our strategy builds on the work of Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2004) and
Brown et al. (2008). These studies show that an individual’s region of birth can have
long-lasting effects on attitudes later in life. Our instrument is also motivated by the
“paradox of distance” in the public administration literature. Frederickson and
Frederickson (1997, 187) define this paradox by stating that “while people trust and
even revere those government officials who are near at hand, they believe that
government officials who are far away are lazy, incompetent, and probably dishonest.”
Consistent with this, Schminke, Cropanzano, and Rupp (2002) find that proximity to the
highest level of the organization affects one’s sense of the fairness of the decisions made
by that organization.
We make use of the fact that individuals born in Central Croatia (the part of the
country centered around the capital, Zagreb) would likely have different views about
the importance of receiving what they are due from the government than individuals in
outer regions of Croatia would. The use of this instrument is grounded in the
administrative division of Croatia, as well as the Croatian historical linguistic map (i.e.,
Central Croatia has a different dialect than the outlying areas do). Our conjecture is that
this physical and cultural separation from the center of government in Zagreb causes
more of a concern about being “wronged” by the government and a greater focus on
wanting to get back everything they are owed in nominal terms (i.e., to “be made
whole”). With the plethora of characteristics we already include in our regression of
payment choice, including controls for county of current residence, measures of income
and wealth, education and financial literacy, age and bequest motives, ethnicity and

31

religiosity, and health status, our identifying assumption is that birth region affects the
choice of whether to defer pension repayment only through the attitudes toward the
government nurtured there.
Thus, we construct a simple binary instrument based on whether individuals
were born in Central Croatia or in the outlying areas (Figure 4). For perspective, 44% of
Croatians in our survey were born in Central Croatia.
In Panel A of Table 5, we report the results of our first-stage regression of a
binary indicator variable for whether “receiving the full amount due no matter how
long it takes” is rated as very important against our binary indicator of region of birth.
The results show that individuals born in Central Croatia were 7 percentage points less
likely to indicate that it is important to receive the full amount owed than individuals
born outside of Central Croatia were. This coefficient is virtually unchanged when we
include the full set of other explanatory variables from our earlier regression, including
a full set of 24 indicator variables for the county in which the respondent currently lives,
underscoring that this effect is orthogonal to all the other factors influencing the
pension choice. In the second stage, we find that the instrumented effect of “being made
whole” is statistically significant, with a coefficient of 57, even larger than our baseline
case (consistent with measurement error biasing our estimates downwards).
The 2SLS results provide confirming evidence that a desire to receive the full,
nominal amount due has a very strong effect on the pension choice. As it turned out, in
this case, this factor works in the direction of pushing individuals toward what might
plausibly be considered, at least ex post, the better financial choice. In other words, a
focus on the nominal amount owed, rather than the recognition of the high internal rate

32

of return, is arguably the most powerful explanation offered by those who chose the
delayed payout, yet this focus on the nominal amount owed is not observable in the
usual household data sets.20
3.7.3 How Government Attitudes Interact with Liquidity Constraints
We have shown in earlier sections that the liquidity-constrained individuals are
more likely to take the early payment option. Taking this notion further, however, one
might expect that if a person is highly liquidity constrained, then it may simply be an
“unaffordable luxury” to be concerned about trust in government or being made whole.
If so, the regressions estimated on the entire sample may have overstated the effect of
government attitude variables in the liquidity-constrained population, and understated
the effects on those who were unconstrained. We address this possibility through the
addition of interactions of the government attitude variables with our measure of
liquidity constraints described in Section 3.1.21 As a reminder of the importance of the
direct effect of liquidity constraints, we note that only 22 percent of liquidityconstrained individuals choose the deferred-payment option B (these individuals
represent 51% of the sample that cited liquidity constraints as a very important factor in
their pension repayment choice), whereas option B was selected by 40 percent of

The inclusion of variables concerning macroeconomic expectations (Panel F in Table 4) and government
attitudes (Panel G in Table 4) into the specification increases the overall explanatory power of our
regressions by nearly one-third (the adjusted R-squared increases from 0.24 in a regression that includes
only Panels A through E to 0.31 in the regression that also includes Panels F and G). Although these
variables add substantial explanatory power, their exclusion does not create significant omitted variable
bias for the variables typically included in standard data sets. Specifically, the inclusion or exclusion of
these macroeconomic and political variables does not substantially change the coefficients on the
variables in Panels A through E across the two specifications.
21 In the interest of space, we do not report an entire new table with these interactions, but instead report
the relevant new coefficients in the text to follow.
20

33

unconstrained individuals (the portion of the sample who considered liquidity
constraints to be of only moderate or of no importance in their decision).
The results of these interactions indicate that many of the attitudes toward
government have a much stronger effect on the pension-repayment choice for
individuals who are not liquidity constrained. For example, a concern about
government not honoring its commitment has no relation with the pension-repayment
choice for liquidity constrained individuals, but is highly significant and large in
magnitude for those who are not liquidity constrained (with the difference between the
two groups significant at the 1-percent level).22 The interaction term on the other
political-risk question, confidence that all B payments will be made, is not significant,
although a joint test clearly indicates that the combination of these two political-risk
measures differs between constrained and unconstrained individuals (p-value = 0.05).
Turning to a desire to be made whole no matter how long it takes, we find that
the interaction term with liquidity constraints is also highly significant. For the
population that is not liquidity constrained, a very strong desire to be made whole is
associated with a 34.2 percentage-point increase in the likelihood of selecting the
deferred payments. This point estimate falls to 19.4 percentage points for the liquidityconstrained subsample (with the difference in coefficients statistically significant at the
1-percent level).
Thus, liquidity constraints are not only a direct determinant of intertemporal
decisions, but also affect the relative importance of attitudes toward government. In
Among the population that is not liquidity constrained, those who expressed that a concern that the
government might not honor its commitment is very important are 13.4 percentage points less likely to
take the deferred payment option (coefficient = -13.4, SE = 3.0). For those who are liquidity constrained,
this coefficient is an insignificant 0.6 percentage points (SE = 3.6).
22

34

essence, these results suggest that liquidity constraints severely limit the ability of an
individual to take deferred payments, even when an exceptional rate of return of 26
percent is offered and the individual expressed no concern about government reneging
on its commitment.

4. Summary and Conclusions
In this paper, we empirically examine the determinants of individuals’ discount
rates. We exploit a unique policy change in Croatia whereby retirees were given the
choice between two payment streams to compensate them for past underpayments
from the pension system. One option offered more immediate payments, while the
other offered a more deferred payment structure (with an internal rate of return of more
than 26% compared to the first option). Our use of micro-level survey data enables us to
examine a wide range of possible determinants of this choice, including proxies for
beliefs about various types of political risk.
We find that the payment stream choice is strongly correlated with a wide range
of explanatory variables. As one might expect, those with higher income and wealth,
and those not facing liquidity constraints exhibited lower discount rates and, thus, were
more willing to accept deferred payment from the government. Family structure and
health were also important in this intertemporal tradeoff. Those with children and selfreported strong bequest motives were much more likely to accept a deferred pension
repayment option, while those who were older and reported poor health were more
likely to accept the significantly lower amount of money up front.

35

Unique to this study, we also examine the role beliefs concerning various types
of political risk play in individuals’ decision-making. In particular, we find that the
individuals with low confidence in the government’s ability to make all the payments
promised are much more likely to select a more immediate, reduced payment stream.
Another important consideration the respondents expressed is the desire to “be
made whole,” that is, to receive the full (nominal) amount owed, no matter how long it
takes. Three-fifths of pensioners regarded this consideration as very important to them.
The prevalence of this desire, and the intensity with which it was felt, is estimated to
have increased the proportion of the population opting for the deferred-payment plan
by the government (which paid out the exact nominal amount owed to the pensioners,
but spread it out over many years) from only 12% of the affected population to 31%.
Although Croatia’s recent political history differs from that of the U.S. and many
other nations, the findings of this study have direct relevance for debates over public
pension systems in the U.S. and elsewhere. The presence of political risk may lead
participants in these systems to discount future benefits at a higher rate than would be
predicted otherwise by the standard socioeconomic determinants of intertemporal
decision-making. This suggests that many retirees may view as attractive a government
program offering pensioners a lump-sum payment rather than a promised stream of
benefits (even if offered at a substantial discount in present-value terms from the
government’s perspective). An important offsetting factor, however, is the extent to
which individuals assign importance to the nominal value of the promises made.

36

References
Arrow, Kenneth, 1972, Gifts and Exchanges, Philosophy and Public Affairs, 1(4): 343-367.
Barro, Robert J. and D. B. Gordon, 1983, Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a Model of
Monetary Policy, Journal of Monetary Economics, 12 (1): 101-21.
Barsky, Robert B., F. T. Juster, and M. Kimball, 1997, Preference Parameters and
Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health and Retirement
Study, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(2): 537-579.
Black, M., 1984, Personal Discount Rates: Estimates for the Military Population, Final Report
of the Fifth Quadrennial Review of Military Compensation, volume 1B, Appendix I, U.S.
Department of Defense, Washington D.C.
Brown, Jeffrey R., 2001, Private Pensions, Mortality Risk, and the Decision to Annuitize,
Journal of Public Economics, 82(1): 29-62.
Brown, Jeffrey R., Zoran Ivković, Paul Smith and Scott J. Weisbenner, 2008, Neighbors
Matter: Causal Community Effects and Stock Market Participation, Journal of Finance,
63 (3): 1509-1531.
Chabris, C. F., Laibson, D. I., Morris, C. L., Schuldt, J. P., and Taubinsky, D., 2008,
Individual Laboratory-Measured Discount Rates Predict Field Behavior, Journal of
Risk and Uncertainty, 37: 237–269.
Frederickson, David G. and H. George Frederickson, 1997, The Paradox of Distance and
the Problem of Role Differentiation. In H. George Frederickson, The Spirit of Public
Administration. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers. Pp. 183-194.
Gallup, July 20, 2010, Six in 10 Workers Hold No Hope of Receiving Social Security,
http://www.gallup.com/poll/141449/six-workers-hold-no-hope-receiving-socialsecurity.aspx
Gilman, H. J., 1976, Determinants of Implicit Discount Rates: An Empirical Examination of
the Pattern of Voluntary Pension Contributions of Employees in Four Firms, Centre for
Naval Analyses, Arlington, VA.
Guiso, Luigi, Paolo Sapienza and Luigi Zingales, 2004, The Role of Social Capital in
Financial Development. American Economic Review, 94(3): 526-556.

37

Hausman, Jerry A., 1979, Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization of
Energy- Using Durables, Bell Journal of Economics, 10(1): 33-54.
Kirby, Kris N., Nancy M. Petry, and Warren K. Bickel, 1999, Heroin Addicts Have
Higher Discount Rates for Delayed Rewards than Non-Drug-Using Controls, Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 128: 78–87.
Knack, S. and P. Keefer, 1997, Does Social Capital Have an Economic Payoff? A CrossCountry Investigation, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(4): 1251-1288.
Lahiri, Ashok Kumar, 1991, Money and Inflation in Yugoslavia, IMF Staff Papers, Vol.
38(4): 751-788.
Lawrance, Emily C, 1991, Poverty and the Rate of Time Preference: Evidence from Panel
Data, Journal of Political Economy, 99(1): 54-77.
Loewenstein G. and Prelec D., 1992, Anomalies in Intertemporal Choice: Evidence and
an Interpretation, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107: 573-597.
Loewenstein, George, 1987, Anticipation and the Valuation of Delayed Consumption,
Economic Journal, 97: 666-684.
Loewenstein, George and Drazen Prelec, 1991, Negative Time Preference, American
Economic Review 81: 347-352.
Loewenstein, George and Thaler, Richard H., 1989. Intertemporal Choice, Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 3(4): 181-193.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell, 2007a, Baby Boomer Retirement Security:
The Roles of Planning, Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth, Journal of Monetary
Economics, 54: 205-224.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell, 2007b, Financial Literacy and Retirement
Preparedness: Evidence and Implications for Financial Education, Business
Economics, 42(1): 35-44.
Luttmer, Erzo F.P. and Andrew A. Samwick, 2011, The Causes and Consequences of
Perceivied Political Uncertainty in Social Security. Working paper available at
http://www.nber.org/programs/ag/rrc/NB11-11 Luttmer, Samwick FINAL.pdf.

38

Malloy, Christopher, Tobias J. Moskowitz, and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen, 2009, LongRun Stockholder Consumption and Asset Returns, Journal of Finance, 64(6): 24272479.
Mankiw, N. Gregory and Zeldes, Stephen P., 1991, The Consumption of Stockholders
and Nonstockholders, Journal of Financial Economics, 29(1): 97-112.
Novy-Marx, Robert and Joshua D. Rauh, 2009, The Liabilities and Risks of StateSponsored Pension Plans, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(4): 191-210.
Rocha, Roberto de Rezende, 1992, Inflation and Stabilization in Yugoslavia,
Contemporary Economic Policy, Vol. 10(4): 21-38.
Samuelson, Paul, 1937, A Note on Measurement of Utility, The Review of Economic
Studies, 4: 155-161.
Samwick, Andrew A., 1998, Discount Rate Heterogeneity and Social Security Reform,
Journal of Development Economics, 57(1): 117-146.
Schminke, Marshall, Russell Cropanzano, and Deborah E. Rupp, 2002, Organization
Structure and Fairness Perceptions: The Moderating Effects of Organizational Level,
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 89: 881-905.
Shoven, John B. and Sita N. Slavov, 2006, Political Risk Versus Market Risk in Social
Security, NBER Working Paper No. 12135.
Slemrod, Joel, 2002, Trust in Public Finance, NBER Working Paper 9187.
Staiger, Douglas and James H. Stock, 1997, Instrumental Variables Regression with
Weak Instruments, Econometrica, vol. 65(3): 557-586.
Summers, Lawrence H., 1989, Some Simple Economics of Mandated Benefits, The
American Economic Review, 79(2): 177-183.
Warner, John T. and Saul Pleeter, 2001, The Personal Discount Rate: Evidence from
Military Downsizing Programs, The American Economic Review, 91(1): 33-53.
World Bank, Data and Statistics for Croatia,
http://www.worldbank.hr/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/COUNTRIES/ECAEXT/CROATIA
EXTN/0,,menuPK:301270~pagePK:141132~piPK:141109~theSitePK:301245,00.html.

39

Table 1: Summary Statistics of Pension Repayment Amount by Household Income
This table provides the distribution of the pension repayment amount owed to
households in the survey, broken down by the self-reported income range of the
household. Amounts are in Kuna (the Croatian currency). At the time of the survey, one
Kuna was worth about $0.19 U.S. dollars.
10th
25th Median 75th 90th
12,000 25,000 38,938 50,000 66,000
Full Sample
4,250 9,400 16,650 24,000 43,000
Lower Income (less than 2,000 Kn/month)
Medium Income (2,000 to 4,000 Kn/month) 14,000 26,000 36,000 47,280 56,000
Higher Income (4,000 Kn/month or more) 18,000 32,000 43,000 60,000 78,000

Mean
39,668
20,936
36,851
46,598

40

Table 2: Hypothetical Example of Payments Under Two Pension Repayment Options
This table illustrates the breakdown and timing of the payments that would be made
under option A (the more immediate payments) and option B (the more deferred
payments) for a pension repayment amount of 60,000 Kunas. For reference, our survey
was fielded between mid-November 2008 and mid-January 2009.
Option A
mid July 2005
late December 2005

Option B

Government announces it will offer A/B choice
Decision-making time

late June 2006

7,500

late December 2006

7,500

late June 2007

7,500

late December 2007

7,500

10,000

late June 2008
late December 2008

Survey fielded mid-November 2008—mid-January 2009

10,000

late June 2009
late December 2009

10,000

late June 2010
late December 2010

10,000

late June 2011
late December 2011

10,000

late June 2012
late December 2012

10,000

Total paid:

30,000

Discount rate that
equates the present
value of the two
payout streams

26.6%

60,000

41

Table 3: Summary Statistics for Key Variables, in Percent Unless Stated Otherwise
Panel A: Rate of Time Preference and Risk Aversion
Not Willing to Deposit for 1 Year (no CD)
71.2
Willing (no CD=0)
Not Willing (no CD=1)
28.8
Deposit Rate for 1 Year (if willing to deposit, in %)
10th
5
25th
5
Median
7
75th
10
90th
15
Mean
8.7
Risk Level Regarding Income Gamble
Take No Gamble
52.9
Take Gamble 2x Income for 10% Loss
9.9
Take Gamble 2x Income for 30% Loss
15.2
Take Gamble 2x Income for 50% Loss
8.8
Don’t Know
13.1
Self Perception of Inclination to Take Risk
Not Willing
59.6
25.4
Moderately Willing
12.2
Very Willing
Don’t Know
2.8
Panel B: Income, Wealth, and Liquidity Constraints
Living Standard Relative to Average Retiree
Below
20.8
About the Same
54.8
20.6
Higher
Don’t Know
3.8
Income (Croatian Kuna/month)
9.1
Lower Income (less than 2,000)
46.4
Medium Income (2,000 to 4,000)
44.5
Higher Income (4,000 or more)
Lives With Children?
Family Helped?
Owns...
House?
Savings in Croatian Kuna?
Savings in Foreign Currency?
Savings in Kuna or Foreign Currency?
Vacation Home?
Rental Real Estate?
Other Real Estate?
Stocks?
Mutual Funds?
Bonds?
Reported Pension Repayment Amount?
Did Not Report
Reported Pension Repayment Amount
Pension Repayment Amount in Kunas, if Reported
10th
25th
Median
75th
90th
Mean
Immediate Need to Pay for Something
Not Important
Moderately Important
Very Important
Don’t Know

42.0
31.6
87.7
30.2
29.1
43.6
19.8
7.7
31.6
15.9
3.4
0.9
18.2
81.8

Panel C: Education, Financial Literacy, and
Financial Self-Assessments
Education
High School or Less
More than High School
School Exposure to Acc., Bank., Bus., Econ., Fin.
Not at All
A Little
A Lot
Don’t Know
Job Exposure to Acc., Bank., Bus., Econ., Fin.
Not at All
A Little
A Lot
Don’t Know
Extensive Financial Calculations Picking A or B
Not Extensive
Moderately Extensive
Very Extensive
Don’t Know
Good at Calculations
Not Good
Moderately Good
Very Good
Don’t Know
Good at Everyday Finance
Not Good
Moderately Good
Very Good
Don’t Know
Financial Skill Relative to Others
Worse than Others
About the Same as Others
Better than Others
Don’t Know
Response to Simple Interest Compounding Question
Completely Wrong
Almost Correct
Correct
Don’t Know
Response to Simple Inflation Question
Completely Wrong
Almost Correct
Correct
Don’t Know
Response to “Doubling” Compounding Question
Wrong
Guessed 5-10 Years to Double at 10%
Don’t Know

71.6
28.4
46.1
24.3
27.4
2.2
43.4
22.9
30.0
3.7
57.6
22.1
11.0
9.3
6.3
31.8
59.9
2.0
5.0
11.3
80.3
3.4
4.2
56.0
30.2
9.6
18.4
23.8
32.0
25.8
4.3
7.6
74.9
13.2
24.2
44.7
31.1

12,000
25,000
38,938
50,000
66,000
39,668
25.2
19.9
51.4
3.5

42

Table 3: Summary Statistics for Key Variables, in Percent Unless Stated Otherwise
(Continued)
Panel D: Family Structure and Other
Demographics
Female?
Married at Time of Option Choice?
Spouse Picked A?
Spouse Picked B?
Any Children?
How Important that Money Would go to Heirs
Not Important
Moderately Important
Very Important
Don’t Know
Age at Time of Choice (in years)
10th
25th
Median
75th
90th
Mean
Important to Receive Most Money While Alive
Not Important
Moderately Important
Very Important
Don’t Know
Formerly Employed State or Local Gov’t?
How Important is Religion in Your Life?
Not Important
Moderately Important
Very Important
Don’t Know
Croat Nationality?
Panel E: Health and Longevity
Health Relative to Peers (Other Retirees)
Very Poor or Poor
Average
Good or Excellent
Don’t Know
Likelihood Alive 7+ Years Beyond Choice Time
Not Likely
Moderately Likely
Very Likely
Don’t Know

58.0
71.1
18.9
8.0
90.6
19.6
10.9
60.3
9.2
60
63
68
71
75
67.4
22.2
20.5
49.8
7.5
32.4
21.6
23.3
51.0
4.0
87.6

Panel F: Macroeconomic Risk
Inflation Belief over Several Years at Choice Time
43.6
Annual Inflation in 0-8% Range
11.6
Annual Inflation in 9-16% Range
2.1
Annual Inflation more than 16%
Don’t Know
42.7
Exchange Rate Belief over Several Years at Choice Time
51.3
Kuna Will Remain the Same or Appreciate Against Euro
21.7
Kuna Will Depreciate Against Euro
Don’t Know
27.0
Panel G: Political Risk and Being Made Whole
Choice Time Confidence All B Payments Will be Made
Not Confident
36.9
29.1
Moderately Confident
32.0
Very Confident
Don’t Know
2.1
Concern Government Might Not Honor Its Commitment
Not Important
26.1
22.1
Moderately Important
44.4
Very Important
Don’t Know
7.4
Desire to Receive Full Amount Due No Matter How Long it Takes
Not Important
17.0
13.6
Moderately Important
60.8
Very Important
Don’t Know
8.6

22.4
45.0
31.5
1.2
21.8
28.5
33.9
15.8

43

Table 4: Linear Regression of Decision to Select Option B (More Deferred Payment)
for Pension Repayment
The dependent variable is an indicator variable for whether the respondent selected
pension repayment option B (the more deferred payment option). This variable is
expressed as 0 if the respondent picked option A (more immediate payment) and 1 if
the respondent picked option B. The linear regression is estimated by OLS, with robust
standard errors. For convenience, we multiply all coefficients in the table by 100, so that
they can easily be interpreted as percentage points. Ten indicator variables for ethnicity
and 24 indicator variables for residence county are also included in the regression. The
regression is estimated on 2,490 observations and the adjusted R-squared of the
regression is 0.31. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 1-percent, 5-percent, and
10-percent levels, respectively.
Panel A: Rate of Time Preference and Risk Aversion
Coef.
SE
Not Willing to Deposit for 1 Year (no CD)
1.5
2.3
Deposit Rate for 1 Year (0 if not willing, %)
-0.1
0.2
Risk Level Regarding Income Gamble
Take Gamble 2x Income for 10% Loss
-0.9
2.7
Take Gamble 2x Income for 30% Loss
-1.7
2.2
Take Gamble 2x Income for 50% Loss
0.2
2.9
Don’t Know
-0.3
2.6
Self Perception of Inclination to Take Risk
0.5
1.9
Moderately Willing
-1.1
2.6
Very Willing
Don’t Know
4.5
5.9
Panel B: Income, Wealth, and Liquidity Constraints
Coef.
SE
Living Standard Relative to Average Retiree
About the Same
0.4
2.1
0.9
3.0
Higher
Don’t Know
1.9
4.8
Income (Croatian Kuna/month)
6.6**
2.8
Medium Income (2,000 to 4,000)
6.8**
3.3
Higher Income (4,000 or more)
Lives With Children?
1.8
1.7
Family Helped?
2.0
1.8
Owns...
House?
-1.1
2.4
0.3
1.9
Savings in Croatian Kuna?
2.9
2.0
Savings in Foreign Currency?
Vacation Home?
2.5
2.2
Rental Real Estate?
1.7
3.3
Other Real Estate?
0.8
1.8
2.4
Stocks?
4.7*
Mutual Funds?
1.1
5.0
Bonds?
3.2
12.5
Did Not Report Pension Repayment Amount
20.4
12.7
2.5**
1.2
ln(Pension Payment Amount, if Reported)
Immediate Need to Pay for Something
-8.4***
2.6
Moderately Important
-18.6***
2.2
Very Important
Don’t Know
-1.0
5.2

Panel C: Education, Financial Literacy, and
Financial Self-Assessments
Coef.
Education
More than High School
3.1
School Exposure to Acc., Bank., Bus., Econ., Fin.
A Little
0.5
3.1
A Lot
Don’t Know
-5.4
Job Exposure to Acc., Bank., Bus., Econ., Fin.
A Little
-3.0
-3.4
A Lot
Don’t Know
3.5
Extensive Financial Calculations in Picking A or B
-0.3
Moderately Extensive
1.5
Very Extensive
Don’t Know
-5.2*
Good at Calculations
-0.3
Moderately Good
0.5
Very Good
Don’t Know
8.5
Good at Everyday Finance
-2.7
Moderately Good
-5.8
Very Good
Don’t Know -11.1*
Financial Skill Relative to Others
About the Same as Others
-4.1
Better than Others
-3.0
Don’t Know
-1.3
Response to Simple Interest Compounding
Almost Correct
2.2
-0.4
Correct
Don’t Know
1.3
Response to Simple Inflation Question
5.8
Almost Correct
6.1
Correct
Don’t Know
4.2
Response to “Doubling” Compounding Question
Guessed 5-10 Years to Double at 10%
-0.0
Don’t Know
2.5

44

SE
1.9
2.1
2.5
5.2
2.2
2.3
4.2
2.0
2.6
2.8
3.4
3.4
7.3
4.4
3.9
6.0
4.0
4.2
4.7
2.5
2.3
2.6
4.8
3.9
4.5
2.0
2.3

Table 4: Linear Regression of Decision to Select Option B (More Deferred Payment)
for Pension Repayment (Continued)
Panel D: Family Structure and Other Demographics
Coef.
SE
Female?
-2.6
1.9
Married at Time of Option Choice?
3.6
2.2
-17.3***
2.0
Spouse Picked A?
34.1***
3.3
Spouse Picked B?
Any Children?
8.5***
2.5
How Important that Money Would go to Heirs
3.8
2.9
Moderately Important
8.5***
2.2
Very Important
Don’t Know
0.4
3.0
Age at Time of Choice (in years)
-1.0***
0.1
Important to Receive Most Money While Alive
2.6
Moderately Important -6.6**
2.2
Very Important -5.2**
3.7
Don’t Know -7.0*
Formerly Employed State or Local Gov’t?
0.1
1.7
How Important is Religion in Your Life?
1.2
2.4
Moderately Important
2.2
Very Important -0.5
Don’t Know
3.9
4.9
Ethnicity indicator variables
p-value = 0.25
Residence county indicator variables
p-value = 0.00***
Panel E: Health and Longevity
Coef.
SE
Health Relative to Peers (Other Retirees)
Average
2.1
2.0
5.5**
2.3
Good or Excellent
Don’t Know
5.2
7.5
Likelihood Alive 7+ Years Beyond Choice Time
8.1***
2.2
Moderately Likely
9.3***
2.3
Very Likely
2.7
Don’t Know
5.7**

Panel F: Macroeconomic Risks
Coef.
SE
Inflation Belief over Several Years at Choice Time
Annual Inflation in 9-16% Range -2.1
2.6
6.2
Annual Inflation more than 16% -10.3*
Don’t Know -2.3
2.0
Exchange Rate Belief over Several Years at Choice Time
2.1
Kuna Will Depreciate Against Euro -4.5**
Don’t Know
0.8
2.1
Panel G: Political Risk and Being Made Whole
Coef.
SE
Choice Time Confidence All B Payments Will be Made
Moderately Confident
7.8***
1.9
2.1
Very Confident 14.7***
Don’t Know -3.0
5.1
Concern Government Might Not Honor Its Commitment
Moderately Important -2.2
2.4
2.0
Very Important -7.5***
Don’t Know
3.3
3.9
Desire to Receive Full Amount Due No Matter How Long it Takes
2.7
Moderately Important 12.1***
2.1
Very Important 27.2***
3.2
Don’t Know
8.5***

45

Table 5: IV Regression of Pension Repayment Choice, Instrumenting for the
Importance of “Receiving the Full Amount Due No Matter How Long it Takes” with
whether was Born in Central Croatia
This table presents the two-stage least squares regression of the pension repayment
choice in which the importance of “receiving the full amount due no matter how long it
takes” is instrumented with the birth region of the respondent (the first-stage
regression). Precisely, in Panel A, whether “receiving the full amount due no matter
how long it takes” is very important or not very important is related to whether the
respondent was born in Central Croatia (that is, born in the capital, Zagreb, or
surrounding counties—the region identified as Central Croatia). See Figure 4 for further
details on the definition of Central Croatia. The first-stage regression in column (1)
includes no other controls and the regression in column (2) includes all of the other
explanatory variables included as determinants of the pension repayment choice (i.e.,
all of the other controls used in the regression from Table 4). In Panel B, the dependent
variable of the second-stage (IV) regression is an indicator variable for whether the
respondent selected pension repayment option B (the more deferred payment option).
This variable is expressed as 0 if the respondent picked option A (more immediate
payment) and 1 if the respondent picked option B. In column (3), the importance of
receiving the full amount due is not instrumented for with being born in Central
Croatia, whereas in column (4) it is. The linear regressions are all estimated by OLS or
2SLS, with robust standard errors. For convenience, we multiply all coefficients in the
table by 100 so that they can easily be interpreted as percentage points. The regressions
are all estimated on 2,490 observations. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 1percent, 5-percent, and 10-percent levels, respectively.
Panel A: First-Stage Regression
Dependent Variable:

Panel B: Second-Stage Regression
Dependent Variable:

Receiving the Full
Amount Due No Matter
How Long it Takes is
Very Important

Born in
Central Croatia

(1)
−6.6***
(2.0)

Other Controls?

No

F-test of Instrument
No. of Observations

11.3***
2,490

(2)
−7.5***
(2.7)
Yes
7.9***
2,490

Select Pension
Repayment Option B,
the Deferred Payment
Being Made Whole
Very Important

(3)
20.9***
(1.8)

(4)
57.1*
(32.7)

Other Controls?

Yes

Yes

Instrumental Variables?

No

Yes

No. of Observations

2,490

2,490

46

Figure 1: Various Rates of Savings and Investments Returns in Croatia, 1997-2009.
This figure presents various rates of savings and investment returns available in Croatia
in the period from 1997 to 2009—rates on certificates of deposit (CDs), savings, and
government bonds—be they denominated in Kunas or in foreign currencies.

12
Annual Return/Yield in Percentage Points

11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

CD in Kunas

CD in Foreign Currencies

Savings Account in Kunas

Savings Account in Foreign Currencies

Government Bond (Kuna Denominated)

47

Figure 2: Change in Likelihood of Selecting Option B (More Deferred Payment)
Associated with a One Percentage-Point Increase in the Individual’s Stated Rate of
Time Preference, by Subgroups.
This figure reports the coefficients from a modified version of our baseline regression in
which we interact the rate of time preference question with indicator variables for
various subsamples. The first bar represents the coefficient from Table 4, that is, the
baseline coefficient on our rate of time preference question that shows the change in
likelihood of selecting option B (the deferred payments) resulting from a onepercentage point change in the rate of time preference. Subsequent bars show the effect
of the rate of time preference for various subgroups, each obtained from a separate
regression. The effect of the rate of time preference for the full sample is statistically
insignificant from zero for the full sample, and is statistically different from zero for
each of the various subsamples (p-values lower than 0.10).

Subsamples
Full Sample

Liquidity
Constraints
Not
Important

Have Savings

Have Savings
in Foreign
Currency

Liquidity
Constraints Not
Important and Have
Savings in Foreign
Currency

Change in Percentage Points

0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
-0.8
-1
-1.2

48

Figure 3: Actual Likelihood of Selecting Option B (More Deferred Payment) and
Hypothetical Choice if Payments Spread Out Over 10 Years (Rather Than 6 Years).
This figure provides a decomposition of how important the factor of “receiving the full
amount due, no matter how long it takes” (i.e., “being made whole”) was in the
selection of option B (the more deferred payment schedule). The “being made whole”
component in the selection of option B is calculated as the difference between the
percent selecting option B minus the percent that would have been predicted to select
option B if the entire population had shifted from their current beliefs regarding the
importance of receiving the full amount due no matter how long it takes to everyone
believing that this is not an important consideration (using the Table 4 regression
results). We perform this calculation for both the actual pension repayment choice, the
first bar, as well as for responses to the hypothetical scenario of the B payments being
spread out over 10 years, rather than the actual 6 years (the second bar). These
decompositions are then repeated for a subsample of individuals who would be no
more than 70 years old at receipt of the last B payment (the two rightmost bars).
Full Sample

Age ≤70 at Time of Last Payment

40
35

Percentage Points

30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Payment Spread
Over 6 Years

Payment Spread
Over 10 Years
"Being Made Whole" Component

Payment Spread
Over 6 Years

Payment Spread
Over 10 Years

Other Factors

49

Figure 4: Map of Croatia (in White) with Central Croatia and Zagreb Highlighted.
This figure provides a map of Croatia (the white area below), with the Central Croatia
region highlighted with the wide black border. The county in Croatia that contains
Zagreb, the capital of Croatia, is shaded with the diagonal lines.

50

