                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE VALUE OF CLIMATE AMENITIES:
                       EVIDENCE FROM US MIGRATION DECISIONS

                                          Paramita Sinha
                                         Maureen L. Cropper

                                        Working Paper 18756
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18756


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2013




We would like to thank the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Resources for the Future, and
RTI International for funding and Wolfram Schlenker for generously providing data from the Hadley
III model. We would like to thank Sara Casey and Martha Caulkins for excellent research assistance
and Jamie Cajka and Kibri Everett for providing GIS support. We would also like to thank participants
at seminars at the Camp Resources, National Center for Environmental Economics, Resources for
the Future, Columbia University, the Annual Social Sciences Association meetings, and the Third
World Congress of Environmental and Resource Economists. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18756.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Paramita Sinha and Maureen L. Cropper. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Value of Climate Amenities: Evidence from US Migration Decisions
Paramita Sinha and Maureen L. Cropper
NBER Working Paper No. 18756
February 2013
JEL No. Q5,Q51

                                           ABSTRACT

We value climate amenities by estimating a discrete location choice model for households that changed
metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) between 1995 and 2000. The utility of each MSA depends on
location-specific amenities, earnings opportunities, housing costs, and the cost of moving to the MSA
from the household’s 1995 location. We use the estimated trade-off between wages and climate amenities
to value changes in mean winter and summer temperatures. At median temperatures for 1970 to 2000,
a 1°F increase in winter temperature is worth less than a 1° decrease in summer temperature; however,
the reverse is true at winter temperatures below 25°F. These results imply an average welfare loss
of 2.7 percent of household income in 2020 to 2050 under the B1 (climate-friendly) scenario from
the special report on emissions scenarios (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 2000), although
some cities in the Northeast and Midwest benefit. Under the A2 (more extreme) scenario, households
in 25 of 26 cities suffer an average welfare loss equal to 5 percent of income.


Paramita Sinha
Research Triangle Institute
701 13th Street, NW
Suite 750
Washington, DC 20005-3967
psinha@rti.org

Maureen L. Cropper
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
cropper@econ.umd.edu
Contents




1. Introduction ......................................................................................................................... 1
     Our Approach...................................................................................................................... 2
     Our Findings ....................................................................................................................... 3

2. Household Residential Location Model ............................................................................ 4
     Household Location Choice ................................................................................................ 5
     Estimation of the Model...................................................................................................... 6
     Predicting Wages and Housing Costs ................................................................................. 7

3. Data ...................................................................................................................................... 9
     Migrant Households and Migration Patterns .................................................................... 10
     Climate Variables.............................................................................................................. 11
     Nonclimate Amenities ...................................................................................................... 12

4. Estimation Results ............................................................................................................ 13
     Hedonic Wage Equations .................................................................................................. 13
     Hedonic Housing Market Equation .................................................................................. 13
     Results from the First Stage of the Migration Model ....................................................... 14
     Results from the Second Stage of the Migration Model ................................................... 15
     MWTP for Climate Amenities .......................................................................................... 17

5. WTP for Temperature Changes ...................................................................................... 18

6. Conclusions ........................................................................................................................ 20

References .............................................................................................................................. 22

Figures and Tables ................................................................................................................ 24
Appendix ................................................................................................................................ 45




iii
                                                                                        Sinha and Cropper

              The Value of Climate Amenities: Evidence from US Migration Decisions

                                    Paramita Sinha and Maureen L. Cropper


1. Introduction

           The amenity value of climate—what people are willing to pay to experience warmer
winters or to avoid hotter summers—is an important component of the benefits of greenhouse
gas mitigation policies. Yet the literature contains few recent estimates of the value of climate
amenities for the United States.1 This paper helps fill this gap by estimating a discrete location
choice model in which a household’s choice of the city in which to live depends on climate
amenities as well as earnings, housing costs, and other location-specific amenities. We use the
model to estimate household willingness to pay (WTP) for changes in mean winter and summer
temperature and use these values to assess the welfare effects of temperature changes in cities
throughout the United States.

           Traditionally, economists have used hedonic wage and property value functions to value
climate amenities (Cragg and Kahn 1999; Gyourko and Tracy 1991; Blomquist et al. 1988;
Smith 1983). In a world in which households can migrate costlessly across cities, location-
specific amenities should be capitalized into wages and property values. In equilibrium, each
household will select a city (i.e., a vector of amenities) so that the marginal cost of obtaining
each amenity, measured in terms of wages and housing costs, just equals the value it places on
the amenity (Roback 1982).2

           The continuous hedonic approach, however, assumes that moving is costless.3 As Bayer
et al. (2009) have pointed out, moving costs imply that a household’s marginal WTP (MWTP)
need not equal the weighted sum of the slopes of the hedonic wage and property value equations.


 Paramita Sinha, RTI International; Maureen Cropper, University of Maryland and Resources for the Future,
cropper@rff.org.
1   A notable exception is Albouy et al. (2011).
2 Formally, marginal WTP for an amenity must equal the sum of the slope of the hedonic wage function with respect
to the amenity plus the slope of the hedonic property value function evaluated at the chosen amenity vector (Roback
1982).
3   It also assumes, in most specifications, national labor and housing markets.

                                                            1
                                                                                    Sinha and Cropper
An alternative approach, which does allow for moving costs, is to estimate the parameters of a
household’s utility function directly using a discrete model of location choice (Bayer et al. 2004;
Bayer and Timmins 2007; Klaiber and Phaneuf 2010).


Our Approach

        In this paper, we value climate amenities by estimating a model of residential location
choice for households that changed metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) between 1995 and
2000. We model the decision of migrants as a choice among MSAs based on potential earnings,
housing costs, moving costs, climate amenities, and other location-specific amenities. The model
is estimated in two stages (Berry et al. 1995; Bayer et al. 2009; Klaiber and Phaneuf 2010). In
the first stage, MSA-specific constants are estimated together with other utility function
parameters to explain the location choices of migrants. In the second stage, the MSA-specific
constants are regressed on amenities that vary by MSA to estimate the average utility attached to
these amenities. This procedure allows us to identify the parameters of households’ indirect
utility functions and, thus, to estimate the welfare effects of changes in climate variables.

        In our location choice model, the marginal value of an amenity is the rate of substitution
between the wage and the amenity in question. To estimate the coefficient on the wage,
households must compare differences in wages across locations. This implies that the model is
not suitable for estimating the preferences of retirees or households with no wage income. It is
also the case that, conditional on moving costs, households must in fact be maximizing utility: if
households do not compare other cities with their point of origin, the discrete choice model will
not recover preferences for amenities.

        We focus on households that have moved recently (“movers”) on the grounds that they
are more likely to be in equilibrium than households that have not moved (“stayers”).4 Although
it is impossible to formally test this proposition, location choice models that we have estimated
using movers and stayers suggest that stayers place much less weight on wages than movers do,
suggesting that they may not be considering all relevant options in determining their current



4We also focus on households whose heads are prime aged (between 26 and 55 years old); prime-aged heads have
greater labor force attachment than older workers (see Table 1).

                                                      2
                                                                                              Sinha and Cropper

locations (Sinha 2008).5 We therefore measure the preferences of households that have recently
moved, acknowledging that their preferences may differ from those of stayers. We do, however,
measure the impact of household characteristics—specifically, the impact of household size and
the age of the household head—on WTP for locational amenities.

           Our paper builds on the work of Cragg and Kahn (1997), who were the first to use a
discrete choice approach to value climate amenities.6 We extend their work, following Bayer et
al. (2009) by including moving costs and modeling choices across MSAs. Unlike Bayer et al.,
however, we cannot use multiple cross-sections to difference out unobserved amenities across
cities. Historical data indicate that climate changes slowly, forcing us to rely on a single cross-
section of data rather than data over consecutive decades.7 We attempt to allay concerns about
omitted variable bias by controlling for a wide variety of location-specific amenities other than
temperature, especially those that are correlated with temperature.


Our Findings

           Our results indicate that households are willing to pay to avoid cold winter temperatures
and hot summer temperatures. The important question for assessing the impacts of climate
change is the relative weight that households place on increases in summer versus winter
temperature. Evaluated at the means of our data, MWTP to lower summer temperature by 1°F is
greater than MWTP for a 1° increase in winter temperature. Moreover, MWTP for higher winter
temperature decreases as temperature increases. The disamenity of hotter summers appears to
decrease slightly with mean summer temperature, but, because mean summer temperature varies
less than mean winter temperature, this effect is estimated less precisely than for winter
temperature.

           Our results also suggest that the value attached to climate amenities varies with the age of
the household head and with household size: households whose heads are between 46 and 55
years old place more value on climate amenities than households whose heads are between 26

5Bayer et al. (2009) use data on movers and stayers but limit their sample to households with heads ≤ 35 years of
age, who are more mobile than the rest of the population.
6Cragg and Khan (1997) value climate amenities by estimating a model of the choice of state in which to live for
households that moved between 1985 and 1990.
7   This is also true of the literature that examines the impact of climate on agriculture (Schlenker and Roberts 2009).

                                                             3
                                                                                        Sinha and Cropper
and 35 years old, a result that agrees with Cragg and Kahn (1997). Smaller households place a
lower value on amenities than larger households, although this effect is not as pronounced.

        We use these estimates to value changes in mean summer and winter temperature over
the period 2020 to 2050 for 26 US cities. The Hadley model projects that, under the B1 scenario
from the special report on emissions scenarios (SRES),8 mean summer temperature will
increase, on average, by 3.3°F in these cities and mean winter temperature by 3.3°F. Cities in the
northeastern United States will experience larger increases in winter temperature than in summer
temperature, although the reverse is true for cities in the South and Southwest. We find that
average WTP for temperature changes projected to occur in the Northeast is positive, ranging
from 1.0 to 3.5 percent of income. The disamenity value of climate changes in Dallas—a city
that is projected to experience a 6°F increase in summer temperature—is approximately 10
percent of income. Averaged across all cities, the disamenity value of the B1 scenario is
approximately 2.7 percent of income. The disamenity value of the A2 scenario, which projects
larger summer and smaller winter temperature increases, is about 5.0 percent of income.

        The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the household’s location decision
and the econometric models we estimate. Section 3 describes the data used in our analysis.
Estimation results are presented in Section 4. Section 5 uses these results to evaluate the value of
temperature changes projected by the B1 and A2 SRES scenarios. Section 6 concludes the paper.


2. Household Residential Location Model

        We model households that moved between 1995 and 2000 as selecting their preferred
MSA from the set of MSAs in the United States in 2000. Household utility depends on housing,
location-specific amenities, moving costs, and expenditures on all other goods (income minus the
cost of housing). Utility maximization proceeds in two stages: for each location j the household
optimally allocates its income between housing expenditures and all other goods, yielding an
indirect utility function for city j. Then the household chooses the location in which to live that
yields the highest indirect utility.

8 To represent a range of driving forces for emissions, such as demographic development, socioeconomic
development, and technological change, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) developed a set of
emissions scenarios. In the SRES, IPCC (2000) describes these scenarios in more detail. We use projections from a
climate-friendly scenario (B1) and a more extreme scenario (A2).

                                                        4
                                                                                  Sinha and Cropper
Household Location Choice

            In each city, household i chooses the quantity of consumption of a numeraire good and
housing to maximize its utility subject to a budget constraint. Assuming a Cobb–Douglas utility
function, the utility maximization problem of household i in location j is to select consumption
Cij and housing Hij to maximize

                                 
                        U ij  Cij C H ij H e
                                                 MCij g ( E j )
                                                      e
                                                                                         (1)

subject to

                        Cij  R j H ij  mi1 wmj  Wij
                                                 N

                                                                  ,                      (2)

where MCij denotes household i’s cost of moving to city j, Ej is a vector of amenities, Rj is the
cost of housing, and wmj is the earnings of family member m in city j (Wij represents household
i’s earnings). Substituting optimal values of consumption and housing expenditures into the
utility function yields the logarithm of household i’s indirect utility from living in city j,9



                        ln Vij    W ln Wij  MCij  H ln(R j )  g ( E j )
                                                                                         (3)

where the coefficient on the wage, αW ≡ αC + αH, and αH/αW is the fraction of income spent on
housing. In our empirical model, we allow αW to depend on household characteristics,
specifically on the age of the household head and household size, to capture life-cycle effects.

            The form of the function g(.) depends on what is assumed about preferences for
amenities. It might, for example, be reasonable to assume that there is an optimal temperature
that households prefer, which would be captured by a quadratic form for g(.). Below, we present
results using different functional forms for g(.). MWTP for an amenity equals the marginal rate
of substitution between the amenity and income. For example, if we assume that g ( E j ) =

 E ln E j , then the MWTP of a household i for climate amenity E is (αE/αW)( Wij / E j ).


                      C                 H
9β   =    C ln(            )   H ln(         )
                    C  H             C  H


                                                                      5
                                                                                                         Sinha and Cropper
        Moving costs capture the psychological, search, and out-of-pocket costs of leaving a
household’s place of origin. We try several specifications of moving costs. Following Bayer et
al. (2009), we represent moving costs as a series of dummy variables that reflect whether city j is
outside of the state, Census division, and/or Census region in which household i lived in 1995.
Formally,

                        MCij   M 0 d ij State   M 1 d ij Division   M 2 d ij Region
                                                                                               ,                  (4)
               State
where d                denotes a dummy variable that equals one if j is in a state that is different from the
          ij
                                                               Division
one in which household i lived in 1995, d                                 = 1 if location j is outside of the Census
                                                          ij
                                                                            Re gion
division in which household j lived in 1995, and d                                    = 1 if location j lies outside of the
                                                  ij
Census region in which household i lived in 1995. We also estimate a variant of equation (4) in

which d ij State is multiplied by the logarithm of distance between the population-weighted

centroid of the state in which household i lived in 1995 and the population-weighted centroid of

the state in which city j is located; d ij Division and d ij Region are similarly weighted by the

logarithm of distance.10


Estimation of the Model

        To estimate the household’s indirect utility function, we rewrite equation (3) as

                        ln Vij   ij   W ln Wˆ ij  MCij  A j   ij
                                                                             ,                                    (5)

defining Aj    H ln(R j )  g ( E j ) . Aj combines the unit cost of housing and the average utility

of amenities in city j into a city-specific fixed effect. Because we do not observe a household’s
earnings in all cities, Wij is replaced by its predicted value, described in more detail below. The
error term εij combines the error in predicting household i’s wages in city j with household i’s
unmeasured preferences for city j. Assuming that the idiosyncratic errors are independently and



10 Sinha and Cropper (2011) examine additional specifications of moving costs, including costs that depend on the
distance between the MSA in which the household lived in 1995 and MSA j (Bishop 2007).

                                                                      6
                                                                                            Sinha and Cropper
identically distributed Type I extreme value, the probability of household i selecting city j is
given by the conditional logit model,
                                                            W ln Wij  MCij  A j
                  Pr(lnVij  lnVik , k  j )          e
                                                 =    K                                 .            (6)
                                                     e
                                                     k 1
                                                                W ln Wik  MCik  Ak




Equation (6) is estimated via maximum likelihood techniques, using the McFadden sampling
procedure to reduce the size of each household’s choice set (McFadden 1978).

         In the second stage of the estimation, the MSA-specific fixed effect A j is regressed on ln

R j and location-specific amenities to estimate the parameters of g(Ej). If we were to estimate

Aj    H ln(R j )  g ( E j )   j , where the error term represents the average utility of unmeasured

amenities, it is likely that living costs would be correlated with the error term. We therefore
estimate equation (7),11

                  ( A j   H ln R j )  g ( E j )   j
                                                            .                                        (7)

Our estimate of αH is based on the median share of income spent on housing in our sample
(0.25). Specifically, we set αH /αW = 0.25, where αW is the estimated coefficient of the log wage
from the discrete choice model.


Predicting Wages and Housing Costs

         Estimating equations (6) and (7) requires information on the wages that a household
would earn and the cost of housing in all MSAs. Because wages are observed only in the
household’s chosen location, we estimate a hedonic wage equation for each MSA and use it to
predict Wij. The hedonic wage equation for MSA j regresses the logarithm of the hourly wage
rate for worker m in MSA j on variables (Xmj) measuring the demographic characteristics—
education, experience, and industry and occupation—of worker m.12



11 The second-stage regression yields consistent estimates because the sample size used in the first-stage regression
is greater than the square of the number of alternatives (Berry et al. 2004).
12 Equation (8) is estimated using data on full-time workers who are not self-employed. See Sinha (2008) for
estimation details.

                                                                   7
                                                                                       Sinha and Cropper

                 ln(hwmj )   j   j X mj   mj
                                                                                                (8)

Equation (8) is estimated using data on all workers in the Public Use Microdata sample (PUMS).
The coefficients of (8) are used to calculate the earnings of each worker in the sample.13
Summing these over all individuals in each household, we obtain predicted household wages for
household i in location j ( Ŵij ).

        The cost of housing in each location (i.e., {Rj}) is estimated by including city-specific
intercepts in a national hedonic housing market equation,14

                 ln(Pkj )  ROWN ODkj  RDC DCkj  ln R j   kj
                                                                    .                           (9)

Pkj is the annual cost of owning house k in city j. It is computed as the sum of the monthly

mortgage payment or rent and the cost of utilities, property taxes, and property insurance. ODkj is

a dummy variable indicating whether the house was owned or rented, and DCkj is a vector of

dwelling characteristics. Utility costs are added to both the costs of owning a home and to rents
because heating and cooling requirements vary with climate. We wish to separate these costs
from climate amenities. Equation (9) is estimated using data on houses in all MSAs in the 2000
PUMS (Sinha 2008).

        It should be emphasized that amenities do not enter either the wage or the housing
hedonic equations. The purpose of these equations is to predict earnings opportunities and
housing costs facing the household in each city.

Focus on Prime-Aged Migrants

        The equilibrium location model in equations (6) and (7) could be estimated using data on
all households. We focus on households that have recently moved (movers) on the grounds that




13We bypass the need to model the labor–leisure choice by making the simplifying assumption that individuals
work the same number of hours and weeks in all locations.
14 If we were to estimate a separate housing equation for each metropolitan area, we would have to make an
assumption about the housing bundle consumed by each household in each area to predict housing expenditures for
a household in each city. The housing price index approach is much cleaner.

                                                       8
                                                                                       Sinha and Cropper

they are more likely to be in equilibrium than households that have not moved (stayers).15
Although it is impossible to formally test this proposition, we have estimated the discrete
location choice model using movers and stayers (Sinha 2008), with two alternative definitions of
moving costs: costs defined relative to the household’s location in 1995 and costs defined
relative to the head of household’s birthplace, as in Bayer et al. (2009). We find that stayers
place much less weight on wages than movers do, suggesting that they may not be considering
all relevant variables in determining their current location.16 We therefore measure the
preferences of households that have recently moved, acknowledging that their preferences may
differ from those of stayers.

        We also focus on households whose heads are prime aged (between 26 and 55 years old).
In our equilibrium location choice model, the marginal value of an amenity is the rate of
substitution between the wage and the amenity in question. To estimate the coefficient on the
wage, households must compare differences in wages across locations. This implies that our
model is not suitable for estimating the preferences of retirees or households with no wage
income. Households with the greatest labor force attachment are those with prime-aged heads.
Table 1 describes the employment characteristics of migrant households, by age of household
head. The youngest (head aged 25 or younger) and oldest (head over 56 years) age groups are the
ones with the lowest labor force attachment. Migrant households whose heads are between 26
and 55 are more likely to have heads who work full time. These households are also more similar
in terms of household size and composition. For this reason, our analysis below focuses on
households with prime-aged heads.


3. Data

        The data used to estimate our location model, hedonic wage equations, and hedonic
housing equation come from the 5 percent PUMS of the 2000 Census as well as other publicly
available data sources.



15 Cragg and Khan (1997) also focus on movers, on the grounds that wages and housing prices in a given location
are exogenous to movers, but not to all households.
16 When moving costs are measured from the head of household’s birthplace, we find that stayers place only one-
fifth of the weight on wages that movers do.

                                                        9
                                                                                           Sinha and Cropper
Migrant Households and Migration Patterns

         The PUMS contains information on more than 5.6 million households. Table 2 describes
households that changed MSAs between 1995 and 2000, for whom both the origin and
destination MSA can be identified.17 Of these 441,393 households, 60.8 percent moved to a
different state, 46.9 percent moved to a different Census division, and 36 percent moved to a
different Census region. Table 2 shows the origin and destination of households by Census
region. Of the households that moved between 1995 and 2000, 32 percent were living in the
South in 1995; 28 percent were living in the West. Over 70 percent of these households moved
within the region in which they lived in 1995. In contrast, only about half of the movers who
lived in the Northeast or Midwest in 1995 remained in their region of origin. On net, households
left the Northeast and Midwest for the South and West, a pattern that began after the Second
World War and is predicted to continue at least through 2030.

         Table 3 compares the characteristics of movers and stayers. Households that moved are,
on average, smaller and have fewer children than households that did not move. A higher
proportion of households that moved are male-headed, and the heads of households that moved
are better educated than the heads of households that did not move.

         In addition, heterogeneity among migrant households may affect the value they place on
amenities. In equation (5), the marginal rate of substitution between an amenity and wages
decreases with αW, the coefficient of the log of household wages. The weight placed on wages
and housing costs in a household’s utility function is likely to vary with labor force attachment
and, possibly, household size.18 We therefore interact the log of household wages with dummy
variables for the age of the household head and household size.




17 Ofthe 5.66 million households in the PUMS, 1.53 million lived in named MSAs in both 1995 and 2000. Between
1995 and 2000, 28 percent of these households changed location. A household was considered to have moved if the
head of household moved.
18 Note also that, holding the percentage of income spent on housing constant, a larger value of αW implies a larger
estimated value of αH.

                                                         10
                                                                                           Sinha and Cropper
Climate Variables

         The climate variables considered in the second stage of the model are summarized in
Table 4. All variables are climate normals: the arithmetic mean of a climate variable computed
for a 30-year period.19

         We focus on mean temperature, measured for the winter (December–February) and
summer (June–August) seasons. Previous studies of climate amenities have primarily used mean
winter and summer temperature or annual heating and cooling degree days.20,21 In studying the
impact of climate on agriculture, health, and electricity usage, temperature has been measured by
the number of days in various temperature bins (Schlenker and Roberts 2009; Deschenes and
Greenstone 2011). The advantage of mean winter and summer temperature is that they capture
seasonality, which annual heating and cooling degree days and temperature bins do not. At the
same time, correlation between winter and summer temperature and temperature during other
seasons of the year means that winter and summer temperature will pick up other temperature
impacts: the correlation between mean winter temperature and mean March temperature is 0.97,
as is the correlation between mean winter temperature and mean November temperature.
Collinearity among mean winter, summer, fall, and spring temperatures, however, makes it
impossible to include all four measures in our models.

         The precision with which the impact of temperature on location decisions can be
estimated depends on temperature variation. Mean winter temperature across the 284 MSAs in
our data averages 37°F, with a standard deviation (s.d.) of 12°; summer temperature averages
73°, with an s.d. of only 6°. Winter and summer temperature are highly correlated (r = 0.76).

         The models presented in the next section include annual snowfall, mean summer
precipitation, and July relative humidity. Mean winter precipitation, which averages 9.4 inches
(s.d. = 5 inches), is highest in the Pacific Northwest and the Southeast, where winter

19The temperature and summer precipitation data are for the period 1970 to 2000. July relative humidity, annual
snowfall, and percentage possible sunshine are measured for the period 1960 to 1990.
20 Heating and cooling degree days are computed by the National Climatic Data Center using the average of the
high and low temperatures for a day. If this is greater than 65°F, it results in (average temperature−65) cooling
degree days. If the average temperature is less than 65°, it results in (65−average temperature) heating degree days.
21Graves and Mueser (1993) and Kahn (2009) use mean January and mean July temperatures; Cragg and Kahn
(1997, 1999) use mean February and mean July temperatures. Roback (1982), Blomquist et al. (1988), and Gyourko
and Tracy (1991) use annual heating and cooling degree days, as do Albouy et al. (2011).

                                                          11
                                                                               Sinha and Cropper
precipitation comes in the form of rain. In preliminary analyses, winter precipitation appeared to
be a disamenity, but this effect was statistically significant only at low levels of precipitation.
This suggested that snowfall should replace winter precipitation: cities with significant snowfall
have lower levels of winter precipitation (the correlation between annual snowfall and winter
precipitation is −0.36), and snow is likely to be more of a disamenity than rain.

       Summer precipitation, which averages 11 inches (s.d. = 5 inches), is heaviest in the
southeastern United States. Surprisingly, the correlation between summer precipitation and
winter precipitation is very low (r = 0.03), as is the correlation between summer precipitation and
annual snow (r = −0.02). Mean July relative humidity is 69 percent (s.d. = 7 percent) and is not
highly correlated with either winter temperature (r = 0.06) or summer temperature (r = 0.14).

       Following the literature, we also include the percentage of possible sunshine, defined as
the total time that sunshine reaches the surface of the earth, expressed as a percentage of the
maximum amount possible from sunrise to sunset.


Nonclimate Amenities

       The nonclimate amenity variables used in the second stage of the model are also
summarized in Table 4. These include amenity measures typically used in quality-of-life studies
as well as variables that are likely to be correlated with climate, such as elevation, visibility, and
measures of parks and recreation opportunities. Our desire is to be as inclusive as possible.
Because climate changes slowly, we cannot use panel data to value climate amenities. We
therefore strive to avoid problems of omitted variable bias by including a variety of location-
specific amenities in our models and by using different functional forms for our temperature
variables.

       It is especially important that we control for population. If the first stage of the location
model were estimated without including wages and moving costs, the location-specific intercepts
would reflect the proportion of the sample locating in each city. Because people are more likely
to migrate to more populous cities, it is imperative that we control for city population when
estimating equation (7).

       Other (dis)amenities for which we control include air pollution (fine particulate matter
[PM2.5]), an index of violent crime, visibility (percentage of hours with visibility greater than 10

                                                  12
                                                                               Sinha and Cropper
miles), square miles of parks within the MSA, elevation measured at the population-weighted
centroid of the MSA, and distance from the population-weighted centroid of each MSA to the
nearest coast. We also include indices from the Places Rated Almanac (Savageau and
D’Agostino 2000) that measure how well each city functions in terms of transportation,
education, health, and recreation opportunities. We include dummy variables for the nine Census
divisions to capture regional variation in amenities not otherwise controlled for as well as
differences in the cost of nonhousing goods. In our preferred specifications, amenities other than
winter and summer temperature explain at least 85 percent of the variation in the second-stage
dependent variables.


4. Estimation Results


Hedonic Wage Equations

       The results of the hedonic wage equations are summarized in Appendix Table A-1. Most
variables are significant at the 5 percent level for all MSAs. Older workers earn more, but the
age premium declines with age, as expected. Married individuals and males earn more than
single workers and females. People who speak English well earn more than those who have
difficulty with the language, and Hispanics earn less than non-Hispanics. The returns to
education are positive. Occupation dummies also have the expected signs (i.e., occupations
requiring more education and/or white collar occupations are associated with higher wages). We
find, as do Cragg and Kahn (1997), that the returns to different occupations and industries vary
significantly across MSAs, suggesting that the assumption of a national labor market, made in
earlier hedonic studies, is inappropriate.


Hedonic Housing Market Equation

       The results of the hedonic housing equation are presented in Appendix Table A-2. An
owner-occupied house carries a premium. Houses with greater numbers of rooms and bedrooms
are worth more than houses with fewer rooms. Houses on smaller acreage are worth less than
houses on larger lots. Older houses have lower values than newer houses. All housing
characteristics are statistically significant at the 5 percent level, as are 93 percent of the MSA-
specific dummy variables (the {lnRj}). The MSA-specific dummies, which represent housing

                                                  13
                                                                                             Sinha and Cropper
cost indices, seem reasonable. For example, Boston has a higher index than Seattle, which is in
turn more expensive than Washington, DC. The MSAs in California, New York, and New Jersey
have very high costs of living.


Results from the First Stage of the Migration Model

         We estimated equation (6) using households that moved between 1995 and 2000 whose
household head was between 26 and 55 years of age. To make the analysis computationally
tractable, we used a sample of migrant households from the PUMS and the McFadden sampling
procedure to construct the choice set facing each household. The sample of households with
prime-aged heads numbers 115,623.22 Following McFadden (1978) the choice set for each
household includes the chosen MSA and 19 other randomly selected MSAs.

         We experimented with various specifications of moving costs (Sinha and Cropper 2011):
using dummy variables to indicate that an MSA is outside of the state, Census region, and
Census division in which the household lived in 1995 (equation [4]); weighting each dummy
variable by distance; and weighting each dummy variable by the log of distance.23 Weighting
state, division, and region dummies by distance captures the fact that households in the Northeast
are more likely to move to the South than to the West (see Table 2). The best-fitting of the three
models is the one that weights each dummy variable by the log of distance.

         Table 5 presents estimates of the migration equation. Model 1 includes all households
with heads between 26 and 55 years old. Model 2 allows the coefficient on the wage among
prime-aged movers to vary by household size. In Model 3, the coefficient on the wage for prime-
aged movers is allowed to vary by age group. The weight attached to wages in the migration
decision depends on the age of the household head and household size. The coefficient on the
wage for one- and two-person prime-aged households (Model 2) is about 47 percent higher than
the coefficient for households with more than two people. The weight placed on wages by prime-

22 Three categories were created for household heads aged 26 to 35, 36 to 45, and 46 to 55 years. A 50 percent
random sample was chosen in each category to ensure a sufficient number of observations in each age group in
every MSA.
23 d ij State is multiplied by the distance between the population-weighted centroid of the state in which household i
                                                                                                 Division          Region
lived in 1995 and the population-weighted centroid of the state in which city j is located; d ij          and d ij
are similarly weighted by distance.

                                                           14
                                                                                         Sinha and Cropper
aged households (Model 3) declines with age: it is approximately twice as high for households
headed by a 26- to 35-year-old as for households headed by a 46- to 55-year-old. Other things
equal, the higher the weight placed on wages, the lower the MWTP for amenities, holding
income constant. This implies that younger households and households without children will
have a lower MWTP than older households and households with children, holding income
constant.

        The MSA fixed effects estimated in stage one (the {Aj}) represent the average utility
obtained from location-specific amenities net of housing costs. Interestingly, the correlation
between the {Aj} for any pair of models in Table 5 is never lower than 0.99. As discussed above,
more populous cities have higher Ajs. (The correlation between the {Aj} and the log of MSA
population is 0.89.) This makes it imperative to control for population in the second stage.


Results from the Second Stage of the Migration Model

        In the second stage of the estimation, MSA fixed effects are regressed on the log of the
housing cost index (ln Rj) and amenities. Because living costs are likely to be correlated with the
error term ηj, the fraction of income spent on housing is set equal to 0.25, which is the median
share of income spent on housing in the movers sample, and αHlnRj is added to the dependent
variable (equation [7]).

        The estimate of αH varies with the coefficient on the wage in the first stage of the model.
Holding constant the fraction of income spent on housing, a higher value of the wage coefficient
implies a higher value of αH.24 If the fraction of income spent on housing is 0.25, a wage
coefficient of 1.62 implies a value of αH of 0.41. A wage coefficient of 2.03 implies a value of αH
= 0.51 in equation (7). This means that a second-stage equation should be estimated for each
value of the wage coefficient in the first stage. Below, we focus on results from the sample of all
prime-aged movers (Model 1).

        In Section 5, we use the value of changes in mean winter and summer temperature to
value SRES climate scenarios. Two important considerations are what form these variables
should take in the second-stage models and what other variables should be held constant. We

24 The fraction of income spent on housing is αH/αW, where αW is the coefficient on the wage. Therefore αH =
0.25αW.

                                                        15
                                                                                      Sinha and Cropper
have tried cubic, quadratic, and logarithmic specifications of the temperature variables. In
evaluating the impact of the temperature and precipitation variables, we controlled for mean July
relative humidity, annual snowfall, the logarithm of summer precipitation, and percentage
sunshine as well as the nonclimate variables listed above. Results from our preferred
specifications are reported in Table 6. Models 4 and 5 include Census division fixed effects;
Models 6 and 7 exclude Census division fixed effects but cluster standard errors at the Census
division level.

        All specifications indicate that increasing winter temperature increases mean utility, at a
decreasing rate. In quadratic specifications, mean utility peaks at 49°F when Census division
dummies are included in the model and at 60° when they are excluded. Marginal effects from the
quadratic specifications are statistically significant up to 49° and insignificant at higher
temperatures.25 When the log of winter temperature replaces the quadratic function, its
coefficient is negative and significant at the 0.01 level and unaffected by division fixed effects.
The marginal effect of winter temperature on utility is presented in Table 7 and plotted in Figure
1 for the models without division fixed effects. The marginal utility of winter temperature is very
similar for the models without division fixed effects for temperatures between 27° and 47°, the
sample interquartile range.

        All models indicate that increasing summer temperature reduces utility, but whether the
marginal disutility of s                   ummer temperature increases or decreases with temperature
varies with equation specification. Results are statistically significant and robust to the inclusion
of division fixed effects when we use the log of summer temperature (Models 5 and 7). These
models impose the restriction that marginal disutility declines as temperature increases. Entering
summer temperature in quadratic form implies that the marginal disutility of summer
temperature increases as temperature rises when division fixed effects are included in the model
but decreases with temperature when division dummies are excluded. Marginal disutility is,
however, significant only when division dummies are excluded from the equation (Model 6) and
only for temperatures in the range of 60° to 80°F. This is not surprising: there is little within-
division variation in summer temperature, and few mean summer temperatures lie outside of the


25 As shown in Table 7, winter temperature becomes a disamenity at very high temperatures; however, the marginal
effects are not statistically significant.

                                                       16
                                                                                           Sinha and Cropper
60° to 80° range using climate averages for the 1970 to 2000 period. Because of the small
within-division variation in summer temperature, we focus on the results from models without
division dummies (Models 6 and 7) for the remainder of the paper.26

         As Table 7 and Figure 2 suggest, the marginal disutility of summer temperature is quite
similar in the logarithmic and quadratic models between 65° and 80°F (the sample interquartile
range). The marginal disutility of higher temperatures actually decreases slightly with
temperature, which may reflect the fact that once people have adapted to higher temperatures
(e.g., by spending less time outdoors), additional increases in temperature yield (slightly) less
disutility.

         The marginal effects in Table 7 imply that, in most MSAs, the utility of a 1°F increase in
mean winter temperature is less than the utility of a 1° decrease in mean summer temperature.
The median average winter temperature in our sample is 35°, and the median average summer
temperature is 73°. Whether using the quadratic or logarithmic models, the utility of a decrease
in summer temperature from 73° to 72° exceeds the utility of increasing temperature from 35° to
36°. Only at a mean winter temperature of 25° or lower in the case of quadratic utility (20° or
below in the case of logarithmic utility) does the utility of an increase in winter temperature
exceed the utility of reducing summer temperature at 73°.


MWTP for Climate Amenities

         The coefficients in Tables 5 and 7 may be combined to estimate what households would
pay for marginal changes in winter and summer temperature (Table 8). In interpreting estimates
of MWTP for mean winter and summer temperature, it should be emphasized that a 1°F change
in temperature over the months of December through February is highly correlated with a 1°
change in November and March temperatures; a similar relationship holds for summer and
September temperatures.27 We also note that mean daily temperature is highly correlated with
daily temperature extremes; hence, a 1° decrease in mean winter temperature will reduce


26 We also note that there is little within-division variation in snowfall and humidity: these variables become
statistically significant when division dummies are removed.
27 We have tried expanding the definition of winter to include November and March and summer to include
September. The models presented in Table 6 produce better fits than the models estimated with expanded definitions
of winter and summer temperature.

                                                          17
                                                                                       Sinha and Cropper
minimum daily temperature, and a reduction in mean summer temperature will reduce maximum
daily temperature.

          Table 8 indicates that, on average, a prime-aged household is willing to pay between 1.3
and 1.4 percent of its income for a 1°F increase in winter temperature at 35° (the sample median)
and must be compensated 2 percent of its income for a 1° increase in temperature from 75° to
76° in the summer. This amount varies with temperature and with household characteristics.
MWTP for a 1° increase in winter temperature is only about 1 percent of income for households
with heads between 26 and 35 years old, whereas it is about 2 percent of income for households
headed by 46- to 55-year-olds. The greater value placed on climate by households with older
heads agrees with the findings of Cragg and Kahn (1997). Table 8 indicates that larger
households have higher MWTP (in absolute terms) than smaller households, although the
difference is less dramatic.


5. WTP for Temperature Changes

          We use the results of the equilibrium location model to estimate what households would
pay for temperature changes that are projected to occur over the period 2020 to 2050 under two
SRES climate scenarios. Specifically, we use the results of the Hadley III model to project mean
winter and summer temperature over the 2020 to 2050 period in 26 US cities (shown in Figure 3)
under the B1 and A2 SRES scenarios.28 We estimate WTP for these temperature changes,
compared with climate averages over the period 1970 to 2000. In computing WTP, we ask what
a household in each city would pay for the projected changes in winter and summer temperature,
assuming that the household must remain in the city.29

          The B1 SRES scenario, a more climate-friendly scenario than the A2, leads to an
atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration of 550 parts per million (ppm) in the year 2100,
whereas the A2 scenario results in an atmospheric CO2 concentration of 850 ppm by 2100 (Karl
et al. 2009). Over the period 2020 to 2050, however, the temperature projections for the United
States do not differ dramatically between the two scenarios. Both scenarios project warmer


28   Data from the Hadley III model were generously provided by Wolfram Schlenker.
29Formally, we used the deterministic component of the household’s utility function to compute compensating
variation for the predicted change in winter and summer temperature, holding the household’s location fixed.

                                                       18
                                                                                     Sinha and Cropper
winters and warmer summers; however, the B1 scenario projects, on average, warmer winters
than the A2 scenario for the cities we consider—an average increase in winter temperature of
3.3°F under B1 and 2.0°F under A2. Projections of increases in summer temperature for the two
scenarios are slightly higher under the A2 scenario (on average, 3.7°F) than under the B2
scenario (3.3°F).

           The variation in temperature changes across the 26 cities in Table 9 is, however,
considerable. Under the B1 scenario, cities in the Northeast Census region experience increases
in winter temperature between 4.5° and 5.4°F, whereas cities in the West experience increases
between 1.0° and 2.9°. In general, cities at lower latitudes experience larger increases in mean
summer temperature than cities at higher latitudes under both scenarios.

           Table 9 displays household WTP for each simulated temperature change using the
deterministic portion of the household’s utility function (Herriges and Kling 1999).30 We
assume that a household located in a given city experiences the temperature change for that city
shown in Table 9, holding all other prices and amenities constant, and must remain in the city.
This overstates (in absolute value) compensating variation for the temperature changes, because
the household is not allowed to adjust by moving.31

           Under each scenario, the welfare impacts of temperature changes, averaged across all
cities, are robust to the form of the utility function. The average welfare loss under the B1
scenario (population weighted) is the same for both utility functions—about 2.7 percent of
income. Under the A2 scenario it is about 5.0 percent of income (population weighted) using
either utility function. Estimates of net welfare impacts in individual cities do vary somewhat
with the form of the utility function. As indicated in Figure 1, cities with winter temperatures
between 20° and 35°F benefit more from warmer winters using a quadratic utility function;
hence the benefits of increases in winter temperatures in the Northeast are higher using the
quadratic specification of temperature. Cities with milder winters (such as West Palm Beach,
Orlando, Dallas, and Houston) benefit more from increases in winter temperature using the
logarithmic utility function.

30   Computations in Table 9 are based on Model 1 of Table 5.
31We could compute expected consumer surplus, allowing temperatures to change simultaneously and allowing
households to move. This would, however, need to be accompanied by an analysis of how wages and housing prices
would change across cities, which is beyond the scope of this paper.

                                                         19
                                                                               Sinha and Cropper
       Welfare impacts vary considerably across cities. Under the B1 scenario, several cities
experience welfare gains. These include cities in the northeastern region and midwestern cities
such as Minneapolis, Minnesota, and Fargo, North Dakota, whose projected increases in winter
temperature exceed increases in summer temperature. Under the A2 scenario, increases in
summer temperatures are greater than increases in winter temperatures in almost all cities; hence,
a typical household experiences a net welfare loss under the A2 scenario in all cities except
Fargo, North Dakota. Cities experiencing high welfare losses under both scenarios include
Fresno, California, and Dallas–Fort Worth, Texas, because projected temperature changes for
summer are much larger than those for winter.

       Table 9 suggests that average temperature changes of about 2°C would impose
significant welfare losses—on average, about 2.7 percent of income—based on the cities
examined in Table 9. These losses are larger than those reported by Albouy et al. (2011) using a
hedonic approach. Albouy et al. (2011) regressed a weighted average of wages (net of taxes) and
housing prices on local amenities using data from the 2000 PUMS. They found that households
are willing to pay more to reduce cooling degree days than heating degree days and that the
marginal disutility to reduce severe heat is not statistically different from the marginal disutility
to reduce moderate heat. When these results are used to value temperature changes associated
with the A2 SRES scenario in 2090 to 2100, welfare losses are between 1.5 and 2.0 percent of
household income. There are many reasons for differences in the magnitude of our results, but
the higher values that we obtained using a discrete location choice model are consistent with the
differences between the discrete choice and hedonic approaches found by Bayer et al. (2009).


6. Conclusions

       Our analysis indicates that US households that moved between 1995 and 2000 considered
climate amenities, as well as housing prices, earnings opportunities, and moving costs, in their
location decisions. They were willing to pay for increases in winter temperature and decreases in
summer temperature as well as for less humid summers and less snowfall. Moreover, MWTP for
higher winter temperature decreases as temperature increases. The disamenity of hotter summers
appears to decrease slightly with mean summer temperature, but, because mean summer
temperature varies less than mean winter temperature, this effect is estimated less precisely than
for winter temperature.

                                                  20
                                                                             Sinha and Cropper
       Holding income constant, the models indicate that households with heads between 46 and
55 years of age were willing to pay almost twice what a household headed by a 26- to 35-year-
old would pay for an improvement in a climate amenity. Households with more than two
members were willing to pay about 50 percent more than households with one or two members
for a climate amenity.

       Based on these results, summer temperature is more of a disamenity than winter
temperature. Using results for all prime-aged households, the average rate of substitution
between wages and temperature—evaluated at sample medians (35°F winter temperature and
73°F summer temperature)—implies that a 1° increase in winter temperature combined with a 1°
increase in summer temperature would reduce welfare by about 0.25 percent of income. The
marginal disutility of winter temperature, however, increases as temperature falls. Thus, MWTP
for a 1° increase in winter temperature from a baseline of 25°F (or lower) would be greater than
MWTP for a 1° decrease in summer temperature.

       When these results are combined with projections of temperature changes associated with
the B1 SRES scenario over the period 2020 to 2050, they imply that, averaged across 26 cities,
WTP to avoid the projected changes in climate is about 2.7 percent of income. For the A2
scenario, the loss is, on average, about 5 percent of income. These figures correspond to
population-weighted average temperature changes of 3.3°F (2.0°F) in the winter under the B1
(A2) scenario and 3.3°F (3.7°F) in the summer. Under the B1 scenario, some cities in the
Northeast and Midwest benefit on net from larger increases in winter temperatures than in
summer temperatures. Under the A2 scenario, however, the larger projected increases in summer
temperatures than in winter temperatures result in a net welfare loss in 25 of the 26 cities
examined. We emphasize that these losses do not account for adaptation to climate change: the
losses do not allow households to move in response to temperature changes. So they should be
regarded as upper bounds to climate damages.

       Estimates for the United States of market-based damages associated with climate change
have typically been in the range of 1 percent of gross domestic product for an increase in mean
temperature of 2°C (National Research Council 2010). Our results suggest that the amenity value
of climate could significantly increase estimates of climate damages, even for moderate
temperature increases.


                                                 21
                                                                         Sinha and Cropper



References

Albouy, D., W. Graf, R. Kellogg, and H. Wolff. 2011. Climate Amenities, Climate Change and
       American Quality of Life. Unpublished paper.

Bayer, P., N. Keohane, and C. Timmins. 2009. Migration and Hedonic Valuation: The Case of
       Air Quality. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 58: 1–14.

Bayer, P., R. McMillan, and K. Reuben. 2004. An Equilibrium Model of Sorting in an Urban
       Housing Market. NBER working paper no. 10865. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
       Economic Research.

Bayer, P., and C. Timmins. 2007. Estimating Equilibrium Models of Sorting across Locations.
       The Economic Journal 117(518): 353–374.

Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes. 1995. Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium.
       Econometrica 63(4): 841–890.

Berry, S., O.B. Linton, and A. Pakes. 2004. Limit Theorems for Estimating the Parameters of
       Differentiated Product Demand Systems. Review of Economic Studies 71(3): 613–654.

Bishop, K.C. 2007. A Dynamic Model of Location Choice and Hedonic Valuation. Unpublished
       paper. Durham, NC: Duke University.

Blomquist, G.C., M.C. Berger, and J.P. Hoehn. 1988. New Estimates of Quality of Life in Urban
       Areas. American Economic Review 78(1): 89–107.

Cragg, M., and M. Kahn. 1997. New Estimates of Climate Demand: Evidence from Location
       Choice. Journal of Urban Economics 42: 261–284.

Cragg, M., and M. Kahn. 1999. Climate Consumption and Climate Pricing from 1940 to 1990.
       Regional Science and Urban Economics 29: 519–539.

Deschenes, O., and M. Greenstone. 2011. Climate Change, Mortality, and Adaptation: Evidence
       from Annual Fluctuations in Weather in the US. American Economic Journal: Applied
       Economics 3(4): 152–185.




                                              22
                                                                          Sinha and Cropper
Graves, P., and P. Mueser. 1993. The Role of Equilibrium and Disequilibrium in Modeling
       Regional Growth and Decline: A Critical Reassessment. Journal of Regional Science
       33(1): 69–84.

Gyourko, J., and J. Tracy. 1991. The Structure of Local Public Finance and the Quality of Life.
       Journal of Political Economy 99(4): 774–806.

Herriges, J.A., and C.A. Kling. 1999. Nonlinear Income Effects in Random Utility Models.
       Review of Economics and Statistics 99(1): 62–72.

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2000. Special Report: Emissions Scenarios:
       Summary for Policymakers. A Special Report of IPCC Working Group III. Cambridge,
       UK: Cambridge University Press.

Kahn, M. 2009. Urban Growth and Climate Change. Annual Review of Resource Economics 1:
       333–350.

Karl, Thomas R., Jerry M. Melillo, and Thomas C. Peterson (eds.). 2009. Global Climate
       Change Impacts in the United States. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Klaiber, H.A., and D.J. Phaneuf. 2010. Valuing Open Space in a Residential Sorting Model of
       the Twin Cities. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 60(2): 57–77.

McFadden, D. 1978. Modeling the Choice of Residential Location. In Spatial Interaction Theory
       and Planning Models, edited by A. Karlqvist, L. Lundquist, F. Snickars, and J. Weibull.
       Amsterdam: North Holland.

National Research Council. 2010. Hidden Costs of Energy: Unpriced Consequences of Energy
       Production and Use. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.

Roback, J. 1982. Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life. Journal of Political Economy 90(6):
       1257–1278.

Savageau, D., and R. D’Agostino. 2000. Places Rated Almanac: Millennium Edition. New York:
       Hungry Minds Inc.

Schlenker, W., and M. Roberts. 2009. Nonlinear Temperature Effects Indicate Severe Damages
       to US Crop Yields under Climate Change. Proceedings of the National Academy of
       Sciences 106(37): 15594–15598.

                                               23
                                                                        Sinha and Cropper
Sinha, P. 2008. The Value of Climate Amenities: A Disequilibrium Approach. Ph.D. diss.,
       University of Maryland, College Park.

Sinha, P., and M. Cropper. 2011. The Value of Climate Amenities: Evidence from US Migration
       Decisions. Washington, DC: US Environmental Protection Agency.

Smith, V.K. 1983. The Role of Site and Job Characteristics in Hedonic Wage Models. Journal of
       Urban Economics 13(3): 296–321.




Figures and Tables

       (See following pages.)




                                               24
                                                                        Sinha and Cropper


    Table 1. Descriptive Statistics (Percentages) of Migrants by Age of Household Head

                                   Ages      Ages        Ages   Ages       Ages        Ages

           Variable                16–25     26–35      36–45   46–55      56–65       > 65

Married                             22.4     50.5        58.6   56.3       58.5        46.5
Household size
  1-person hh                       63.3     29.6        25.9   31.3        34         58.3
  2-person hh                       20.3     29.5        19.5   32.4       49.2         36
  3-person hh                       9.26     17.1        16.4   15.6       9.51         3.6
  > 3-person hh                     7.16     23.9        38.3   20.8       7.28        2.14
Usual hours worked per
week
  Hours worked = 0                  12.1      6.4         8.5    13        35.7        84.9
  Hours worked > 0 and < 30         33.2      7.3         5.9    6.5        11          7.6
  Hours worked > 30 and <
                                    51.8     81.2        80.3   76.2       50.9         7.3
  60
  Hours worked > 60                 2.9       5.1         5.2    4.3        2.3         0.3
Weeks worked in a year
  Weeks worked = 0                  12.1      6.4         8.5    13        35.7        84.9
  Weeks worked > 0 and < 30         35.3      8.9         7.8    8.6       12.7         6.2
  Weeks worked > 0 and < 30         52.6     84.6        83.7   78.4       51.6         8.9

Note: Figures in table are percentages.




                Table 2. Origin and Destination of Migrants by Census Region

                                      Region (2000)
  Region
  (1995)        Midwest          Northeast           South       West              Total

Midwest           38,900           5,130             20,900     13,200             78,100


                                              25
                                                     Sinha and Cropper
            −8.8%    −1.2%         −4.7%     −3.0%           −17.7%
Northeast   5,230    55,500        29,700    10,200          101,000
            −1.2%    −12.6%        −6.7%     −2.3%           −22.8%
South       11,700   11,900        99,800    17,300          141,000
            −2.7%    −2.7%         −22.6%    −3.9%           −31.9%
West        7,710    5,830         18,700    89,800          122,000
            −1.8%    −1.3%         −4.2%     −20.3%          −27.6%
Total       63,500   78,400        169,000   130,000         441,000
            −14.4%   −17.8%        −38.3%    −29.6%




                              26
                                                                          Sinha and Cropper


                Table 3. Descriptive Statistics of Migrants versus Nonmigrantsa

                                                                 Movers            Stayers
                                             Variable          (N = 441,393)   (N = 1,083,986)

Gender of head of household        Male                            64.1              60.4
(proportions)
Race of head of household          White                           75.9               73
(proportions)                      Black                            11                15
                                   Other                           13.1               12
Marital status of head of          Married                         46.4              47.1
household (proportions)
Education of head of household     No high school                  10.7              19.3
(proportions)                      High school                     17.8              25.5
                                   Some college                    34.2              30.4
                                   College graduate                23.4              16.4
                                   Postgraduate education          13.9              8.46
Age of head of household           Age                             38.4              42.9
(Mean)
Household wage earnings            Sum of the wage earnings       44,900            43,900
(Mean)                             of all household members
Total household income (Mean)      Sum of wage, business          63,600            56,900
                                   and farm incomes and
                                   income from other
                                   sourcesb of all household
                                   members
Size of household                  1 member                        39.9              30.1
                                   2 members                       27.4              26.6
                                   3 members                       13.2              16.9
                                   4 members                       11.4              14.7
                                   More than 4 members             8.15              11.8


                                               27
                                                                             Sinha and Cropper

                                                                    Movers             Stayers
                                               Variable          (N = 441,393)    (N = 1,083,986)

Number of children in the            0 children                       68.4              54.7
household                            1 child                          13.3               19
                                     2 children                       11.7              16.4
                                     3 children                       4.68              6.85
                                     4 children                       1.39              2.14
                                     > 4 children                     0.54              0.95
a
    There are 5,663,214 households in the PUMS data. We know the MSAs in which households
lived in 1995 and 2000 for 26.9 percent of these households (1,525,379 households). For the
remaining households, we do not have values for the MSA variable. This may be because these
were households that did not live in MSAs in either of the two years, migrated to the United
States from abroad, or for which we have missing values for either of the two years.
b
    Income from other sources would include Social Security income; welfare (public assistance)
income; Supplementary Security income; interest, dividend, and rental income; retirement
income; and other income.




                                                  28
                                                                         Sinha and Cropper


                       Table 4. Descriptive Statistics of Amenity Variable

                                                                  Std.
                    Variable                        Na   Mean    Dev.    Minimum Maximum

Mean PM2.5 (micrograms/cubic meter)              284     12.8     2.88        5.38     19.5
Violent crime rate (number of violent crimes
                                                 284     4.56    2,210       0.0686    12.3
per 1,000 persons)
Population (1,000s)                              284     761     1210         102      9520
Distance to coast (miles)                        284     141      170        0.00924    824
Avg. elevation (miles)                           284     0.197   0.273   0.000283      1.62
Area of parks (square miles)                     284     193      584         0.00     5480
Visibility > 10 Miles (% of hours)               284     46.1     19.5         5       85.5
Annual snowfall (inches)                         284     20.4     21.4        0.00     84.1
July relative humidity (%)                       284     66.2     10.9        22.5      78
Avg. winter temperature (°F)                     284     37.3     12.2        9.44     67.9
Avg. summer temperature (°F)                     284     73.3     5.82        60.8     89.7
Summer precipitation (inches)                    284      11      5.06        0.44     23.3
Transportation score                             284     50.4     29.2        0.00      100
Education score                                  284     51.2     29.3        0.00      100
Arts score                                       284     51.1     29.1        0.00      100
Healthcare score                                 284     49.2     28.7        0.00     98.3
Recreation score                                 284     53.3     28.4        0.00      100
Annual avg. of sunshine (% of possible
                                                 284     60.8     8.32         43       78
sunshine in 24 hours)
a
    N denotes the number of MSAs in our dataset for which we have nonmissing observations.




                                               29
                                                                           Sinha and Cropper


Table 5. First-Stage Estimates—Location Choice Model for Prime-Aged Movers Broken down by Household Size and Age
                                                             Group

                                                               Model 1                      Model 2                 Model 3

                                                                                   Include interactions       Include interactions
                                                                                   with household size          with age group
                                                           No interactions              dummies                    dummies

                      Variable                          Coefficient t-Statistic   Coefficient t-Statistic    Coefficient t-Statistic

Log (household wages)                                      1.63          35.8         1.9             32.1      2.03          38.3
Log (distance between state of origin and state of
                                                          −0.146         −157       −0.146        −158         −0.146         −158
MSA j )
Log (distance between division of origin and division
                                                         −0.0332         −31.8      −0.0331       −31.7       −0.0332       −31.8
of MSA j )
Log (distance between region of origin and region of
                                                         −0.0331         −39.7      −0.0332       −39.8       −0.0331       −39.6
MSA j )
Log (household wages) * I(hh size =2)                                               −0.0256       −0.39
Log (household wages) * I(hh size > 2)                                              −0.611        −10.3
Log (household wages) * I(age group 36 to 45)                                                                  −0.567       −10.4
Log (household wages) * I(age group 46 to 55)                                                                  −0.98        −14.8
Number of observations                                         115,623                      115,623                 115,623



                                                               30
                                                                            Sinha and Cropper

                                                                Model 1                    Model 2                   Model 3

                                                                                     Include interactions      Include interactions
                                                                                      with household size        with age group
                                                             No interactions               dummies                  dummies

                       Variable                          Coefficient t-Statistic    Coefficient t-Statistic   Coefficient t-Statistic

Log likelihood                                                  −218,028                   −217,959                 −217,911
Number of iterations                                                  62                        68                      64

Note: I(.) represents a dummy variable equal to 1 if the condition in parentheses holds.




                                                                 31
                                                                        Sinha and Cropper
                                 Table 6. Second-Stage Results for Prime-Aged Moversa

                                   Quadratic
                                  specification         Log specification       Quadratic specification       Log specification

                                    Model 4                  Model 5                      Model 6                    Model 7

 Using first-stage estimates              Include division dummies                             No division dummies

        from Model 1                           t-                                             t-Statistic                t-Statistic
(No. of observations = 284) Coefficient Statistic     Coefficient t-Statistic   Coefficient (clustered) Coefficient (clustered)

Mean PM2.5                      −0.032       −1.97     −0.00784      −0.552     −0.00677        −0.36       0.00401            0.26
Violent crime rate              −22.4        −1.58      −15.2        −1.08        −17.6         −1.27        −15.1         −1.17
Transportation score           −0.00304      −2.14     −0.00308      −2.17      −0.00267        −1.04       −0.00268       −1.03
Education score                −0.00102      −0.729   −0.000375      −0.273     −0.000211       −0.142      0.000121       0.0889
Arts score                     0.00407        2.76     0.00432         2.91      0.00529            2.90    0.00531            2.87
Healthcare score               0.00175        1.53     0.00174         1.53      0.00134            1.05    0.00141            1.11
Recreation score               0.00194        1.22     0.00208         1.3       0.00449            2.75    0.00446            2.69
Log (population)                0.882         15.7      0.843          15.4       0.759             9.49     0.743             9.13
Distance to coast               −0.748       −1.02      −0.735       −1.00        −1.20         −1.71        −1.22         −1.74
Distance to coast squared       0.121        0.133      0.364        0.399         1.69             2.59      1.76             2.58
Log (avg. elevation)            0.0565        1.57      0.0613         1.74       0.0546            2.00     0.0592            2.12
Area of parks                   0.0483       0.921      0.0649         1.24       0.104             1.42     0.109             1.46
Visibility > 10 miles          0.00393        1.25     0.00484         1.59      0.00383            1.96    0.00512         2.12


                                                             32
                                                                        Sinha and Cropper

                                   Quadratic
                                  specification         Log specification       Quadratic specification      Log specification

                                    Model 4                  Model 5                   Model 6                      Model 7

 Using first-stage estimates              Include division dummies                           No division dummies

          from Model 1                         t-                                            t-Statistic                t-Statistic
(No. of observations = 284) Coefficient Statistic     Coefficient t-Statistic   Coefficient (clustered) Coefficient (clustered)

Annual snowfall                −0.00382      −1.38     −0.00606        −2.3     −0.00721       −1.78       −0.00778       −2.03
July relative humidity         −0.000351    −0.0674    −0.00202      −0.391       −0.011       −2.72       −0.0107        −2.61
Avg. winter temperature         0.0707        3.36                                0.0595         2.89
Avg. winter temperature
                               −0.000688     −2.95                              −0.000524      −2.32
squared
Avg. summer temperature          0.129       0.767                               −0.0459      −0.298
Avg. summer temperature
                               −0.000987     −0.874                             0.0000852     0.0788
squared
Log (summer precipitation)       0.319        3.01      0.237          2.32       0.407          3.66       0.386             3.76
Log (winter temperature)                                0.727          2.95                                 0.727             3.75
Log (summer temperature)                                −2.01        −1.83                                  −2.57         −3.46
Annual sunshine                 −0.0067      −0.891    −0.00782      −1.18       0.00428       0.506       0.00217        0.302


Constant                         −8.06       −1.34       3.73        0.916        −0.868      −0.162         6.13             2.19



                                                             33
                                                                               Sinha and Cropper

                                         Quadratic
                                       specification           Log specification         Quadratic specification        Log specification

                                          Model 4                   Model 5                      Model 6                       Model 7

    Using first-stage estimates               Include division dummies                                  No division dummies

          from Model 1                               t-                                                t-Statistic                    t-Statistic
    (No. of observations = 284) Coefficient Statistic       Coefficient t-Statistic     Coefficient (clustered) Coefficient (clustered)

Adjusted R-Squared                         0.871                      0.869                        0.849                0.85
a
    Violent crime rate is the number of crimes per person, distance to the coast is in 1000s of miles, area of parks is in 1000s of
square miles; all other variables are in the same units as Table 4.




                                                                    34
                                                                       Sinha and Cropper


                      Table 7. Marginal Effects of Climate Variables for Prime-Aged Movers

                      Quadratic specification        Log specification          Quadratic specification      Log specification

                             Model 4                     Model 5                       Model 6                   Model 7

                                Include division dummies                                   No division dummies

                                                                                               t-Statistic
 Temperature (°F)   Marginal effect    t-Statistic   Marginal effect         Marginal effect (clustered)     Marginal effect

Summer
         60             0.0109            0.3            −0.0336                 −0.0357         −1.38           −0.0429
         65            0.00107            0.04            −0.031                 −0.0348         −2.12           −0.0396
         70            −0.0088           −0.47           −0.0288                  −0.034         −3.32           −0.0367
         75            −0.0187           −1.17           −0.0269                 −0.0331         −2.52           −0.0343
         80            −0.0285            −1.4           −0.0252                 −0.0323         −1.48           −0.0322
         85            −0.0384           −1.33           −0.0237                 −0.0314         −0.99           −0.0303
         90            −0.0483           −1.24           −0.0224                 −0.0306         −0.72           −0.0286
Winter
         10             0.057             3.38            0.0727                  0.049           3.01            0.0727
         15             0.0501            3.36            0.0484                  0.0437          3.09            0.0485
         20             0.0432            3.32            0.0363                  0.0385          3.18            0.0364
         25             0.0363            3.2             0.0291                  0.0333          3.28            0.0291
         30             0.0295            2.96            0.0242                  0.028           3.37            0.0242

                                                           35
                                                                              Sinha and Cropper

                            Quadratic specification         Log specification           Quadratic specification         Log specification

                                    Model 4                     Model 5                          Model 6                     Model 7

                                     Include division dummies                                        No division dummies

                                                                                                          t-Statistic
  Temperature (°F)        Marginal effect     t-Statistic   Marginal effect          Marginal effect (clustered)         Marginal effect

           35                  0.0226            2.53            0.0208                   0.0228             3.37             0.0208
           40                  0.0157            1.86            0.0182                   0.0175             3.08             0.0182
           45                 0.00883            1.03            0.0161                   0.0123             2.27             0.0162
           50                 0.00195            0.21            0.0145                   0.00705            1.17             0.0145
           55                −0.00493           −0.47            0.0132                   0.00181            0.25             0.0132
           60                 −0.0118           −0.98            0.0121                  −0.00343           −0.38             0.0121
           65                 −0.0187           −1.35            0.0112                  −0.00867            −0.8             0.0112

Note: Boldface type indicates that marginal effects are statistically significant. The t-statistic does not vary with temperature for
the log specifications.




                                                                   36
                                                                   Sinha and Cropper


   Table 8. MWTP for a 1°F Change in Temperature as a Percentage of Income for Different Demographic Groups

                                    Quadratic
               Log specification   specification      Quadratic specification              Quadratic specification

                            Model 1                               Model 2                         Model 3

                                                           Household size                  Age of household head
 Temperature
     (°F)            All prime-aged movers                 ≤2                >2        26 to 35   36 to 45    46 to 55

Summer
     60             −2.63             −2.19               −1.88             −2.86       −1.71      −2.45       −3.49
     65             −2.43             −2.14               −1.86             −2.71       −1.72      −2.36       −3.27
     70             −2.26             −2.09               −1.84             −2.57       −1.72      −2.27       −3.05
     75             −2.11             −2.03               −1.82             −2.43       −1.72      −2.19       −2.84
     80             −1.97             −1.98               −1.80             −2.29       −1.73      −2.10       −2.62
     85             −1.86             −1.93               −1.78             −2.15       −1.73      −2.01       −2.40
     90             −1.75             −1.88               −1.76             −2.00       −1.73      −1.92       −2.18
Winter
     10              4.46              3.01               2.59              3.76        2.44        3.34        4.61
     15              2.98              2.68               2.31              3.35        2.18        2.98        4.12
     20              2.23              2.36               2.03              2.95        1.91        2.62        3.62
     25              1.79              2.04               1.75              2.55        1.65        2.26        3.12
     30              1.49              1.72               1.48              2.14        1.39        1.90        2.62

                                                     37
                                                                                 Sinha and Cropper

                                            Quadratic
                    Log specification      specification           Quadratic specification               Quadratic specification

                                   Model 1                                      Model 2                         Model 3

                                                                         Household size                  Age of household head
  Temperature
       (°F)                All prime-aged movers                         ≤2                >2        26 to 35   36 to 45    46 to 55

        35                 1.28                 1.40                    1.20              1.74        1.13        1.54        2.13
        40                 1.12                 1.08                    0.92              1.33        0.87        1.19        1.63
        45                 0.99                 0.76                    0.65              0.93        0.61        0.83        1.13
        50                 0.89                 0.43                    0.37              0.53        0.35        0.47        0.64
        55                 0.81                 0.11                    0.09              0.12        0.09        0.11        0.14
        60                 0.74                −0.21                    −0.18             −0.28       −0.17      −0.25       −0.36
        65                 0.69                −0.53                    −0.46             −0.69       −0.44      −0.61       −0.86

Note: Boldface type indicates that marginal effects in Table 7 are statistically significant.




                                                                   38
                                                                     Sinha and Cropper


                       Table 9. WTP (As a Percentage of Income) for Temperature Changes in 26 Cities

                                                    B1 climate                            A2 climate
                                                     scenario                              scenario

                                                    Simulated                             Simulated
                             Mean temperature      temperature       Compensating        temperature       Compensating
                                      (°F)         changes (°F)         variation        changes (°F)        variation

                              Summer Winter Summer Winter (Log) (Quadratic) Summer Winter (Log) (Quadratic)

Northeast
 New Haven – Meriden,
                                 71          31    2.8      4.5    −0.05      1.00        3.1      1.9   −4.12    −3.37
 CT
 Boston, MA                      69          29    2.8      4.5     0.29      1.72        3.1      1.9   −4.10    −3.10
 Portland, ME                    65          22    2.8      4.5     1.90      3.61        3.1      1.9   −3.52    −2.32
 Pittsburgh – Beaver
                                 69          29    2.9      4.4    −0.33      1.03        3.1      1.8   −4.48    −3.53
 Valley, PA
 New York, NY/NJ                 71          31    2.5      5.4     1.81      2.97        3.1      2.4   −3.52    −2.65
 Buffalo – Niagara Falls,
                                 68          25    2.7      4.9     1.69      3.41        3.3      1.6   −4.89    −3.84
 NY
 Rochester, NY                   68          25    2.7      4.9     1.68      3.40        3.3      1.6   −4.90    −3.84
Midwest
 St. Louis, MO/IL                75          31    4.9      4.0    −4.64     −3.76        5.2      1.7   −8.53    −8.02


                                                            39
                                                                 Sinha and Cropper

                                                B1 climate                           A2 climate
                                                 scenario                             scenario

                                                 Simulated                            Simulated
                            Mean temperature    temperature     Compensating         temperature      Compensating
                                    (°F)        changes (°F)       variation         changes (°F)          variation

                            Summer Winter Summer Winter (Log) (Quadratic) Summer Winter (Log) (Quadratic)

 Chicago – Gary – Lake,
                               71          25   3.0      3.1   −1.38    −0.24        3.4      1.9   −4.18       −3.28
 IL
 Minneapolis – St. Paul,
                               67          14   3.0      2.9   1.62      1.47        3.3      2.5   −0.31       −0.37
 MN
 Fargo Morehead, ND/MN         67          9    2.7      2.9   5.57      2.86        3.1      1.8   0.54        −1.20
South
 West Palm Beach – Boca
                               82          67   1.4      2.1   −1.33    −4.35        1.7      1.9   −2.05       −4.83
 Raton – Delray Beach, FL
 Orlando, FL                   81          60   1.5      2.2   −1.26    −3.64        1.8      1.9   −2.07       −4.06
 Raleigh – Durham, NC          76          41   3.4      3.4   −3.32    −3.76        3.7      2.5   −5.03       −5.28
 Washington, DC/MD/VA          74          35   2.9      4.4   −0.84    −0.36        3.1      1.8   −4.44       −4.02
 Nashville, TN                 76          39   4.4      3.1   −5.62    −5.73        5.0      2.1   −7.89       −7.90
 Houston – Brazoria, TX        82          54   4.9      2.8   −7.12    −9.72        4.4      2.5   −6.34       −8.58
 Dallas – Fort Worth, TX       82          47   6.3      3.0   −9.33    −11.10       5.8      1.9   −9.39       −10.60
West


                                                         40
                                                               Sinha and Cropper

                                              B1 climate                           A2 climate
                                               scenario                             scenario

                                               Simulated                            Simulated
                          Mean temperature    temperature     Compensating         temperature      Compensating
                                  (°F)        changes (°F)       variation         changes (°F)        variation

                          Summer Winter Summer Winter (Log) (Quadratic) Summer Winter (Log) (Quadratic)

Phoenix, AZ                  88          53   3.4      2.9   −3.72    −6.21        3.3      2.0   −4.31     −6.15
Las Vegas, NV                77          40   3.7      2.3   −5.02    −5.20        3.4      2.0   −4.70     −4.84
Denver – Boulder –
                             65          27   3.9      2.9   −4.69    −2.93        4.1      2.9   −5.28     −3.47
Longmont, CO
Los Angeles – Long
                             77          51   3.5      2.1   −5.23    −6.46        3.3      2.2   −4.89     −6.15
Beach, CA
Fresno, CA                   74          46   5.0      2.7   −8.01    −8.71        6.5      2.5   −11.50    −12.20
San Francisco – Oakland
                             65          49   0.4      1.5   0.35     −0.22        1.9      1.5   −3.15     −3.36
– Vallejo, CA
Sacramento, CA               71          42   5.0      2.7   −8.35    −8.26        6.5      2.5   −12.00    −11.80
Seattle – Everett, WA        61          38   3.5      1.0   −7.88    −6.52        3.3      1.4   −6.94     −5.64
Population-weighted
                             74          38   3.3      3.3   −2.69    −2.73        3.6      2.1   −4.97     −5.04
average




                                                       41
                                                                                          Sinha and Cropper


                                      Figure 1. Marginal Effects of Winter Temperature



                    0.08

                    0.07

                    0.06

                    0.05

                    0.04
 Marginal Effects




                    0.03                                                                              Model 6
                                                                                                      Model 7
                    0.02

                    0.01
                                                                                                 25th ‐75th
                       0                                                                         percentile
                            10   15   20    25   30    35    40     45     50   55   60    65
                    ‐0.01

                    ‐0.02
                                                      Winter Temperature



Note: Bold lines indicate that marginal effects in the figure are statistically significant. Vertical
lines denote inter-quartile range of temperature.




                                                              42
                                                                                  Sinha and Cropper


                                    Figure 2. Marginal Effects of Summer Temperature



                               60    65       70       75        80       85     90
                          0

                       ‐0.01

                       ‐0.02

                       ‐0.03

                       ‐0.04
    Marginal Effects




                                                                                            Model 6
                       ‐0.05
                                                                                            Model 7
                       ‐0.06

                       ‐0.07
                                                                                       25th ‐ 75th
                       ‐0.08                                                           percentile

                       ‐0.09

                        ‐0.1
                                                     Summer Temperature


Note: Bold lines indicate that marginal effects in the figure are statistically significant. Vertical
lines denote inter-quartile range of temperature.




                                                            43
                                                 Sinha and Cropper


Figure 3. Map Showing 26 US Cities and Census Regions




                         44
                                                                    Sinha and Cropper




Appendix


                      Table A-1. Summary of Hedonic Wage Coefficients

                   Variables                 Mean of estimates   Std. dev. of estimates
   (dependent variable: log(wage rate)           from 297 MSAs      from 297 MSAs

High school (left out category is no high
                                                     0.101               0.040
school)
Some college                                         0.181               0.047
College graduate                                     0.387               0.070
Higher education                                     0.553               0.076
Age                                                  0.051               0.008
Age squared (divided by 100)                        −0.049               0.009
Married                                              0.095               0.022
Male                                                 0.213               0.040
Black (left out category is white)                  −0.067               0.075
Other race                                          −0.054               0.058
Speaks English well                                  0.111               0.117
Hispanic                                            −0.043               0.080
Business operations occupation (left out
                                                    −0.125               0.067
category is management occupation)
Financial specialists occupation                    −0.114               0.078
Computer and math occupation                        −0.002               0.090
Engineering occupation                              −0.074               0.084
Life, physical, and social sciences
                                                    −0.183               0.112
occupation
Social services occupation                          −0.345               0.085
Legal occupation                                    −0.040               0.137
Teachers occupation                                 −0.200               0.091


                                            45
                                                                     Sinha and Cropper



                    Variables                  Mean of estimates   Std. dev. of estimates
   (dependent variable: log(wage rate)             from 297 MSAs     from 297 MSAs

Other educational occupation                          −0.486               0.134
Arts, sports, and media occupation                    −0.253               0.098
Healthcare practitioners occupation                    0.074               0.077
Healthcare support occupation                         −0.323               0.081
Protective services occupation                        −0.237               0.106
Food and serving occupation                           −0.419               0.076
Maintenance occupation                                −0.466               0.079
Personal care service occupation                      −0.413               0.112
High-skill sales occupation                           −0.135               0.068
Low-skill sales occupation                            −0.228               0.064
Office support occupation                             −0.298               0.052
Construction trades occupation                        −0.239               0.094
Extraction workers occupation                         −0.261               0.292
Maintenance workers occupation                        −0.185               0.067
Production occupation                                 −0.310               0.085
Transportation occupation                             −0.356               0.074
Construction industry (left out category is
                                                      −0.178               0.098
mining and utilities)a
Manufacturing industry                                −0.118               0.108
Wholesale industry                                    −0.185               0.099
Retail industry                                       −0.342               0.098
Transportation industry                               −0.093               0.110
Information and communications industry               −0.139               0.114
Finance industry                                      −0.173               0.107
Professional and scientific management
                                                      −0.223               0.106
services industry




                                              46
                                                                           Sinha and Cropper



                     Variables                    Mean of estimates      Std. dev. of estimates
       (dependent variable: log(wage rate)           from 297 MSAs         from 297 MSAs

    Educational and health social services
                                                        −0.274                   0.096
    industry
    Recreation and food services industry               −0.378                   0.114
    Other services industry                             −0.361                   0.101
    Public administration industry                      −0.131                   0.100
a
    Because these two industries have very few observations, we bundled them together as the
omitted category.




                                                47
                                                                          Sinha and Cropper



                   Table A-2. Coefficients of the Hedonic Housing Equationa

            Dependent variable: log (user costs including insurance and utility costs)

                            Number of observations used: 3,346,588

                                     Adjusted R-Sq: 0.5737

                      Variables                           Coefficient           t-Statistic

Intercept                                                     5.63                 499
House is owned                                               0.505                 634
3 Bedrooms (left out category is less than 3
                                                             0.129                 100
bedrooms)
4 Bedrooms                                                   0.154                 99.4
5 Bedrooms                                                   0.284                 162
Greater than 5 bedrooms                                      0.486                 225
2 Rooms (left out category is less than 2 rooms)             0.139                 69.3
3 Rooms                                                       0.14                 73.7
4 Rooms                                                      0.169                 79.8
5 Rooms                                                      0.233                 104
6 Rooms                                                      0.329                 141
Greater than 6 rooms                                         0.533                 224
Complete kitchen                                             −0.035               −9.65
Complete plumbing                                            0.218                 55.9
1 to 10 Acres                                                −0.214               −97.5
0 to 1 Years old (left out category is > 61 years
                                                              0.39                 193
old)
2 to 5 Years old                                             0.369                 292
6 to 10 Years old                                            0.314                 255
11 to 20 Years old                                           0.216                 216
21 to 30 Years old                                           0.108                 113



                                                48
                                                                                 Sinha and Cropper



             Dependent variable: log (user costs including insurance and utility costs)

                                  Number of observations used: 3,346,588

                                          Adjusted R-Sq: 0.5737

                           Variables                           Coefficient             t-Statistic

    31 to 40 Years old                                             0.058                     59.2
    41 to 50 Years old                                             0.02                      20.8
    51 to 60 Years old                                            −0.025                     −22
    Number of units in structure: single-family
    attached (left out category is single-family                  −0.157                     −140
    detached)
    2 Units in structure                                           −0.27                     −106
    3 to 4 Units in structure                                     −0.326                     −128
    5 to 9 Units in structure                                     −0.353                     −138
    10 to 19 Units in structure                                    −0.33                     −126
    20 to 49 Units in structure                                   −0.382                     −143
    > 50 Units in structure                                       −0.367                     −143
a
    This regression also includes city-specific fixed effects (not included in the table).




                                                    49
