NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SUBWAYS, STRIKES, AND SLOWDOWNS:
THE IMPACTS OF PUBLIC TRANSIT ON TRAFFIC CONGESTION
Michael L. Anderson
Working Paper 18757
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18757

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013

I thank Ken Small, Lowell Taylor, Matt Turner, and participants at the 13th Occasional California
Workshop on Environmental and Resource Economics, the 2012 AERE Summer Conference, Texas
A&M, and the University of Houston for valuable suggestions. Any errors in the paper are the author’s.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Michael L. Anderson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Subways, Strikes, and Slowdowns: The Impacts of Public Transit on Traffic Congestion
Michael L. Anderson
NBER Working Paper No. 18757
February 2013
JEL No. R41,R42,R48
ABSTRACT
Public transit accounts for only 1% of U.S. passenger miles traveled but nevertheless attracts strong
public support. Using a simple choice model, we predict that transit riders are likely to be individuals
who commute along routes with the most severe roadway delays. These individuals’ choices thus have
very high marginal impacts on congestion. We test this prediction with data from a sudden strike in
2003 by Los Angeles transit workers. Estimating a regression discontinuity design, we find that average
highway delay increases 47% when transit service ceases. This effect is consistent with our model’s
predictions and many times larger than earlier estimates, which have generally concluded that public
transit provides minimal congestion relief. We find that the net benefits of transit systems appear to
be much larger than previously believed.

Michael L. Anderson
Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics
207 Giannini Hall, MC 3310
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
mlanderson@berkeley.edu

1.

INTRODUCTION
It is a stylized fact in the transportation literature that mass transit attracts a

disproportionate share of public funds but carries a negligible fraction of commuters. In
2010, public transit received 23% of federal highway and transit outlays but accounted for
1% of passenger miles traveled (U.S. Department of Transportation 2009, 2011a, 2011b).
State, local, and federal subsidies exceed $40 billion per year and cover 63% of operating
costs and 100% of capital costs. Even in Washington, DC – which boasts the second busiest
metro system in the United States – transit accounts for only 5% of passenger miles traveled
(American Public Transportation Association 2011; Schrank, Lomax, and Eisele 2011).
Public transit subsidies nevertheless remain popular in many areas. For example, in 2008
67% of Los Angeles County residents voted to allocate $26 billion to transit over 30 years.
Why is there such deep public support for transit subsidies if few voters are frequent riders?
The simplest explanation is the possibility of congestion relief – commuters may expect to
benefit from reduced congestion even if they rarely use public transit themselves.1 A large
body of transportation and economic research, however, concludes that public transit has
little effect on reducing congestion, calling into question its heavy subsidy rate (Rubin,
Moore, and Lee 1999; Stopher 2004; Small 2005; Winston and Maheshri 2007).
An important detail that has received little attention in the existing literature is that
commuters on different roadways in the same metropolitan area face sharply different levels
of congestion during peak hours. This paper presents a simple choice model in which
commuters face differing levels of congestion and choose either to drive or take transit.
Calibrating the model using data from the Los Angeles metro area, we predict effects on
congestion that are approximately six times larger than a model that does not account for
heterogeneity in congestion levels. This prediction is much larger than previous estimates,
and the qualitative conclusion is robust to wide variations in parameter values. The intuition
is straightforward: Transit is most attractive to commuters who face the worst congestion, so
a disproportionate number of transit riders are commuters who would otherwise have to
drive on the most congested roads at the most congested times. Since drivers on heavily
congested roads have a much higher marginal impact on congestion than drivers on the
average road, transit has a large impact on reducing traffic congestion.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
This possibility is perhaps best summarized by the title of a satirical article in the November 29, 2000, issue of
The Onion, “Report: 98 Percent of U.S. Commuters Favor Public Transportation for Others.” Other factors
that may explain local support of capital investment in transit include high federal matching rates, a combination
of concentrated economic rents and dispersed costs, and the political appeal of “ribbon cutting” ceremonies
(Taylor 2004; Baum-Snow and Kahn 2005; Winston and Maheshri 2007).
1

!

1

We test our predictions using freeway speed data from a 2003 strike by Los Angeles
County Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA) workers. In October 2003, MTA
workers began a strike that lasted 35 days and shut down MTA bus and rail lines. Using
hourly data on traffic speeds for all major Los Angeles freeways, we estimate a regression
discontinuity (RD) design using time as the running variable. We find an abrupt increase in
average delays of 47% (0.19 minutes per mile) during peak periods. This increase persists
through the end of the strike, and the estimate – consistent with the predictions of our
model – is many times larger than estimates in the existing literature. The effects are largest
on freeways that parallel transit lines with heavy ridership, and they are small and statistically
insignificant during the same period in neighboring counties unaffected by the transit strike.
Our estimates imply that the total congestion relief benefit of operating the Los Angeles
transit system is between $1.2 billion to $4.1 billion per year, or $1.20 to $4.10 per peak-hour
transit passenger mile. We consider the potential gap between the short-run effect of ceasing
transit provision (i.e., our estimates) and the long-run effect of a permanent shutdown. We
find that reducing the long-run effect to less than 50% of the short-run effect’s lower bound
requires implausibly large elasticities of travel with respect to travel costs. We consider the
net benefits of constructing the Los Angeles rail system and conclude – contrary to the
existing literature on rail capital investment – that they are large and positive.
On a broader scale, our findings demonstrate that in contexts in which policymakers
encourage adoption of activities that mitigate negative externalities, considering who adopts
the mitigating activity is critical in determining a policy’s expected benefits. We close with a
brief discussion of other contexts in which selection into mitigating activities may have large
impacts on predicted benefits.
2.

BACKGROUND
Existing economic research on the effects of transit on traffic congestion falls into two

categories: model-based estimates and empirical estimates. Examples of the former include
Nelson et al. (2007) and Parry and Small (2009). Parry and Small (2009) develop an analytical
model of an urban transportation system and compute the optimal transit operating subsidy.
The model takes as inputs average speeds, costs, and price and service elasticities. One input
is the effect of transit on relieving traffic congestion. They compute this effect using
assumptions about substitution between transportation modes and engineering estimates
relating average delays and marginal congestion impacts. In Los Angeles, the congestion
relief externality of traveling 1 mile on transit during peak hours is computed at 1.7 person-

!

2

minutes of reduced traffic delays.2 Aggregating this figure across all peak-period transit
passengers implies that transit reduces average delay by approximately 5% (0.025 minutes
per mile). Nelson et al. explore the potential benefits of the Washington, DC transit system
using a simulation model in which travel decisions are modeled as a nested logit tree. The
model takes as inputs demand response parameters from the literature, and it is calibrated to
match aggregate Washington travel patterns. Applying a relationship between traffic flows
and traffic speeds similar to that used by Parry and Small, Nelson et al. calculate that the
Washington transit system reduces total congestion by 184,000 person-hours per day, or 2.0
person-minutes per peak transit passenger mile carried. This figure is close to the figure
implied by Parry and Small.
Researchers employing empirical approaches include Winston and Langer (2006) and
Duranton and Turner (2011). Using metropolitan-area data, these authors regress total
congestion or vehicle miles traveled (VMT) on measures of transit capacity. They reach
varying conclusions. Winston and Langer estimate that rail lines reduce congestion but that
bus lines increase congestion. The net effect of transit systems is thus to increase congestion.
Duranton and Turner focus on testing the “fundamental law of road congestion” – the
hypothesis that the primary determinant of VMT in most cities is roadway capacity. They
also estimate a positive relationship between bus fleet size and VMT. To address the
potential endogeneity of transit provision, they instrument for bus fleets using an area’s 1972
Democratic vote share. The relationship between bus fleets and VMT then becomes
statistically insignificant and of variable sign, though the instrument is not powerful enough
to rule out the possibility that 1 passenger mile traveled on transit removes substantially
more than 1 VMT from roadways.3 These findings are nevertheless consistent with our own
findings, which suggest that transit has a minimal impact on total VMT but a large impact on
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
In Los Angeles, Parry and Small assume that each passenger mile traveled on transit diverts approximately 0.9
passenger miles from roadways. The average peak period delay in Los Angeles is 0.5 minutes per mile, and
estimates from the literature relating traffic flows and traffic speeds suggest that the marginal effect on total
delay of adding an additional vehicle to the road is 3.7 times the average delay. The congestion relief externality
of traveling 1 mile on transit during peak hours is thus (–0.9 auto passenger miles/transit passenger mile * 0.5
mins avg delay/passenger mile * 3.7 mins increased delay/min avg delay) = –1.7 mins increased delay/transit
passenger mile.
3 Duranton and Turner estimate that increasing a city’s bus fleet by 18 buses (10%) changes annual VMT by –
1.3% to 0.6% (–35 million to 16 million VMT) in their most precise instrumental variables (IV) specification
and –0.7% to 4.9% (–18 million to 133 million VMT) in their least precise IV specification (these figures
correspond to 95% confidence intervals). An average city bus carries 0.3 million passenger miles per year
(American Public Transit Association 2011), so adding 5.4 million passenger miles of bus travel could decrease
VMT by up to 35 million miles in the most precise specification and up to 18 million miles in the least precise
specification.
2

!

3

congestion levels. As we demonstrate below, the type of VMT diverted to transit is critical in
determining transit’s effects on congestion.
Overall, existing economic research does not support the hypothesis that transit
generates large aggregate reductions in traffic congestion. Though transit operating subsidies
may be justifiable on other grounds, such as returns to scale (Parry and Small 2009) or transit
passenger welfare gains (Nelson et al. 2007), there is no evidence that transit service is a
substantial factor in reducing congestion. At a minimum, the positive externalities appear far
too small to justify capital investments in transit infrastructure.
3.

THEORETICAL MODEL
We begin with a simple choice model in which travelers choose to either drive or take

transit. The goal of this model is to explore the quantitative importance of incorporating
heterogeneity in observed driving delays. We calibrate the model using data from the Los
Angeles metropolitan area. We choose Los Angeles for three reasons. First, it is the location
of the transit strike that we use for our RD design. Second, it is one of the three cities
included in Parry and Small’s comprehensive analysis of optimal transit operating subsidies.
Third, its annual transit usage is close to the national urban area average.
3.1

Theoretical Framework
Consider an individual who can either drive or take rail transit to her destination (we

consider the possibility of bus transit later). For convenience we refer to this individual as a
“commuter,” though in practice her trip need not be work-related. Commuter i has
preferences over consumption of a composite good, Xi, and generalized commute costs, Ti.
We assume a quasi-linear utility function of the form:
U i = Xi

T (si (Ri ), ai (Ri ), wi (Ri ), m)

Utility is increasing in the composite good X and decreasing in generalized commute
costs T. Generalized commute costs are a function of vehicle speed si, access and egress time
ai, waiting time wi, and commute distance m. Each of these quantities (except commute
distance) is itself a function of whether the commuter takes rail or drives; Ri equals one if the
commuter takes rail and zero if she drives. The commuter maximizes utility subject to the
budget constraint:
s.t. Yi = Xi + m · (pr Ri + pd (1

Ri ))

Income Yi must equal spending on the composite good X (whose price is normalized to
unity) plus monetary commute costs. If the commuter takes rail (Ri = 1), then commute

!

4

costs are the per-mile cost of rail (pr) times distance m. Otherwise commute costs are the permile cost of driving (pd) times m.
Let the commuter value time at vi dollars per hour. An extensive literature concludes
that commuters place a higher value on time spent waiting for transit, stuck in traffic, or
walking (Small and Verhoef 2007, p. 53; Abrantes and Wardman 2011) than they do on the
same amount of time in other circumstances. Defining a “delay multiplier” ! > 1, we can
write the commuter’s problem as maximizing:
U i = Xi

vi [Ri ( smr + c(ari + wr )) + (1
s.t. Yi = Xi + m · (pr Ri + pd (1

Ri )( smd + c(ad + wdi ))]
Ri ))

where sr is rail speed, ari is rail access and egress time, wr is average waiting time for the train,
sd is free-flow driving speed, ad is car access and egress time, and wdi is driving delay time (i.e.,
the difference between driving time in free-flow traffic and actual driving time). This leads to
a decision rule under which the commuter takes rail if and only if:
[c(ari + wr ) +

m
]
sr

[c(ad + wdi ) +

m
m
]  (pd
sd
vi

(1)

pr )

Rail is the more appealing choice if the difference between delay-penalized rail travel
!

!

!

!

time ! !!" + !! + ! and delay-penalized driving travel time ! !! + !!" + ! is less than the
difference between the cost of driving and the cost of taking rail, converted from dollars to
!

hours (! !! − !! ). The share of commuters taking rail is thus determined by the
!

probability that the inequality above holds. We calibrate the model under two scenarios. The
first scenario assumes that, consistent with the existing literature, all peak-period drivers face
the same average congestion delay, wd. We set the value of time vi at a fraction of the hourly
wage and calibrate the model by varying the distribution of rail access times until the
probability of taking rail equals the observed rail market share in Los Angeles. Note that the
fraction of rail commuters is determined by the fraction of commuters who live sufficiently
close to rail for Equation (1) to hold. If the predicted number of rail commuters is lower
than the true number, then we modify the distribution of rail access times to increase the
share of commuters who live close to rail. We continue this process until the predicted
number of rail commuters matches the actual number.
The second scenario allows for heterogeneous driving delays across commuters. The
distribution of congestion delays is set so that the average driving delay is identical to wd in
the first scenario, and the model is again calibrated by varying the distribution of rail access

!

5

times until the probability of taking rail equals the observed rail market share. Formally, the
two scenarios entail calibrating the following two equations by varying the distribution of rail
access times (i.e., f(ari)) until:
m
(pd
vi

P (Ri = 1) = P [c · ari

pr )  c(ad + wd

wr ) +

m
sd

m
]
sr

(Scenario 1)

m
m
m
(Scenario 2)
(pd pr )  c(ad wr ) +
]
vi
sd
sr
Of course, buses rather than rail serve many areas. For simplicity, we assume that any

P (Ri = 1) = P [c(ari

wdi )

given area is served either by buses or by rail but not both. This assumption is reasonable in
that the MTA arranges its bus lines so that they do not duplicate the rail service. The
commuter takes the bus if and only if:
[c(abi + wb ) +

m
]
sbi

[c(ad + wdi ) +

m
m
]  (pd
sd
vi

pb )

The decision rule for taking the bus is similar to the rule for taking rail, though with
different parameter values. The main difference is that the bus speed sbi varies by commuter.
This reflects the fact that buses do not have a dedicated right-of-way and thus may run more
slowly on congested routes. We calibrate the bus model under the same two scenarios as the
rail model: homogeneous driving delays and heterogeneous driving delays. We assume that
everyone who lives more than 1 mile from a rail line (based on the results of calibrating the
rail choice model) is in a bus catchment area (i.e., on or near a bus line).
3.2

Model Calibration
Table 1 lists the parameter values used to calibrate the rail choice and bus choice models.

In cases with any ambiguity we tried to choose parameter values consistent with the previous
literature (e.g., Parry and Small 2009). We assume a trip length of 7 miles for commuters in
rail catchment areas and 5 miles for commuters in bus catchment areas. Transit headways
and fares come from historical MTA documents, and driving costs come from the American
Automobile Association (AAA). We could not find authoritative data on parking costs or the
share of commuters with free parking, so we assumed that 85% of commuters have free
parking and that parking costs $5.00 per day for those with paid parking. These values are
roughly consistent with those reported in Willson and Shoup (1990), and our results are
robust to variations in these parameters.4
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
Willson and Shoup report that the average market price of parking in Los Angeles Central Business District is
$4.32 per day and that 91% of all workers in Los Angeles, Riverside, San Bernardino, and Ventura Counties
receive free parking. We view 91% as an upper bound on the free parking share because the Los Angeles
County MTA service area is more densely populated than the counties in Willson and Shoup.
4

!

6

Of particular importance for the calibration are parameters that vary across individuals:
vi and wdi. Absent individual heterogeneity, the predicted transit share would be either 0% or
100%. To set vi we assume that an average commuter values time at half his gross hourly
wage and that the elasticity of vi with respect to the wage is 0.8 (Small and Verhoef 2007, p.
52; Parry and Small 2009). This generates a distribution of vi with the 10th percentile at $4.88,
the median at $8.76, and the 90th percentile at $17.96. For wdi we assume an average driving
delay, relative to the free-flow speed, of 0.5 minutes per mile (Parry and Small 2009). This
translates to an average speed of 30 mph when the free-flow speed is 40 mph and 27.1 mph
when the free-flow speed is 35 mph.5 When wdi varies across commuters, we draw wdi from a
gamma distribution parameterized such that the average delay is 0.5 minutes per mile and the
right tail is consistent with our freeway speed data in Section 4.2. This implies percentile
delays corresponding to the following average speeds: 98th percentile, 13 mph; 99th percentile,
11.5 mph; 99.9th percentile, 8 mph.6 An average speed of 11–12 mph is also consistent with
the lowest average speed for a 7-mile trip in Los Angeles that we regularly observed during
rush hour in 2012 (Bing Maps 2012). We set bus speeds to strongly correlate with driving
speeds (ρ = 0.97).
We calibrate the model by varying the distribution of transit access times until the
predicted rail and bus shares match their observed values. In Los Angeles, rail and bus
account for 0.4% and 1.2% of peak-hour travel respectively (Parry and Small 2009). We
generate rail access times ari from a sum of two gamma distributions with shape parameters
of 2 (i.e., similar shape to a chi-square with low degrees of freedom). The first gammadistributed random variable, a1ri, represents access time from home to transit. The second, a2ri,
represents egress time from transit to work. We set E[a2ri] = 0.5*E[a1ri] to reflect the fact that
commercial districts have denser transit service than residential areas. We vary the scale
parameter on f(a1ri) until predicted rail share equals 0.4%.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
We use a lower free-flow speed for commuters in bus catchment areas than in rail catchment areas because
bus commuters have a shorter average commute. A 40 mph free-flow speed over 7 miles (the rail commute
distance) translates to 2.5 miles on local roads at 25 mph and 4.5 miles on freeways at 60 mph. A 35 mph freeflow speed over 5 miles (the bus commute distance) translates to 2.5 miles on local roads and 2.5 miles on
freeways.
6 We calculate evening rush-hour median speed for 960 Los Angeles freeway segments when the transit system
is operating. The 0.1st percentile speed is 8 mph, the 1st percentile speed is 15.5 mph, and the 2nd percentile
speed is 17 mph. We lack speed data for local roads, but Dowling and Skabardonis (2008) take 216 hourly
samples across 8 Los Angeles arterial streets and find average speeds between 7 to 10 mph approximately 10%
of the time. Assuming a local road speed of 8 mph for the 0.1st and 1st percentiles and 9 mph for the 2nd
percentile, then average trip speeds for the 0.1st, 1st, and 2nd percentiles are approximately 8 mph, 11.5 mph,
and 13 mph respectively (as in footnote 5, we assume the 7 mile trip entails 2.5 miles on local roads and 4.5
miles on freeways). Corresponding values for our gamma distribution are 8 mph, 11.3 mph, and 13.2 mph. We
truncate the distribution at 8 mph to prevent speeds slower than the minimum observed speed in the data.
5

!

7

We generate bus access times abi from a sum of two triangular distributions. In an
area with uniformly distributed population and bus lines placed in a grid pattern, the access
time to the nearest bus stop will follow a triangular distribution (see Appendix A1). The first
triangular-distributed random variable, a1bi, represents access time from home, and the
second triangular-distributed random variable, a2bi, represents egress time to work. We again
set E[a2bi] = 0.5*E[a1bi] and vary the scale parameter on f(a1bi) until predicted bus share equals
1.2%. We assume access times ari and abi are independent of driving delays wdi and value of
time vi, but our qualitative results are robust to relaxing this assumption (see Appendix A2).
Replacing the triangular distribution with a smoother gamma distribution also has minimal
impact on our results (see Appendix A2).
3.3

Model Results
Table 2 presents results from calibrating the rail and bus choice models. The first

column reports results from a model in which driving delay wdi is fixed at 0.5 minutes per
mile for all commuters. All rail and bus passengers would thus face the same 0.5 mins/mile
delay if they were to drive. We compute the effect of ceasing transit service (which would
force current rail and bus passengers to drive) by applying a power function of !! = ! ⋅
!"#$$%&!!"#$%! !.! (Parry and Small 2009). The predicted effect of ceasing transit service is

to increase average driving delays by 0.032 minutes per mile (6%). This increase is roughly
similar to the effect of transit service on congestion computed by Parry and Small (2009),
which is reassuring as their study applied similar parameter values. We also calculate average
consumer surplus (relative to driving) and find values of $0.08/mile for rail passengers and
$0.04/mile for bus passengers.
The second column in Table 2 reports results from a model in which wdi varies across
commuters. The average driving delay is 0.5 minutes/mile, but rail and bus passengers come
from routes with higher-than-average driving delays. On these routes, if the rail passenger
chose to drive instead, the average driving delay would be 3.2 mins/mile. The average
driving delay for a bus passenger who drove her own car would be 2.5 mins/mile. As a result,
we predict that ceasing transit service would increase average delays by 0.189 minutes per
mile (38%). This effect is 5.9 times larger than the predicted effect in the homogeneous
driving time model, and routes with the most congestion would experience the largest
increases. Average consumer surplus (relative to driving) is higher than in the homogeneous

!

8

model, at $0.24/mile for rail passengers and $0.11/mile for bus passengers.7 The implied
fare elasticity is –1.1, which is slightly higher than estimates from the literature.8
The bottom two rows of Table 2 report the parameter values that calibrate the model
in each case. We calibrate the model using transit access times; comparing the calibrated
access time distribution to the true access time distribution serves as a check on the model.
In reality, approximately 26% of the Los Angeles metropolitan area lives within 2 miles of a
rail line, and the spacing between bus lines in residential areas is generally between 0.5 and
0.75 miles.9 When calibrating the homogeneous model, 51% of commuters live within 2
miles of a rail line, and the implied spacing between bus lines is 0.4 miles. When calibrating
the heterogeneous model, 30% of commuters live within 2 miles of a rail line, and the
implied spacing between bus lines is 0.5 miles. The parameter values that calibrate the
heterogeneous driving time model are thus reasonably close to their true values.
The intuition underlying our results is straightforward. Driving is the more attractive
option for most commuters because the average cost of driving (including the cost of time)
is much lower than the average cost of transit. Nevertheless, some commuters choose transit,
and these commuters must be different from the average commuter along one or more
dimensions. An important dimension is transit access time – commuters who choose transit
tend to live close to transit. Another dimension is roadway congestion – commuters who
choose transit tend to commute on highly congested routes. As long as there is substantial
heterogeneity in traffic delays, commuters choosing transit will come from routes that have
higher than average congestion. This implies that their marginal effect on congestion will be
higher than the average commuter’s marginal effect on congestion, and the model
demonstrates that the difference is potentially very large.
The qualitative result that a model with heterogeneous driving times predicts much
larger effects from ceasing transit service than a model with homogeneous driving times is
robust to a wide range of parameter values. In general, assumptions that lower the cost of
driving or increase the cost of transit service will widen the difference between the two
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

These values represent average consumer surplus for rail (bus) passengers at current congestion levels. If a
significant number of rail (bus) passengers drove instead, increasing congestion, then average consumer surplus
among the remaining passengers would likely increase.
8 Litman (2004) summarizes long-run fare elasticity estimates as ranging from –0.6 to –0.9. Our overall fare
elasticity of –1.1 is driven by a fare elasticity of –1.3 for bus riders. This elasticity of –1.3 is likely too large
because we do not consider “captive” bus riders who do not own cars. However, we show in Appendix A2 that
the qualitative conclusions from our model are robust to introducing captive bus riders.
9 In 2003, approximately 240 square miles of Los Angeles were within two miles of a subway or light rail line.
The average population density of zip codes containing rail lines is 13,648 residents per square mile (author’s
calculation from US Census). Thus 3.3 million of the 12.8 million Los Angeles metropolitan area residents
(26%) lived within two miles of a rail line.
7

!

9

models’ predictions.10 In cases with uncertainty we therefore err on the side of picking high
values for driving costs and low values for transit costs. For example, we assume that drivers
account for all vehicle operating costs (gas, maintenance, and tires) rather than only gas costs,
and we assume that transit riders are risk-neutral with respect to waiting time for the bus or
train (i.e., they only care about expected waiting time, not the variance in waiting time).
In some cases the parameter choices do not have clear implications for the relative
cost of driving versus transit. Specific examples include the delay multiplier (which applies to
both driving delays and transit wait and access time), the wage multiplier, and trip length. We
test the sensitivity of our conclusions to reasonable variations in these parameters and to the
addition of a group of riders who are “captive” to transit because they do not own cars. In
all cases the model with drive time heterogeneity predicts qualitatively larger congestion
impacts from ceasing transit than the model with homogeneous drive times. Nevertheless,
the magnitudes vary substantially. For example, the predicted congestion impacts from the
heterogeneous model are 3.4 times larger than the homogeneous model if we reduce the
delay multiplier from c = 1.8 to c = 1.3, but they are 7.7 times larger if we increase the delay
multiplier to c = 2.3. There is also some sensitivity to trip length and the wage multiplier (see
Appendix A2). Augmenting the model with a group of commuters who do not own cars and
thus always take the bus attenuates the overall effect of ceasing transit service but has little
impact on the relative magnitudes of the homogeneous and heterogeneous models’
predictions (the latter is 6.1 times larger than the former). Incorporating the possibility that
access times are lower when delays are higher (i.e., when transit lines are located in dense,
congested areas) slightly increases the predicted effect of ceasing transit service, and
incorporating the possibility that lower-income households locate near transit lines modestly
decreases it (see Appendix A2). Thus, while our model unambiguously predicts much larger
congestion impacts from ceasing transit service than the previous literature, it does not
identify exact magnitudes. For this we turn to empirical estimates.
4.

REGRESSION DISCONTINUITY ESTIMATES
On October 14, 2003, Los Angeles County MTA workers went on strike, shutting

down the entire transit system for 35 days. We use this abrupt halt in service to estimate the
effects of transit provision on traffic congestion. To do so we implement an RD design with
the date as the running variable and October 14 as the discontinuity threshold. This design is
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

As the average cost gap between driving and transit increases, commuters need more extreme shocks in
order to choose transit. This means that transit commuters either need to live very close to transit or need to
experience more severe driving delays. The latter factor increases their marginal impact on congestion.
10

!

10

similar in principle to the RD designs implemented by Davis (2008), Auffhammer and
Kellogg (2011), Chen and Whalley (2012), and Bento et al. (2012).
4.1

Institutional Background
The Los Angeles County MTA provides heavy rail (subway), light rail, and bus service

for approximately 10 million people in a 1,400 square mile service area. The MTA service
area includes most incorporated areas in Los Angeles County; the largest populated area that
is not served by the MTA is the area east of I-605 (basically the area from El Monte to
Pomona). In 2003 it operated one subway line (the Red Line), two light rail lines (the Blue
and Green Lines), and dozens of bus lines.11 The bus lines included five “Metro Rapid” lines
featuring frequent service, limited stops, and traffic signal preemption (the number of Metro
Rapid lines has since increased). The busiest Metro Rapid line – the Rapid 720 – runs down
Wilshire Boulevard and carries more passengers than the Metro Green light rail line. The
average number of weekday passenger boardings was 200,000 on all three rail lines and 1.1
million on all bus lines. While the MTA is by far the largest transit provider in Los Angeles
County, some municipalities complement MTA service with their own bus lines, primarily to
fill gaps in local intra-municipality service. Metrolink commuter rail service is also operated
independently of the MTA and serves a much larger geographic area (the majority of its
track lies outside Los Angeles County). Overall, annual transit usage in the Los Angeles area
is very close to the national urban area average (244 miles travelled per capita in Los Angeles
versus 252 miles travelled per capita nationwide; Schrank, Lomax, and Eisele 2011).
Private automobiles account for over 98% of passenger miles traveled in the Los
Angeles metropolitan area. Fifty-three percent of VMT occur on freeways, with the
remainder on city streets. Congestion levels in Los Angeles average 0.34 minutes of delay per
VMT (peak and off-peak), which is higher than the national urban area average of 0.21
minutes per VMT but closer to the average level in other large urban areas of 0.28 minutes
per VMT (all figures are from Schrank, Lomax, and Eisele 2011).12 The backbone of the Los
Angeles freeway network contains three freeways running northwest-to-southeast (I-5, US101, and I-405), two freeways running east-west (I-10 and I-105), and two freeways running
north-south (I-110 and I-710). Several smaller state freeways (SR-2, SR-60, SR-91, and SR170) supplement these primary freeways. Ramp meters regulate traffic flows at most freeway
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
A third light rail line, the Gold Line, began operation three months before the strike, but it had not attracted
significant ridership by the time of the strike.
12 Other large urban areas include Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Dallas-Fort Worth, Detroit, Houston, Miami,
Philadelphia, Phoenix, San Diego, San Francisco-Oakland, Seattle, and Washington, DC. We exclude New
York-Newark from this category because of its unique attributes, particularly with respect to transit use.
11

!

11

entrances, and many freeways contain carpool lanes. Figure 1 covers the MTA service area
and shows the major Los Angeles highways and MTA rail lines.
The 2003 strike was rooted in a disagreement by MTA mechanics over contributions
to a health care fund. The mechanics had worked without a contract for over one year
before striking on October 14. The strike’s exact timing was exogenous in that it occurred
on the first business day following the expiration of a 60-day court-ordered injunction on
striking. MTA drivers, clerks, and supervisors honored the mechanics’ picket line, shutting
down the entire system (Streeter and Bernstein 2003). A small number of contract-operated
MTA bus lines continued service, and the MTA contracted a “Red Line Special” bus service
to duplicate part of the Red Line subway route. Metrolink also continued scheduled
commuter rail service. However, these combined services carried an insignificant fraction of
total MTA riders. Anecdotal evidence suggested that congestion increased substantially
during the strike (Rubin 2003), and this was later confirmed in data analyses.13 The strike
continued until November 18, at which point service was gradually resumed over the
following week (Streeter, Bernstein, and Liu 2003).
4.2

Data
The data for our study come from the Caltrans Performance Measurement System

(PeMS). All major divided freeways in California contain embedded loop detectors that
continually measure the number of vehicles crossing the detector and the average time that
each vehicle spends over the detector. Using these data, PeMS constructs hourly measures of
vehicle flows and average vehicle speed for each detector. The average spacing between loop
detectors is 0.6 miles along the freeways in our sample.
The primary outcome is average delay, measured in minutes per mile. We assume a
free-flow speed of 60 mph on freeways (Schrank and Lomax 2003) and calculate delay as
(60/speed – 1), with a lower bound of 0. For example, a speed of 40 mph corresponds to a
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
The Los Angeles Department of Transportation reported that the number of cars and trucks on the road
increased 4% during the strike (Bernstein, Pierson, and Hernandez 2003). Lo and Hall (2006) analyzed average
traffic speeds from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. and focused on three highways paralleling MTA rail lines (US-101, I105, and I-110). Doing a simple before-and-after comparison, they found that average traffic speeds declined
between 0 and 37% on these highway segments. In contrast to Lo and Hall, we analyze all loop detectors on all
major Los Angeles highways during all peak hours. We employ a regression discontinuity design, which turns
out to be important for achieving identification in this context. If we replicate Lo and Hall’s before-and-after
design on “control” freeways in neighboring counties, we find that peak-period delays increased 32.3% (t = 7.0)
during the strike. These highways were too far from Los Angeles County to be affected by the strike, so
seasonal trends or other unobserved factors must be driving the observed increase. Estimating the RD design
on the same control freeways generates estimates that are much smaller (e.g., 11.7%) and statistically
insignificant (see Section 4.5).
13

!

12

delay of 0.5 minutes per mile. Our results are robust to alternative values for free-flow speed
(e.g., 65 mph or 55 mph) or to using average speed itself as the dependent variable.
We focus on weekday peak hours since this is when congestion occurs. We define
peak hours as hours during which the average speed on Los Angeles freeways consistently
fell below 60 mph during the pre-strike period. Under this definition, the morning peak lasts
from 7 a.m. to 10 a.m., and the evening peak from 2 p.m. to 8 p.m. We prefer a broad
definition of peak hours because the strike lengthens the morning and evening commute
periods. Shortening the peak period increases the average level of congestion and the
magnitude of our estimates. We exclude weekends and holidays from our data set.
Table 3 reports summary statistics for our data set over a 200-day window containing
the strike. Each observation is a detector-by-hour. The first two columns report unweighted
means and standard deviations, and the last two columns report VMT-weighted means and
standard deviations. For average speed, average delay, and share of time occupied, the VMT
weight equals the length of highway covered by a detector multiplied by the average prestrike traffic flow across the detector.14
The average highway is 3.2 lanes wide and carries approximately 4,400 vehicles per
hour (in each direction). Average speed is 52.8 mph when the strike is not in effect and
drops to 48.3 mph during the strike; average delays increase accordingly. Peak vehicle flows
are 1% lower during the strike, in part because increased congestion reduces roadway
capacity. Detectors are occupied by vehicles 11% of the time outside the strike and 12.5% of
the time during the strike. The number of detectors changes slightly over time because
detectors go in and out of service. We include detector fixed effects in our specifications to
ensure that changes in the composition of detectors in service do not bias our estimates.
4.3

Regression Discontinuity (RD) Specification
We use an RD design to estimate the effects of the transit strike. Specifically, we

estimate the equation:
yit = ↵ +

strikeit +

f (dateit ) + "it

In this equation yit is the average delay (in minutes per mile) for detector i during hour
t, strikeit is a binary variable equal to unity when the strike is in effect and zero otherwise, and
dateit is the date measured in days from the beginning of the strike. Identification in the RD
model comes from assuming that the underlying, potentially endogenous relationship
between εit and the date is fully captured by the flexible function f(.). In particular, the
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

For lanes and total flow, the weight equals the length of freeway covered by a detector, and for average share
of time occupied the weight equals the length of freeway covered by a detector times the number of lanes.
14

!

13

relationship between εit and the date must not change discontinuously on or near the date on
which the strike begins. The RD is a sharp RD in that the running variable dateit completely
determines strikeit. We set the RD threshold at the beginning of the strike rather than the end
of the strike because service is restored gradually when the strike ends. There is thus no
sharp change in the “treatment” when the strike ends.
To estimate this model we follow Imbens and Lemieux (2008). With dateit normalized
to be zero on the day the strike begins, we estimate local linear regressions of the form:
(2)
The terms dateit and dateit strikeit should absorb any smooth relationship between the
date and εit. If the RD assumption is valid (i.e., εit does not change discontinuously when the
strike begins) our estimate of β will be unbiased even without the additional controls X it .
However, we include several variables in X it to increase the precision of our estimates. These
additional controls include day-of-week indicators and detector fixed effects.15 In our base
specification we use a bandwidth of 28 days on each side of the threshold. The strike began
on October 14, 2003, so the sample includes dates between September 16 and November 10
(excluding all weekends and holidays). In alternative specifications we use varying
bandwidths and find similar results. In all cases we weight each detector by pre-strike VMT.
In practice this means each observation is weighted by ωi, which equals the length of
highway covered by detector i multiplied by the average traffic flow across detector i in the
pre-strike period. Unweighted regressions generate qualitatively similar results.
Statistical inference is complicated by the fact that εit is correlated both over time and
across detectors. It is thus impossible to construct a single set of clusters in which
observations in different clusters are independent of each other. We address this problem by
clustering along both the day and the detector dimensions, as suggested in Cameron,
Gelbach, and Miller (2011). The resulting standard errors are robust both to within-day and
within-detector serial correlation.
4.4

RD Results
Figure 2 plots the average delay by week across all major Los Angeles freeways for a

28-week window containing the strike. Each point is a VMT-weighted average of delays
during peak periods across all detectors. Some weeks are missing one or more weekdays due
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
15

!

Dropping X it increases the standard errors somewhat but has little impact on the estimates of β.

14

to holidays. To adjust for this we plot the residuals from a regression of average delay on
day-of-week indicators rather than plotting the raw average delay. The two dashed lines in
the figure indicate the beginning and the end of the strike. Delays average around 0.4
minutes per mile in the 12 weeks leading up to the strike and then jump discontinuously to
0.6 minutes per mile during the strike. Average delay increases as the strike continues,
suggesting that the strike’s impacts are not confined to the initial week of the strike. Delays
fall following the strike but take several weeks to reach pre-strike levels. There are several
reasons for this gradual decline. First, service is slowly phased back in over the first week
following the strike. Second, the weeks around Thanksgiving (which occurs two weeks after
the strike ends) tend to have higher-than-average delays (see Section 4.5). Finally, it may take
commuters some time to readjust to their original travel patterns. The outlier at week 24 is
the week containing New Year’s Day.
Figure 3 plots the average delay by week for freeways that parallel major transit lines.
The four busiest transit lines in 2003 were the Red Line (99,000 daily boardings), the Blue
Line (67,000 daily boardings), the Green Line (32,000 daily boardings), and the Metro Rapid
720 bus line (45,000 daily boardings). Panels A and B in Figure 3 plot the average delay on
US 101 and Interstate 105. US 101 parallels the Red Line subway, and Interstate 105
contains the Green Line on its median. In both cases there is a striking and sustained
increase in average delay after the strike begins. Panels C and D plot average delay on
Interstates 110 and 710 and on Interstate 10. Interstates 110 and 710 parallel the Blue Line,
though both of them lie 2 to 4 miles away from the line itself. Interstate 10 parallels the
Metro Rapid 720 bus line. In both panels there is a notable increase in average delay after the
strike begins, though it is less dramatic than on US 101 or Interstate 105.
Table 4 presents the regression analogs of Figures 2 and 3. Each column reports
results from a separate regression. The first column estimates Equation (2) on a sample that
includes all major Los Angeles freeways. The average delay increases by 0.19 minutes per
mile (t = 4.7), or 47% of the pre-strike average delay. The second column reports results for
US 101. Average delay increases by 0.33 minutes per mile (t = 4.4), or 90% of the pre-strike
average. Columns (3), (4), and (5) report results for Interstate 105, Interstates 110 and 710,
and Interstate 10 respectively. Average delay increases between 53% and 81% when the
strike begins, and the coefficients are significant in all three columns. Column (6) reports
results for all major Los Angeles freeways that do not parallel a major transit line. Average
delay increases by 0.13 minutes per mile (29%) on these freeways when the strike begins.

!

15

The increase is statistically significant (t = 3.0), but it is more modest than the increases
observed on freeways paralleling major transit lines.
Table 5 presents regression estimates for the a.m. peak period only. Column (1)
reports results for all major Los Angeles freeways. Average delay increases by 0.31 minutes
per mile (67%) when the strike begins (t = 4.2). Columns (2) through (5) report a.m. peak
period results for freeways that parallel major transit lines. Morning delays increase 123%
and 106% on freeways that parallel the Red Line and Green Line respectively. They increase
39% on freeways paralleling the Blue Line and 65% on the freeway paralleling the Rapid 720
bus line. Morning delays on freeways not paralleling major transit lines, reported in Column
(6), increase 56%. All estimates in Table 5 are statistically significant.
Table 6 reports analogous estimates for the p.m. peak period. Average delay increases
0.16 minutes per mile (41%) across all major freeways (t = 3.9). Delays are again
concentrated on freeways that parallel major transit lines. Average delay on these highways,
reported in Columns (2) through (5), increases between 66% and 78%. The coefficients are
smaller in magnitude than during the a.m. peak period. This occurs in part because the p.m.
peak period is longer, with lower average delay. Transit may also be a poorer substitute for
driving during evening because some trips involve returning late at night, when trains and
buses run less frequently. The increase in average delay on freeways that do not parallel
major transit lines, reported in Column (6), is statistically insignificant.
Table 7 presents regressions measuring the strike’s effect on freeway occupancy. The
dependent variable in these regressions is the share of time that a detector is occupied. This
share increases with the density of cars on the roadway. If cars were placed bumper-tobumper, the share of time occupied would be 100%. If the average space between cars were
equal to the average length of a car, the share of time occupied would be 50%. The first
column reports results for all major Los Angeles freeways during peak hours. The share of
time occupied increases 1.3 percentage points (t = 4.1), or 12% of the pre-strike level.
Columns (2) through (5) report larger increases of 1.6 to 2.3 percentage points on freeways
paralleling major transit lines. The increase in share of time occupied on other freeways,
reported in Column (6), is 0.8 percentage points (t = 2.5).
A 12% increase in the share of time occupied does not imply that the total number of
vehicles traveling on freeways increased 12%. This distinction arises because the share of
time occupied is a function of both the number of vehicles on the freeway and the speed at
which they travel. If the density of vehicles were homogeneous over time, then speed would
not affect the share of time occupied; a decrease in speed would have the same

!

16

proportionate impact on the time a vehicle takes to cross the detector and the time it takes
for the next vehicle to reach the detector. However, the density of vehicles is heterogeneous
over time, and the share of time occupied is a weighted average of different vehicle densities,
with weights inversely proportional to speed.16 A 1% increase in vehicles thus increases the
share of time occupied by more than 1% because it both increases vehicle density and
increases the relative weight placed on higher levels of density (recall that a vehicle’s marginal
effect on congestion is strongly increasing in average congestion). The increase in share of
time occupied will be particularly high if, as predicted by our model, the increase in vehicles
is concentrated among times and freeways with the highest vehicle densities.
Table 8 presents estimates of the strike’s effect on peak-hour vehicle flows. The
dependent variable is the hourly traffic flow per lane. The first column reports results for all
major Los Angeles freeways. Vehicle flows fall by 31 cars per hour (t = 3.2) during peak
hours, or 2.2% of pre-strike levels. The effects are particularly strong on the freeways
paralleling the Red Line and the Rapid 720 (Columns (2) and (5)), but statistically
insignificant on freeways paralleling the Green and Blue lines (Columns (3) and (4)). It may
seem counterintuitive that vehicle flows decrease when transit shuts down, but this occurs
because traffic throughput decreases as congestion increases (Small and Verhoef 2007). Thus,
while the density of vehicles on the freeways increases, the number of vehicles crossing a
specific point per hour decreases. If we estimate the regression in Column (1) using all hours
of the day, we find a statistically insignificant effect of the strike on total vehicle flows. The
95% confidence interval ranges from –13.7 to +9.8 vehicles per hour, or –1.3% to +1.0% of
pre-strike levels (see Appendix Table A3). These results are consistent with our model,
which predicts small changes in VMT but large changes in average delays, and with the fact
that the MTA transports less than 2% of the region’s total passenger miles. However, we
cannot rule out larger changes in VMT on arterial roads as freeways slow down.
4.5

Falsification Tests
Identification in the RD model comes from assuming that the conditional expectation

E[εit | dateit] is smooth as dateit crosses the RD threshold. In our context this implies that
factors affecting traffic congestion must not change sharply on or near October 14, 2003.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
Consider a set of vehicle platoons of heterogeneous density x crossing detector i. The density measure x runs
from 0 (a platoon with no vehicles) to 1 (a platoon that is bumper-to-bumper). Let f(x) represent the frequency
at which platoons of density x occupy detector i. The average share of time occupied for detector i is
16

!
!"(!)!" .
!

However, f(x) = (minutes taken for platoons of density x to cross detector i )/60 minutes
= [(length of platoons of density x in miles)/(speed of platoons of density x in miles per minute)]/60 minutes
= (length of platoons of density x in miles)/[60*(speed of platoons of density x in miles per minute)]. The
weighting function f(x) is thus inversely proportional to the speed at which platoons of density x travel.

!

17

The exact timing of the strike corresponded to the expiration of a 60-day court injunction
and is thus exogenous. Nevertheless, it is important to rule out any possibility of seasonal
effects influencing our results, particularly since the strike began the first day following a
three-day weekend (Columbus Day weekend).
We conduct two falsification tests to rule out bias in our RD design. First, we estimate
the strike’s effect on traffic in neighboring Orange and Ventura counties. Portions of these
counties lie within the Los Angeles Combined Statistical Area, but neither county lies within
the Los Angeles MTA’s service area. We focus on sections of US 101 in Ventura County and
I-5 and I-405 in Orange County that lie near the Los Angeles County border. However, to
avoid spillover effects we exclude any portions of the freeways that are within 10 miles of
the MTA service area. If the RD design is valid, then there should be no statistically
significant effects on these “control” freeways.
Figure 4 plots average delay by week on the control freeways. There is no significant
break in average delay when the strike begins. Table 9 presents the regression analog of
Figure 4. The first three columns report results from estimating Equation (2) on the control
highways. Column (1) uses data from both morning and evening peak hours. Average delay
increases by a statistically insignificant 0.02 minutes per mile (12% of the pre-strike level).
Columns (2) and (3) present results from the morning and evening peak hours. In both
columns the increase is statistically insignificant and less than 15% of pre-strike levels.
Our second falsification test examines delays on Los Angeles freeways one year after
the strike. If seasonal effects drive our results, then similar discontinuities should appear one
year later. We code a “placebo” strike that begins October 12, 2004 – the day after
Columbus Day – and lasts 35 days (the length of the real strike). Since there was no strike
during this period, we expect to find no significant effects if our research design is valid.
Figure 5 plots average delays on major Los Angeles freeways during the weeks
surrounding the 2004 placebo strike. There is no visually perceptible break at the beginning
of the placebo strike. However, delays trend upwards in the weeks during and directly after
the placebo strike, suggesting that traffic increases in the weeks approaching Thanksgiving
even absent a strike. The fourth column of Table 9 presents the regression analog of Figure
5. It estimates Equation (2) using data within 28 days of October 12, 2004. Average delay
during peak hours increases a statistically insignificant 0.06 minutes per mile (14% of “prestrike” levels). Columns (5) and (6) estimate the same regression using only morning and
evening peak period data respectively. In both cases the changes are statistically insignificant
and represent less than 15% of “pre-strike” levels.

!

18

5.

DISCUSSION
The RD results demonstrate that ceasing public transit service causes a marked

increase in traffic delays. Our model calibration results predict a 0.189 minutes per mile
(38%) increase in average delay (Table 2). In comparison, our preferred RD estimate
(Column (1) of Table 4) finds that average delay increases 0.194 minutes per mile (47%). The
observed absolute change is similar to our model’s prediction, but the proportional change is
larger. The discrepancy in the proportional change occurs because we observe an average
pre-strike delay of 0.41 minutes per mile instead of the reported Los Angeles average of 0.5
minutes per mile. Part of this difference may arise because we only have data on freeway
delays and do not observe delays on arterial roads (the 0.5 minutes per mile figure averages
delays across freeways and arterial roads). Regardless, the RD estimates come much closer to
matching the predictions of the model with heterogeneous driving delays than they do to
matching the predictions of the model with homogeneous driving delays.
5.1

Potential Congestion Relief Benefits
How large are the congestion relief benefits of public transit? We calculate these

benefits under two scenarios. Our first scenario focuses on the reduction in freeway delays,
which is all we can observe in our data. Los Angeles freeways carry approximately 36 billion
passenger miles of peak-hour travel each year (Parry and Small 2009; Schrank, Lomax, and
Eisele 2011). An increase of 0.19 minutes per mile in average delay therefore implies an
aggregate increase of 114 million hours of delay per year. Valuing time at half the average
hourly wage, or $10.30, we estimate an annual congestion relief benefit of $1.2 billion per
year (U.S. Department of Labor 2004). However, motorists appear to place a higher value on
time spent stuck in traffic than on time spent driving on uncongested roads. If we apply a
delay multiplier of 1.8, the annual congestion relief benefit becomes $2.1 billion. These
estimates represent a lower bound on the congestion relief benefits since they assume that
transit has no effect on arterial road congestion.
In the second scenario we assume that ceasing transit service increases delays on
arterial roads by the same amount that it increases delays on freeways. This assumption may
underestimate or overestimate transit’s true effects, but there are strong reasons to believe
that congestion on arterial roads increased as much as or more than on freeways. In
particular, ramp meters restrict vehicle flows onto Los Angeles freeways, but they are not
used on arterial roads. Los Angeles freeways and roadways combined carry approximately 70
billion passenger miles of peak-hour travel each year (Parry and Small 2009). A 0.19 minutes
per mile increase in average delay thus increases aggregate delays by 222 million hours per
!

19

year. The annual congestion relief benefit is $2.3 billion when valuing time at half the hourly
wage and $4.1 billion when applying a delay multiplier of 1.8.
We can also express the congestion relief benefit in “per transit passenger mile” terms.
The Los Angeles MTA carried approximately 1 billion passenger miles during peak hours in
2003. A lower bound on the congestion relief benefit per peak-hour transit passenger mile is
thus $1.20 ($1.2 billion/1 billion passenger miles), and reasonable estimates are as high as
$4.10 per peak-hour transit passenger mile ($4.1 billion/1 billion passenger miles). These
estimates are many times larger than those in the previous literature. For example, a 0.025
minutes per mile increase in average delay – which is consistent with Parry and Small’s
calculations – would imply a congestion relief benefit of between $0.16 to $0.54 per peakhour transit passenger mile.17 The congestion relief benefit is also much larger than estimates
of consumer surplus. For example, the results in Table 2 from our choice model suggest
average consumer surplus of $0.24/mile for peak rail passengers and $0.11/mile for peak
bus passengers. The congestion relief benefits thus appear to be an order of magnitude
larger than the private benefits to transit riders (at least for those riders that own cars).
A final external benefit that we consider is agglomeration externalities. Several studies
suggest that increasing traffic speeds raises productivity by reducing “effective distance”
(Prud’homme and Lee 1999; Graham 2007). These papers conclude that a 10% increase in
commuting speed raises productivity by 2–3%. In our context this suggests that the transit
system might increase productivity by $400–600 million per year, or $0.40–0.60 per peakhour passenger mile. 18 These benefits appear larger than our consumer surplus estimates.
5.2

Long-Run Implications
In the long run, individuals may adapt to increased traffic congestion costs using

strategies that are not feasible in the short-to-medium run. Indeed, the “fundamental law of
road congestion” implies that in the long run individuals respond to increases in congestion
by reducing travel to some degree. The long-run effect on congestion of permanently
eliminating public transit may therefore be smaller than the short-run effect of temporarily
shutting down public transit. Potential long-run adaptations that may not be available in the
short run include increasing telecommuting, ride sharing, moving closer to work or school,
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
The $0.16 value applies if we limit delays to freeways only and apply no delay multiplier. The $0.54 value
applies if we assume delays occur on all roads and apply a delay multiplier of 1.8.
18 We calculate this figure as: 395,000 Downtown LA workers × $43,200 average salary × 12% speed increase
× 2–3% productivity increase per 10% speed increase = $410–614 million. Employment figures are from
Thornberg and Haveman (2010).
17

!

20

and leaving the metropolitan area entirely. The first three represent reductions in travel
demand, while the fourth represents a relocation of travel demand.
To evaluate the potential long-run reduction in travel demand due to increased
congestion, we draw on two literatures. The first links gas prices and travel demand, and the
second links congestion charges and travel demand. Like an increase in gas prices or a
congestion charge, an increase in road congestion raises the cost of travel. In all cases we
expect travel demand to fall as a result. Small and van Dender (2007) estimate average longrun VMT elasticities with respect to fuel cost ranging from –0.11 to –0.22. Bento et al.
(2009) estimate a long-run VMT elasticity with respect to gas prices of –0.34, and Knittel
and Sandler (2011) estimate an average “two-year” elasticity of miles traveled with respect to
gas prices of –0.26. We thus consider a “low” estimate of –0.15 for the long-run VMT
elasticity with respect to fuel cost (Small and van Dender’s estimate using 2006 gas prices)
and a “high” estimate of –0.34 for the long-run VMT elasticity. These elasticities imply longrun VMT elasticities with respect to total travel costs (i.e., fuel costs plus time costs) of –0.67
in the “low” case and –1.5 in the “high” case.19 We supplement these estimates with
estimates of the long-run (5 year) travel demand response to the London congestion charge,
which imply a VMT elasticity with respect to total travel costs of –2.0 (Evans 2008, p. 5).20
We consider this the “extreme” case because London has world-class metro and bus systems,
which should make roadway travel demand more elastic. In contrast, our counterfactual
simulation posits a Los Angeles metro area with no transit service at all.
We solve for a long-run equilibrium using a VMT demand equation of !! = ! ⋅
!"#$!!"#$ + !"#$!!"#$

!!

, with ! = 0.67 in the low case, ! = 1.5 in the high case, and ! =

2.0 in the extreme case. The “supply” equation relating VMT and travel delays is given by
the power function !"#$% = ! ⋅ !!!.! (see Section 3.3).21!
Panel A of Table 10 summarizes the travel demand response and corresponding longrun congestion-relief effects under different long-run VMT elasticities. Under a long-run
VMT elasticity with respect to total travel costs of –0.67, long-run travel demand falls
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
Delay-penalized time costs are approximately 240% higher than fuel costs.
Evans finds a long-run VMT elasticity with respect to total travel costs of –1.9 to –2.1 when using a value of
time of £10.8/hr ($16.60/hr).
21 We use the supply and demand equations to solve for equilibrium values at which Q = Q . Quantities are
d
s
normalized to one during the period before the strike, and the parameters a and b are determined by the
average delays observed prior to the strike. The shift in demand following the strike, which represents a change
in b, is calculated by finding the value of b that satisfies the short-run equilibrium at which Qd = Qs during the
strike. To solve for this equilibrium we apply short-run VMT elasticities of ! = 0.14 in the low case, ! = 0.37 in
the high case, and ! = 0.50 in the extreme case (Small and van Dender 2007). A spreadsheet detailing these
calculations is available from the author.
19
20

!

21

between 2.5% (on lightly affected freeways) to 6.7% (on heavily affected freeways). The
demand reduction is modest for two reasons. First, even on heavily affected freeways, the
short-run increase in congestion costs represents only a 21% increase in total travel costs.
Second, these are long-run equilibrium values, and in the long run congestion does not
increase as much as in the short run. With these reductions the long-run effect on delays is
between 56% of the short-run effect (on heavily affected freeways) to 63% of the short-run
effect (on lightly affected freeways). If we increase the long-run VMT elasticity to –1.5 (the
“high” case), then the long-run effect on delays ranges from 45% to 51% of the short-run
effect. In the “extreme” case of a VMT elasticity of –2.0, the long-run effect is between 40%
to 46% of the short-run effect. All of these calculations apply a delay multiplier of 1.8 and
assume that transit’s effect on arterial congestion is similar to its effect on freeway
congestion. Panel B applies no delay multiplier – which is necessary for calculating the lower
bound on the congestion relief benefit (see Section 5.1) – and assumes no arterial congestion.
The long-run effect on delays is now 85% of the short-run effect if ! = 0.67, 79% of the
short-run effect if ! = 1.5, and 75% of the short-run effect if ! = 2.0.22 The lower bound on
the long-run benefit is thus not much smaller than the lower bound on the short-run benefit.
The last column of Table 10 reports the value of these potential long-run effects. Our
estimates of short-run congestion relief effects range from $1.2 billion to $4.1 billion per
year. Equivalent long-run effects range from $1.0 billion to $2.6 billion per year, and even in
the “extreme” case of an elasticity of –2 they can reach $1.9 billion. These long-run figures
include the loss in consumer welfare experienced by individuals who stop traveling, but this
welfare loss is second order, ranging from $13 million to $120 million per year. While the
long-run effects are smaller than the short-run effects, they remain economically significant.
One possibility not captured in our calculations above is the potential for households
to relocate to a different metropolitan area in response to increased traffic congestion. We
are not aware of any studies estimating the effect of within-area travel costs on migration
between metropolitan areas. Nevertheless, we can rule out a large impact on the long-run
effects due to migration. If we assume that drivers on the heavily affected freeways are the
most likely to leave the metropolitan area, then reducing the lower bound on our estimated

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
These figures apply to the average freeway. The analogous figures for lightly affected freeways are 87% and
80% respectively. The analogous figures for heavily affected freeways are 81% and 74% respectively. The
difference between short-run and long-run effects is smaller when there is no delay multiplier because the
dollar value of the congestion increase becomes smaller as a share of total travel costs.
22

!

22

effect by 20% requires an elasticity of migration with respect to travel costs of 8.7.23 An
elasticity of that magnitude is implausibly large – it is equivalent, for example, to assuming
that a 10% increase in Los Angeles-area rents would reduce the Los Angeles population by
80%.24 The large elasticity is necessary in part because delay costs during commute hour
represent a minority of annual household travel costs (particularly when applying no delay
multiplier, as is the case with the lower-bound estimate). It is also necessary because
migration among metropolitan areas does not eliminate congestion but rather reapportions it
between areas. In our simulation we assume that households departing Los Angeles move to
metropolitan areas with a level of congestion equal to the average across all 439 U.S.
metropolitan areas. This implies that for every one hour of congestion eliminated in Los
Angeles, approximately 15 minutes of congestion are generated in other urban areas. The
congestion relief in Los Angeles is thus partially offset by increased congestion elsewhere.25
In summation, it seems likely that the long-run congestion relief benefits of transit
service are at least half the size of the short-run benefits. Under any reasonable assumptions,
the estimated long-run benefits are still four times larger than estimates in the previous
literature. Reducing the long-run effects below 50% of the lower bound on the short-run
effects requires elasticities of implausible magnitude. In fact, the calculations above are
conservative in that they ignore long-run behavioral responses that could increase
congestion. Chief among these is the likelihood that some former transit riders without cars
would purchase cars if the transit system were permanently shut down.
5.3

Capital Investment
Previous research has generally concluded that the costs of rail transit capital projects

greatly exceed the potential benefits (Baum-Snow and Kahn 2005; Winston and Maheshri

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
Reducing the high end of our estimate effects by 20% requires an elasticity of migration with respect to travel
costs of 2.8. A spreadsheet detailing these calculations is available from the author.
24 The average rent in Los Angeles is approximately $14,400 per year ($1,200 per month), and we calculate that
the average household spends about $7,200 per year in travel costs (travel time and fuel). The elasticity of
migration with respect to rents should thus be twice as large as the elasticity of migration with respect to travel
costs (17.4 versus 8.7). At an elasticity of 17.4, a 10% increase in rents causes 80% of the population to leave.
25 Offsetting congestion increases will not occur if households move to rural areas, but rural areas are poor
substitutes for the Los Angeles area. Furthermore, rural moves may create additional welfare losses by reducing
urban agglomeration benefits. For example, if the elasticity of wages with respect to urban density is 0.02
(Combes et al. 2010), the reduction in agglomeration benefits offsets one-quarter of the congestion relief
benefit associated with relocating households to rural areas. This figure applies in our lower-bound scenario
(i.e., a delay multiplier of 1.0 and no effect of transit service on arterial road congestion). The offsetting share
becomes smaller if we apply a higher delay multiplier or assume a larger effect of transit service on arterial road
congestion, but the total long-run effect of transit on congestion is of course higher in those scenarios.
23

!

23

2007; Parry and Small 2009).26 Are the estimates in this paper large enough to alter that
conclusion? To answer this question we consider a back-of-the-envelope calculation
comparing costs and benefits.
Table 11 estimates the net benefits of the Los Angeles rail system under several
scenarios. The circa-2000 Los Angeles rail system cost $7.1 billion to construct (2003 dollars)
and transported 85 million passengers in 2010 (48 million during peak hours). We assume
that ridership increases linearly (as opposed to exponentially) at historical rates and reaches a
maximum capacity of 175 million riders around 2060.27 We value the short-run congestion
relief benefit at $2.50 per peak-hour transit passenger mile, which comes from assuming a
value of time equal to half the median hourly wage, a modest delay multiplier of 1.4, and a
congestion relief benefit on arterial roads that is half the benefit observed on freeways. We
assume a high long-run VMT elasticity with respect to total travel costs of –1.5.
Of course, the average benefit per peak-hour rail passenger mile is less than $2.50
because some rail passengers are diverted from bus lines that are shut down when the rail
system opens. If we replace the rail service parameters with typical bus service parameters in
our choice model, we predict that a bus overlay of the existing rail system would attract 26%
of the current ridership (assuming rail service ceased). We thus assume that 74% of rail
passengers are incremental passengers attracted by the rail system. This assumption
generates a capital cost per incremental rider that is somewhat higher than the estimated
capital cost per incremental rider for the Washington Metro system (Pickrell 1990).28 We
apply a real discount rate of 5%, which lies at the upper end of discount rates used to
evaluate highway infrastructure projects (U.S. Department of Transportation 2003).
The first column of Table 11 presents estimates under these baseline assumptions.
The present value of gross benefits is $13.7 billion and exceeds the costs by $6.6 billion. The
subsequent columns test the robustness of this conclusion to variations in key parameters.
The second column assumes annual ridership grows half as fast; the gross benefits fall to
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
One exception is Nelson et al. (2007), who estimate that the entire Washington, DC, transit system generates
positive net benefits even after accounting for capital costs. However, 76% of the benefits in their study accrue
in the form of consumer surplus among transit riders, which Nelson et al. note must be high by construction
since their logit-based model imposes severe welfare costs for completely eliminating traveler options.
27 Linear growth to 2060 implies an average growth rate of 1.5% per year and a doubling of core ridership in 40
years. This represents slower ridership growth than that experienced by the San Francisco Bay Area Rapid
Transit system (BART) over the past 35 years. BART opened its initial operating segment in 1972 and its core
system in 1976. Core system ridership doubled in just 23 years, and from 1977 to 2012 it increased by an
average of 2.0% per year.
28 Pickrell (1990) estimates that the Washington Metro attracted 281,000 new weekday passengers at a capital
cost of $11.5 billion, or $40.9 million per weekday rider. We estimate that Los Angeles attracted 148,000 new
weekday passengers at a capital cost of $7.1 billion, or $48.0 million per weekday rider (all costs converted to
1998 dollars).
26

!

24

$11.8 billion but still exceed the costs by $4.8 billion. The third column assumes that a bus
replacement of the rail system would attract much higher ridership than in the baseline
scenario (50% of rail ridership). Gross benefits are $12.3 billion and exceed the costs by $5.2
billion, in large part because the cost of operating additional buses to accommodate greater
ridership offsets the reduction in benefits from incremental rail passengers. The last column
increases the long-run VMT elasticity with respect to total travel costs to the “extreme” case
of –2. Gross benefits are $12.7 billion and exceed the costs by $5.7 billion. Reducing the
gross benefits to less than the costs requires a long-run VMT elasticity with respect to travel
costs of –26.2 (equivalent to a VMT elasticity with respect to fuel costs of –5.9).29 This value
lies far outside the range of estimates in the literature and is fundamentally inconsistent with
basic time-series evidence on gas prices and VMT. The calculations in Table 11 do not
account for the full range of benefits (e.g., reductions in air pollution, consumer surplus,
agglomeration externalities, or construction firm profits) or costs (e.g., cost of public funds).
Nevertheless, they indicate that capital investments in transit infrastructure may generate
substantial positive net benefits – a finding that has previously had little empirical support.
6.

CONCLUSION
Using a simple choice model, we show that transit provision should have much larger

impacts on traffic congestion than predicted by models that do not incorporate within-city
heterogeneity in driving delays. Our regression discontinuity estimates of the effects of a
transit strike confirm this prediction, and back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest that the
congestion relief externality of a peak-hour transit passenger mile ranges from $1.20 to $4.10.
The lower bounds on potential long-run benefits are at least half those values. Contrary to
the conclusions in the existing transportation and urban economics literature, the congestion
relief benefits alone may justify transit infrastructure investments.
Both the model calibration and the regression discontinuity estimates apply specifically
to the Los Angeles metropolitan area. The exact magnitudes of the effects are thus unlikely
to generalize to other U.S. urban areas. Nevertheless, there are good reasons to believe that
the qualitative effects of transit on congestion are similar in other large cities. Los Angeles
per capita transit ridership and congestion levels are roughly equivalent to those in other
large urban areas (244 annual transit passenger miles per capita versus 295, and 0.34 minutes
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

Consistent with the literature linking gas prices and VMT, we assume in this calculation that the short-run
VMT elasticity with respect to gas prices is 20% of the long-run VMT elasticity, but we cap the maximum value
of the short-run elasticity at –1.
29

!

25

of delay per VMT versus 0.28).30 The effects are less applicable to smaller urban areas (e.g.,
Buffalo, Fresno, Madison, or Omaha), where congestion levels are three to four times lower
than in Los Angeles. At a minimum, however, the results establish the importance of transit
in what many consider the prototypical car-centric city.
The results also illustrate a more general point of substantive importance to public
policy. In many cases it is logistically or politically infeasible to internalize externalities, and
policymakers instead implement second-best policies that lower the cost of activities that
mitigate externalities. In these cases, determining who will adopt the mitigating activities is
critical in determining a policy’s effectiveness. If the mitigating activity is more attractive to
individuals who generate greater externalities, then it will be more effective than a calculation
using simple population averages would predict. There are numerous potential examples
other than mass transit and congestion. For example, programs that encourage home
weatherization should be most attractive to households with the highest energy costs.
Hybrid and electric vehicle subsidies should be most appealing to drivers who average a high
number of VMT per year. Vaccination against hepatitis B should be most attractive to
individuals who engage in high-risk sexual activities and needle sharing. Exploring the policy
significance of self-selection into mitigating activities in settings such as these may be a
useful area of future research.
REFERENCES
Abrantes, Pedro A.L., and Mark R. Wardman. 2011. “Meta-analysis of UK values of travel
time: An update.” Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 45(1): 1–17.
American Public Transportation Association. 2011. 2011 Public Transportation Fact Book.
Washington, DC.
Auffhammer, M., and R. Kellogg. 2011. “Clearing the Air? The Effects of Gasoline Content
Regulation on Air Quality.” American Economic Review 101(6): 2687–2722.
Baum-Snow, Nathaniel, and Matthew E. Kahn. 2005. “Effects of Urban Rail Transit
Expansions: Evidence from Sixteen Cities, 1970-2000.” Brookings-Wharton Papers on
Urban Affairs 2005(1): 147–206.
Bento, A. M et al. 2012. “Clearing the air? The unintended consequences of the Clean Air
Stickers Program in California.” Cornell Applied Economics Dept. Working Paper.
Bento, Antonio M et al. 2009. “Distributional and Efficiency Impacts of Increased US
Gasoline Taxes.” American Economic Review 99(3): 667–699.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

Other large urban areas include Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Dallas-Fort Worth, Detroit, Houston, Miami,
Philadelphia, Phoenix, San Diego, San Francisco-Oakland, Seattle, and Washington, DC. We exclude New
York-Newark from this category because of its unique attributes, particularly with respect to transit use.
30

!

26

Bernstein, Sharon, David Pierson, and Daniel Hernandez. 2003. “MTA Strike Derails
Business.” Los Angeles Times: A1.
“Bing Maps.” 2012. http://www.bing.com/maps/.
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller. 2011. “Robust Inference With
Multiway Clustering.” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 29(2): 238–249.
Chen, Yihsu, and Alexander Whalley. 2012. “Green Infrastructure: The Effects of Urban
Rail Transit on Air Quality.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3(4): 58–97.
Combes, Pierre-Philippe et al. 2010. “Estimating Agglomeration Economies with History,
Geology, and Worker Effects.” In Agglomeration Economics, ed. Glaeser, Edward.
University of Chicago Press, p. 15–65.
Davis, Lucas W. 2008. “The Effect of Driving Restrictions on Air Quality in Mexico City.”
Journal of Political Economy 116(1): 38–81.
Dowling, Richard, and Alexander Skabardonis. 2008. “Urban Arterial Speed–Flow
Equations for Travel Demand Models.” In Innovations in Travel Demand Modeling,
Austin, TX: Transportation Research Board of the National Academies, p. 109–113.
Duranton, Gilles, and Matthew A Turner. 2011. “The Fundamental Law of Road
Congestion: Evidence from US Cities.” American Economic Review 101(6): 2616–2652.
Evans, Reg. 2009. Demand Elasticities for Car Trips to Central London as revealed by the Central
London Congestion Charge. London: Transport for London Policy Analysis Division.
Graham, Daniel J. 2007. “Variable returns to agglomeration and the effect of road traffic
congestion.” Journal of Urban Economics 62(1): 103–120.
Imbens, Guido W., and Thomas Lemieux. 2008. “Regression discontinuity designs: A guide
to practice.” Journal of Econometrics 142(2): 615–635.
Knittel, C., and R. Sandler. 2011. “Cleaning the Bathwater with the Baby: The Health CoBenefits of Carbon Pricing in Transportation.” NBER Working Paper 17390.
Litman, Todd. 2004. “Transit Price Elasticities and Cross Elasticities.” Journal of Public
Transportation 7(2): 37–58.
Lo, Shih-Che, and Randolph W. Hall. 2006. “Effects of the Los Angeles transit strike on
highway congestion.” Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 40(10): 903–917.
Nelson, Peter et al. 2007. “Transit in Washington, DC: Current benefits and optimal level of
provision.” Journal of Urban Economics 62(2): 231–251.
Parry, Ian W.H., and Kenneth A. Small. 2009. “Should Urban Transit Subsidies Be Reduced?”
The American Economic Review 99(3): 700–724.
Pickrell, D H. 1990. Urban Rail Transit Projects: Forecast Versus Actual Ridership and Costs.
Cambridge, MA: US Department of Transportation.
Prud’homme, Remy, and Chang-Woon Lee. 1999. “Size, Sprawl, Speed and the Efficiency of
Cities.” Urban Studies 36(11): 1849–1858.

!

27

Rubin, Joel. 2003. “MTA Strike Puts Traffic Officers in Thick of It.” Los Angeles Times: B12.
Rubin, Thomas A., James E. Moore II, and Shin Lee. 1999. “Ten myths about US urban rail
systems.” Transport Policy 6(1): 57–73.
Schrank, David, and Tim Lomax. 2003. 2003 Annual Urban Mobility Report. College Station,
TX: Texas Transportation Institute.
Schrank, David, Tim Lomax, and Bill Eisele. 2011. 2011 Urban Mobility Report. College
Station, TX: Texas Transportation Institute.
Small, K A. 2005. “Unnoticed Lessons from London: Road Pricing and Public Transit.”
Access (26): 10–15.
Small, Kenneth A., and Kurt van Dender. 2007. “Fuel Efficiency and Motor Vehicle Travel:
The Declining Rebound Effect.” The Energy Journal 28(1): 25–52.
Small, K., and E. Verhoef. 2007. The Economics of Urban Transportation. New York: Routledge.
Stopher, P. 2004. “Reducing road congestion: a reality check.” Transport Policy 11(2): 117–131.
Streeter, Kurt, and Karen Bernstein. 2003. “MTA Strike Halts Buses Across L.A.” Los
Angeles Times: A1.
Streeter, Kurt, Karen Bernstein, and Caitlin Liu. 2003. “Mediation Plan Ends MTA Strike.”
Los Angeles Times: A1.
Taylor, B. D. 2004. “The politics of congestion mitigation.” Transport Policy 11(3): 299–302.
Thornberg, C., and J. Haveman. 2010. Los Angeles City Council Districts: 2010 Economic Report.
Los Angeles, CA: Beacon Economics.
US Department of Labor. 2006. Employment Cost Index Historical Listing. Washington, DC.
———. 2004. Los Angeles–Riverside–Orange County, CA National Compensation Survey April 2004.
Washington, DC.
US Department of Transportation. 2003. Economic Analysis Primer. Washington, DC.
———. 2011a. Federal Transit Administration Fiscal Year 2011 Budget Estimates. Washington,
DC.
———. 2011b. Highway Statistics 2010. Washington, DC.
———. 2009. Travel Profile of the United States. Washington, DC.
http://nhts.ornl.gov/2009/pub/profile_2012.pdf.
Willson, Richard, and Donald Shoup. 1990. “Parking subsidies and travel choices: Assessing
the evidence.” Transportation 17(2): 141–157.
Winston, Clifford, and Ashley Langer. 2006. “The effect of government highway spending
on road users’ congestion costs.” Journal of Urban Economics 60(3): 463–483.
Winston, Clifford, and Vikram Maheshri. 2007. “On the social desirability of urban rail
transit systems.” Journal of Urban Economics 62(2): 362–382.

!

28

Figure 1: Los Angeles Freeways and Rail Lines (2003)

Figure 2: Weekly Peak Hr. Delay on Major L.A. Freeways (7/14/03–1/30/04)
Average Delay by Week

0

Delay (minutes per mile)
.2
.4
.6

.8

All Highways

0

4

8

12

Week

29

16

20

24

28

Figure 3: Weekly Peak Hr. Delay on Specific L.A. Freeways (7/14/03–1/30/04)
Panel A: Red Line Freeway (US-101)
Panel B: Green Line Freeway (I-105)
Average Delay by Week

US 101

Interstate 105

.1

.2

.2

Delay (minutes per mile)
.4
.6
.8

Delay (minutes per mile)
.3
.4
.5

1

.6

Average Delay by Week

0

4

8

12

Week

16

20

24

28

0

Panel C: Blue Line Freeways (I-110 & I-710)

4

8

12

Week

16

20

24

28

24

28

Panel D: Rapid 720 Freeway (I-10)
Average Delay by Week

Interstates 110 and 710

Interstate 10

0

0

Delay (minutes per mile)
.5
1

Delay (minutes per mile)
.2
.4
.6

.8

1.5

Average Delay by Week

0

4

8

12

Week

16

20

24

28

0

4

8

12

Week

16

20

Figure 4: Weekly Peak Hr. Delay on Orange/Ventura County Freeways (7/14/03–1/30/04)
Average Delay by Week

0

Delay (minutes per mile)
.2
.4
.6

.8

Control Highways

0

4

8

12

Week

30

16

20

24

28

Figure 5: Weekly Peak Hr. Delay on Major L.A. Freeways 1 Year Later (7/14/04–1/30/05)
Average Delay by Week

0

Delay (minutes per mile)
.2
.4
.6

.8

2004 Placebo Strike (All Highways)

0

4

8

12

Week

16

20

Table 1: Parameter Values for Model Calibration
Related variable
Rail
Bus

Parameter
General Parameters
Trip Length
Hourly Wage (avg)
Hourly Wage (95% interval)
Wage Multiplier for Value of Time
Delay Multiplier

m
vi
vi
vi
c

Transit Travel Time and Costs
Transit Vehicle Speed (avg)
sr , sb
Transit Vehicle Speed (95% interval) sr , sb
Avg Time Between Trains/Buses
w r , wb
Walking Speed
ar , ab
Adult Fare (per mile)
pr , pb

24

28

Source (where applicable)

7 miles
5 miles
$21.60
$8.00–$65.50
0.5
1.8

Parry and Small (2009)
BLS (2004)
BLS (2004)
Parry and Small (2009)
Parry and Small (2009)

23 mph
11 mph
23 mph 8.8–11.6 mph
7 mins
8 mins
2.5 mph
$0.12
$0.17

Parry and Small (2009)
Los Angeles County MTA
Los Angeles County MTA

Driving Travel Time and Costs
Free-flow Driving Speed
sd
40 mph
35 mph
Parry and Small (2009)
Actual Driving Speed (avg)
wd
30 mph
27.1 mph
Parry and Small (2009)
Actual Driving Speed (95% interval)
wd
14 –40 mph 13.3–35 mph
PeMS Data, Bing Maps
3 mins
Access, Parking, and Egress Time
ad
$0.15
Operating Costs (per mile)
pd
AAA (2004)
85%
Share Commuters with Free Parking
pd
$5.00
Parking Costs (per day)
pd
Notes: The delay multiplier applies to time spent waiting for transit, walking, or delayed in traffic. For time
spent delayed in traffic, we calculate delay time as the difference between actual driving time and driving
time under free-flow conditions.

31

Table 2: Model Calibration Results
Homogeneous
Driving Speed

Heterogeneous
Driving Speed

0.50 mins/mile

0.50 mins/mile

0.50 mins/mile

3.19 mins/mile

Outcomes
Avg Delay for Drivers
Avg Delay for Rail Passengers
(if they chose to drive)
Avg Delay for Bus Passengers
(if they chose to drive)
Effect of Ceasing Transit on Average Delay

0.50 mins/mile

2.47 mins/mile

0.032 mins/mile

0.189 mins/mile

Avg Consumer Surplus for Rail Passengers
Avg Consumer Surplus for Bus Passengers

$0.08/mile
$0.04/mile

$0.24/mile
$0.11/mile

51%

30%

Calibration Parameters
Share of Population within 2 miles of Rail Line

Average Bus Line Spacing in Residential Areas
0.4 miles
0.5 miles
Notes: Average delay is chosen to match Parry and Small (2009). Calibration parameter
values are the values necessary to equate predicted ridership with observed ridership.

Table 3: Summary Statistics
Unweighted Statistics
No Strike
During Strike
Lanes

VMT-Weighted Statistics
No Strike
During Strike

3.3
(1.4)

3.3
(1.4)

3.2
(1.5)

3.2
(1.5)

Total Flow
(vehicles per hour)

4,619
(2,602)

4,604
(2,531)

4,401
(2,730)

4,355
(2,674)

Average Speed (mph)

53.3
(15.9)

49.3
(17.4)

52.8
(16.6)

48.3
(17.9)

Delay Relative to 55 mph
(minutes per mile)

0.35
(0.83)

0.52
(1.05)

0.37
(0.81)

0.55
(1.01)

Delay Relative to 60 mph
(minutes per mile)

0.39
(0.85)

0.57
(1.07)

0.41
(0.83)

0.61
(1.04)

Delay Relative to 65 mph
(minutes per mile)

0.43
(0.87)

0.62
(1.09)

0.45
(0.85)

0.66
(1.05)

Average Share of Time
Occupied

0.101
(0.072)

0.115
(0.082)

0.110
(0.071)

0.125
(0.080)

720

640

720

640

Detectors in Service

Sample Size
509,946
110,844
509,946
110,844
Notes: The observation is the detector-hour. Parentheses contain standard deviations. See text
for description of weights.

32

Table 4: Effect of Strike on Delays During All Peak Hours
Dependent Variable: Average Delay (in minutes per mile)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Strike

0.194
(0.041)

0.332
(0.076)

0.218
(0.052)

0.190
(0.051)

0.357
(0.128)

0.125
(0.042)

Date

-0.004
(0.002)

-0.003
(0.003)

-0.002
(0.002)

-0.003
(0.002)

-0.005
(0.004)

-0.005
(0.002)

Date*Strike

0.007
(0.002)

0.006
(0.003)

-0.001
(0.002)

0.007
(0.003)

0.012
(0.007)

0.007
(0.002)

Average Delay Pre-Strike

0.409

0.369

0.264

0.357

0.600

0.434

All

101

105

110 & 710

10

Other

Red Line

Green Line

Blue Line

Rapid 720

Freeways
Parallel Transit Line

Sample Size
178,549
15,854
31,058
19,152
15,357
97,128
Notes: Each column represents a separate VMT-weighted regression, with weights equal to (length of highway covered
by detector i)*(average pre-strike traffic flow over detector i). The observation is the detector-hour, and the sample is
limited to weekdays from 7-10 am and 2-8 pm within 28 days of the strike's beginning. Parentheses contain clustered
standard errors that are robust to within-day and within-detector serial correlation. All regressions include day-ofweek and detector fixed effects.

33

Table 5: Effect of Strike on Delays During AM Peak Hours
Dependent Variable: Average Delay (in minutes per mile)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Strike

0.314
(0.075)

0.482
(0.148)

0.283
(0.090)

0.189
(0.073)

0.619
(0.179)

0.258
(0.079)

Date

-0.003
(0.003)

-0.003
(0.005)

0.003
(0.002)

-0.002
(0.004)

-0.013
(0.009)

-0.003
(0.004)

Date*Strike

0.000
(0.005)

-0.005
(0.007)

-0.012
(0.004)

0.008
(0.006)

0.010
(0.012)

0.001
(0.005)

Average Delay Pre-Strike

0.472

0.392

0.268

0.485

0.953

0.464

All

101

105

110 & 710

10

Other

Red Line

Green Line

Blue Line

Rapid 720

Freeways
Parallel Transit Line

Sample Size
58,380
5,210
10,136
6,214
5,074
31,746
Notes: Each column represents a separate VMT-weighted regression, with weights equal to (length of highway
covered by detector i)*(average pre-strike traffic flow over detector i). The observation is the detector-hour, and the
sample is limited to weekdays from 7-10 am within 28 days of the strike's beginning. Parentheses contain clustered
standard errors that are robust to within-day and within-detector serial correlation. All regressions include day-ofweek and detector fixed effects.

34

Table 6: Effect of Strike on Delays During PM Peak Hours
Dependent Variable: Average Delay (in minutes per mile)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Strike

0.157
(0.040)

0.266
(0.064)

0.213
(0.061)

0.197
(0.056)

0.279
(0.132)

0.085
(0.049)

Date

-0.005
(0.002)

-0.004
(0.003)

-0.005
(0.002)

-0.004
(0.002)

-0.004
(0.005)

-0.006
(0.002)

Date*Strike

0.010
(0.002)

0.011
(0.004)

0.005
(0.002)

0.007
(0.002)

0.017
(0.008)

0.011
(0.002)

Average Delay Pre-Strike

0.384

0.361

0.274

0.300

0.401

0.431

All

101

105

110 & 710

10

Other

Red Line

Green Line

Blue Line

Rapid 720

Freeways
Parallel Transit Line

Sample Size
120,007
10,575
20,922
12,938
10,283
65,289
Notes: Each column represents a separate VMT-weighted regression, with weights equal to (length of highway
covered by detector i)*(average pre-strike traffic flow over detector i). The observation is the detector-hour, and the
sample is limited to weekdays from 2-8 pm within 28 days of the strike's beginning. Parentheses contain clustered
standard errors that are robust to within-day and within-detector serial correlation. All regressions include day-ofweek and detector fixed effects.

35

Table 7: Effect of Strike on Freeway Occupancy
Dependent Variable: Average Share of Time Detector Is Occupied
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Strike

0.013
(0.003)

0.023
(0.006)

0.019
(0.004)

0.016
(0.004)

0.022
(0.009)

0.008
(0.003)

Date

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

Date*Strike

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

0.001
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

Average Share of Time Detector
Is Occupied Pre-Strike
Freeways

0.112

0.121

0.097

0.115

0.129

0.110

All

101

105

110 & 710

10

Other

Red Line

Green Line

Blue Line

Rapid 720

Parallel Transit Line

Sample Size
179,680
16,222
31,112
19,152
15,668
97,526
Notes: Each column represents a separate VMT-weighted regression, with weights equal to (length of highway covered
by detector i)*(lanes at detector i). The observation is the detector-hour, and the sample is limited to weekdays from 710 am and 2-8 pm within 28 days of the strike's beginning. Parentheses contain clustered standard errors that are
robust to within-day and within-detector serial correlation. All regressions include day-of-week and detector fixed
effects.

36

Table 8: Effect of Strike on Traffic Flows
Dependent Variable: Hourly Traffic Flow per Lane
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Strike

-31.3
(9.7)

-68.2
(17.3)

-9.4
(11.7)

-1.4
(18.1)

-61.1
(19.6)

-29.4
(9.0)

Date

0.81
(0.40)

0.79
(0.58)

0.91
(0.62)

0.46
(0.94)

1.14
(0.88)

0.83
(0.33)

Date*Strike

-1.85
(0.61)

-2.50
(0.85)

-1.29
(0.73)

-2.46
(1.07)

-2.45
(1.06)

-1.53
(0.60)

Average Hourly Flow Pre-Strike

1,399

1,576

1,349

1,403

1,455

1,353

All

101

105

110 & 710

10

Other

Red Line

Green Line

Blue Line

Rapid 720

Freeways
Parallel Transit Line

Sample Size
179,680
16,222
31,112
19,152
15,668
97,526
Notes: Each column represents a separate VMT-weighted regression, with weights equal to (length of highway covered
by detector i)*(lanes at detector i). The observation is the detector-hour, and the sample is limited to weekdays from 710 am and 2-8 pm within 28 days of the strike's beginning. Parentheses contain clustered standard errors that are
robust to within-day and within-detector serial correlation. All regressions include day-of-week and detector fixed
effects.

37

Table 9: Effect of Placebo Strikes on Delays
Dependent Variable: Average Delay (in minutes per mile)
Falsification Sample:

Orange and Ventura Counties
(1)
(2)
(3)

October/November 2004
(4)
(5)
(6)

Strike

0.024
(0.027)

0.025
(0.037)

0.026
(0.037)

0.060
(0.042)

0.082
(0.054)

0.045
(0.064)

Date

0.000
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.003)

0.000
(0.002)

-0.002
(0.002)

-0.002
(0.003)

-0.003
(0.002)

Date*Strike

0.004
(0.002)

0.000
(0.003)

0.006
(0.003)

0.005
(0.003)

0.002
(0.003)

0.007
(0.004)

Average Delay Pre-Strike

0.205

0.170

0.219

0.433

0.539

0.386

All Peak

AM Peak

PM Peak

All Peak

AM Peak

PM Peak

Hours

Sample Size
13,149
4,296
8,853
177,572
59,532
118,034
Notes: Each column represents a separate VMT-weighted regression, with weights equal to (length of highway covered by
detector i)*(average pre-strike traffic flow over detector i). The observation is the detector-hour, and the sample is limited
to weekdays from 7-10 am and 2-8 pm within 28 days of the strike's beginning. Parentheses contain clustered standard
errors that are robust to within-day and within-detector serial correlation. All regressions include day-of-week and detector
fixed effects. In Columns (1)-(3) the strike variable is defined normally but the sample contains detectors in neighboring
counties not subject to the strike. In columns (4)-(6) the strike variable equals zero prior to October 12, 2004 and unity
after October 12, 2004.

38

Table 10: Potential Long-run Effects
Long-run equilibrium travel demand reduction
Implied generalized
LightlyHeavilyAverage
travel cost elasticity
affected
affected
Travel Response Parameter
freeway
of VMT
freeways
freeways
Panel A: Delay Multiplier = 1.8, Arterial Congestion
Fuel price elasticity of VMT = -0.15
-0.67
-2.5%
-3.9%
-6.7%

Long-run effect as a % of short-run effect
LightlyHeavilyAverage
affected
affected
freeway
freeways
freeways

Long-run
annual
congestion
relief benefit

63%

62%

56%

$2.6 billion

Fuel price elasticity of VMT = -0.34

-1.5

-3.3%

-5.2%

-8.9%

51%

49%

45%

$2.1 billion

London Congestion Charge Response

-2.0

-3.6%

-5.7%

-9.7%

46%

45%

40%

$1.9 billion

Panel B: No Delay Multiplier, No Arterial Congestion
Fuel price elasticity of VMT = -0.15
-0.67

-0.8%

-1.5%

-2.5%

87%

85%

81%

$1 billion

Fuel price elasticity of VMT = -0.34

-1.3%

-2.1%

-3.7%

80%

79%

74%

$1 billion

-1.5

London Congestion Charge Response
-2.0
-1.5%
-2.5%
-4.3%
77%
75%
70%
$1 billion
Notes: Panel A applies a delay multiplier of 1.8 to time spent in traffic and assumes an effect of transit on arterial congestion that is similar to the estimated effect of transit
on freeway congestion. Panel B applies no delay multiplier and assumes transit has no effect on arterial congestion.

39

Table 11: Capital Investment Benefits

Fixed Parameters
2001 Ridership (Red, Green, Blue Lines)
2010 Ridership (Red, Green, Blue Lines)
Share of Ridership that is Peak Hour
2010 Rail Operating Subsidy ($2003)
Annual Real Wage Growth
Real Discount Rate
Short-run Congestion Relief Benefit per Peak Mile
Varying Parameters
Annual Ridership Growth (to max of 175 million)
Share Riders Retained if Replacing Rail with Bus
2010 Operating Subsidy if Replacing Rail with Bus
VMT Elasticity wrt Total Travel Costs
Long-run Congestion Relief Benefit per Peak Mile

Baseline

Low Ridership
Growth

High Bus
Ridership

"Extreme"
VMT Elasticity

69 million
85 million
57%
$115 million
1%
5%
$2.50

-

-

-

1.7 million
26%
$126 million
-1.5
$1.61

0.9 million
-

50%
$215 million
-

-2.0
$1.50

Total Costs and Benefits
Capital Cost of Rail System
$7.1 billion
$7.1 billion
$7.1 billion
$7.1 billion
$12.3 billion
$12.7 billion
Present Value of Gross Benefits
$13.7 billion
$11.8 billion
Present Value of Net Benefits
$6.6 billion
$4.8 billion
$5.2 billion
$5.7 billion
Notes: Cell entry of "-" indicates cell contains same value as baseline column. All dollar figures are expressed in 2003
dollars for comparability. Ridership figures and operating subsidies come from LACMTA reports. Real wage growth
comes from US Dept. of Labor (2006), and real discount rate comes from US Dept. of Transportation (2003).

40

ONLINE APPENDIX (NOT FOR PRINT PUBLICATION)
A1. MATHEMATICAL APPENDIX
Suppose that bus lines are placed in a grid pattern of width 2a, that the population is
uniformly distributed across space, and that people cannot walk diagonally across city blocks.
Further suppose that bus stops are placed at locations at which bus lines cross (this
assumption simplifies notation but can be relaxed with minimal effect on our conclusions).
Then accessing the nearest bus stop requires walking U miles north/south and V miles
east/west, where U and V are independent and each is distributed uniform (0, a). The
random variable X = U + V measures the distance to the nearest bus stop and follows a
triangular distribution with density f(x) = x/a2 for x ϵ (0, a) and density f(x) = 2/a – x/a2 for
x ϵ (a, 2a).
Proof:
!

First note that ! !, ! = !(!) ⋅ !(!) = !!.
Thus for x ϵ (0, a), ! ! < ! = ! ! + ! < !
=

! !!! !
!" !"
! !
!!

=

!!
!! !

.

Therefore f(x) = x/a2 for x ϵ (0, a).
By symmetry f(x) = 2/a – x/a2 for x ϵ (a, 2a).
A2. SENSITIVITY OF MODEL CALIBRATION RESULTS
In this section we test the sensitivity of our calibration results to alternative parameter
choices. In our baseline calibration we choose parameter values that tend to lower the cost
of transit and increase the cost of driving. These choices are conservative in that they lower
the predicted effect of ceasing transit service under the heterogeneous driving delay model.
However, in several cases the parameter choices do not have clear implications for the
relative cost of driving versus transit. These cases include the delay multiplier (which applies
to driving delays, transit wait, and transit access time), the wage multiplier, and trip length.
Table A1 tests the sensitivity of our predictions to reasonable variations in these three
parameters. Column (1) reproduces the predictions from our baseline calibration for

41

comparison purposes. In the baseline calibration, the heterogeneous driving delay model
predicts a congestion impact from ceasing transit service that is 5.9 times greater than the
homogeneous driving delay model’s prediction. Columns (2) and (3) test sensitivity to
variations in the delay multiplier, which is set at c = 1.8 in our baseline calibration (a delay
multiplier of 1.8 implies that individuals value time spent waiting in traffic, waiting for transit,
or walking to transit at 1.8 times their normal value of time). Under a high delay multiplier (c
= 2.3), the ratio of the heterogeneous model prediction to the homogeneous model
prediction increases to 7.7. Under a low delay multiplier (c = 1.3), the ratio decreases to 3.4.
Columns (4) and (5) test sensitivity to variations in the value of time. Under a high value of
time (60% of the average wage), the ratio of the two models’ predictions increases to 7.6.
Under a low value of time (40% of the average wage), the ratio decreases to 4.1. Columns (6)
and (7) test sensitivity to variations in trip length. Since long and short trips are less common
than average-length trips, we calibrate the model in these two columns so that predicted
transit share is half the overall transit share. This reduces the predicted impact of ceasing
transit service under either model (homogeneous or heterogeneous), but it has little impact
on the ratio of the two predictions (which is the object of interest). On long trips (a 10-mile
rail trip or a 7-mile bus trip), the ratio of the two predictions is 6.1. On short trips (a 5-mile
rail trip or a 3-mile bus trip), the ratio of the two predictions is 3.6.
Table A2 tests the sensitivity of our predictions to different assumptions about
transportation alternatives and sorting behavior. Column (1) reproduces the predictions
from our baseline calibration for comparison purposes. Column (2) calibrates the two
models under the assumption that one-third of the bus riders are “captive” riders who do
not own cars. Under this assumption the predicted impact of ceasing transit service falls in
both models because captive riders do not switch to driving. Nevertheless, the ratio of the
two models’ predictions is nearly unchanged at 6.1. Column (3) calibrates the two models
under the assumption that access time and driving delays are negatively correlated (i.e.,
people living far from transit experience fewer driving delays). This modification captures
the possibility that denser areas have better transit access and more congestion. The ratio of
the two predictions increases to 6.5. Column (4) calibrates the two models under the
assumption that access time and value of time are positively correlated (i.e., wealthy
neighborhoods are farther from transit). This modification captures the possibility that lowincome individuals choose to live closer to transit. The ratio of the two predictions decreases
to 4.6.

42

Two patterns emerge from the sensitivity analyses in Tables A1 and A2. First, in all
cases the heterogeneous driving delay model predicts a much greater increase in congestion
from ceasing transit service than the homogeneous driving delay model. The minimum ratio
between the two models’ predictions is 3.4, and the maximum ratio is 7.7. Second, despite
the consistent qualitative finding that a model incorporating heterogeneous driving delays
predicts much greater congestion impacts, the magnitude of the predictions varies
substantially with different parameter values. Thus it is infeasible to make an accurate
quantitative prediction about the effect of ceasing transit service without additional data or a
natural experiment.

43

Parameter Modification:

Outcomes
Effect of Ceasing Transit on Average Delay
(Homogeneous Driving Delay Model)
Effect of Ceasing Transit on Average Delay
(Heterogeneous Driving Delay Model)
Ratio of Heterogeneous Model Effect
to Homogeneous Model Effect
Calibration Parameters (Heterogeneous Model)
Share of Population within 2 miles of Rail Line

Table A1: Model Calibration Results Under Different Parameter Values
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
None
High Delay
Low Delay
High Value
Low Value
Long Trip
Short Trip
Multiplier
Multiplier
of Time
of Time
(Rail = 10 miles, (Rail = 5 miles,
(c = 2.3)
(c = 1.3)
(60% avg wage) (40% avg wage) Bus = 7 miles) Bus = 3 miles)
6.3%

6.4%

6.4%

6.3%

6.3%

3.1%

3.1%

37.1%

49.3%

21.5%

47.8%

25.8%

18.9%

11.2%

5.9

7.7

3.4

7.6

4.1

6.1

3.6

30%

30%

27%

32%

25%

15%

30%

Average Bus Line Spacing in Residential Areas
0.5 miles
0.5 miles
0.5 miles
0.3 miles
0.7 miles
0.6 miles
0.6 miles
Notes: Average delay is chosen to match Parry and Small (2009). Calibration parameter values are the values necessary to equate predicted ridership with observed ridership in
the model with heterogeneous driving delays. The effect of ceasing transit under the homogeneous model is smaller in columns (6) and (7) than other columns because
observed ridership for long/short trips is assumed to be half the observed ridership for the average trip.

44

Parameter Modification:

Outcomes
Effect of Ceasing Transit on Average Delay
(Homogeneous Driving Delay Model)
Effect of Ceasing Transit on Average Delay
(Heterogeneous Driving Delay Model)
Ratio of Heterogeneous Model Effect
to Homogeneous Model Effect
Calibration Parameters (Heterogeneous Model)
Share of Population within 2 miles of Rail Line

Table A2: Model Calibration Results Under Different Parameter Values
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
None
1/3 of Bus Riders
Access Time and Delays Access Time and Value
are "Captive"
Negatively Correlated
of Time Positively
Correlated

(5)
Bus Access Time
Distributed
Gamma

6.3%

4.7%

6.3%

6.2%

6.2%

37.1%

28.6%

41.0%

28.5%

33.7%

5.9

6.1

6.5

4.6

5.4

30%

30%

28%

22%

30%

Average Bus Line Spacing in Residential Areas
0.5 miles
0.5 miles
0.5 miles
0.7 miles
0.5 miles
Notes: Average delay is chosen to match Parry and Small (2009). Calibration parameter values are the values necessary to equate predicted ridership with observed ridership in
the model with heterogeneous driving delays. The effect of ceasing transit under the homogeneous model is smaller in column (2) than other columns because the "captive"
riders do not switch to driving when transit service ceases.

45

Table A3: Effect of Strike on Traffic Flows over Entire Day
Dependent Variable: Hourly Traffic Flow per Lane
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Strike

-1.9
(6.0)

-13.3
(8.1)

14.3
(7.3)

14.0
(13.0)

-11.1
(9.5)

-5.0
(6.3)

Date

0.04
(0.22)

-0.16
(0.27)

0.09
(0.44)

-0.03
(0.71)

0.20
(0.47)

0.08
(0.18)

Date*Strike

-0.85
(0.43)

-1.10
(0.51)

-0.65
(0.52)

-1.15
(0.81)

-0.95
(0.63)

-0.71
(0.47)

Average Hourly Flow Pre-Strike

1,016

1,133

990

1,004

1,059

987

All

101

105

110 & 710

10

Other

Red Line

Green Line

Blue Line

Rapid 720

Freeways
Parallel Transit Line

Sample Size
463,848
41,819
80,290
49,433
40,673
251,633
Notes: Each column represents a separate VMT-weighted regression, with weights equal to (length of highway covered
by detector i)*(average pre-strike traffic flow over detector i). The observation is the detector-hour, and the sample is
limited to weekdays within 28 days of the strike's beginning. Parentheses contain clustered standard errors that are
robust to within-day and within-detector serial correlation. All regressions include day-of-week and detector fixed
effects.

46

