                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   DISTRIBUTION CAPITAL AND THE SHORT- AND LONG-RUN IMPORT DEMAND
                              ELASTICITY

                                           Mario J. Crucini
                                            J. Scott Davis

                                        Working Paper 18753
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18753


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2013




This paper was begun while Davis was a visiting researcher at the Bank of Estonia and while Crucini
was a visiting Senior Fellow at the Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute, Federal Reserve Bank
of Dallas. We would like to thank participants at the 2011 Midwest Macro Meetings and the 2012
meetings of the System Committee for International Economic Analysis at the Federal Reserve Bank
of San Francisco, the 2013 North American Meetings of the Econometric Society, the 2013 Shanghai
Macro Workshop, and the 2013 meeting of the Society for Economic Dynamics. In addition we would
like to thank George Alessandria, Aurelijus Dabušinskas, Mick Devereux, Jonathan Heathcote, Finn
Kydland, Sylvain Leduc, Andrea Raffo, Jian Wang, Lenno Uusküla and Mark Wynne for many helpful
comments and suggestions. The views in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research. Mario Crucini acknowledges the generous financial support of the
National Science Foundation (SES #1030164).

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Mario J. Crucini and J. Scott Davis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Distribution Capital and the Short- and Long-Run Import Demand Elasticity
Mario J. Crucini and J. Scott Davis
NBER Working Paper No. 18753
February 2013, Revised August 2013
JEL No. F1,F14,F44

                                               ABSTRACT

The elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods is one of the most important parameters
in international economics. The international macro literature, which is primarily concerned with short-run
business cycle fluctuations, assigns a low value to this parameter. The international trade literature,
which is more concerned with long-run changes in trade flows following a change in relative prices,
assigns a high value to this parameter. This paper constructs a model where this discrepancy between
the short- and long-run elasticities is due to frictions in distribution. Goods need to be combined with
a local non-traded input, distribution capital, which is good specific. Home and foreign goods may
be close substitutes, but if distribution capital is slow to adjust then agents cannot shift their consumption
in the short run following a change in relative prices, and home and foreign goods appear as poor substitutes
in the short run. In the long run this distribution capital can be reallocated, and agents can shift their
purchases following a change in relative prices. Thus the observed substitutability gets larger as time
passes.


Mario J. Crucini
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
Box 1819 Station B
Nashville, TN 37235-1819
and NBER
mario.j.crucini@vanderbilt.edu

J. Scott Davis
Research Department
2200 North Pearl Street
Dallas, TX 75201
Scott.Davis@dal.frb.org
1     Introduction
The elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods, also called the Armington
elasticity, is one of the most important parameters in dynamic equilibrium models of in-
ternational trade and business cycles. The parameter determines how quantities adjust in
response to a change in relative prices, and thus determines how quantities of imports and
exports adjust after a shift in the real exchange rate. Trade models rely on this parameter
to determine the e¤ect of trade policy and tari¤ rates on trade ‡ows and welfare. Macro
models rely on this parameter to determine the business cycle e¤ects of certain macro shocks
and the business cycle properties of international macro models.
    The problem, as highlighted in Ruhl (2005) and Arkolakis, Eaton and Kortum (2012), is
that the trade literature and the international macro literature don’t agree on the value of
this parameter. Macro models, which are concerned with short-run ‡uctuations, generally
ascribe a low value to this parameter. In the workhorse international real business cycle
model, Backus, Kehoe and Kydland (1994) assign a value of 1.5 to the Armington elasticity
and discuss how the model fails to replicate the negative co-movement between the terms of
trade and net exports for values of the elasticity that are too high (above 3). In the calibration
of their model, Kose and Yi (2006) use this same value. Stockman and Tesar (1995) use
a Cobb-Douglas speci…cation, and thus an elasticity of 1, to aggregate home and foreign
goods. Heathcote and Perri (2002) estimate the Armington elasticity from an equation that
links changes in the real exchange rate to changes in net exports and relative production.
They estimate a value of the Armington elasticity of around 0.9. Corsetti, Dedola and Leduc
(2008) use a value of around 0.85. They arrive at this value by calibrating their model to
match certain features of the data, most notably the second moments of international relative
prices like the real exchange rate and the terms of trade. Enders, Müller and Scholl (2011)
construct a model to speci…cally explain the path of the real exchange rate and the terms
of trade following either a productivity or government spending shock. They …nd that the
model calibrated with a high elasticity of substitution yields counterfactual results as to the
response of the real exchange rate following a shock.
    Similarly, in estimations using data on relative prices and import shares, Blonigen, Lieb-
man and Wilson (1999) use quarterly data and …nd an average elasticity of about 0.81.
Hooper, Johnson and Marquez (1998) and Gallaway, McDaniel and Rivera (2003) use a re-
gression framework that allows them to distinguish between short- and long-run elasticities.
They …nd that import demand elasticities are typically much larger in the long run than
they are in the short run.
    On the trade side, in their survey of the literature on trade costs, Anderson and van


                                                3
Wincoop (2004) …nd that the import demand elasticity is generally found to lie between
5 and 10. Hillberry et al. (2001) …nd long run estimates of the elasticity between 4 and
8. Hummels (1999) backs the elasticity parameter out of an estimated gravity model after
estimating the elasticity of trade costs with respect to distance and …nds the elasticity is
about 5. In a similar fashion, Obstfeld and Rogo¤ (2000) …nd that when the elasticity of
substitution is equal to 6, the observed home bias in trade can be reconciled with estimated
international trade costs. Head and Reis (2001), Clausing (2001), and Romalis (2007) each
estimate the elasticity using U.S.-Canadian trade data from before and after the passage of
the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement and …nd the elasticity is somewhere between 6 and
11. Eaton and Kortum (2002) estimate a parameter that can be thought of as an import
demand elasticity and …nd a value of 8.
    The discrepancy between short- and long-run estimates of the elasticity of substitution
is closely related to the literature on the J-curve. As noted in Junz and Rhomberg (1973)
and Magee (1973), after a change in international relative prices, like an exchange rate
depreciation, quantities do not always adjust instantaneously. This is closely related to the
famous Marshall-Lerner condition, which states that in order for a currency depreciation to
lead to an improvement in the trade balance, the sum of the absolute values of the import
demand elasticity and export demand elasticity must be greater than one. If the sum of the
elasticities is smaller than one in the short run then the currency depreciation will actually
lead to a worsening of the trade balance, but if the elasticities get larger with time, then the
trade balance should improve in the long run following an exchange rate depreciation.1
    This paper presents a novel mechanism to explain why exports and imports may be
slow to respond to a change in relative prices, and thus why the observed import demand
elasticity may be low in the short run but high in the long run. In this paper, traded goods
need to be combined with a local non-traded component (distribution services) before they
can be consumed. Frictions and bottlenecks within this distribution sector may lead to the
slow adjustment of quantities following a change in relative prices.
    By explicitly modeling a distribution sector, this paper is similar to Burstein, Neves and
Rebelo (2003), Burstein, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2005; 2007), Corsetti and Dedola (2005)
and Corsetti, Dedola and Leduc (2008). These authors discuss how the observed import
demand elasticity is di¤erent from the Armington elasticity of substitution when the cost
of a local non-traded component makes up a large part of the cost of an imported good.2
   1
     See Bahmani-Oskooee and Bolhasani (2008) and Boyd, Caporale and Smith (2001) for empirical evidence
of a J-curve e¤ect and evidence that the Marshall-Lerner condition holds in the long run but may not hold
in the short run. See also Rose (1991) for evidence that the Marshall-Lerner condition does not hold and
that the trade balance is largely independent of movements in the real exchange rate in at least the …rst two
years following a change in the exchange rate.
   2
     Anderson and van Wincoop (2004) report that distribution costs are responsible for 55% of the …nal

                                                     4
However, unlike these models, we assume that the inputs that are used for the distribution of
domestic goods can’t be reallocated to the distribution of imported goods in the short run.
The technological elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods may be high
and they may be highly substitutable in the long run after the inputs used in distribution
can be reallocated, but in the short run frictions in distribution may limit the response of
relative quantities to a change in relative prices, making home and foreign goods appear as
poor substitutes.
    If in response to a positive foreign shock, home agents try to rapidly increase their
purchases of imports, they strain the supply of this local component and face a steeply
increasing marginal cost curve. In the short run the increasing marginal cost of the non-
traded component largely cancels out the fall in the price of the imported good. As a result,
the …nal prices paid by consumers may barely change in the short run in response to a change
in relative price of imports.3 As time passes, the supply of the non-traded component is able
to adjust more easily and thus there is a greater response to the quantity of imports following
a change in their relative wholesale price.
    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The model is presented in section 2. In the
version of the model without local non-traded inputs, the model collapses to the benchmark
IRBC model in Backus, Kehoe and Kydland (1994). The benchmark calibration of the model
is presented in section 3. Here we will pay particular attention to the calibration of the key
parameters involved in the distribution sector, and how the value of these parameters can be
inferred from micro-data on prices. The results from the di¤erent versions of the model are
presented in section 4. First we solve analytically for the observed import demand elasticity
following a change in the relative price of imports. We then compare the di¤erent versions of
the model, the version with a high elasticity of substitution as measured in the international
trade literature, the version with the low elasticity as measured in the international macro
literature, and the version with the high elasticity of substitution but a local non-traded
component that is inelastically supplied in the short run. Only the version of the model with
a high elasticity of substitution but an inelastically supplied local non-traded component can
replicate both the short-run properties of aggregate prices and quantities that we observe
in the data while also reproducing the observed long-run import demand elasticity. Finally,
price of an imported good, Berger et al. (2012) argue that the distribution margin is between 50 70%.
    3
      Thus the mechanism in the model is similar to that in any model where a change in relative prices at
the wholesale level doesn’t pass through into …nal prices. Campa and Goldberg (2005) and many other
papers document the low pass through of exchange rate changes into import prices. Drozd and Nosal (2012)
construct a search model where sales require some marketing capital. In this search framework, consumers
initially may not notice a change in the relative price of imported goods. In their model, marketing capital
is acquired slowly but can be lost quickly. As such, sellers have an incentive to keep transitory price changes
from passing through into …nal goods prices.



                                                      5
section 5 concludes.


2     The Model
2.1     Production
There are two countries, home and foreign. Foreign variables are written with an asterisk
( ) and home variables are not. In the following description of the model, foreign equations
are omitted for brevity.
    An aggregate good is used by households for consumption, Ct , investment in production
capital, It , and investment in distribution capital, Id;t . This aggregate good, yt , is formed
through the combination of domestic and imported retail goods, which are combined in an
Armington (1969) aggregator function with an elasticity of substitution .
                                          h     1               1                     1        1
                                                                                                   i   1
                Ct + It + Id;t = yt = (!) (~
                                           yD;t )                   + (1      !) (~
                                                                                  yM;t )                   .   (1)

where y~D;t is the retail quantity of domestically produced goods and y~M;t is the retail quantity
of imported goods.
    The demand for domestically produced or imported …nal goods as a function of aggregate
expenditure is:

                                   y~D;t = ! (~
                                              pD;t )                 yt                                        (2)
                                  y~M;t = (1                 !) (~
                                                                 pM;t )       yt

where p~D;t (~
             pM;t ) is the retail price of domestic (imported) goods relative to the price of the
home consumption good.
   Substituting these demand functions into the aggregator function in (1) yields:
                                                                                  1
                                pD;t )1
                             ! (~             + (1           pM;t )1
                                                         !) (~                1
                                                                                          =1

   The retail quantity of the domestic good, y~D;t , is formed from the combination of a
quantity of the domestic good, yD;t , and good speci…c distribution services dD;t .
                                      h              1         1              1
                                                                                  i       1
                             y~D;t = (yD;t )             +          (dD;t )

where    is the weight on distribution services, and                  is the elasticity of substitution between



                                                         6
tangible goods and distribution. This same production technology is used to de…ne y~M;t :
                                   h          1         1             1
                                                                          i           1
                            y~M;t = (yM;t )       +         (dM;t )

where yM;t is the quantity of imported goods, and dM;t are distribution services employed
in the distribution of these imports. In the functions for y~D;t and y~M;t , when = 0, the
technology for domestic goods condenses to y~D;t = yD;t and y~M;t = yM;t , and the model
collapses to Backus et al. (1994). From this production function, the retail prices of domestic
and imported goods relative to the home aggregate price de‡ator are:
                                                                                  1
                            p~D;t =    (pD;t )1       + (cD;t )1              1
                                                                                           (3)
                                                                                  1
                            p~M;t =    (pM;t )1       + (cM;t )1              1




where pD;t (pM;t ) is the wholesale price of the domestic (imported) good, and cD;t (cM;t ) is
the cost of domestic (import) distribution services.
    Wholesale goods are produced by …rms engaged in perfect competition, and thus the
price of a home produced good is equal to its marginal cost of production, M Ct , and the
price of a foreign produced good is equal to its marginal cost of production, M Ct . The
relative price of the domestic good in the home market is thus pD;t = M Ct while the relative
                                                          MC
price in the home market of the imported good is pM;t = Qt t , where Qt is the real exchange
rate de…ned as the foreign price level divided by the home price level.
    Wholesale goods used domestically or exported to the foreign country, yD;t and yM;t ,
exhaust current period production:

                                  yD;t + yM;t = At Nt1           Kt                        (4)

where Nt and Kt are labor and capital employed in the production of home country goods,
and At is a country speci…c total factor productivity parameter.
    From this production function, the demand for labor and capital are given by Nt =
(1     ) MwCt t yD;t + yM;t and Kt = MrCt t yD;t + yM;t where wt is the home real wage rate
(in terms of the home consumption good), rt is the rental rate of physical capital employed
                                                         1
in the production of home goods, and M Ct = A1t 1wt           rt
                                                                  .
    Domestic distribution services employed in the …nal sales of domestic and imported goods,




                                                  7
dD;t and dM;t , are given by:
                                 h                      1                  1             1                  1
                                                                                                                i     1
                        dD;t = At (1            ^ d ) (NdD;t )                  + (^ d ) (KdD;t )                                     (5)
                                 h                      1                   1            1                  1
                                                                                                                i     1
                        dM;t = At (1            ^ d ) (NdM;t )                  + (^ d ) (KdM;t )

where NdD;t and KdD;t are the labor and capital employed in the distribution of domestic
goods, and NdM;t and KdM;t are the labor and capital employed in the distribution of imported
goods.4
   From the production functions for domestic and imported distribution services, the mar-
ginal costs of distribution are given by:

                                     1                                                                1
                            cD;t =      (1                  ^ d ) (wt )1        + ^ d (rD;t )1    1
                                                                                                                                      (6)
                                     At
                                     1                                                                  1
                            cM;t   =    (1                  ^ d ) (wt )1        + ^ d (rM;t )1      1

                                     At

where rD;t is the rental rate of capital used for domestic distribution services, rM;t is the rental
rate for capital used in import distribution. The demand functions for capital and labor in the
                                                                                       rD;t     dD;t
distribution of both domestic and imported goods are given by KdD;t = (1 ^ d ) cD;t             A1
                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                      t
                         rM;t      dM;t                             wt           dD;t                                wt    dM;t
KdM;t = (1       ^ d)    cM;t      A1t
                                          , NdD;t = ^ d            cD;t          A1t
                                                                                        , NdM;t = ^ d               cM;t   A1t
                                                                                                                                  .


2.2     Households
The one representative household per country derives utility from consumption and leisure.
The household in the home country maximizes expected lifetime utility given by:

                                          P
                                          1             1     h                              i1
                                    E0          t                 (1      ht ) (Ct )1                                                 (7)
                                          t=o       1

where is the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion and ht = Nt + NdD;t + NdM;t .
   We assume that international asset markets are complete. We can model this by assuming
   4
     ^ d is the weight on capital in the production function, if the elasticity of substitution, = 1, ^ d would
also be the share of distribution costs devoted to capital. When 6= 1, the capital share is instead a function
                                                                1
of the steady state wage and rental rate, d = ^ (r)1 ^+(1  d (r)
                                                                  ^ d )(w)1
                                                                            . In section 3 where we calibrate this
                                                     d
parameter, to gain intuition we will calibrate capital’s share of distribution costs, d , but for a given steady
state wage and rental rate, there is a one-to-one relationship between the capital share, d , and the parameter
^ d.




                                                                   8
households share one worldwide budget constraint:

         Ct + It + Id;t + qt Ct + It + Id;t                                                  (8)
      = wt ht + rt Kt + rD;t KdD;t + rM;t KdM;t + qt wt ht + rt Kt + rD;t KdD;t + rM;t KdM;t :


2.3     Capital Stocks
There are three separate types of capital in each country, capital used in production, Kt , and
capital used in distribution of either domestic or imported goods, KdD;t and KdM;t . Capital
employed in the production of goods evolves according to the usual capital accumulation
equation:
                                    Kt+1 = (1     ) Kt + It                                  (9)

    Distribution capital is earmarked for domestic or imported distribution services. We
will consider two cases about how this capital is allocated for distribution of domestic or
imported goods. In the …rst case we assume that there is one stock of capital dedicated
to distribution. This stock of distribution capital, Kd;t , evolves according to the following
capital accumulation equation:

                                                          Id;t
                             Kd;t+1 = (1      ) Kd;t +           Kd;t                       (10)
                                                          Kd;t
where this distribution capital can be allocated to domestic goods distribution or imported
goods distribution, Kd;t = KdD;t + KdM;t . The adjustment cost for distribution capital is
described by the concave function ( ) ( 0 > 0 and 00 < 0).
    In the second case the two markets for distribution capital are segmented in the sense that
capital cannot be reallocated between the distribution of domestic goods and the distribution
of imports. The two types of distribution capital each evolve according to their own capital
accumulation equation:

                                                           IdD;t
                         KdD;t+1 = (1         ) KdD;t +          KdD;t                      (11)
                                                           KdD;t
                                                           IdM;t
                        KdM;t+1 = (1          ) KdM;t +          KdM;t
                                                           KdM;t

where the total investment in distribution capital, Id;t , is allocated to investment in domestic
or imported goods distribution, Id;t = IdD;t + IdM;t .
    The di¤erence between these two cases highlights the key mechanism in this paper. In
the …rst case, where there is only one stock of distribution capital, capital can be reallocated
between domestic goods distribution and imported goods distribution within the period, and

                                                 9
thus the rental rates of these two types of capital must be equal in equilibrium rD;t = rM;t .
This ensures that in equilibrium the cost of domestic goods distribution is the same as the
cost of imported goods distribution, cD;t = cM;t .
    This …rst case, where the costs of distribution are equal across goods, is very similar to
the distribution sector in Corsetti, Dedola and Leduc (2008).
    In the second case, where the markets for the two types of distribution capital are seg-
mented, this equality in distribution costs holds in a long-run steady state, but need not
hold in the short run. Speci…cally, this market segmentation forms a friction in the mar-
ket for distribution services, and it leads to this result that highly substitutable home and
foreign goods may appear as poor substitutes in the short run. If there is a sudden shift
in international relative prices that make foreign goods cheaper at the wholesale level, the
quantity demanded of imports will increase. However, if distribution capital cannot be real-
located away from domestic goods distribution to imported goods distribution, this increased
quantity demanded for imports will strain the existing stock of imported goods distribution
capital, leading to a bottleneck in the distribution of imported goods. The cost of imported
goods distribution, cM;t , will increase, and this will partially reverse or potentially completely
o¤set the initial fall in the price of foreign goods at the wholesale level.


3         Calibration
The model described in the previous section is solved with a linear approximation and
simulated in order to produce moments and impulse responses of key variables.
     In the next section, simulations of the model under di¤erent values of the Armington
elasticity, , and the parameter controlling the distribution share, , are used to examine the
importance of the distribution sector in a¤ecting the substitutability of home and foreign
traded goods. The rest of the model’s parameters and their benchmark values are found in
table 1.
     The …rst six parameters: , the exponent on leisure in the Cobb-Douglas utility function,
  , the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion, , the capital share, , the discount factor, !, the
weight on domestic goods in the Armington aggregator function, and , the capital depreci-
ation rate, are all taken from Backus, Kehoe and Kydland (1994) and found throughout the
international real business cycle literature.
     The next four parameters, , d , , and are the key parameters in distribution.5 To
      5
          describes the capital adjustment cost for capital used in distribution.   Speci…cally   =
 00   IdD;t               00   IdM;t
      KdD;t   IdD;t            KdM;t   IdM;t
 0
      IdD;t   KdD;t   =   0
                               IdM;t   KdM;t .
      KdD;t                    KdM;t




                                                   10
identify these parameters, we will calculate certain second moments of wholesale prices and
distribution margins from the data and then calibrate the value of these four parameters so
that the model can match speci…c moments of the data.
    We use a panel dataset of retail prices for over 300 goods in 123 cities where the price
of each good in each city is observed annually from 1990-2005. The data-set is described in
Crucini and Landry (2012). The dataset covers over 300 goods, but we exclude the goods
that are very close to the de…nition of a non-traded good (like domestic cleaning help), and
aggregate the remaining goods into four sectors, grocery items, non-food consumer goods,
clothing, and transportation. The full list of goods in the dataset and how they are grouped
into four categories is presented in the appendix. We restrict our attention to 13 U.S. cities,
the list of these 13 cities is also presented in the appendix.
    Before we discuss how the data is used, consider the price indices for the retail price and
the marginal cost of distribution in (3) and (6). If we linearize these price indices, then the
‡uctuations in the …nal good price, p~it , can be expressed as a combination of the ‡uctuations
in the wholesale price, p^it , the wage rate (non-sector speci…c input into distribution), w^t , and
the rental rate for sector speci…c distribution capital, r^it :

                                p~it = (1   s) p^it + s (1     d) w
                                                                  ^t   +s   dr
                                                                             ^it

                                                                                   1            1
                                                                      cD           cM
where s measures the steady state distribution margin, s =            p~D
                                                                             =     p~M
                                                                                            .
    In the data set we observe p~ijt , the retail price of the good from sector i in city j at time
t. Crucini and Landry (2012) also provide data on the distribution margin for each good
in the dataset, si .6 Given these prices and the distribution margins we can estimate the
following regression:
                              p~ijt = (1 si ) it + si jt + si ijt                              (12)

where it is sector speci…c …xed e¤ect intended to capture variation in wholesale prices (^        pit ),
and jt is a city-…xed e¤ect intended to capture variation in the city, but not good speci…c
component of distribution (w^t ). Furthermore we can calculate the total distribution cost,
       p~ (1   )
c^it = ijt i i it .
     With time series of w^t , p^it , c^it we can calculate the variance, the persistence, and the co-
movement of each one of the components of the retail price. These statistics are presented in
table 2. In this table, these statistics are computed using a few di¤erent detrending methods.
The price data, p~ijt , is nominal, so the …rst step is to remove the nominal trend. In columns
1-3, the nominal trend is removed by including a time dummy in the regression in equation
(12). In columns 4-6, the nominal trend is removed by dividing all prices by the consumer
  6
      The distribution margins, s , are good speci…c, but is common across all locations and time.


                                                      11
price index, and in columns 7-9, there is no nominal detrending. Comparing each set of
three columns shows that nominal detrending really doesn’t have much of an e¤ect on these
statistics. This is due to the fact that the data is taken from 13 U.S. cities over the period
1990-2005, a period when in‡ation was low and stable.
    But even after taking out a nominal trend, over this period there have been shifts in rela-
tive productivity between sectors, which would lead to non-stationary relative price changes
that we would want to …lter out before using the data to calibrate a stationary model (e.g.
productivity improvements in the technology sector have led to a non-stationary fall in the
relative price of computers over this period). To account for these non-stationary shifts in
sectoral prices, we can either …lter the sectoral price data, p~ijt , using an HP …lter (with
smoothing parameter 100 for annual data) or taking …rst-di¤erences. Thus within each set
of three columns in table 2, the …rst column …lters each sectoral price with an HP …lter, the
second uses …rst-di¤erences, and the third does nothing.
    The …rst thing to notice is that the wholesale goods price, p^it , is extremely volatile when
no …lter is used. This is due to non-stationary shifts in relative prices across sectors. Once
we use a …lter to remove these non-stationary shifts in relative prices, the results in the
table are largely invariant to which …lter we use. The only noticeable di¤erence is that the
…rst-order autocorrelation coe¢ cient is much lower using the …rst-di¤erenced data, but all
other statistics are largely the same. Thus in the following calibration exercise, we simply
use the …rst column, the data using the time dummy for nominal detrending and the HP
…lter for additional detrending, as the benchmark set of statistics.
    Simulated method of moments are employed to …nd the combination of , d , and
that minimizes the squared distance between the moments presented in the …rst column of
table 2 and the corresponding moments from simulations of the model. These estimated
parameters are listed in the bottom four rows of table 1.
    The the optimal combination of , d , and is chosen by varying all four parameters
simultaneously, but to gain some intuition about the separate role of each of these four
parameters related to the distribution sector, in tables 3 and 4 we vary one of these four
parameters, while holding the other three constant.
    The e¤ect of varying the elasticity of substitution between tangible goods and distrib-
ution services, , is shown in columns 2-6 of table 3. The simulated method of moments
exercise …nds that the optimal value of is 0:02, implying that tangible goods and distrib-
ution services are nearly perfect compliments. The table reports the e¤ect of increasing
while holding all other parameters constant. As increases, there is very little change in
either the volatility or the persistence of the wage rate, w^t . However, the relative volatility
of both the wholesale price and distribution costs falls as increases. In the data, both


                                               12
wholesale prices, p^i , and distribution costs, c^i , are about two-thirds as volatile as the wage
rate. When wholesale goods and distribution services are nearly perfect compliments, the
model is able to replicate these relative volatilities. As increases and the two become more
substitutable, these relative volatilities fall, when = 0:8, the price of wholesale goods and
the cost of distribution are both about a third as volatile as the wage rate. Hence, must be
small, implying that wholesale goods and distribution services are compliments, to replicate
the volatility of prices that we see in the data. Our estimates of a near perfect complemen-
tarity between wholesale goods and distribution services largely validates the calibration by
Burstein, Neves and Rebelo (2003), Burstein, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2007), and Corsetti,
Dedola and Leduc (2008).
    In columns 7-11 of the same table we vary d , the labor share in the production of
distribution services from 0:16 to 0:56. Again we see that varying d has little e¤ect on the
volatility or persistence of the wage rate. Allowing the labor share to increase does have
some e¤ect on the relative volatilities of the wholesale price and the distribution costs, but
the major e¤ect of increasing d is in the co-movement between the wage rate and wholesale
prices or between the wage rate and distribution costs. In the data, the correlation between
the wage rate and the cost of distribution is about 0:34. When d is small, and thus there is
very little labor used in distribution, the model predicts that the co-movement between the
two should be almost 0. As d increases and thus there is more labor used in distribution,
the correlation between the two will increase. However, as d gets too big, the correlation
between the two gets too large, so to replicate the positive but modest correlation between
the wage rate and the cost of distribution, d should be about 0:36.
    Similarly, in the data, the correlation between the wage rate and wholesale prices is about
  0:27. In the model, when d is small, the two are nearly uncorrelated, but as d increases,
this correlation falls, but again, to replicate the negative, but modest, correlation, d should
be about 0:36.
    In columns 2-6 of table 4 we vary , the elasticity of substitution between capital and
labor in the production of distribution services. Again we see that allowing to vary has little
e¤ect on the volatility or the persistence of the wage rate. However, as increases capital
and labor in distribution become more substitutable, and the relative volatilities of both the
distribution cost and the wholesale price falls. When is small, and capital and labor in
distribution are nearly perfect compliments, both distribution costs and the wholesale prices
should be about as volatile as the wage rate. When is higher and capital and labor are
closer substitutes, these two prices are about half as volatile as the wage rate, in order to
match the relative volatilities that we observe in the data, should be about 0:4.
    Finally, columns 7-11 of table 4 present the results from simulation of the model where


                                               13
 , the distribution capital adjustment cost parameter varies. Again, allowing           to vary
has little e¤ect on the volatility or the persistence of the wage rate. Note that in contrast
to the other three cases in tables 3 and 4, only when we vary do we see any signi…cant
e¤ect on persistence. In the data, both the distribution cost and the wholesale price have a
…rst-order autocorrelation coe¢ cient of about 0:82. When = 0, implying that there are no
costs to adjusting the stocks of distribution capital, the persistence of these two variables is
counterfactually low. Similarly, when is low, the relative volatilities of the two prices is
too low, the correlation between the wage rate and the cost of distribution is too low, and
the correlation between the wage rate and wholesale prices is too high. In order to replicate
the moments we observe in the data, the model needs a modest investment adjustment cost
parameter of 0:18.


3.1    Shock Process
In this real business cycle model, ‡uctuations in total factor productivity drive business cycle
‡uctuations. The At and At variables in (4) are exogenous country speci…c shocks. Using
data on gross value added, total employment, and gross …xed capital formation from the
OECD’s STAN database, we estimate two series of total factor productivity for the United
States and the combination of Germany, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Belgium, Austria,
and Finland from 1977-2007. The data is available at annual frequency, we …rst estimate
a VAR(1) with the two series using the annual data, and then we impose symmetry and
convert this annual process to a quarterly process. The resulting quarterly shock process for
the model is:
                        "          #       "             #"        #       "        #
                            At+1               0:83 0         At               "t
                                       =                               +
                            At+1                0 :083        At               "t
where var("t ) =var("t ) = 0:12 and corr("t ; "t ) = 0:31.
    This shock process assumes that TFP is the same across both the production sector
and the distribution sector within a country, as in the production functions in (4) and (5).
Alternatively we can assume that there is a separate TFP process for the distribution sector,
and thus the At in (5) is replaced with Adt . There are now four TFP processes to estimate, so
with the STAN data, instead of considering total value added, total employment, and total
capital formation in order to …nd aggregate TFP, we can consider these same series separated
into industry and service sectors. Thus using both industrial and service sector TFP for both
the U.S. and Europe, we can estimate a VAR(1) with the four TFP variables, At , At , Adt ,
and Adt . Again, this data is available at an annual frequency, so after estimating the annual


                                                   14
process, imposing symmetry across countries, and converting to a quarterly process, the
resulting shock process for the model is:

                                                 At+1 = At + "t
               h                           i0
where At =         At   At    Adt    Adt        and E ("t "0t ) =       , where

                                       2                                          3
                                        0:78 0:06                0:07      0:19
                                      6                                           7
                                      6 0:06 0:78                0:19      0:07   7
                                    = 6
                                      6 0:00 0:02
                                                                                  7
                                                                                  7
                                      4                          0:84      0:07   5
                                        0:02 0:00                0:07      0:84
                                      and   2                                           3
                                              6:92               0:63   0:32     0:77
                                            6                                           7
                                            6 0:63               6:92   0:77     0:32   7
                                    = 10 1 66 0:32
                                                                                        7
                                                                                        7
                                            4                    0:33   0:97     0:47   5
                                              0:33               0:32   0:47     0:97


4       Results
4.1     Distribution costs and the observed elasticity of substitution
The elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods is de…ned as the percentage
change in relative quantities divided by the percentage change in relative prices:

                                                                 yM;t
                                                        d ln     yD;t
                                                 "t =                                                       (13)
                                                                 pD;t
                                                        d ln     pM;t

   To …nd this elasticity in terms of the model’s structural parameters, consider the demand
                                                y~
functions in (2) and …nd an expression for ln y~M;t
                                                  D;t
                                                      :7

                                      y~M;t             1        !             p~M;t
                                ln              = ln                     ln
                                       y~D;t                !                   p~D;t
    If p~D;t = pD;t and p~M;t = pM;t , then the elasticity, "t equals the structural parameter .
If however, the price of imports relative to domestic goods at the wholesale level varies over
    7
    The model is calibrated such that , the elasticity of substitution between intermediate goods and
distribution services is equal to zero. In this derivation of the observed elasticity of substitution we are using
                                              y~             y
that fact in order to simplify and say d ln y~M;t
                                                D;t
                                                     = d ln yM;t
                                                               D;t
                                                                   . If instead > 0, then the expression linking
wholesale quantities and retail quantities will be more complicated, but the intuition is the same.


                                                            15
time relative to that at the retail level, then the elasticity "t becomes a function of other
parameters in the model, and generally time varying.
   To see this, expand the elasticity expression in (13):

                                                y~M;t             p~D;t                      p~D;t
                                       d ln      y~D;t
                                                         d ln    p~M;t
                                                                                    d ln    p~M;t
                              "t =                                           =
                                                 p~D;t           pD;t                       pD;t
                                       d ln     p~M;t
                                                         d ln    pM;t
                                                                                    d ln    pM;t

    Thus the change in relative quantities following a change in wholesale prices is the Arm-
ington elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods, , multiplied by the elas-
ticity of relative prices at the consumer level with respect to changes in relative prices at the
wholesale level.8 Given the expressions for the …nal consumer prices in (3), this elasticity
can be written as:

                                   p~D;t                               pD;t                     cD;t
                           d ln   p~M;t
                                                  (1      s) d ln      pM;t
                                                                                   + sd ln      cM;t
                                  pD;t                                           pD;t
                           d ln   pM;t
                                                                     d ln        pM;t

   Thus the observed elasticity of substitution between domestic and imported goods fol-
lowing a change in wholesale prices is:
                                                 0                                cD;t
                                                                                           1
                                                                      d ln        cM;t
                                       "t = @(1            s) + s                          A
                                                                                  pD;t
                                                                      d ln        pM;t

   There are two inputs into the production of distribution services, non-sector speci…c labor
and sector speci…c capital. From equation (6), ‡uctuations in the ratio of the two distribution
               cD;t
margins, d ln cM;t  , can be written as:

                   cD;t                    wt                                    rD;t                             rD;t
            d ln          =   d d ln              + (1          d ) d ln                   = (1        d ) d ln
                   cM;t                    wt                                    rM;t                             rM;t
       Thus the observed elasticity of substitution, "t , is:
                                           0                                             rD;t
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                 d ln    rM;t
                              "t = @(1               s) + s (1              d)
                                                                                                 A                       (14)
                                                                                         pD;t
                                                                                 d ln    pM;t

   This expression for the observed elasticity of substitution, "t , highlights the di¤erence
between the two cases regarding the market for distribution capital described by the capital
accumulation equations in (10) and (11). In the case with integrated markets for domestic
   8
    See Crucini and Yilmazkuday (2009) for empirical evidence using micro-level price data of how distrib-
ution costs lead to a long-run disconnect between producer and consumer prices.


                                                                16
goods and import distribution capital, capital can be reallocated between the two within the
period, and the equality rD;t = rM;t will always hold in equilibrium. Thus the expression for
the observed elasticity of substitution becomes "t = (1 s) .
    In the second case there are segmented markets for domestic good and import distribution
capital. Following the shift in the quantity demanded of imported and domestic wholesale
goods, the demand for imported goods distribution services will increase and the demand for
domestic goods distribution services will fall. Labor used in the production of distribution
services can be reallocated within the period, but distribution capital cannot be reallocated.
Thus following a change in relative wholesale prices that leads to an increased demand for
imports and a decreased demand for domestic goods, there is an excess demand for imported
goods distribution capital and an excess supply of domestic goods distribution capital. This
implies that the equilibrium cost of domestic goods distribution capital should fall and the
cost of imported goods distribution capital should rise. Thus the following inequality holds
in the short run:9

                                                   rD;t
                                            d ln   rM;t
                                                          <0
                                                   pD;t
                                            d ln   pM;t

    Given this excess demand in one market and the excess supply in another, agents will
change their future investment plans. Investment in imported goods distribution capital will
increase and investment in domestic good distribution capital will decrease.
    If there are no adjustment costs in the capital accumulation equations in (11) then plans
for investment in new domestic or import distribution capital are changed and the capital
stocks reach their new e¢ cient level in the next period. If there are capital adjustment costs
then the adjustment may be slower and it may take multiple periods to clear out any excess
demand or supply in the market for distribution services and reach a point where rD;t = rM;t .
    Given this change in the relative distribution costs, in the short run "t < (1 s) , and
as time passes and capital is reallocated, "t approaches (1 s) .
    The path of the observed elasticity of substitution following a productivity shock is
presented in …gure 1. The …gure presents the path of the observed elasticity of substitution,
as measured by (13) for 40 quarters following a shock in the four di¤erent cases. The solid
line in the …gure refers to the case where the Armington elasticity of substitution between
home and foreign goods is equal to 4 and there is no distribution sector. The dashed line
line in the …gure refers to the case the Armington elasticity is equal to 0:9 and there is
   9
    Empirically, Goldberg and Campa (2010) …nd that following a 1% exchange rate depreciation that results
in a 1% increase in the price of foreign currency denominated imports at the dock, the distribution cost of
imports falls by 0:47%.


                                                    17
no distribution sector. The dotted line refers to the case where the Armington elasticity is
equal to 8 but distribution costs make up approximately 50% of the …nal cost of a good,
and the markets for the two types of distribution capital are integrated. The line with stars
refers to the case where the Armington elasticity is equal to 8 but distribution costs make
up approximately 50% of the …nal cost of a good, and the markets for the two types of
distribution capital are segmented.
    In the two cases where there is no distribution sector the observed elasticity of substitution
is simply equal to the Armington elasticity. When there is a distribution sector but the
markets for distribution capital are integrated the observed elasticity is simply a constant
and proportional to the Armington elasticity, "t = (1 s) :
    When the markets for the two types of distribution capital are segmented, the observed
elasticity is initially close to zero since distribution capital is a state variable and cannot
be instantaneously reallocated from the domestic goods sector to the imported goods sector
(the reason it isn’t exactly zero is that some labor can be shifted into distribution in the
high demand sector, but since the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor in the
distribution sector is low, the bene…ts of this labor reallocation are small). Agents cannot
reallocate existing capital but can change investment plans subject to investment adjustment
costs, so over time capital in one sector is allowed to depreciate without replacement while the
stock of distribution capital increases in the other. Over time, as the stocks of distribution
capital change, the observed substitutability between home and foreign goods increases.


4.2    Impulse Responses
The responses of home and foreign GDP and its components to a positive home TFP shock
are presented in …gures 2 and 3. Figure 2 presents the responses of home and foreign GDP
and investment under four cases mentioned earlier, where the Armington elasticity, , is
equal to 4 and the distribution margin is equal to 0, where the Armington elasticity is equal
to 0:9 and the distribution margin is equal to 0, where the Armington elasticity is equal to 8,
the distribution margin is set to 50% and there are no frictions in the market for distribution
capital, and where the Armington elasticity is equal to 8, the distribution margin is set to
50% and there are frictions in the market for distribution capital. Figure 3 does the same
for consumption and net exports.
    For the case where the elasticity is equal to 4 but there is no distribution sector, the
…gures show the familiar result for an international real business cycle model with complete
international asset markets and a high degree of substitutability between home and foreign
goods. Following a productivity shock in the home country, there is a sharp increase in home


                                               18
investment demand. The foreign country does not have the same increase in investment
demand and any increase in foreign investment is tempered in order to ship goods to fuel
the productivity induced investment boom in the home country. Thus in the immediate
aftermath of the shock, before the bene…ts of the shock in terms of increased home production
are felt, the home country runs a current account de…cit and the foreign country runs a
current account surplus.
    Within a few quarters there is a reversal in the current account as the higher production
leads to increased saving in the home country, some of this increased savings is shipped
abroad in the form of high home current account surpluses. Thus after the …rst few quarters,
the home country runs a large and persistent current account surplus and the foreign country
runs a large and persistent de…cit.
    The current account dynamics change in signi…cant ways when home and foreign goods
are less substitutable. When the elasticity of substitution is equal to 0:9, the foreign goods
can’t as easily be used to fuel a home country investment boom, so there is more of an increase
in foreign investment in the aftermath of the shock. Furthermore, once the increased home
productivity leads to an increase in home production and home saving, foreign agents can’t
as easily consume the bene…ts of the productivity fueled boom in the home country and thus
do not run large current account de…cits when substitutability is low.
    The responses from the model with a distribution sector but no frictions in distribution
are very similar to the responses when the Armington elasticity is equal to 4. In both cases,
home and foreign goods are highly substitutable, and the output from one country can easily
be consumed in the other country, leading to a large a persistent current account surplus in
the country that experiences the positive productivity shock.
    The responses from the model with a distribution sector and frictions in distribution are
very similar to the responses when the Armington elasticity is equal to 0:9. The observed
long-run elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods may be equal to 4, but in
the short run, home and foreign goods are poor substitutes. The …gure shows that there is
more of an increase in foreign investment in the immediate aftermath of the shock as foreign
goods are not as easily diverted for use in the home country investment boom. Furthermore,
without adequate distribution channels, foreign agents cannot as easily substitute the excess
production from the home country for their own goods, so foreign agents import less and
run a smaller trade de…cit.
    Following a shock to productivity in one country, prices and quantities need to adjust to
restore equilibrium. Figures 2 and 3 show that when there is low substitutability between
home and foreign goods, there is not much response to net exports following a shock, so it



                                              19
must be that most of the burden of adjustment falls on international relative prices.10
    Figure 4 shows the responses of the home country terms of trade and the real exchange
rate following a positive home TFP shock. When the technological elasticity of substitution
is equal to 4 and there is no distribution sector there is little movement in either the terms
of trade or net exports following a shock. This is also true when there is a distribution
sector, but there are no frictions in distribution. When the elasticity of substitution is equal
to 0:9, there is much more movement in both the terms of trade and the real exchange
rate. Similarly when the Armington elasticity of substitution is equal to 8 but there are
frictions in distribution there is signi…cant movement in both the terms of trade and the real
exchange rate following the shock. Thus when there are distribution costs and a distribution
sector that is slow to adjust, the economy with a high elasticity of substitution acts a lot
like the economy with a low elasticity of substitution, following a shock, quantity variables
like like exports and imports cannot adjust quickly to restore equilibrium, so the burden of
adjustment falls on prices like the terms of trade and the real exchange rate.


4.3     Volatility and co-movement of certain macro variables
The standard deviation and co-movement of GDP, the components of GDP, and international
prices like the terms of trade and the real exchange rate are listed in table 5. The …rst column
of the table lists these moments calculated from U.S. data. The data is quarterly from 1984
to 2007. The rest of the table presents these moments as calculated from simulations of
the model. In the …rst four columns from simulations of the model (Model 1), exports and
imports (and thus net exports and GDP) are measured with prices that are allowed to vary
over the cycle. Exports and imports are measured with constant (steady-state) prices in the
last four columns of the table (Model 2).
     The simulations of the model are conducted under the four alternative parameterizations
that were used in the impulse response analysis. The table shows that when the Armington
elasticity is equal to 4 and there is no distribution sector, simulations of the model yield too
little volatility in both consumption and international prices like the terms of trade or the
real exchange rate, a positive co-movement between output and net exports, a low cross-
country co-movement in production side variables like output, investment and employment,
and a high cross-country co-movement in consumption.
     These features of the model where shown earlier in the impulse response analysis. Fol-
lowing a positive shock in one country, the country that experienced the positive shock can
  10
     A similar argument (but one that relied on incomplete pass-through to explain the low substitutability)
is given in Devereux and Engel (2002) to explain the high volatility of exchange rates that we observe in the
data.


                                                     20
easily export their surplus production to the less productive country. This leads to too much
consumption smoothing, and since quantities adjust so easily in order to clear markets inter-
nationally, there is not much movement in either the terms of trade or the real exchange rate.
The high substitutability of home and foreign goods means that agents are willing to change
the composition of their consumption basket and take advantage of productivity di¤eren-
tials across countries to maximize total consumption, and this results in a low cross-country
correlation in production and a high cross-country correlation in consumption.
    When the elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods is 0:9, the low
substitutability between home and foreign goods means that the country that experiences
a positive shock cannot as easily export their surplus production to the foreign country.
This implies that net exports are less volatile and consumption is more volatile. Lower
substitutability means that production responsibilities cannot as easily be "shared" between
countries, so cross-country output co-movement is higher and cross-country consumption
co-movement is lower. Given that home and foreign goods are not as easily substitutable,
international prices like the real exchange rate and the terms of trade must move more to
restore equilibrium following a shock.
    In the version of the model where the Armington elasticity of substitution between home
and foreign goods is equal to 8, there is a distribution sector, and there exists one integrated
market for both domestic and import distribution capital, the volatility and co-movement
from simulations of the model are very close to the moments predicted from the model with
the high Armington elasticity. There is a distribution sector in this version of the model,
but since distribution capital can be reallocated within the period, there are no frictions to
limit the substitutability of home and foreign goods in the short run.
    In the version of the model where the Armington elasticity of substitution between home
and foreign goods is equal to 8, there is a distribution sector, and there are frictions in
distribution due to the segmented markets for domestic and import distribution capital, the
volatility and co-movement from simulations of the model are very close to the moments
from the model with the low Armington elasticity. Even though the Armington elasticity
is high, since distribution channels cannot be adjusted quickly following a shock, at short
horizons home and foreign goods are much less substitutable. As a result, net exports are
not very volatile, and the model can replicate the high volatility of the real exchange rate
and the terms of trade even when the observed long-run elasticity of substitution between
home and foreign goods is equal to 4 (" = (1 s)). Since home and foreign goods are
poor substitutes in the short run, there is less consumption smoothing, lower cross-country
consumption correlation, and higher cross-country correlation in output, investment and
employment.


                                              21
    In the last four columns of the table exports and imports are measured with constant
(steady state) prices. In the main results, when exports and imports are measured with
current prices, there is the possibility that changes in the moments of GDP and net exports
are not due to an actual change in quantities but are simply due to movements in the terms
of trade. Measuring exports and imports with constant prices removes this possibility.11
    The table shows that measuring exports and imports with constant prices has little e¤ect
on most variables in the model. None of the variances or co-movements involving GDP, net
exports, exports, or imports are signi…cantly a¤ected. The volatility of exports and imports
drops when measured with constant prices. The key result, that the model with frictions in
the distribution margin can reproduce many of the short-run business cycle moments that
we see in a model with a low Armington elasticity, still holds when exports and imports are
measured with constant prices. Thus these frictions in distribution are a¤ecting export and
import volumes, not simply prices.

4.3.1   The S-curve

As discussed in Backus, Kehoe and Kydland (1994), the contemporaneous correlation be-
tween international relative prices like the terms of trade or the real exchange rate and net
exports is low and maybe even negative, and the last two rows of table 5 show that the cor-
relation between the terms of trade and net exports or between the real exchange rate and
net exports is negative in the United States. Furthermore, the table shows that simulations
of the model where the Armington elasticity is equal to 4 yields a high contemporaneous
correlation between relative prices and net exports. In the model, when there is a depreci-
ation in the real exchange rate or the terms of trade that makes home goods relatively less
expensive than goods produced abroad, there is an instantaneous improvement in the trade
balance.
    The table shows that when home and foreign goods are less substitutable, the contem-
poraneous correlation between relative prices and net exports falls. The model with a low
substitutability between home and foreign goods predicts that the contemporaneous corre-
lation between the terms of trade and net exports is about 0:36.
    The version of the model with a distribution sector but no frictions in distribution also
leads to a very high correlation between these international relative prices and net exports,
re‡ecting the high elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods. On the other
hand, the model with frictions in distribution can replicate negative correlation between the
real exchange rate and net exports. In this model, even though the Armington elasticity
  11
    Kehoe and Ruhl (2008) show how movements in the terms of trade can potentially have a large e¤ect
on business cycle moments in model simulations.


                                                 22
is high, frictions in the distribution sector ensure that home and foreign goods are poor
substitutes in the short run.12
    Backus et al. go on to describe the S-curve. The fact that the correlation between the
terms of trade at time t and net exports at time t+n looks like a horizontal letter S as n goes
from some negative integer to some positive integer. Most importantly, the S-curve shows
the fact that the contemporaneous correlation between net exports and international relative
prices is negative, but the correlation between relative prices today and net exports at time
t + n is positive for some positive n, implying that the immediate impact of an exchange
rate depreciation may be a fall in the trade balance, but a depreciation eventually leads to
an increase in net exports.
    This S-like relationship between relative prices like the real exchange rate or the terms
of trade and lags or leads of net exports is presented in …gure 5. The …gure shows the
correlation between relative prices at time t and net exports at time t + n as observed in the
data for the United States and the Euro Area, and as predicted by the four versions of the
model.
    As observed from the S-curves in the data, the correlation between relative prices at
time t and net exports at time t + n is increasing as n increases. Thus there is a negative
contemporaneous correlation between either the terms of trade or the real exchange rate
and the current value of net exports, but this correlation increases for future values of net
exports. When the Armington elasticity is equal to 4 and there is no distribution sector, or
when there is a distribution sector but no frictions in distribution, the model cannot replicate
this …nding. Counterfactually the model …nds that the correlation between relative prices at
time t and net exports at time t + n falls as n increases.
    However, when the short-run substitutability of home and foreign goods is low, either
because the Armington elasticity is low or because frictions in the distribution sector hamper
substitutability in the short run, the model can replicate the fact that the correlation between
relative prices at time t and net exports at time t + n starts at an initially low level and
increases as n increases.
  12
     The fact that the contemporaneous correlation between the terms of trade and the trade balance may be
positive or negative is related to the famous Marshall-Lerner condition. When there is a depreciation in the
terms of trade, the relative price of imports increases, this means that the quantity demanded of imports will
certainly fall and the quantity demanded of a country’s exports will certainly rise. Thus when measuring net
exports with constant (steady-state) prices, there will certainly be a positive correlation between the terms
of trade and the trade balance, as shown in the results for Model-2. However, when we use current prices
to calculate the trade balance, the relative price of imports may increase, and thus the quantity demanded
of imports will fall, but if the import demand elasticity is less than 1 then the fall in quantity demanded is
not as great as the rise in the price, so the total spending on imports will actually increase, resulting in a
negative contemporaneous correlation between the terms of trade and the trade balance.




                                                     23
4.3.2    Separate shocks in the production and distribution sectors

The results presented so far have assumed that both the production and distribution sectors
within a country are a¤ected by the same country-speci…c TFP shock. This was done
to ensure that the results from the model without the distribution sector could be easily
compared with the results from the model with a distribution sector. However, as mentioned
in section 3, it may be more realistic to assume that within each country there are two shocks,
a production sector shock, At , that a¤ects the manufacturing sector, and a service sector
shock, Adt , that a¤ects the distribution sector. We use data from the OECD’s STAN database
to calculate country and sector speci…c TFP processes for both the manufacturing sector and
the service sector, and the results from the estimation of this VAR(1) process with these four
shocks was presented in section 3.
    The results from simulations of this model are presented in table 6. Now the comparison
between the model with no distribution sector and the model with a distribution sector is
not as easy. Since the shocks to the production sector are more volatile than shocks to the
services sector, it is not as clear-cut to compare a model where all of the economy is engaged
in manufacturing to one where half is manufacturing and half is distribution.
    That said, in the model with both sector- and country-speci…c shocks, most of the same
features of the model with only country-speci…c shocks continue to hold. Namely the fact
that in the model with a high elasticity of substitution, consumption volatility will be coun-
terfactually low, the volatility of the terms of trade and the real exchange rate will be too low,
cross-country GDP co-movement will be too low, and cross-country consumption correlation
will be too high. These key failings of the model were brought on by the fact that home and
foreign goods were too highly substitutable, and thus home and foreign agents could too eas-
ily smooth consumption following a county-speci…c shock. The model with both sector- and
country-speci…c TFP shocks can still lead to key improvements in the ability of the model
to match the data since frictions in the distribution sector still hamper the substitutability
of home and foreign goods in the short run.


5       Summary and Conclusion
In the international macro literature a low elasticity of substitution between home and
foreign goods is needed to explain short business cycle ‡uctuations, particularly movements
in international relative price and the real exchange rate. At the same time the international
trade literature estimates a high value for this elasticity using data on the longer term change
in trade patterns following a changes in relative prices.


                                               24
    This paper presents a model that can explain these two apparently contradictory results.
The true elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods is high, like in the trade
literature. However in the short run there are frictions in distribution that makes home and
foreign goods appear much less substitutable in the short run. The model is parameterized
to produce this high long-term elasticity, but simulations of the model show that in the
short run it behaves like an international macro model parameterized with a low elasticity
of substitution. Speci…cally, the model is able to replicate the short-run volatility of the
real exchange rate and the terms of trade. The model can also replicate the negative co-
movement between relative prices and both GDP and net exports while still maintaining the
high long-run substitutability that would satisfy the international trade literature.




                                             25
References
Anderson, James E., and Eric van Wincoop. 2004. “Trade Costs.”Journal of Economic
   Literature, 42(3): 691–751.

Arkolakis, Costas, Jonathan Eaton, and Samuel S. Kortum. 2012. “Staggered Ad-
   justment and Trade Dynamics.”mimeo.

Armington, P.S. 1969. “A theory of demand for products distinguished by place of pro-
   duction.”IMF Sta¤ Papers, 16: 159–178.

Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland. 1994. “Dynamics of
   the Trade Balance and the Terms of Trade: The J-Curve?” The American Economic
   Review, 84: 84–103.

Bahmani-Oskooee, Mohsen, and Marzieh Bolhasani. 2008. “The J-Curve: Evidence
   from commodity trade between Canada and the U.S.” Journal of Economics and Fi-
   nance, 32: 207–225.

Berger, David, Jon Faust, John H. Rogers, and Kai Steverson. 2012. “Border prices
    and retail prices.”Journal of International Economics, 88(1): 62–73.

Blonigen, Bruce A., Benjamin H. Liebman, and Wesley W. Wilson. 1999. “Explain-
    ing Armington: What Determines Substitutability between Home and Foreign Goods?”
    The Canadian Journal of Economics, 32(1): 1–21.

Boyd, Derick, Guglielmo Maria Caporale, and Ron Smith. 2001. “Real Echange Rate
   E¤ects on the Balance of Trade: Cointegration and the Marshall-Lerner Condition.”
   International Journal of Central Banking, 6(3): 187–200.

Burstein, Ariel, Joao C. Neves, and Sergio Rebelo. 2003. “Distribution costs and real
   exchange rate dynamics during exchange-rate-based stabilizations.” Journal of Mone-
   tary Economics, 50: 1189–1214.

Burstein, Ariel, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 2005. “Large Devaluations
   and the Real Exchange Rate.”Journal of Political Economy, 113: 742–784.

Burstein, Ariel, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 2007. “Modeling Ex-
   change Rate Passthrough After Large Devaluations.”Journal of Monetary Economics,
   54(2): 346–368.

Campa, Jose Manuel, and Linda S. Goldberg. 2005. “Exchange Rate Pass Through
   into Import Prices.”Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(4): 679–690.

Clausing, Kimberly A. 2001. “Trade Creation and Trade Diversion in the Canada - United
    States Free Trade Agreement.”The Canadian Journal of Economics, 34(3): 677–696.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, and Luca Dedola. 2005. “A macroeconomic model of international
    price discrimination.”Journal of International Economics, 67: 129–155.

                                         26
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Luca Dedola, and Sylvain Leduc. 2008. “International Risk
    Sharing and the Transmission of Productivity Shocks.” Review of Economic Studies,
    75(6): 443–473.

Crucini, Mario J., and Anthony Landry. 2012. “Accounting for Real Exchange Rates
   Using Micro-Data.”Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Globalization and Monetary Policy
   Institute Working Paper No. 108.

Crucini, Mario J., and Hakan Yilmazkuday. 2009. “A Model of International Cities:
   Implications for Real Exchange Rates.” Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Globalization
   and Monetary Policy Institute Working Paper No. 38.

Devereux, Michael B., and Charles Engel. 2002. “Exchange rate pass-through, ex-
   change rate volatility, and exchange rate disconnect.”Journal of Monetary Economics,
   49: 913–940.

Drozd, Lukasz A., and Jaromir B. Nosal. 2012. “Understanding International Prices:
   Customers as Capital.”American Economic Review, 102: 364–395.

Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum. 2002. “Technology, Geography, and Trade.”
    Econometrica, 70: 1741–1779.

Enders, Zeno, Gernot J. Müller, and Almuth Scholl. 2011. “How do …scal and tech-
   nology shocks a¤ect real exchange rates? New evidence for the United States.”Journal
   of International Economics, 83: 53–69.

Gallaway, Michael P., Christine A. McDaniel, and Sandra A. Rivera. 2003. “Short-
    run and long-run industry-level estimates of U.S. Armington elasticities.”North Amer-
    ican Journal of Economics and Finance, 14: 49–68.

Goldberg, Linda S., and Jose Manuel Campa. 2010. “The sensitivity of the CPI to
   exchange rates: Distribution margins, imported inputs, and trade exposure.”Review of
   Economics and Statistics, 92(2): 392–407.

Head, Keith, and John Reis. 2001. “Increasing Returns versus National Product Dif-
   ferentiation as an Explanation for the Pattern of U.S.-Canada Trade.” The American
   Economic Review, 91(4): 858–876.

Heathcote, Jonathan, and Fabrizio Perri. 2002. “Financial autarky and international
   business cycles.”Journal of Monetary Economics, 49: 601–627.

Hillberry, Russell, Michael Anderson, Edward Balistreri, and Alan Fox. 2001.
    “The determinates of Armington taste parameters in CGE models, or why you love
    Canadian vegetable oil.” U.S. International Trade Commisson, O¢ ce of Economics
    Working Paper.

Hooper, Peter, Karen Johnson, and Jamie Marquez. 1998. “Trade Elasticities for
   the G-7 Countries.” Board of Governors International Finance Discussion Paper No.
   609.

                                           27
Hummels, David. 1999. “Toward a Geography of Trade Costs.”mimeo.

Junz, Helen B., and Rudolf R. Rhomberg. 1973. “Price Competitiveness in Export
   Trade Among Industrial Countries.”American Economic Reveiw (Papers and Proceed-
   ings), 63: 412–418.

Kehoe, Timothy J., and Kim J. Ruhl. 2008. “Are shocks to the terms of trade shocks
   to productivity.”Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(4): 804–819.

Kose, M. Ayhan, and Kei-Mu Yi. 2006. “Can the standard international business cycle
   model explain the relation between trade and comovement?” The Journal of Interna-
   tional Economics, 68: 267–295.

Magee, Stephen P. 1973. “Currency Contracts, Pass-Through, and Devaluation.” Brook-
   ings Papers on Economic Activity, 1973(1): 303–325.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogo¤. 2000. “The Six Major Puzzles in International
   Economics: Is there a Common Cause?” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 15: 339–390.

Romalis, John. 2007. “NAFTA’s and CUSFTA’s E¤ect on International Trade.” Review
   of Economics and Statistics, 89(3): 416–435.

Rose, Andrew K. 1991. “The role of exchange rates in a popular model of international
   trade: Does the Marshall-Lerner Condition hold?” Journal of International Economics,
   30: 301–316.

Ruhl, Kim J. 2005. “Solving the Elasticity Puzzle in International Economics.” mimeo,
   University of Texas - Austin.

Stockman, Alan C., and Linda L. Tesar. 1995. “Tastes and Technology in a Two-
    Country Model of the Business Cycle: Explaining International Comovement.”Ameri-
    can Economic Review, 85(1): 168–185.




                                          28
A     Data Appendix - Not for publication

The EIU dataset used for the calibration of parameters speci…c to the distribution sector
contains the prices of over 300 goods from 123 cities. These prices are available annually
from 1990-2005. We excluded goods that were non-tradable to very close to non-tradeable.
We then combined the goods into four sectors: Grocery Items, Non-food consumer goods,
clothing, and transportation. In addition, Crucini and Landry (2012) provide data on the
distribution margin, calculated from input-output tables, for each good in the dataset. The
list of goods we use and their grouping into one of the four categories is as follows:




                                              29
                       Description                    Sector     Assumed s
 1   White bread, 1 kg (supermarket)               Grocery Items     0.3606
 2   White bread, 1 kg (mid-priced store)          Grocery Items     0.3606
 3   Butter, 500 g (supermarket)                   Grocery Items     0.3606
 4   Butter, 500 g (mid-priced store)              Grocery Items     0.3606
 5   Margarine, 500g (supermarket)                 Grocery Items     0.3606
 6   Margarine, 500g (mid-priced store)            Grocery Items     0.3606
 7   White rice, 1 kg (supermarket)                Grocery Items     0.3606
 8   White rice, 1 kg (mid-priced store)           Grocery Items     0.3606
 9   Spaghetti (1 kg) (supermarket)                Grocery Items     0.3606
10   Spaghetti (1 kg) (mid-priced store)           Grocery Items     0.3606
11   Flour, white (1 kg) (supermarket)             Grocery Items     0.3606
12   Flour, white (1 kg) (mid-priced store)        Grocery Items     0.3606
13   Sugar, white (1 kg) (supermarket)             Grocery Items     0.3606
14   Sugar, white (1 kg) (mid-priced store)        Grocery Items     0.3606
15   Cheese, imported (500 g) (supermarket)        Grocery Items     0.3606
16   Cheese, imported (500 g) (mid-priced store)   Grocery Items     0.3606
17   Corn‡akes (375 g) (supermarket)               Grocery Items     0.3606
18   Corn‡akes (375 g) (mid-priced store)          Grocery Items     0.3606
19   Yoghurt, natural (150 g) (supermarket)        Grocery Items     0.3606
20   Yoghurt, natural (150 g) (mid-priced store)   Grocery Items     0.3606
21   Milk, pasteurized (1 l) (supermarket)         Grocery Items     0.3606
22   Milk, pasteurized (1 l) (mid-priced store)    Grocery Items     0.3606
23   Olive oil (1 l) (supermarket)                 Grocery Items     0.3606
24   Olive oil (1 l) (mid-priced store)            Grocery Items     0.3606
25   Peanut or corn oil (1 l) (supermarket)        Grocery Items     0.3606
26   Peanut or corn oil (1 l) (mid-priced store)   Grocery Items     0.3606
27   Potatoes (2 kg) (supermarket)                 Grocery Items     0.5229
28   Potatoes (2 kg) (mid-priced store)            Grocery Items     0.5229
29   Onions (1 kg) (supermarket)                   Grocery Items     0.5229
30   Onions (1 kg) (mid-priced store)              Grocery Items     0.5229
31   Mushrooms (1 kg) (supermarket)                Grocery Items     0.5229
32   Mushrooms (1 kg) (mid-priced store)           Grocery Items     0.5229
33   Tomatoes (1 kg) (supermarket)                 Grocery Items     0.5229
34   Tomatoes (1 kg) (mid-priced store)            Grocery Items     0.5229
35   Carrots (1 kg) (supermarket)                  Grocery Items     0.5229
36   Carrots (1 kg) (mid-priced store)             Grocery Items     0.5229
37   Oranges (1 kg) (supermarket)                  Grocery Items     0.5229
38   Oranges (1 kg) (mid-priced store)             Grocery Items     0.5229
39   Apples (1 kg) (supermarket)                   Grocery Items     0.5229
40   Apples (1 kg) (mid-priced store)              Grocery Items     0.5229
41   Lemons (1 kg) (supermarket)                   Grocery Items     0.5229
42   Lemons (1 kg) (mid-priced store)              Grocery Items     0.5229
43   Bananas (1 kg) (supermarket)                  Grocery Items     0.5229
44   Bananas (1 kg) (mid-priced store)             Grocery Items     0.5229
45   Lettuce (one) (supermarket)                   Grocery Items     0.5229
46   Lettuce (one) (mid-priced store) 30           Grocery Items     0.5229
                          Description                          Sector     Assumed s
47   Eggs (12) (supermarket)                                Grocery Items     0.3606
48   Eggs (12) (mid-priced store)                           Grocery Items     0.3606
49   Peas, canned (250 g) (supermarket)                     Grocery Items     0.3606
50   Peas, canned (250 g) (mid-priced store)                Grocery Items     0.3606
51   Tomatoes, canned (250 g) (supermarket)                 Grocery Items     0.3606
52   Tomatoes, canned (250 g) (mid-priced store)            Grocery Items     0.3606
53   Peaches, canned (500 g) (supermarket)                  Grocery Items     0.3606
54   Peaches, canned (500 g) (mid-priced store)             Grocery Items     0.3606
55   Sliced pineapples, canned (500 g) (supermarket)        Grocery Items     0.3606
56   Sliced pineapples, canned (500 g) (mid-priced store)   Grocery Items     0.3606
57   Beef: …let mignon (1 kg) (supermarket)                 Grocery Items     0.3606
58   Beef: …let mignon (1 kg) (mid-priced store)            Grocery Items     0.3606
59   Beef: steak, entrecote (1 kg) (supermarket)            Grocery Items     0.3606
60   Beef: steak, entrecote (1 kg) (mid-priced store)       Grocery Items     0.3606
61   Beef: stewing, shoulder (1 kg) (supermarket)           Grocery Items     0.3606
62   Beef: stewing, shoulder (1 kg) (mid-priced store)      Grocery Items     0.3606
63   Beef: roast (1 kg) (supermarket)                       Grocery Items     0.3606
64   Beef: roast (1 kg) (mid-priced store)                  Grocery Items     0.3606
65   Beef: ground or minced (1 kg) (supermarket)            Grocery Items     0.3606
66   Beef: ground or minced (1 kg) (mid-priced store)       Grocery Items     0.3606
67   Veal: chops (1 kg) (supermarket)                       Grocery Items     0.3606
68   Veal: chops (1 kg) (mid-priced store)                  Grocery Items     0.3606
69   Veal: …llet (1 kg) (supermarket)                       Grocery Items     0.3606
70   Veal: …llet (1 kg) (mid-priced store)                  Grocery Items     0.3606
71   Veal: roast (1 kg) (supermarket)                       Grocery Items     0.3606
72   Veal: roast (1 kg) (mid-priced store)                  Grocery Items     0.3606
73   Lamb: leg (1 kg) (supermarket)                         Grocery Items     0.3606
74   Lamb: leg (1 kg) (mid-priced store)                    Grocery Items     0.3606
75   Lamb: chops (1 kg) (supermarket)                       Grocery Items     0.3606
76   Lamb: chops (1 kg) (mid-priced store)                  Grocery Items     0.3606
77   Lamb: Stewing (1 kg) (supermarket)                     Grocery Items     0.3606
78   Lamb: Stewing (1 kg) (mid-priced store)                Grocery Items     0.3606
79   Pork: chops (1 kg) (supermarket)                       Grocery Items     0.3606
80   Pork: chops (1 kg) (mid-priced store)                  Grocery Items     0.3606
81   Pork: loin (1 kg) (supermarket)                        Grocery Items     0.3606
82   Pork: loin (1 kg) (mid-priced store)                   Grocery Items     0.3606
83   Ham: whole (1 kg) (supermarket)                        Grocery Items     0.3606
84   Ham: whole (1 kg) (mid-priced store)                   Grocery Items     0.3606
85   Bacon (1 kg) (supermarket)                             Grocery Items     0.3606
86   Bacon (1 kg) (mid-priced store)                        Grocery Items     0.3606
87   Chicken: frozen (1 kg) (supermarket)                   Grocery Items     0.3606
88   Chicken: frozen (1 kg) (mid-priced store)              Grocery Items     0.3606
89   Chicken: fresh (1 kg) (supermarket)                    Grocery Items     0.3606
90   Chicken: fresh (1 kg) (mid-priced store)               Grocery Items     0.3606
91   Frozen …sh …ngers (1 kg) (supermarket)                 Grocery Items     0.2188
92   Frozen …sh …ngers (1 kg) (mid-priced31 store)          Grocery Items     0.2188
                              Description                            Sector      Assumed s
 93   Fresh …sh (1 kg) (supermarket)                               Grocery Items     0.2188
 94   Fresh …sh (1 kg) (mid-priced store)                          Grocery Items     0.2188
 95   Instant co¤ee (125 g) (supermarket)                          Grocery Items     0.3606
 96   Instant co¤ee (125 g) (mid-priced store)                     Grocery Items     0.3606
 97   Ground co¤ee (500 g) (supermarket)                           Grocery Items     0.3606
 98   Ground co¤ee (500 g) (mid-priced store)                      Grocery Items     0.3606
 99   Tea bags (25 bags) (supermarket)                             Grocery Items     0.3606
100   Tea bags (25 bags) (mid-priced store)                        Grocery Items     0.3606
101   Cocoa (250 g) (supermarket)                                  Grocery Items     0.3606
102   Cocoa (250 g) (mid-priced store)                             Grocery Items     0.3606
103   Drinking chocolate (500 g) (supermarket)                     Grocery Items     0.3606
104   Drinking chocolate (500 g) (mid-priced store)                Grocery Items     0.3606
105   Coca-Cola (1 l) (supermarket)                                Grocery Items     0.3606
106   Coca-Cola (1 l) (mid-priced store)                           Grocery Items     0.3606
107   Tonic water (200 ml) (supermarket)                           Grocery Items     0.3606
108   Tonic water (200 ml) (mid-priced store)                      Grocery Items     0.3606
109   Mineral water (1 l) (supermarket)                            Grocery Items     0.3606
110   Mineral water (1 l) (mid-priced store)                       Grocery Items     0.3606
111   Orange juice (1 l) (supermarket)                             Grocery Items     0.3606
112   Orange juice (1 l) (mid-priced store)                        Grocery Items     0.3606
113   Wine, common table (1 l) (supermarket)                       Grocery Items     0.3606
114   Wine, common table (1 l) (mid-priced store)                  Grocery Items     0.3606
115   Wine, superior quality (700 ml) (supermarket)                Grocery Items     0.3606
116   Wine, superior quality (700 ml) (mid-priced store)           Grocery Items     0.3606
117   Wine, …ne quality (700 ml) (supermarket)                     Grocery Items     0.3606
118   Wine, …ne quality (700 ml) (mid-priced store)                Grocery Items     0.3606
119   Beer, local brand (1 l) (supermarket)                        Grocery Items     0.3606
120   Beer, local brand (1 l) (mid-priced store)                   Grocery Items     0.3606
121   Beer, top quality (330 ml) (supermarket)                     Grocery Items     0.3606
122   Beer, top quality (330 ml) (mid-priced store)                Grocery Items     0.3606
123   Scotch whisky, six years old (700 ml) (supermarket)          Grocery Items     0.3606
124   Scotch whisky, six years old (700 ml) (mid-priced store)     Grocery Items     0.3606
125   Gin, Gilbey’s or equivalent (700 ml) (supermarket)           Grocery Items     0.3606
126   Gin, Gilbey’s or equivalent (700 ml) (mid-priced store)      Grocery Items     0.3606
127   Vermouth, Martini & Rossi (1 l) (supermarket)                Grocery Items     0.3606
128   Vermouth, Martini & Rossi (1 l) (mid-priced store)           Grocery Items     0.3606
129   Cognac, French VSOP (700 ml) (supermarket)                   Grocery Items     0.3606
130   Cognac, French VSOP (700 ml) (mid-priced store)              Grocery Items     0.3606
131   Liqueur, Cointreau (700 ml) (supermarket)                    Grocery Items     0.3606
132   Liqueur, Cointreau (700 ml) (mid-priced store)               Grocery Items     0.3606
133   Soap (100 g) (supermarket)                                 Consumer Goods      0.4050
134   Soap (100 g) (mid-priced store)                            Consumer Goods      0.4050
135   Laundry detergent (3 l) (supermarket)                      Consumer Goods      0.4050
136   Laundry detergent (3 l) (mid-priced store)                 Consumer Goods      0.4050
137   Toilet tissue (two rolls) (supermarket)                    Consumer Goods      0.3405
138   Toilet tissue (two rolls) (mid-priced
                                          32store)               Consumer Goods      0.3405
139   Dishwashing liquid (750 ml) (supermarket)                  Consumer Goods      0.4050
140   Dishwashing liquid (750 ml) (mid-priced store)             Consumer Goods      0.4050
                                     Description                               Sector      Assum
141   Insect-killer spray (330 g) (supermarket)                            Consumer Goods      0
142   Insect-killer spray (330 g) (mid-priced store)                       Consumer Goods      0
143   Light bulbs (two, 60 watts) (supermarket)                            Consumer Goods      0
144   Light bulbs (two, 60 watts) (mid-priced store)                       Consumer Goods      0
145   Batteries (two, size D/LR20) (supermarket)                           Consumer Goods      0
146   Batteries (two, size D/LR20) (mid-priced store)                      Consumer Goods      0
147   Frying pan (Te‡on or good equivalent) (supermarket)                  Consumer Goods      0
148   Frying pan (Te‡on or good equivalent) (mid-priced store)             Consumer Goods      0
149   Electric toaster (for two slices) (supermarket)                      Consumer Goods      0
150   Electric toaster (for two slices) (mid-priced store)                 Consumer Goods      0
151   Laundry (one shirt) (standard high-street outlet)                    Consumer Goods      0
152   Laundry (one shirt) (mid-priced outlet)                              Consumer Goods      0
153   Dry cleaning, man’s suit (standard high-street outlet)               Consumer Goods      0
154   Dry cleaning, man’s suit (mid-priced outlet)                         Consumer Goods      0
155   Dry cleaning, woman’s dress (standard high-street outlet)            Consumer Goods      0
156   Dry cleaning, woman’s dress (mid-priced outlet)                      Consumer Goods      0
157   Dry cleaning, trousers (standard high-street outlet)                 Consumer Goods      0
158   Dry cleaning, trousers (mid-priced outlet)                           Consumer Goods      0
159   Aspirins (100 tablets) (supermarket)                                 Consumer Goods      0
160   Aspirins (100 tablets) (mid-priced store)                            Consumer Goods      0
161   Razor blades (…ve pieces) (supermarket)                              Consumer Goods      0
162   Razor blades (…ve pieces) (mid-priced store)                         Consumer Goods      0
163   Toothpaste with ‡uoride (120 g) (supermarket)                        Consumer Goods      0
164   Toothpaste with ‡uoride (120 g) (mid-priced store)                   Consumer Goods      0
165   Facial tissues (box of 100) (supermarket)                            Consumer Goods      0
166   Facial tissues (box of 100) (mid-priced store)                       Consumer Goods      0
167   Hand lotion (125 ml) (supermarket)                                   Consumer Goods      0
168   Hand lotion (125 ml) (mid-priced store)                              Consumer Goods      0
169   Shampoo & conditioner in one (400 ml) (supermarket)                  Consumer Goods      0
170   Shampoo & conditioner in one (400 ml) (mid-priced store)             Consumer Goods      0
171   Lipstick (deluxe type) (supermarket)                                 Consumer Goods      0
172   Lipstick (deluxe type) (mid-priced store)                            Consumer Goods      0
173   Man’s haircut (tips included) (average)                              Consumer Goods      0
174   Woman’s cut & blow dry (tips included) (average)                     Consumer Goods      0
175   Cigarettes, Marlboro (pack of 20) (supermarket)                      Consumer Goods      0
176   Cigarettes, Marlboro (pack of 20) (mid-priced store)                 Consumer Goods      0
177   Cigarettes, local brand (pack of 20) (supermarket)                   Consumer Goods      0
178   Cigarettes, local brand (pack of 20) (mid-priced store)              Consumer Goods      0
179   Pipe tobacco (50 g) (average)                                        Consumer Goods      0
180   Business suit, two piece, medium weight (chain store)                       Clothing     0
181   Business suit, two piece, medium weight (mid-priced/branded store)          Clothing     0
182   Business shirt, white (chain store)                                         Clothing     0
183   Business shirt, white (mid-priced/branded store)                            Clothing     0
184   Men’s shoes, business wear (chain store)                                    Clothing     0
185   Men’s shoes, business wear (mid-priced/branded store)                       Clothing     0
186   Mens raincoat, Burberry type (chain  33 store)                              Clothing     0
187   Men’s raincoat, Burberry type (mid-priced/branded store)                    Clothing     0
                                 Description                           Sector     Assumed s
188   Socks, wool mixture (chain store)                                  Clothing     0.5193
189   Socks, wool mixture (mid-priced/branded store)                     Clothing     0.5193
190   Dress, ready to wear, daytime (chain store)                        Clothing     0.5193
191   Dress, ready to wear, daytime (mid-priced/branded store)           Clothing     0.5193
192   Women’s shoes, town (chain store)                                  Clothing     0.5194
193   Women’s shoes, town (mid-priced/branded store)                     Clothing     0.5194
194   Women’s cardigan sweater (chain store)                             Clothing     0.5193
195   Women’s cardigan sweater (mid-priced/branded store)                Clothing     0.5193
196   Women’s raincoat, Burberry type (chain store)                      Clothing     0.5193
197   Women’s raincoat, Burberry type (mid-priced/branded store)         Clothing     0.5193
198   Tights, panty hose (chain store)                                   Clothing     0.5193
199   Tights, panty hose (mid-priced/branded store)                      Clothing     0.5193
200   Child’s jeans (chain store)                                        Clothing     0.5193
201   Child’s jeans (mid-priced/branded store)                           Clothing     0.5193
202   Child’s shoes, dresswear (chain store)                             Clothing     0.5194
203   Child’s shoes, dresswear (mid-priced/branded store)                Clothing     0.5194
204   Child’s shoes, sportswear (chain store)                            Clothing     0.5892
205   Child’s shoes, sportswear (mid-priced/branded store)               Clothing     0.5892
206   Girl’s dress (chain store)                                         Clothing     0.5193
207   Girl’s dress (mid-priced/branded store)                            Clothing     0.5193
208   Boy’s jacket, smart (chain store)                                  Clothing     0.5193
209   Boy’s jacket, smart (mid-priced/branded store)                     Clothing     0.5193
210   Boy’s dress trousers (chain store)                                 Clothing     0.5193
211   Boy’s dress trousers (mid-priced/branded store)                    Clothing     0.5193
212   Low priced car (900-1299 cc) (low)                           Transportation     0.1668
213   Low priced car (900-1299 cc) (high)                          Transportation     0.1668
214   Compact car (1300-1799 cc) (low)                             Transportation     0.1668
215   Compact car (1300-1799 cc) (high)                            Transportation     0.1668
216   Family car (1800-2499 cc) (low)                              Transportation     0.1668
217   Family car (1800-2499 cc) (high)                             Transportation     0.1668
218   Deluxe car (2500 cc upwards) (low)                           Transportation     0.1668
219   Deluxe car (2500 cc upwards) (high)                          Transportation     0.1668
220   Yearly road tax or registration fee (low)                    Transportation     0.8560
221   Yearly road tax or registration fee (high)                   Transportation     0.8560
222   Cost of a tune up (but no major repairs) (low)               Transportation     0.8480
223   Cost of a tune up (but no major repairs) (high)              Transportation     0.8480
224   Annual premium for car insurance (low)                       Transportation     0.9420
225   Annual premium for car insurance (high)                      Transportation     0.9420
226   Regular unleaded petrol (1 l) (average)                      Transportation     0.1890
227   Taxi: initial meter charge (average)                         Transportation     0.8560
228   Taxi rate per additional kilometer (average)                 Transportation     0.8560
229   Taxi: airport to city centre (average)                       Transportation     0.8560



                                      34
   The EIU dataset contains data from 123 cities, but to ensure that ‡uctuations in the
nominal exchange rate don’t cloud the results, we use data from 13 U.S. cities:

    Cities
    Atlanta
    Boston
    Chicago
    Cleveland
    Detroit
    Houston
    Los Angeles
    Miami
    New York
    Pittsburgh
    San Francisco
    Seattle
    Washington DC




                                          35
                            Table 1: Parameter Values

Symbol Value   Description
        0:66   weight on leisure in the household’s utility function
         2     coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion
        0:36   capital share in the production of traded goods
        0:99   discount factor
  !     0:85   exogenous preference for home goods
       0:025   capital depreciation rate
        0:02   elasticity of substitution between wholesale goods and distribution services
   d    0:36   capital’s share in distribution costs
        0:40   elasticity of substitution between capital and labor in distribution
        0:18   capital adjustment cost parameter for capital used in distribution




                                         36
                  5


                4.5


                  4


                3.5


                  3


                2.5


                  2


                1.5


                  1


                0.5


                  0
                      0   5      10     15     20     25      30     35      40
                                             Quarters


Figure 1: Observed Elasticity of Substitution following a TFP shock. In the solid line
the structural elasticity is equal to 4 and there is no distribution. In the dashed line the
structural elasticity is equal to 0.9 and there is no distribution. In the dotted line the
structural elasticity is equal to 8, there is a distribution sector, but distribution capital can
be instantaneously reallocated from distribution of domestic goods to the distribution of
imports, and vice versa. In the line with stars the structural elasticity is equal to 8, there
is a distribution sector, but frictions prevent the reallocation of distribution inputs in the
short run.




                                               37
                      Hom e GDP                                       Foreign GDP
     0.7                                               0.2

     0.6
                                                      0.15
     0.5

     0.4
                                                       0.1
     0.3

     0.2
                                                      0.05
     0.1

       0                                                 0
           0     10       20       30       40               0   10       20        30     40



                   Hom e Investm ent                             Foreign Investm ent
     2.5                                               0.6


       2                                               0.5

                                                       0.4
     1.5
                                                       0.3
       1
                                                       0.2
     0.5
                                                       0.1

       0                                                 0

    -0.5                                              -0.1
           0     10      20        30       40               0   10      20         30     40
                       Quarters                                        Quarters


Figure 2: The responses of home and foreign GDP and investment to a positive home TFP
shock. In the solid line the structural elasticity is equal to 4 and there is no distribution.
In the dashed line the structural elasticity is equal to 0.9 and there is no distribution. In
the dotted line the structural elasticity is equal to 8, there is a distribution sector, but
distribution capital can be instantaneously reallocated from distribution of domestic goods
to the distribution of imports, and vice versa. In the line with stars the structural elasticity is
equal to 8, there is a distribution sector, but frictions prevent the reallocation of distribution
inputs in the short run.




                                                 38
                  Hom e Consum ption                              Foreign Consum ption
     0.14                                              0.06

     0.12                                              0.05

      0.1
                                                       0.04
     0.08
                                                       0.03
     0.06
                                                       0.02
     0.04

     0.02                                              0.01


        0                                                 0
            0    10       20       30       40                0   10      20      30       40



                   Hom e Net Exports                              Foreign Net Exports
     0.06                                              0.08

     0.04                                              0.06

     0.02                                              0.04

        0                                              0.02

    -0.02                                                 0

    -0.04                                             -0.02

    -0.06                                             -0.04

    -0.08                                             -0.06
            0    10      20        30       40                0   10     20       30       40
                       Quarters                                        Quarters


Figure 3: The responses of home and foreign consumption and net exports to a positive home
TFP shock. In the solid line the structural elasticity is equal to 4 and there is no distribution.
In the dashed line the structural elasticity is equal to 0.9 and there is no distribution. In
the dotted line the structural elasticity is equal to 8, there is a distribution sector, but
distribution capital can be instantaneously reallocated from distribution of domestic goods
to the distribution of imports, and vice versa. In the line with stars the structural elasticity is
equal to 8, there is a distribution sector, but frictions prevent the reallocation of distribution
inputs in the short run.




                                                 39
                 Hom e T erms of T rade                        Real Exchange Rate
    0.25                                             0.09

                                                     0.08
      0.2                                            0.07

                                                     0.06
    0.15
                                                     0.05

                                                     0.04
      0.1
                                                     0.03

    0.05                                             0.02

                                                     0.01

       0                                               0
           0     10       20       30      40              0   10     20        30      40
                                                                    Quarters

Figure 4: The response of the home country terms of trade and the real exchange rate to
a positive home TFP shock. In the solid line the structural elasticity is equal to 4 and
there is no distribution. In the dashed line the structural elasticity is equal to 0.9 and
there is no distribution. In the dotted line the structural elasticity is equal to 8, there
is a distribution sector, but distribution capital can be instantaneously reallocated from
distribution of domestic goods to the distribution of imports, and vice versa. In the line
with stars the structural elasticity is equal to 8, there is a distribution sector, but frictions
prevent the reallocation of distribution inputs in the short run.




                                                40
        Correlation between NX(t+n) and T OT (t)          Correlation between NX(t+n) and T OT (t)
       1                                                 1
                                US
                                Euro Area
     0.5                                               0.5



       0                                                 0



    -0.5                                              -0.5



      -1                                               -1
             -5           0          5                         -5           0          5
                          n                                                 n


        Correlation between NX(t+n) and RER(t)            Correlation between NX(t+n) and RER(t)
       1                                                 1
                                 US
                                 Euro Area
     0.5                                               0.5



       0                                                 0



    -0.5                                              -0.5



      -1                                               -1
             -5           0          5                         -5           0          5
                          n                                                 n


Figure 5: The correlation between relative prices and lagged values of net exports. In the
solid line the structural elasticity is equal to 4 and there is no distribution. In the dashed
line the structural elasticity is equal to 0.9 and there is no distribution. In the dotted line
the structural elasticity is equal to 8, there is a distribution sector, but distribution capital
can be instantaneously reallocated from distribution of domestic goods to the distribution
of imports, and vice versa. In the line with stars the structural elasticity is equal to 8, there
is a distribution sector, but frictions prevent the reallocation of distribution inputs in the
short run.



                                                 41
     Table 2: The price data used to calibrate the distribution parameter values under various detrending methods.
     Remove nominal trend:               Use Time dummy                Remove CPI                 Do nothing
        Additional …ltering:            HP       Di¤     None       HP     Di¤    None        HP      Di¤   None
                   St. Dev.       w^t 12:12 12:10 22:35            12:07 11:87 22:88         12:07 11:98 22:80

           St. Dev. relative         p^it    0:69   0:84   19:81   0:56   0:65   17:85       0:56    0:66   16:88
                       to w^t         c^it   0:65   0:72    0:69   0:70   0:82    0:72       0:70    0:82    0:72

            Autocorrelation          w^t     0:90   0:80    0:96   0:91   0:79     0:96      0:91    0:80    0:96
                                     p^it    0:82   0:16    0:95   0:81   0:45     0:96      0:80    0:66    0:95
                                      c^it   0:82   0:66    0:93   0:82   0:64     0:93      0:82    0:65    0:93

                 Correlation p^it ; w^t      0:27   0:15    0:33   0:44   0:36     0:20      0:42    0:21    0:26
                              c^it ; w^t     0:34   0:25    0:30   0:74   0:69     0:72      0:74    0:68    0:72
                             p^it ; c^it     0:44   0:32    0:01   0:36   0:30     0:15      0:35    0:21    0:19




42
                                      Table 3: Calibrating the value of the parameters used in distribution
                                      Data       = :02      = :2    = :4     = :6   = :8       d = :16     d = :26   d   = :36   d   = :46   d   = :56
             St. Dev.         w^t     12:12        0:58     0:59    0:60     0:61    0:61         0:59        0:58        0:58        0:58        0:59

     St. Dev. relative        p^it     0:69        0:69     0:57    0:50     0:44    0:40          0:87      0:78         0:69        0:60        0:52
                 to w^t        c^it    0:65        0:65     0:52    0:44     0:39    0:34          0:84      0:75         0:65        0:55        0:45

      Autocorrelation         w^t      0:90        0:96     0:96    0:95     0:95    0:95          0:98      0:97         0:96        0:95        0:94
                              p^it     0:82        0:86     0:88    0:89     0:90    0:90          0:85      0:85         0:86        0:87        0:90
                               c^it    0:82        0:86     0:87    0:89     0:90    0:90          0:84      0:85         0:86        0:87        0:89

          Correlation p^it ; w^t       0:27        0:32     0:33    0:33     0:32    0:31          0:06      0:19         0:32        0:46        0:59
                       c^it ; w^t      0:34        0:29     0:29    0:28     0:26    0:25          0:04      0:16         0:29        0:42        0:56
                      p^it ; c^it      0:44        0:99     0:99    0:98     0:98    0:98          0:99      0:99         0:99        0:99        0:98




43
                                      Table 4: Calibrating the value of the parameters used in distribution
                                      Data       = :10     = :25     = :40     = :55    = :70        =0     = :09   = :18   = :27   = :36
             St. Dev.         w^t     12:12        0:56      0:57     0:58      0:59     0:59       0:64     0:60    0:58    0:56    0:55

     St. Dev. relative        p^it     0:69        0:90     0:77      0:69     0:63     0:58       0:43     0:62     0:69    0:74    0:77
                 to w^t        c^it    0:65        0:86     0:73      0:65     0:58     0:53       0:37     0:57     0:65    0:69    0:73

      Autocorrelation         w^t      0:90        0:98     0:97      0:96     0:95     0:95       0:97     0:97     0:96    0:96    0:95
                              p^it     0:82        0:82     0:84      0:86     0:88     0:89       0:46     0:83     0:86    0:88    0:89
                               c^it    0:82        0:82     0:84      0:86     0:87     0:89       0:39     0:82     0:86    0:87    0:88

          Correlation p^it ; w^t       0:27        0:21     0:28      0:32     0:36     0:39       0:15     0:21     0:32    0:40    0:45
                       c^it ; w^t      0:34        0:19     0:25      0:29     0:32     0:35       0:23     0:16     0:29    0:37    0:43
                      p^it ; c^it      0:44        0:99     0:99      0:99     0:99     0:99       0:92     0:98     0:99    0:99    0:99




44
     Table 5: Volatility and co-movement of GDP and its components in the data and from simulations of the model under di¤erent
     elasticities of substitution and distribution costs.
                                                                      Model - 1                          Model - 2
                                                  Distribution  No   No      Yes     Yes       No       No     Yes     Yes
                                                  Elasticity     4   0.9      8       8         4       0.9      8      8
                                        Data      Frictions    N/A  N/A      No      Yes      N/A      N/A      No     Yes
         St. Dev.          GDP          0:92                   1:07 0:97    0:89     0:82     1:10     1:02    0:91   0:86
                           NX           0:28                   0:30 0:16    0:15     0:12     0:34     0:16    0:19   0:11

        Volatility      C            0:89                    0:42    0:49     0:52    0:59      0:41    0:47    0:51    0:57
        Relative        I            3:14                    3:16    3:22     3:88    3:83      3:09    3:06    3:80    3:65
        to GDP          N            0:85                    0:49    0:45     0:39    0:27      0:48    0:43    0:38    0:26
                        Ex           3:86                    1:31    1:00     1:49    1:21      1:31    0:97    1:58    1:15
                        Im           3:37                    1:13    1:12     1:12    1:27      1:27    0:96    1:55    1:15
                        Tot          2:14                    0:33    0:81     0:52    1:16      0:32    0:77    0:51    1:11
                        Q            4:14                    0:23    0:57     0:42    0:73      0:22    0:54    0:41    0:70




45
        Co-movement     C            0:84                    0:80    0:82     0:81    0:86      0:80    0:84    0:80    0:85
        with            I            0:91                    0:89    0:94     0:90    0:91      0:88    0:93    0:90    0:91
        GDP             NX            0:41                   0:10     0:47    0:52     0:24     0:19     0:13   0:56    0:10
                        N            0:81                    0:94    0:90     0:92    0:94      0:94    0:89    0:93    0:93
                        Ex           0:54                    0:58    0:59     0:78    0:41      0:60    0:62    0:86    0:64
                        Im           0:82                    0:51    0:99      0:03   0:76      0:30    0:77     0:11   0:50
                        Tot          0:29                    0:48    0:39     0:59    0:54      0:51    0:48    0:61    0:60
                        Q             0:02                   0:48    0:39     0:46    0:49      0:51    0:48    0:49    0:55

        Cross-country GDP            0:52                    0:23    0:48     0:24    0:44      0:17    0:34    0:19    0:31
        co-movement C                0:76                    0:76    0:54     0:69    0:50      0:76    0:54    0:69    0:50
                      I              0:67                     0:03   0:14     0:01    0:21       0:03   0:14    0:01    0:21
                      N              0:47                    0:05    0:47      0:38   0:47      0:05    0:47     0:38   0:47
                      Ex             0:63                     0:28   0:46      0:65    0:39      0:32   0:41     0:52    0:02

        Correlation     Tot,NX        0:13                   0:77      0:36 0:97      0:48     0:83     0:38    0:98     0:13
                        Q,NX          0:05                   0:77      0:36 0:99      0:10     0:83     0:38    0:98     0:50
        Notes:The statistics taken from the data are from quarterly U.S. data from 1984-2007. The cross-country statistics
        are between the U.S. and the Euro Area.
     Table 6: Volatility and co-movement of GDP and its components in the data and from simulations of the model under di¤erent
     elasticities of substitution and distribution costs. Simulated assuming separate shocks for the production and distribution sectos.
                                                                            Model - 1                          Model - 2
                                                   Distribution    No      No     Yes      Yes         No      No     Yes      Yes
                                                   Elasticity       4      0.9      8       8          4      0.9       8       8
                                         Data      Frictions      N/A     N/A      No      Yes        N/A     N/A      No      Yes
         St. Dev.           GDP          0:92                     1:07    0:97    0:98    0:85        1:10    1:02    1:03     0:90
                            NX           0:28                     0:30    0:16    0:49    0:17        0:34    0:16    0:57     0:14

        Volatility       C             0:89                      0:42    0:49     0:49    0:59       0:41     0:47    0:47     0:56
        Relative         I             3:14                      3:16    3:22     3:73    3:85       3:09     3:06    3:54     3:64
        to GDP           N             0:85                      0:49    0:45     0:51    0:57       0:48     0:43    0:48     0:53
                         Ex            3:86                      1:31    1:00     3:50    1:84       1:31     0:97    3:77     1:37
                         Im            3:37                      1:13    1:12     3:47    1:81       1:27     0:96    3:75     1:32
                         Tot           2:14                      0:33    0:81     1:15    3:12       0:32     0:77    1:10     2:94
                         Q             4:14                      0:23    0:57     0:46    0:73       0:22     0:54    0:44     0:69




46
        Co-movement      C             0:84                      0:80    0:82     0:75    0:85       0:80     0:84    0:73     0:82
        with             I             0:91                      0:89    0:94     0:65    0:78       0:88     0:93    0:62     0:77
        GDP              NX             0:41                     0:10     0:47    0:52    0:00       0:19      0:13   0:58     0:31
                         N             0:81                      0:94    0:90     0:53    0:21       0:94     0:89    0:56     0:08
                         Ex            0:54                      0:58    0:59     0:52    0:11       0:60     0:62    0:70     0:73
                         Im            0:82                      0:51    0:99      0:46   0:12       0:30     0:77     0:43    0:26
                         Tot           0:29                      0:48    0:39     0:57    0:15       0:51     0:48    0:62     0:36
                         Q              0:02                     0:48    0:39     0:36    0:49       0:51     0:48    0:36     0:57

        Cross-country GDP              0:52                      0:23    0:48     0:11    0:48       0:17     0:34    0:01     0:32
        co-movement C                  0:76                      0:76    0:54     0:61    0:47       0:76     0:54    0:61     0:47
                      I                0:67                       0:03   0:14     0:29    0:61        0:03    0:14    0:29     0:61
                      N                0:47                      0:05    0:47      0:11    0:03      0:05     0:47     0:11     0:03
                      Ex               0:63                       0:28   0:46      0:82    0:09       0:32    0:41     0:93     0:25

        Correlation     Tot,NX        0:13                   0:77      0:36 0:99      0:70     0:83     0:38    0:99     0:57
                        Q,NX          0:05                   0:77      0:36 0:13      0:03     0:83     0:38    0:14     0:60
        Notes:The statistics taken from the data are from quarterly U.S. data from 1984-2007. The cross-country statistics
        are between the U.S. and the Euro Area.
