                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       DO PRICES AND ATTRIBUTES EXPLAIN INTERNATIONAL DIFFERENCES
                           IN FOOD PURCHASES?

                                           Pierre Dubois
                                           Rachel Griffith
                                            Aviv Nevo

                                        Working Paper 18750
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18750


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2013




We thank Martin Browning, Robin Lee, Arthur Lewbel, Peter Neary and participants in several seminars
and conferences for comments. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from USDA, ERC-2009-AdG
grant 249529, ANR-ESRC ORA grant number ES/I012222/1 and the Center for the Study of IO at
Northwestern University. This research was funded in part by a cooperative agreement between the
USDA/ERS and Northwestern University, but the views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the U.S. Department of Agriculture or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18750.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Pierre Dubois, Rachel Griffith, and Aviv Nevo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Prices and Attributes Explain International Differences in Food Purchases?
Pierre Dubois, Rachel Griffith, and Aviv Nevo
NBER Working Paper No. 18750
February 2013
JEL No. D12,I18,L10

                                               ABSTRACT

Food purchases differ substantially across countries. We use detailed household level data from the
US, France and the UK to (i) document these differences; (ii) estimate a demand system for food and
nutrients, and (iii) simulate counterfactual choices if households faced prices and nutritional characteristics
from other countries. We find that differences in prices and characteristics are important and can explain
some difference (e.g., US-France difference in caloric intake), but generally cannot explain many of
the compositional patterns by themselves. Instead, it seems an interaction between the economic environment
and differences in preferences is needed to explain cross country differences.


Pierre Dubois                                          Aviv Nevo
Toulouse School of Economics                           Department of Economics
21 allée de Brienne                                    Northwestern University
3100 Toulouse                                          2001 Sheridan Road
France                                                 Evanston, IL 60208-2600
Pierre.Dubois@tse-fr.eu                                and NBER
                                                       nevo@northwestern.edu
Rachel Griffith
IFS
7 Ridgmont Street
London WC1E 7AE
UK
rgriffith@ifs.org.uk
1     Introduction
Food purchases di¤er across countries, within countries over time and across demographic
groups. These di¤erences seem to be correlated with rates of excess weight gain and diet
related illness. Economists tend to attribute the di¤erence in food purchases across markets
to di¤erences in prices. An alternative explanation is that they are due to inherent di¤erences
in preferences and eating habits. In this paper we study the di¤erences in food purchases
and nutritional outcomes across countries, focusing on the US, UK and France.
    We start by systematically documenting the di¤erences in food purchases for consumption
at home between the US, UK and France. We show that US households purchase di¤erent
foods from French and UK households. For example, US households purchase more calories
per person. A greater percentage of those calories come in the form of carbohydrates, and a
lower share in the form of proteins. A higher share of expenditure is on drinks and prepared
foods, and a lower share is on fruits and vegetables. We also document substantial di¤erences
in prices and nutritional characteristics of foods across the three countries.
    This leads to the main contribution of the paper, which is to consider whether prices
and nutritional characteristics can explain the observed di¤erences in food purchases. To
answer this question we develop and estimate a model of demand for food products and
nutrients in each country. We estimate the model using household-level (home scanner) data
that include detailed food purchases for an extended period for participating households in
each of the three countries. The purchase data is merged with data on nutrient content at a
disaggregated product level. We use the estimates to simulate the quantities and nutritional
content of the food basket that US households would purchase if they faced the prices and
food characteristics faced by households in France and the UK. This allows us to better
understand how important di¤erences in prices and nutritional attributes are in explaining
di¤erences in food purchases, as opposed to preferences or other factors. We consider this
counterfactual scenario not necessarily because changing US prices and product attributes to
those in France or the UK is a feasible policy, but because we think it is informative in helping
us to understand why the nutritional balance of households’ food baskets are so di¤erent
across the three countries.1 We conduct the simulations for the average US household, but
    1
      For discussion of the wide range of policies to address obesity that are under consideration see, inter
alia, Acs et al. (2007), Gortmaker et al. (2011), Gri¢ th and O’Connell (2010), and Philipson and Posner
(2008).


                                                     1
we also separately simulate the e¤ect on two other groups that are of particular policy
interest: low income households and households that purchase more calories (per capita).
   We …nd that, if faced with French prices and product attributes, the average US household
would purchase substantially fewer calories: a similar level to the average French household
when faced with the same environment. However, the composition of these calories would
di¤er. The simulated change is mostly due to price di¤erences. If we change only the
nutrient characteristics this has little impact on the amount of calories the average US
household obtains, though it does a¤ect the form of those calories, shifting them away from
carbohydrates and towards proteins and fats. In contrast, when we simulate the average US
household’s food basket with UK product attributes this has a substantial impact on reducing
calories, whereas changing relative prices in fact increases calories. For some questions it can
be misleading to focus only on total calories. The simulations suggest that, even when the
total calories purchased is not a¤ected, the composition of macronutrients and food groups
can change substantially.
   The results suggest that, while the economic environment, as re‡ected in prices and
attributes, can have a large impact on food purchases and the nutritional composition of
the food basket, prices and attributes do not fully explain the observed di¤erences. Price
di¤erences mostly explain the large di¤erence in caloric intake between the average French
and US household. However, nutrient characteristics are important when comparing to the
UK, and di¤erences in preferences and eating habits are generally quite important, and in
some cases can o¤set the in‡uences of the economic environment. For example, we …nd that
UK households have healthier purchasing patterns than US households despite the prices
and product o¤ering they face, not because of them.
   There are several reasons to be interested in the di¤erences in food purchases across
the three countries. Of primary interest is the fact that the di¤erences in nutritional char-
acteristics are mirrored in a number of health outcomes. The National Research Council
(2011) reports di¤erences along a number of dimensions, most of which show that the US
has poorer health than the UK and France. For example, 36.4% of men aged 65+ in the
US report having heart disease compared to 28.8% in France and 32.2% in the UK; diabetes
prevalence is 21.4% in the US compared to 13.0% in France and 11.2% in the UK (Table 2-1




                                               2
of National Research Council, 2011). Obesity rates are also the highest in the US at 30.0%,
compared to 14.5% in France and 23.6% in the UK.2
       Di¤erences in obesity rates across countries, and implications for health outcomes, are
due to many factors, including exercise and general life style, but are likely to at least in
part also be due to di¤erences in food consumption patterns.3 More generally, nutrition is
well understood to be an important determinant of health outcomes, leading to economic
costs, including medical costs, lost productivity and a reduction in the quality of life. For
example, in the UK poor diet is estimated to account for about one-third of all deaths from
cancer and cardiovascular disease, and the US Center for Disease Control estimates that in
2008 medical costs related to obesity were as high as $147 billion (CDC, 2011).
       In order to address our main question, and to exploit the richness of our data, we develop
a model of demand that nests models in product space and those in characteristics space.
To understand the need for this model consider two commonly used alternatives. The …rst
approach is to model demand at a disaggregate product level, for example demand for soft
drinks, and assess the importance of prices and various characteristics. This approach will
pin down preferences within narrowly de…ned product groups, but will not let us address
questions of choice among product groups and di¤erences in the overall food basket. Further-
more, narrowly de…ned products (i.e. brands) are very di¤erent across countries, creating
problems with matching products across the countries. A second common approach would
be to model demand for food at a much more aggregated level.4 However, this would not
take advantage of the detailed information in our data, nor does it account for the di¤erences
across countries in the attributes of food o¤ered; each food category would be assumed to
be the same across all countries.
       We instead propose a model in which a consumer chooses continuous quantities of each
of a large number of products in order to maximize utility, which depends both on the char-
acteristics of the products, as in Gorman (1956) and Lancaster (1966), and on the quantity
consumed of each product. This nests commonly used models in characteristics space, such
as the discrete choice model (McFadden, 1974, Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes, 1995), and the
   2
     See also National Academy of Sciences (2013).
   3
     See also, Abaluck (2011), Bleich et al (2007), Bawa (2005), Chou et al (2004), Du¤ey and Popkin (2011),
French et al (2001), Drewnowski and Specter (2004), Finkelstein and Zuckerman (2008), Lakdawalla and
Philipson (2002, 2009), Philipson et al (2004), Philipson and Posner (2011), Swinburn et al (2009).
   4
     For example, following this approach Deaton (1997) studies demand for food in developing countries, and
Seale et al (2003) provide a descriptive analysis of di¤erences in food consumption patterns across countries.


                                                      3
hedonic price model (inter alia Court, 1939, Griliches, 1961, Rosen, 1974, Epple, 1987). Our
model also generalizes classical demand models in product space, such as Cobb Douglas,
Translog or the Almost Ideal Model, which typically rely on weak separability of prefer-
ences in order to make the analysis tractable. We relax the weak separability assumption by
creating an interaction between products through the characteristics they supply.
   Key to our analysis is the rich micro data we use. In each country we have a sample of
several thousand households for whom we observe all purchases of food for consumption at
home; that is we know the households’entire food basket. We know precisely what product
was bought, the quantity that was purchased, how much was paid and crucially its nutritional
content. We use data for 2005-2006. To facilitate cross-country comparison, and to make
the estimation of demand tractable, we need to aggregate the data to similar categories of
food items across countries. We specify a model of demand that explicitly aggregates from
the individual product level and comes from a direct speci…cation of the utility model. Our
model yields a simple linear estimating equation, which relates expenditure on products to
their nutritional content, and it allows us to control for rich patterns of heterogeneity using
household level …xed e¤ects. This tractability comes at a cost: for a given individual with
a given draw of random parameters, the functional form of how income and prices a¤ect
quantity demands is very limited.
   The variation over time and across households in the underlying available products (and
their nutritional components) is key for our estimation. An endogeneity problem arises from
the fact that quantities appear both in the dependent variable and as an explanatory variable
in the quantity of nutrients purchased. To account for this endogeneity we use variation in
the nutritional content of products available, which we assume is exogenous conditional on
our controls. This idea is similar to using variation in product attributes to identify demand,
which is popular in the IO literature (Bresnahan, 1981, Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes, 1995).
To generate this variation we rely on the detailed nutrition information available in our data.
   Our paper is related to a literature that tries to attribute the di¤erences in obesity over
time and across markets to di¤erences in prices. For example, Cutler et al. (2003) suggest
that the decrease in the price of calories has increased caloric intake and contributed to the
increase in obesity. Philipson and Posner (2003) also suggest that a change in price is a key
driver of the increase in obesity, but focus on the price of burning calories, which has gone



                                              4
up over time.5 Neither of these papers provides direct evidence on the importance of the
economic environment relative to other factors, such as the change in the nutritional content
of food or di¤erence in preferences. We are able to add to this literature by providing direct
evidence on the economic determinants of the nutritional balance of households’food basket.
      Another closely related paper is Atkin (2012), who documents regional consumption dif-
ferences in India, and explores the origins of these di¤erences, as well as their implications
for nutrition. He introduces habit formation into a overlapping-generations general equilib-
rium model in order to study the causes and consequences of the regional taste di¤erences.
In his model, households develop tastes for locally-abundant foods that they were fed as
children. Over generations regional di¤erences in preference and consumption arise endoge-
nously through habit formation. He tests the predictions of the model using cross-regional
migration data. He concludes, as we do for our setting, that an interaction between prefer-
ences and the environment is needed to explain observed regional di¤erences. The context
and identi…cation strategies in the two papers are di¤erent, yet we reach similar conclu-
sions. We believe that the fact that we reach similar conclusions to Atkin, studying di¤erent
settings and using di¤erent methodologies, adds to the credibility of the …ndings.
      In the nutrition literature, Drewnowski (2004) and Drewnowski and Specter (2004) show
that energy dense foods – foods with more calories per unit of weight – are negatively
correlated with price per calorie. Similarly, Drewnowski et al (2007), and Maillot et al
(2007), use French data to show that households who buy energy dense food baskets also
tend to spend less on food. Based on these associations they conclude that relative price
di¤erences are a key cause to a poor diet. Our analysis di¤ers in several signi…cant ways.
First, we have more detailed price and purchase data, along with nutritional information at
a very disaggregated level (see Gri¢ th and O’Connell, 2009, for the importance of detailed
data). Second, we can account for several macro nutrients, not just calories or calories per
unit weight. Third, we estimate the causal e¤ect of prices and characteristics on consumer
choice. Finally, we are able to go further than simply considering the direction of change,
we can simulate and quantify the e¤ect of a change in prices and nutrients.
      The structure of the rest of the paper is as follows. The next section describes the data
and provides an initial description of di¤erences in the nutritional characteristics of shopping
baskets and behavior across countries. In section 3 we develop a model of demand over
  5
      In addition to the above papers, see also Goldman et al (2009) and Lu and Goldman (2010).


                                                    5
products and characteristics. In section 4 we estimate the model and discuss the implications
of our estimates and simulations. A …nal section summarizes and concludes.



2     Comparison of Food Purchases

2.1     Data
We use detailed data collected by market research …rms using similar methodology in the
US, UK and France. In France and the UK the data come from the Kantar (formerly known
as TNS) WorldPanel, while in the US the data were collected by Nielsen as part of the
Homescan panel. These data include information on all food purchased and brought into
the home by a large number of households over a two year period (2005-2006); the data
are recorded by households using handheld scanners in the home. We have information on
quantities, prices and characteristics of the products purchased at the level of the individual
food product, as de…ned by the barcode or what is called the Universal Product Code (UPC)
in the US. The characteristics include nutritional characteristics such as calories, proteins,
fats and carbohydrates, as shown on nutritional labels.6
    Table 1 provides some descriptive statistics on the demographics of the sample of house-
holds we use in each of the three countries. These are a sub-set of all households in the data.
We drop households that are outliers (as described in the Appendix). In the US, Nielsen
asks a sub sample to report purchases of random-weight products, which are products that
are not pre-packaged and typically do not have a UPC. Random-weight items are common
in fruit, vegetables, meat and deli items. Since collecting information on random-weight
products is time consuming, Nielsen only asks a fraction of its panelists to collect these data.
The US sample we use are those households that reported random-weight purchases and
therefore the number of households in the US is smaller than in the UK and France, despite
having a larger overall sample.
    Family structure, as measured by household size, number of kids and age, is similar across
the samples from the three countries. In what follows we use the household as the unit of
   6
     The nutritional information is of the same form across the countries but it was collected somewhat
di¤erently in the three countries. In the UK the nutritional information was collected by Kantar from
manufacturers, food labels and by direct measurement. In the US the data on purchases from Nielsen was
matched with nutritional information from Gladson, and in France the nutritional information was collected
directly from labels and public sources. The Data Appendix provides details on the construction of the data.


                                                     6
analysis. To control for di¤erence in size and composition across households we use an adult
equivalence scale based on caloric needs.7 We sum the daily caloric needs of each member
of the household (based on age and gender) and divide by 2500, which is the caloric needs
of an adult male (19-59). We provide details in Section A.4 in the Appendix. The sample
average of this measure is also similar across the countries.

                                     Table 1 : Demographics
                                               France  UK   US
                            # of households 11,677 12,698 8,484
                            Household size       2.7   2.6  2.4
                            # of kids            0.7   0.6  0.5
                            Adult equivalent     2.2   2.1  2.0
Notes: numbers are averages across households in the sample used in subsequent analysis. Adult equivalent
   is a caloric needs scale: we sum the daily caloric needs of each household member (based on age and
                                        gender) and divide by 2500.


       A key advantage of the detailed data is that they allow direct measurement of prices and
characteristics of a substantial part of households’food purchases. Precise information on
prices and detailed attributes of the products allows us to estimate preferences. Estimates
using more aggregated purchase data and coarse data on expenditures and prices provides
much less accurate estimates of preference parameters. Panel data on households’purchases
also allows us to control for individual heterogeneity in a rich way. Many standard sources
of information on food purchases are cross-sectional, and therefore rely on cross household
di¤erences for identi…cation of preference parameters. Instead we rely mainly on within
household variation. Nonetheless, before proceeding with our analysis we should be up-front
about several potential concerns with the data.
       The data in all countries are collected by households themselves within the home, and
as such might su¤er from recording error. To document the extent of this problem Einav,
Leibtag and Nevo (2010) compare Nielsen Homescan data to information from cash registers
of a retailer and …nd that in some dimensions the US data are indeed prone to error, but
the amount of noise seems equivalent to that found in many data sets commonly used. For
example, Bound and Krueger (1991) …nd that the variance of the log of the ratio of earnings
reported in the CPS with Social Security administrative is 0.114, while Einav, Leibtag and
Nevo (2010) …nd the variance of the log of the ratio of Homescan and retailer price is 0.139.
   7
   An alternative to the equivalence scale is the more general approach of Lewbel (1985) and Lewbel and
Pendakur (2011), which takes into account observed and unobserved heterogeneity in equivalence scales.


                                                   7
In both studies the correlation between the reported and true variables is 0.88. Leicester
and Old…eld (2009) compare the UK data to data from the Family Expenditure Survey and
“suggest that problems of fatigue and attrition may not be so severe as may be expected.”
We note that even if recording errors exist, as long as there is no systematic di¤erences in
reporting errors across the countries our …ndings should not be signi…cantly impacted. In
addition, the rich controls for heterogeneity we introduce in the econometric analysis will
help to control for di¤erences across households in recording.
      Collecting the data is quite time consuming and therefore likely to generate a selection in
who agrees to participate in the sample. Indeed, the demographics in Table 1 suggest that
the households in the sample are from smaller households, have fewer children and are older
than the respective national averages. However, the numbers in the table also suggest that
the demographics of the sample participants are similar across the three countries.
      The data we have does not include food purchases for consumption outside the home, for
example in restaurants. It is also purchase data, not consumption data, so does not re‡ect
food that is wasted. These considerations could matter for some of the descriptive analysis,
but largely they make the di¤erences larger - the best estimates that we can …nd suggest
that US households eat out more and waste more food than either French or UK households.
In the simulations our main assumption is that behavior along these two dimensions remains
unchanged, however, we consider what implications these considerations might have for our
analysis in Section 4.4.


2.2      Purchasing Patterns
We start by considering total food purchased.8 Table 2 describes total calories, nutrients and
expenditure, with all …gures reported per day per adult equivalent. The …rst row reports
the average across households of total calories purchased per person per day. The second,
third and fourth rows show the average amount of calories in terms of each of the three
macronutrients (carbohydrates, proteins and fats), the …fth, sixth and seventh row show the
average amount of each macronutrient in terms of grams, and the …nal row shows average
household expenditure on food per person per day in US$.
  8
    We will use the terms "purchases" and "consumption" interchangeably. Our data records purchases,
which we will assume equals consumption. In reality, some food might be thrown away without being
consumed, or it might be consumed by someone who is not a member of the household.



                                                 8
      There are some striking di¤erences. US households purchase more calories per person.
This is even more striking given the higher propensity to eat food out in the US. In terms
of the balance of macronutrients the US and UK households are similar on aggregate, but
comparing the US to the French the extra calories are in the form of carbohydrates. French
households purchase both a larger amount and higher share of their calories in the form of
proteins and fat. Average spending on food is higher in France than in the US or UK.
      These broad patterns hold not just at the mean, but at other parts of the distribution as
well. For example, in the counterfactual analysis we compare low income households, and
also households that are at the top of the calorie consumption distribution.

                         Table 2 : Mean Consumption Across Countries
                                          FR          UK             US
                calories                   1776.6      1928.9         2102.7
                  from carbohydrates 667.4 (38%) 890.5 (47%) 1019.3 (49%)
                  from protein        287.9 (16%) 293.3 (16%) 264.9 (13%)
                  from fats           821.0 (46%) 694.5 (37%) 781.6 (37%)
                carbohydrates (g)            178.0       237.5         271.8
                proteins (g)                  72.0        73.3          66.2
                fats (g)                      91.2        77.2          86.8
                expenditure ($)               5.03        4.71          4.59
Notes: Figures reported are the average per person per day using an adult equivalent scale over 2005-2006.
              Expenditure is in US$ using an exchange rate of £ 1 = $1.80 and e1 = $1.25.


      The recommended percentage of energy consumed in the form of each macronutrient that
is consistent with good health are roughly similar across the three countries.9 The …gures in
Table 2 suggest that the French are the most out of line with the guidelines. However, we
should be careful in making this inference since these …gures do not include food consumed
at restaurants.
      To further study the cross-country di¤erences we look at how these purchases are divided
between nine broad food categories. The categories are commonly used by the USDA for
descriptive analysis, and were chosen for their nutritional characteristics; foods within each
category share a similar nutrient composition. The Appendix (Section A.4) details what
products are included in each category.
  9
    The French government agency coordinating nutrition information and policy, Programme National
Nutrition Santé- Afssa (2002) recommends 50-55% carbohydrates, 11-15% protein and 30-35% fats. The
UK Department of Health (1991) recommends 50%, 15% and 35%, while the US Guidelines, available
at http://www.health.gov/dietaryguidelines/dga2010/DietaryGuidelines2010.pdf, recommend 45-65% car-
bohydrates, 10-30 % protein and 25-35% fat.


                                                    9
       Table 3 reports average household expenditure, expenditure shares and quantities across
the nine food categories. There are considerable di¤erences in expenditure by food category
across the countries. The UK and US expenditure patterns are more similar, while the
French numbers are di¤erent. The average French household spends less on processed food,
such as drinks and prepared foods, and more on basic ingredients such as meats, dairy, fruits
and vegetables, both in dollar terms and as a fraction of overall expenditure. The average
UK and US household spends less than French households on meats and the UK spend more
on grains, while the average US household spends less on dairy and more on drinks and
prepared foods.


                            Table 3: Expenditure and Quantity by Category
                        Expenditure            Exp Shares (%)            Quantity         Calorie Share (%)
                         ($ per qtr)                                  (kilo per qtr)
  Category         FR        UK      US       FR     UK     US      FR UK US              FR     UK      US
 Fruits           29.65     42.34 34.54        6.6    9.3   8.1     14.6 14.0 17.2         4.5    4.5     5.3
 Vegetables       44.22     46.13 34.43        9.7   10.4    7.9    18.2 20.2 14.0         5.3    6.0     3.0
 Grains           25.33     34.31 30.97        6.0    8.4   7.8      6.7 13.4 8.8         14.3   19.8    14.3
 Dairy            74.90     53.55 38.85       16.7   12.7    9.5    25.7 27.9 20.7        17.2   12.8     9.3
 Meats           147.53     80.00 80.78       31.0   18.3   19.0    14.2 11.1 14.7        16.6   13.2    16.1
 Oils             15.14      8.81    7.96      3.3    2.0   1.9      3.1    2.1   2.2     13.1    6.8     6.6
 Sweeteners       5.85       4.30    5.54      1.4    1.1   1.4      2.4    2.4   2.6      5.1    4.9     4.4
 Drinks           26.81     24.38 41.44        5.9    5.8   10.1    43.4 17.4 50.0         3.5    2.0     5.9
 Prepared         96.35 138.98 151.48         21.2   32.7   36.1    16.4 26.2 30.0        22.8   31.2    38.0
  Notes: Figures are the mean of the distribution across households and quarters, and are per person per
quarter using an adult equivalent scale, conditional on strictly positive expenditure in that category in that
          quarter. Expenditure is in US$ using an exchange rate of £ 1 = $1.80 and e1 = $1.25.


       The next three columns present quantities, measured in kilograms.10 The numbers in
these columns present a slightly di¤erent picture than the expenditure numbers. The US
and UK consumption patterns are now quite di¤erent. For example, price di¤erences across
countries (discussed in the next section) explain why the French spend much more on meat
but purchase a similar quantity to US households. Generally, the French tend to purchase
less processed food, such as drinks and prepared foods, and more basic ingredients such as
meats, dairy and vegetables. This is especially true compared to the US purchasing patterns.
The UK and US purchasing patterns are more similar, but even here there are di¤erences,
  10
    Here, and elsewhere, we measure quantities in kilos, which should be innocuous when comparing similar
products, but can lead to di¢ culties when aggregating across diverse products. Ideally, we could measure
quantities in "servings" but our data does not allow us to do this.

                                                     10
with the average UK household consuming more vegetables, grains and dairy and the average
US household consuming more meat and drinks.
   In the …nal three columns we look at the share of calories from each food category. We see
some of the same broad patterns as before. The French continue to be somewhat di¤erent,
purchasing a larger fraction of their calories from vegetables, dairy and meat and less from
prepared foods. This will serve as a key motivation for our analysis below: di¤erences in the
prices might explain the di¤erences in the quantity of prepared food purchased, but to fully
understand the health implications we need to account for the di¤erences in the nutrient
content of prepared food between the UK and US.
   The numbers in Table 3 give us a …rst indication of the importance of di¤erences across
countries in both prices and the nutrient content of food. Consider the expenditure shares.
They tell us something about di¤erences in preferences across countries. Indeed, if we consid-
ered a simple Cobb-Douglas utility function these shares would be the preference parameters.
However, by looking at the di¤erences between quantities and expenditures, for example
between the US and UK, we get a …rst indication of the importance of prices - similar ex-
penditure shares can translate into quite di¤erent quantities purchased, and thus into quite
di¤erent nutritional outcomes. Similarly, the di¤erences in calorie shares suggest that it is
important to control for di¤erences in nutrient content across countries.


2.3    Prices and Product Attributes
In this section we document some of the di¤erences in prices and nutrition attributes across
countries that we saw indirectly in Table 3. Table 4 describes the average price per kilo in
each product category. With a few exceptions the US prices are the lowest and the prices in
France the highest. If we hold the quantities …xed at the levels of Table 3 the US expenditure
would increase by 14.4% and 13.9% if paying the UK and French prices. On the other hand,
French expenditure would decrease by 13.3% and 2.2% if the French paid US or UK prices.
The UK expenditure would decrease by 4.3% if paying US prices but would increase by 12.7%
if paying French prices. However, note that relative prices do not all go the same way, the
relative prices di¤er across categories (for example, fruit is cheapest in France, while meat
is cheapest in the US) and this will lead to important di¤erences in our simulations.




                                             11
   The di¤erences in relative prices are consistent with some of the di¤erences we saw in
Table 3, but it is clear that prices do not tell the whole story. For example, US households
purchase more fruit and fewer vegetables than the UK, consistent with the lower relative price
of fruit in the US and lower price of vegetables in the UK. On the other hand, the relative
price of drinks in the US is somewhat higher than in France, even though the US households
purchase slightly more (50 versus 43).We have to be a little careful in this comparison, since
it could be driven by composition e¤ects.

                              Table 4: Mean Prices by Category
                                           FR     UK     US
                              Fruits       2.09 3.21     2.12
                              Vegetables 2.53 2.32       2.64
                              Grain       3.89 2.63      3.73
                              Dairy        3.26 2.22     2.48
                              Meats       10.33 7.29     5.88
                              Oils         5.19 3.97     4.47
                              Sweeteners 2.79 2.38       4.61
                              Drinks       0.89 2.50     1.56
                              Prepared    6.04 5.43      5.13
      Notes: units are US$ per 1 kilogram using an exchange rate of £ 1 = $1.80 and e1 = $1.25.


   The nutrient characteristics of foods on o¤er and purchased also vary. In Table 5 we
show the mean nutrient content of the food products by category in each country. As before,
the di¤erences across countries could at least in part be driven by composition e¤ects. For
example, the lower carbohydrate content in French drinks is due to the fact that French
households buy more water. One way around this is to zoom in on more disaggregated
products. An alternative, which we think might be more meaningful here, is to focus on the
di¤erence in o¤erings. We do that by presenting in Table 5 an unweighted average of all the
products we ever see purchased by households in our sample. In other words, we take the
universe of all products ever purchased by any of the households in our sample, and keep one
observation for each. This does not totally eliminate the impact of choice, since the product
needs to be bought at least once, but it signi…cantly reduces it.
   We see large di¤erences across countries. For example, the meat products that US house-
holds buy have on average much more fat and carbohydrate than the meat products that
French households purchase, which are more protein intensive. Another example, we saw
above that the higher fraction of calories from prepared foods in the US is consistent with


                                                 12
prepared foods in the US being more calorie dense relative to UK prepared foods. The dif-
ference in calories from prepared foods seems to come from the di¤erences in carbohydrates
and fats. Drinks are also much more carbohydrate intense in the US than in the UK, and
even more than in France. The di¤erences across countries remain even if we focus on more
narrowly de…ned products.
                        Table 5: Calories from     each Nutrient by     Category
                               carbohydrates            protein              fat
                               FR UK US             FR UK US            FR UK        US
                 Fruits         57 68 70             3     5    2         8   7       1
                 Vegetables 39 38 49                 20 22 13            76 85        7
                 Grain         211 129 227           34 22 38            96 20        36
                 Dairy          18 22 29             71 57 48           188 166      130
                 Meats          5    21 30           76 72 66           120 129      206
                 Oils            2   7      6        11    3    2       678 602      671
                 Sweeteners 305 307 345              3     4    0         0   1       0
                 Drinks         27 34 69             1     4    2        1    4       5
                 Prepared      126 95 194            24 23 22           127 88       117
 Notes: Figures are means across all products purchased in our sample, with an equal weight to each food
product (UPC). Units are calories from each nutrient (carbohydrates, proteins, fats) per 100 grams of food.



3     A Model of Demand
As we saw in the previous section there are cross-country di¤erences in the choices households
make and in the prices and product o¤erings they face. Our aim is to investigate the extent
to which cross-country di¤erences in purchases are attributable to di¤erences in prices and
the attributes of products (the economic environment). One could address this question
by estimating disaggregate product level demand, say by using methods that are standard
in the Industrial Organization literature (see, inter alia, Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes, 1995,
and Nevo, 2000), and simulating the purchases if a household faced di¤erent prices and
characteristics. This approach does not let us address questions of choice among product
groups, does not take advantage of the coverage of our data and is problematic since narrowly
de…ned products (i.e., brands) are very di¤erent across countries and therefore hard to match.
    Instead, we model demand for food at home more generally at an aggregated level, for ex-
ample at the level of the nine categories we used in the previous section. We allow preferences
to depend on characteristics, nutrients in our case, in order to account for the di¤erences
across countries in the attributes of each food category. The model we use builds on Gorman

                                                    13
(1956) and Lancaster (1966), where utility depends on the characteristics of the product.
Special cases of the characteristics model are the discrete choice model (McFadden, 1974,
Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes, 1995), and the hedonic price model (Court, 1939, Griliches,
1961, Rosen, 1974, Epple, 1987, as well as many others).
       As noted by Gorman (1956), one constraint of the pure characteristics model is that it
predicts that the number of goods purchased will not exceed the number of characteristics.
In a discrete choice setting this is not a constraint, since the consumer chooses a single option.
The same is true for the hedonic setting, where the consumer chooses a single option from a
continuum of choices (or from a discrete choice set as in Bajari and Benkard, 2005). However,
in many settings, of which the one we examine below is an example, consumers choose from a
discrete menu of products but choose many products. The key is that the number of products
chosen exceeds the number of observed characteristics. In the characteristics approach this
can be explained by introducing product speci…c attributes. As we will see this essentially
amounts to going back to a “standard” demand model where utility is de…ned in product
space. The model we propose can nest standard models in characteristics space as well as
demand models in product space.


3.1       Theory
A household11 chooses from N products, where product n is characterized by C characteris-
tics fan1 ; ::; anC g. We primarily have in mind cases where C is smaller than N , in some cases
much smaller. The utility of household i with demographics                    i   is given by U (xi ; zi ; yi ; i )
where xi is the numeraire, zi is a C            1 vector of characteristics of food and yi is a vector
of the quantities purchased of all food products by household i. De…ne the N                           C matrix
A        fanc gn=1;::;N;c=1;::;C . The household will maximize utility by choosing the quantity of
the numeraire, xi , and of food items, yi , subject to a budget constraint:


                                           max U (xi ; zi ; yi ; i )
                                           xi ;yi


                         XN
                  s:t:             yin pn + p0 xi   Ii ;       zi = A0 yi ;       xi ; yin   0;
                             n=1
  11
   As we saw in the previous section the data is at the household level. To match this we formulate the
model as a choice by a household with a well de…ned utility function. We abstract from issues of intra
household interactions.


                                                      14
where pn is the price of one unit of yin , Ii is the household’s income, and p0 is the price of
the outside good xi .
   Following standard arguments (and dropping the i subscripts) this can be written as

                                                     I    p0 y
                                    max U                        ; A0 y; y
                                         y               p0
                                              s:t:       yn      0:


Assuming that quantities fyn gN
                              n=1 are continuous, the …rst order conditions are

                        XC              @U    @U pn   @U
                                  anc               +    = 0 if yn > 0:
                            c=1         @zc   @x p0 @yn

   The model we propose nests various models considered in the literature: discrete choice
and hedonics on one hand and demand models in product space on the other. First, suppose
the utility function is U (x; z), which is the case in discrete choice models or in hedonic
models. Because the transformation from products to characteristics is linear and in this
case @U=@yn = 0, at most C of the N products would be purchased. If we restrict yn 2 f0; 1g
     P
and N  n=1 yn  1, the model collapses to the standard discrete choice model. In general,
the prediction that at most C products are purchased is a problem since we would like to
consider cases where the number of products chosen is (much) greater than the number of
observed characteristics.
   Alternatively, if the utility function is U (x; y) then we can generate standard demand
systems in product space, such as Cobb-Douglas, CES, Translog and the Almost Ideal De-
mand System. Once we allow for a characteristic that is product speci…c then a model in
characteristics space is equivalent to a model in product space, as long as the characteristics
do not vary over time or markets. Note, that we need more than just di¤erent values on
a small number of unobserved characteristics, but a totally di¤erent characteristic that can
only be obtained from each product. A model with such a large number of characteristics
would be intractable in many applications, where the number of products considered is large
thus generating a serious dimensionality problem. In addition, for our purpose, a model in
only product space would not allow us to incorporate di¤erences in the characteristics and
availability of products across countries.



                                                         15
   To better understand the role of the characteristics in our model we can rewrite the …rst
order conditions for n such that yn > 0 as

                                   @U=@yn   pn                    XC                @U=@zc
                                          =                                  anc           :
                                   @U=@x    p0                         c=1          @U=@x

Consider the case where characteristics do not enter the utility, i.e., @U=@zc = 0. The …rst
                                      @U=@yn               pn
order conditions, in this case        @U=@x
                                                     =     p0
                                                              ,   implicitly de…ne the demand correspondence.
Indeed, under invertibility conditions, we can write the (Marshallian) demand function as
Q(p; i ). A similar idea applies in our model. Demand depends on the hedonic prices of each
                                                   PC        @U=@zc
good instead of prices. The hedonic prices, ppn0     c=1 anc @U=@x , depend on the marginal
                                                                                       @U=@zc
utility of the consumer from the characteristics. Indeed if                            @U=@x
                                                                                                 are constants then one can
simply plug the hedonic prices in the demand function in lieu of prices. If the marginal
utility from a characteristic is positive then a consumer will adjust the price downward. In
other words, if two products have the same price but one has more of a characteristic, with
a positive marginal utility, then the e¤ective price to the consumer will be lower for the
product with the higher value of the characteristic.
   We focus on a particular functional form for utility. We divide the large number of
products into J food groups each with Kj products for each group j 2 f1; ::; Jg. Each
product n is now labelled kj if it is the k th food item of food group j (where k 2 f1; ::; Kj g).
We do this in order to keep the model tractable, and to work at a level of products that
are readily comparable across countries, but we base the food group on conceptually sound
aggregation from the individual items. The aggregation assumptions are thus transparent
and we can assess which parameters can (and cannot) be identi…ed. There is conceptually
no problem with working at a lower level of aggregation, it is an economic question of what
level is most meaningful for the particular application.
   We assume that utility is given by:
                                                 0                       1     ij
                                                     Kj
                                           Y
                                           J         X                              Y
                                                                                    C
                 U (xi ; zi ; yi ; i ) =         @         fikj (yikj )A                  hic (zic ) exp ( i xi )               (1)
                                           j=1       k=1                            c=1


                                                                       PJ          PKj
where   i   is the marginal utility of income, zic =                         j=1      k=1   akj;c yikj , fikj (yikj ) and hic (zic )
are individual speci…c utility functions that give the utility from products within a food
group and the utility from nutrients respectively. If we assume that hic (zic ) = zicc then the

                                                                  16
utility from food groups and nutrients is Cobb-Douglas. The utility from products within a
group can take di¤erent forms. One particular function that is easy to work with is the CES
                                  ij
function fikj (yikj ) =    ikj yikj .

    This speci…cation of utility allows for a great deal of heterogeneity across goods and
individuals. However, a serious limitation of the speci…c functional forms, relative to more
‡exible continuous demand system models, is that the way that income and prices a¤ect
quantity is limited. Expenditures on each food group will depend on individual parameters,
but will not vary with an individual’s income. In the estimation we can control for het-
erogeneity across consumers in income, but the functional form imposes restrictive income
e¤ects within a consumer as income changes. Similarly, the model limits the nonlinearities
in price e¤ects. As we will see below, while restrictive in limiting nonlinearities and inter-
action terms in prices and income, this functional form facilitates both aggregation across
goods, and a tractable linear estimation equation that allows for the inclusion of substantial
unobserved heterogeneity using a large number of …xed e¤ects.
    The way we de…ne utility from products follows a long tradition in demand analysis
of assuming weak separability across product groups when de…ning consumer preferences
(Gorman, 1959, and follow up work). Denoting the vector of products yi = yi1 ; ::; yiJ
                           j;Kj
where yij = (yij;1 ; :::; yi      ), we assume that the utility function satis…es U (xi ; zi ; yi ; i ) =
U (xi ; zi ; W1 (yi1 ) ; ::; WJ yiJ ; i ), where Wj (:) are subutilities that are a function of the
subvector yij . Without taste for overall nutrition characteristic zi , the utility function would
be weakly separable across groups. However, entering characteristics into the utility function
directly breaks this weak separability and generates more general preferences over products.
We have a functional form which is weakly separable across groups conditional on indices A0 y.
We impose a sort of “characteristic contingent weak separability” across groups, because
demand is weakly separable across bundles of goods yj for vectors y1 ; ::; yJ in the sets
Y (z0 ) = yjA0 y = z0 for any vector of values of characteristic z0 . Products from di¤erent
food groups that have a non-zero amount of a characteristic will interact with each other
through the utility from the characteristic, and not just through the group subutilities. This
allows for a tractable way to relax the weak separability assumption.
    The e¤ect of relaxing weak separability is related to the concept of latent separability
in Blundell and Robin (2000). However, our model is not nested within, nor does it nest,
                                                                                              ej
latent separability. In latent separability the subutilities, Wj (:), are de…ned over vectors y

                                                      17
                           PJ
of size N , where            j=1   ej = yj . The subutilities can be thought of as utilities from various
                                   y
(latent) activities, each of which require a (non exclusive) subset of the products make. The
total amount of each product consumed is a summation over the amount required for each
activity. Weak separability is broken because products from di¤erent groups can interact
through di¤erent subutilities. Like here, weak separability is generalized. However, the way
weak separability is generalized in Blundell and Robin (2000) is di¤erent from our model.
    Maximizing utility subject to budget constraint yields the following …rst order conditions:

                                    0
                                   fikj  (yikj ) yikj X              h0ic (zic )                          pkj
                                ij  P                 +   a     y
                                                            kj;c ikj             =                    i       yikj :
                                       l fijl (yilj )                hic (zic )                           p0
                                                        c


Summing the …rst order conditions over k for a given j :
                        P 0
                         k fikj (yikj ) yikj
                                               X h0 (zic ) X                                                 X pkj
                                                   ic
                     ij  P                   +                 akj;c yikj =                                i       yikj :
                             f
                           k ikj  (y ikj )      c hic (zic ) k                                                k p0


                                 ij
Using fikj (yikj )=        ikj yikj   and hic (zic )=exp( c zic ), this expression can be simpli…ed to:


                                X                         ij ij
                                                                           X                X
                                                                                        c
                                          pkj yikj = p0               +            p0               akjc yikj :             (2)
                                      k                     i                  c        i       k


    Moving to the empirical speci…cation we introduce a time subscript t as we are using
panel data. Quantities and prices vary over time, and as prices for a unique good may vary
across markets we also introduce an individual subscript to price.


3.2          Estimation
Our estimating equation comes directly from equation (2). This allows us to de…ne the error
term from the theory and directly introduce unobserved heterogeneity of preferences. Fol-
lowing the recent literature in Industrial Organization, we assume one of the characteristics,
                                                                                P
indexed c = 1, is unobserved. Introducing a time subscript t, let p0 ij ij +p0 1 k akj;1 yikjt
                                                                                                               i       i

=   ij   +   jt + "ijt .   We normalize p0 = 1 and                i   = 1. The normalization of the price of the out-
side good p0 will have to be taken into account when we consider counterfactual experiments
that change real versus nominal prices. We return to this point below.




                                                                      18
   Our estimating equation is

                                            X
                                 wijt =                 c zijct   +   ij   +   jt   + "ijt                     (3)
                                                    c

             P
where wijt = k pikjt yikjt , is the expenditure on food group j by household i at period t,
           P
and zijct = k akj;ct yikjt is the amount of nutrient c household i gets from group j at t.
   The combined error term,        ij   +      jt   + "ijt , captures elements of preferences and the envi-
ronment. One could imagine that preferences for food groups vary across households. For
example, some households might derive more utility from vegetables than other households.
The household-category e¤ects,          ij ,   are meant to capture this. In addition, the products
could have an unobserved attribute that varies over time. For example, fruit might be of
higher quality during the summer months. The category-quarter e¤ects,                          jt ,   will capture
this. Finally, the term "ijt will capture interactions between these e¤ects and could include
preference shocks (if preferences are not …xed over time, or if these shocks are, for example,
due to changes in unobserved physical activity) and variation over time in the unobserved
characteristic.
   If "ijt includes either (changes in the) unobserved characteristics of the goods or preference
shocks it will likely impact the choice of quantities of products chosen. This raises a potential
concern about endogeneity of the nutrient, zijct . Even if we allow for household-category,                    ij ,

and category-time,   jt ,   …xed e¤ects, there remain shocks "ijt at the household-category-time
level that might be correlated with quantity choice and hence with zijct .
   To see the problem, assume that Kj = 1, i.e., there is a single product within each
category, and for simplicity assume that there is a single nutrient, say carbohydrates. The
estimating equation becomes


                                pijt yijt = aj;ct yijt +              ij   +   jt   + "ijt :


In words, we regress the expenditure of product j on the carbohydrates from product j.
Consider the variation in the quantity of carbohydrates. This will in part be due to changes
in yijt and in part due to changes in aj;ct . As we discussed above, the error term "ijt consists
of random preference shocks and of variation in the utility from unobserved attributes, which




                                                            19
will likely be correlated with yijt . Therefore, it is quite likely the quantity of carbohydrates
from product j, zijct , will be endogenous.
   To account for endogeneity of the z’s we exploit the variation of available products, and
their prices and attributes, due to exogenous reasons. The variation in products and their
attributes can be due to entry or exit of products or to changes in the market structure, say
due to entry and exit of stores. We have a very rich set of controls in the model that account
for heterogeneity in preferences, so when we say that available products are exogenous, we
mean that they are exogenous conditional on the controls. For example, whether a particular
product is o¤ered, is likely correlated with the preferences of households in the market.
However, we are able to control for these preferences and look at the e¤ect of changes in
product attributes.
   The linearity of the estimating equation implies that we can use standard linear panel
and instrumental variable (IV) methods. A key challenge for us is how to generate individual
variation in the instruments. Ideally we would observe the actual availability of products
in the stores where the household shops, and use this availability as an IV. Unfortunately,
we only observe products that are actually purchased by some households in our data and
not the complete set of available products. We therefore approximate the nutrients of prod-
ucts available to each household by computing the (unweighted) average nutrient content of
products purchased, in that category and quarter, by households in a “reference”group.
   In order to de…ne the reference group we compute for each household the retailer where
they shop for each category most frequently. We then de…ne the reference group as other
households in the local area who do their shopping in the same retail chain. Note that the
reference group for each household will vary by category. We then compute an (unweighted)
average nutrient content of products bought by members of the reference group. We think
of this as the average nutritional content of the products in the household’s choice set.
This variable will vary by household, category and time, and as we will see below is highly
(conditionally) correlated with the endogenous variable. Our identifying assumption is that
the variation in this average, conditional of the household-category and category-time …xed
e¤ects, is uncorrelated with the error term.
   Formally, denote by Ah(i)jt the choice set of products in category j for household type
(the “reference”group) h(i) in period t. We use the average nutritional content of the choice
                   1
                          P
set, ! h(i)jct = #Ah(i)jt  k2Ah(i)jt akj;c , as instrumental variables. Note, that these variables,



                                                20
one for each nutrient, will depend on the de…nition of i’s reference group h(i) and vary across
periods, household type h(i) and category because of the variations in the choice set Ah(i)jt .
Our identifying assumption is that for c = 1; ::; C


                                     E "ijt j! h(i)jct ;   ij ; jt   = 0:


It requires that, conditional on household-category and category-period …xed e¤ects, (i) "ijt
is not correlated with which products (UPCs) are bought by same type of households, and
(ii) that the (changes) in the unobserved characteristic of category j, akj;1 , is uncorrelated
with other characteristics akj;c . As we will see below, these instrumental variables ! h(i)jct are
                                P
highly correlated with zijct = k2Ah(i)jt akj;c yikjt , and thus are quite powerful instruments.



4        Empirical Results

4.1       Demand Estimates
In Table 6 we report the estimated coe¢ cients for the demand equation described by equation
(3), estimated separately for each country. An observation in the estimation is a household-
category-quarter, where we de…ne the nine categories as in Section 2 and describe them in
the Appendix. The dependent variable in all the regressions is the expenditure in dollars
per adult equivalent for a household in a quarter and category. We include the three macro-
nutrients - carbohydrates, proteins and fats - all measured in kilograms. Data limitations do
not allow us to introduce more detailed nutrients, such as di¤erent types of fats or proteins
from di¤erent sources. To capture this heterogeneity in the nutrients we allow the e¤ect of
the protein and fat characteristics to vary with the food category. Proteins and fats in the
dairy and meat category are largely from animal sources, prepared foods are a mix of animal
and vegetal food products, and other categories, such as fruit, vegetables and grains, are
primarily vegetal sources.
       One might think that preferences are also over total calories, and not just macro nutrients.
The caloric content of food is comprised of energy in the form of these three macro-nutrients;
total calories is a weighted sum of grams of these macronutrients.12 The estimates in Table
  12
    Approximate weights are 4 calories for each gram of carbohydrates, 4 calories for each gram of proteins
and 9 calories for each gram of fats.


                                                     21
6 allow us to check if households only care about calories. The coe¢ cients on the nutrients
are (mostly) statistically signi…cant and di¤erent from these weights, they di¤er across coun-
tries, and we will see in the counterfactual analysis that varying them has an economically
signi…cant impact.
                   Table 6: Demand Estimates: preferences for nutrients
                            OLS - Fixed E¤ects               IV - Fixed E¤ects
                         FR        UK         US        FR          UK         US
    Carbohydrates     3.484*** 2.913*** 1.311*** 1.483*** 1.751*** 1.459***
                      (0.0240) (0.0236) (0.0145)      (0.554)     (0.219)   (0.356)
    Proteins
    Dairy and Meat 37.01*** 27.17*** 26.70*** 23.62*** 18.09*** 19.79***
                      (0.0972) (0.0856)     (0.114)   (1.660)     (0.958)   (2.327)
           Prepared 46.93*** 46.07*** 59.11*** 16.21*** 18.36*** 51.84***
                       (0.358)   (0.182)    (0.230)   (4.979)     (3.015)   (1.502)
              Other 19.83*** 18.10*** 19.39***         2.948       2.660     -1.058
                       (0.205)   (0.189)    (0.213)   (4.808)     (1.729)   (2.306)
    Fats
    Dairy and Meat 8.497*** 6.424*** -1.810*** 4.376*** 1.315**               1.184
                       (0.137)   (0.104)    (0.105)   (1.447)     (0.610)   (0.751)
           Prepared 12.80*** 8.793*** 1.562*** 10.94*** 10.56*** -2.224***
                       (0.171)   (0.113)   (0.0941)   (1.250)     (0.592)   (0.715)
              Other 4.509*** 5.835*** 3.359*** 1.748*** 3.707*** 1.661***
                      (0.0432) (0.0854) (0.0681)      (0.606)     (0.599)   (0.517)
    Validity of IV                                     340.72     1962.72    337.06
    Weak IV                                            113.63      656.54     48.19
    Observations      657,822 654,736      423,976    657,822 654,736       423,976
    R-squared           0.700     0.610      0.532
   Note: The dependent variable is the expenditure in dollars per adult equivalent by a household in a
 category-quarter over 2005-2006. All regressions include household-category and category-quarter …xed
 e¤ects. The IV results use the (unweighted) average nutrient content in the reference group by category
   and quarter, de…ned as household purchasing in the same store in the local area, as the instrumental
variable. All standard errors are clustered at the household-food category levels. The validity of IV test is
an LM test of whether the excluded instruments are correlated with the endogenous regressors; a rejection
     of the null indicates that the model is identi…ed. The weak IV test is the Cragg-Donald statistic.

   The …rst three columns present estimates from …xed e¤ects OLS regressions; each regres-
sion uses data from the indicated country. All the regressions include household-category
and category-time …xed e¤ects. The former control for household speci…c tastes for partic-
ular products, while the latter control for category-speci…c seasonal e¤ects. The coe¢ cients
are identi…ed from within household-category variation, i.e. the correlation between nu-
trient content and expenditure within a category (and household) over time. Most of the
coe¢ cients are statistically signi…cant and positive.

                                                     22
   As we previously discussed, these results potentially su¤er from endogeneity. Therefore,
in the next three columns we examine the results from instrumental variable regressions.
The instruments we use are the (unweighted) average nutrients of the products purchased
in each quarter by households shopping in the same retail chain in the same area. They aim
to capture the variation in the attributes of available products. The regression also includes
category-time …xed e¤ects, to control for category speci…c seasonal e¤ects, and household-
category e¤ects, to control for heterogeneity in preferences. This wipes out a signi…cant
fraction of the variation in the instruments. However, as we can see from the standard
errors, su¢ cient variation is left and as we see in the bottom of the table the …rst stage
F-statistic of the excluded IVs is very high.
   The coe¢ cients are mostly signi…cant, with some interesting di¤erences across countries.
The French have the highest relative preference for fats and proteins in dairy and meat. And
the Americans have the highest preference for proteins in prepared food, and the lowest for
fats in prepared foods. The ratio of the fats coe¢ cients to the carbohydrates coe¢ cient is
the highest in France and the lowest in the US, while the ratio of proteins to carbohydrates
tends to be higher in the US compared to France and the UK (this is mostly driven by the
coe¢ cient for the prepared category).
   In Table 7 we report the average household-category and category-quarter …xed e¤ects,
averaged across households and quarters, within the nine categories. These …xed e¤ects
could be treated as preference parameters, or as unobserved country-speci…c attributes of
the products. For each country these are,

                                1 X            1 X           X
                                                                     b zijct
                       j   =           bijt =         wijt            c
                               IT   it        IT   it            c


where wijt , bc and zijct are the dependent variable, the estimated coe¢ cients and the re-
gressors from the regression de…ned in equation (3) for each country, and I and T are the
total number of households and periods. These can be negative; a negative number suggests
that households are purchasing this product for its nutrient characteristics. Indeed, when
the value of the coe¢ cients on nutrients is larger, as in the OLS …xed e¤ects regressions, we
see more negative numbers.
   The numbers are consistent with the story we told above. US households have a higher
preference for prepared foods and drinks, both high in carbohydrates, while the French have


                                                23
a higher preference for dairy and meat, higher in protein. This is one factor that explains
why the US households purchase more carbohydrates, while the French households purchase
more protein.

                    Table 7: Demand Estimates: preferences for categories
                               OLS - Fixed E¤ects     IV - Fixed E¤ects
                                FR    UK      US      FR     UK      US
                   Fruits      21.78 35.10 29.40 26.92 38.77 31.19
                   Vegetables 31.04 31.85 28.49 40.77 41.03 32.93
                   Grains      -3.59 -7.82 7.18 16.49 18.41 23.54
                   Dairy       -8.46 5.60 10.21 24.66 25.35 14.87
                   Meat        28.44 10.64 18.56 73.40 38.25 28.89
                   Oils         3.08 0.05 2.75 10.71 3.11 5.39
                   Sweeteners -1.98 -2.30 2.15 2.53 0.50 1.77
                   Drinks      20.87 21.06 36.91 24.33 22.67 37.31
                   Prepared    15.48 29.23 51.01 54.75 73.81 71.45
 Notes: The table reports the average of the household-category and category-quarter …xed e¤ects across
                           households and quarters, within the nine categories.



4.2    Counterfactual Analysis
To explore the role that di¤erences in prices and product attributes play in the observed
di¤erences in the nutritional content of purchased food we simulate the behavior of house-
holds from one country if faced with prices and attributes from the other countries. In the
discussion below we focus on US households, and ask what would US households purchase if
faced with French and UK prices and product attributes. We start by examining the behav-
ior of the average household, and then explore heterogeneity in the response by separately
considering low income households and households that purchase a high calorie basket of
goods. We focus on these two groups as they are of particular policy interest, and groups
for which we might expect di¤erent behavior.
   In all cases we view the simulation as leaving the US household in place and changing only
their shopping environment, namely the prices they face and attributes of products o¤ered
to them, and asking what would they purchase. In particular, we envision the household’s
income as staying constant, which is important given the limitations we discussed above
in how our functional form can capture income e¤ects. We describe how expenditure and
nutrient patterns compare in these counterfactuals to actual purchases made by the average
household in the US, France and the UK.


                                                  24
       In de…ning preferences we always use the estimated slope coe¢ cients, b1 ; :; bC from the
home country, which in all but a few simulations below is the US. It is less clear how to think
of the category …xed e¤ects. In principle these could be treated as preference parameters, or
we could treat them as unobserved country-speci…c attributes of the products. For example,
if the average expenditure in France on meat is high, this could be because French households
have a higher preference for meat or because meat is of higher quality. We explore the extreme
cases where these …xed e¤ects are either all attributed to preferences or all attributed to
unobserved product characteristics.
       We start with the “average” household and computing their purchases in the home
country. This average household reproduces exactly the average consumption by category
                                                                                                  H
observed in the data. The implied category …xed e¤ects,                                           j   for country H, that imply this
choice, given prices and attributes in each country, are given by:
                                            h             X                     i
                                   H
                                       = y j pH                      b H aH          for H 2 fU S; F R; U Kg
                                   j          j                       c    jc
                                                                 c


                    1
                         P                            1
                                                          P                           1
                                                                                          P
where yj =         IT        it
                                   H
                                  yijt , pH
                                          j =        IT     it   pH        H
                                                                  ijt and ajc =      IT    it   aH
                                                                                                 ijct .

       The counterfactual simulations we consider are de…ned by …ve variables, which can take
the value estimated for any of the three countries. We label these V1 ; ::; V5 : product at-
tributes (V1 ), food prices (V2 ), category e¤ects (V3 ), nutrient preference parameters (V4 ) and
a conversion factor to re‡ect the price of the outside good (V5 ).
       In our model, simulated quantities purchased of each category j are given by13

                                       V3
  (V :::V )                            j                                   ^V5 Vj 3
ybj 1 5       =                        P bV4 V1 = V2                          P V4                Vi 2 fF R; U K; U Sg; i = 1; ::; 5
                   pVj 2 =^V5           c c ajc  pj                       ^V5 c bc aVjc1
                                                                                                                                 (4)
where ^       V5
                   =   pV0 5 =pU0 S    is a conversion factor that allows us to convert nominal prices into real
prices. We use information from the Penn World Tables on the “price level of consumption”
to proxy the price of the outside good. We …nd that the price of the outside good in France
is 7.9% higher than in the US (implying ^F R = 1:079), while it is 8.9% higher in the UK
than in the US (^U K = 1:089).
  13                                   (V1 :::V5 )
    We take the max of ybj                           and 0, to deal with corner solutions. This constraint does not bind for our
preferred speci…cation.




                                                                                25
   We examine …ve scenarios that amount to assuming di¤erent values for V1 ; ::; V5 . An
                                                                  P V4
important input into the simulation is the hedonic price pVj 2 ^V5 c bc aVjc1 . In Tables A3
and A4 in the Appendix A.6 we show the hedonic prices under di¤erent scenarios. These
prices will be informative when we consider the simulations below. The counterfactual
scenarios we consider are:
   Scenario A: hold the quantity that the average US household purchases …xed, but allow
the products to have the average attributes from France or the UK. This scenario simulates
the e¤ect of changing the nutrients of food products while holding food choices constant,
which allows us the separate the e¤ect of a change in attributes on choice from the e¤ect of
a change in nutrients holding choice constant.
   Scenario B: preferences and product attributes are those of the average US household
but food prices are as in France or the UK. In this case quantities are given by equation
(4), with V = (U S; F R; U S; U S; U S) for France and equivalently for the UK. This scenario
isolates the e¤ect of prices. Choices are allowed to change according to the model, but the
assumption is that the product attributes do not change (they remain as in the US).
   Scenario C: preferences are those of the average US household but food prices and
product attributes are as in France or the UK. Quantities are given by equation (4), with
V = (F R; F R; U S; U S; U S) for France and equivalently for the UK. This scenario simulates
the e¤ect of the change of both prices and product attributes to those available in France
and the UK.
   Scenario D: preferences are those of the average US household but food prices and
product attributes are as in France or the UK, as well as the price of the outside good.
In other words, the prices are changed to the real prices in France or the UK, as opposed
to nominal prices as in Scenario C. In this case quantities are given by equation (4), with
V = (F R; F R; U S; U S; F R) for France and equivalently for the UK.
   Scenario E: preferences are those of the average US household but food prices, product
attributes, and the price of the outside good are as in France or the UK, as well as the
                        V
mean category e¤ects    j ,   which could re‡ect some characteristics of goods and aspects of
the economic environment and not only preferences. In this case quantities are given by
equation (4), with V = (F R; F R; F R; U S; F R) for France and equivalently for the UK.
   In the simulations, prices and product attributes are the quantity weighted averages in
country V for category j: we are not simulating the choices of the disaggregated quantities

                                               26
yijkt , only the quantity at the category level. There are two ways to view our simulations.
First, we can consider the category j as a homogenous or single good. In that case the
simulation is directly linked to the theory. An alternative is to acknowledge that each
category is an aggregate over heterogenous products, but to assume a two stage maximization
problem. The simulated household takes the choice of the products within each of the
categories as given, and then chooses how much to purchase of each category. This is not
the same as the solution to the maximization problem we present in the theory section.
   The reason we need to conduct the simulations at the aggregated level is twofold. First,
to simulate quantities at a disaggregated level would require estimating many parameters.
Given the number of products we have, this is not feasible to do at the level of narrowly
de…ned products; the problem thus requires some aggregation. Second, even if we could
estimate the parameters at a very disaggregated level, we could not use these estimates
directly since very narrowly de…ned products are very di¤erent in the three countries. In
order to use the parameters we would need to average prices and attributes to a level that
is comparable across the di¤erent countries.


4.2.1   US Households Facing French Prices and Attributes

We start by considering the purchasing behavior of a household with preferences of the aver-
age US household facing French prices and product attributes. Table 8 shows the predicted
change in calories and macronutrients purchased by the average US household under scenar-
ios A to E described above. In column (1) we show the simulated purchases by a household
with average US preferences facing US food prices and attributes. In column (7) we show
the simulated purchases by a household with average French preferences facing French prices
and attributes. Columns (2)-(6) show the simulated purchases for scenarios A-E.
   Focusing …rst on the row showing total Calories, comparing column (2) to column (1)
we see that holding quantities constant at the level of the average US household but using
(average) French nutrient content has little impact on total calories. There is, however,
an impact on the fraction of calories coming from the di¤erent nutrients, moving the US
percentages closer to the French ones. Moving to column (3), where we use French food prices
but keep nutrients as in the US, has a substantial impact, leading the average US household
to substantially reduce the calories they purchase (to 85% of the level in column (1)). Indeed
the total calories is very similar to those of the average French household (displayed in the

                                               27
last column). However, this average US household would spend 12% less than the French for
approximately the same total calories and the fraction of calories coming from each macro
nutrient is very di¤erent and changes in the “wrong”way. Column (4) considers the average
US household facing French food prices and product attributes, leading to a slight further
reduction in calories to 84% of the amount in column (1).

                 Table 8: US Households Facing French Prices and Attributes
                                (1)     (2)      (3)     (4)     (5)      (6)                (7)
    scenario:                            A        B       C       D         E
    attributes (V1 )            US      FR       US      FR      FR       FR                FR
    prices (V2 )                US      US       FR      FR      FR       FR                FR
    category e¤ects (V3 )       US      US       US      US      US       FR                FR
    nutrient pref (V4 )         US      US       US      US      US       US                FR
    price adjustment (V5 )        1       1        1       1 1.079 1.079                     1

    Calories                    2212.3 2158.3 1884.1 1839.9 2088.5 1946.6 1873.4
    Expenditure                   5.41   5.41   4.75   4.94   5.59   5.51   5.38
    Carb (cal)                  1092.6 903.0 1166.6 949.4 1070.5 766.6 709.6
                                  49.4   41.8   61.9   51.6   51.3   39.4   37.9
    Prot (cal)                  279.40 326.66 171.57 213.18 243.26 287.91 299.90
                                  12.6   15.1    9.1   11.6   11.6   14.8   16.0
    Fat (cal)                    840.3 928.7 545.9 677.3 774.8 892.1 863.9
                                  38.0   43.0   29.0   36.8   37.1   45.8   46.1
    % calories
    Fruits                          4.7       4.1         5.5     4.7       4.5       4.2    4.1
    Vegetables                      3.0       3.5         3.6     4.2       4.1       5.2    5.2
    Grain                          13.0      15.2        14.5    17.4      16.9      12.3   13.3
    Dairy                          10.2      12.5         7.0     9.9      10.2      13.9   17.8
    Meats                          16.0      14.5         6.5     6.4       6.4      14.4   16.1
    Oils                            5.7       6.8         5.6     6.8       6.6      12.8   12.5
    Sweeteners                      3.3       3.1         8.5     7.5       7.6       4.6    4.2
    Drinks                          8.0       4.6        17.8     9.6       9.2       4.7    4.5
    Prepared                       36.2      35.7        31.0    33.4      34.4      27.9   22.3
                 Notes: Figures are per adult equivalent per day. Expenditure is in US$.


   In column (5) we consider a change of the prices facing US households to the real French
prices, by accounting for di¤erences in the relative price of the outside good. Since the price
of the outside good is higher in France this makes food more attractive, and leads to an
increase in total calories. In column (6) we consider the scenario where we alter food prices,
product attributes, the price of the outside good and change the category e¤ects to the
French values. Category e¤ects capture household-category and category-time …xed e¤ects.

                                                    28
As previously discussed, these probably combine preferences and aspects of the economic
environment. Once we include these the level of calories purchased is similar to the average
French household, around 4% higher, and around 12% lower than column (1). Interestingly,
in this last scenario not only are total calories similar to French level, but the fraction of
calories coming from di¤erent macro nutrients is more similar, as is the level of expenditure.
   In comparing the total calories purchased by the average US and French household it
appears that food prices can explain much of the di¤erence (scenario B), but not all. However,
this conclusion while true for calories, is overly simplistic. If we look at the macronutrients
purchased we see that these remain di¤erent. The average US household purchases more
carbohydrates and less proteins and fats than the average French household when faced with
French prices and attributes (columns (2) - (5)). It is only when we change the category
e¤ects that the balance of macro nutrients looks more like the French diet.
   Consideration of Tables 5 and A.3, in the Appendix, shows us in part where these results
come from. Comparing columns (1) and (3) of Table A.3 we can see that the hedonic price
of many of the large food categories for a household with US preferences but facing French
food prices is higher than in the US, e.g. Dairy, Meats and Prepared Foods, and so the
average US household reduces the quantity purchased of each of these. However, this is
not true of all categories. Fruits, Vegetables, Sweeteners and Drinks are all cheaper, and
so the average US household increases the quantity purchased in these categories. In some
categories this change in quantity is o¤set by di¤erences in product attributes (shown in
Table 5). So, for example, the quantity of Fruit purchased by the average US household
increases when faced with French food prices, but the di¤erence in product attributes means
that this represents a reduction in calories. This is also true for Sweeteners and Drinks. For
Dairy products it goes in the other direction, the higher hedonic price means that the average
US household purchases less Dairy when faced with French food prices, but the di¤erence
in product attributes means that this represents an increase in calories. This is also true
for Oils. For the other categories the change in quantities goes in the same direction as the
change in calories. The biggest change comes from Meats. The hedonic price is substantially
higher for the average US household facing French food prices and product attributes, and
this leads to a big reduction in Meat purchased, and the average attributes of Meat in France
mean that it has fewer calories.



                                              29
   While the total share of macronutrients purchased by the average US household when
faced with French food prices and attributes is similar to that when they face US prices
and attributes, the food categories that these nutrients come from di¤ers substantially. For
example, a US household with average US preferences faced with US prices and attributes
obtains 37% of proteins from Meats, 27.4% from Prepared foods, 14.5% from Dairy and
13.9% from Grains. When faced with French food prices and attributes they obtain only
14% of proteins from Meats (because Meat is much more expensive in France they purchase
less), 36% from Prepared foods (because prepared foods in France contain more protein),
15.3% from Dairy and 20% from Grains.


4.2.2   US Households Facing UK Prices and Attributes

We now consider a household with the average US preferences facing UK food prices and
attributes. Table 9 is laid out as Table 8, in column (1) we show the simulated purchases
by a household with average US preferences, and in column (7) by a household with average
UK preferences. Columns (2)-(6) show the simulated purchases for scenarios A-E.
   These results are quite di¤erent to those for the average US household facing French
prices and attributes. Comparing columns (1) and (2) we see that using US quantities and
UK nutrient content leads to a substantial reduction in calories. Products in the UK tend
to have less carbohydrates, about the same amount of fats, but more protein. Thus, in
total holding quantities …xed leads to a decrease in calories, due to the decrease in fats and
carbohydrates, but an increase in proteins.
   Comparing columns (1) and (3) we see that the e¤ect on the average US household of
facing UK food prices is to purchase 6% more calories, and increase purchase of all the
nutrients. This is the opposite of the impact of product attributes. In Section 2.3 we saw
that a Laspeyres index, holding quantities …xed at US levels, …nds the UK prices are higher
than US prices. Here, however, we …nd that when faced with UK prices, US households
purchase more calories not less. This is because some categories are cheaper in the UK, and
have a lower hedonic price, leading to increase consumption in these categories and increase
in total calories. Column (4) combines the two e¤ects. This leads to a reduction in the
total calories purchased to 97% of the level in column (1), though as we discuss below the
products purchased di¤er substantially. In column (5) we consider also changing the price of
the outside good to the UK level, because prices in the UK are higher than in the US this

                                              30
makes food more attractive and total calories purchased increases substantially. In column
(6) we also alter category e¤ects. When faced with this “full”UK environment of food prices,
attributes and the price of the outside good and category e¤ects, the average US household
would purchase around 7% more calories than when faced with the “full” US environment,
and over 20% more than the average UK household. He would also spend considerably more
than when faced with the US environment, and more than the average UK household faced
with the same environment.
                 Table 9: US Households Facing UK Prices and Attributes
                              (1)      (2)     (3)     (4)     (5)      (6)                  (7)
    scenario:                           A       B       C       D        E
    attributes (V1 )          US      UK       US     UK      UK        UK                  UK
    prices (V2 )              US       US      UK     UK      UK        UK                  UK
    category e¤ects (V3 )     US       US      US      US      US       UK                  UK
    nutrient pref (V4 )       US       US      US      US      US       US                  UK
    price adjustment (V5 )      1        1       1       1 1.089 1.089                       1

    Calories                    2212.3 2015.3 2336.4 2157.3 2567.6 2372.5 1972.8
    Expenditure                   5.41   5.41   5.29   5.54   6.55   6.56   5.19
    Carb (cal)                  1092.6 936.1 1269.9 1095.9 1293.3 1066.5 926.1
                                  49.4   46.4   54.4   50.8   50.4   45.0   46.9
    Prot (cal)                  279.40 313.11 270.36 299.69 359.30 387.66 306.79
                                  12.6   15.5   11.6   13.9   14.0   16.3   15.6
    Fat (cal)                    840.3 766.1 796.1 761.8 915.0 918.4 739.9
                                  38.0   38.0   34.1   35.3   35.6   38.7   37.5
    % calories
    Fruits                          4.7       5.0         2.8     3.0       2.7       3.9    4.4
    Vegetables                      3.0       3.9         3.2     4.2       3.9       5.1    5.9
    Grain                          13.0      11.7        19.9    16.1      15.2      12.6   18.4
    Dairy                          10.2      10.3        12.6    10.3      10.4      15.2   14.3
    Meats                          16.0      17.2         9.5    11.7      12.0      14.9   13.4
    Oils                            5.7       6.0         6.4     6.4       6.1       3.4    6.7
    Sweeteners                      3.3       3.5        10.4     9.9      10.2       2.8    3.8
    Drinks                          8.0       8.7         4.6     4.9       4.5       2.7    3.1
    Prepared                       36.2      33.8        30.6    33.6      35.0      39.4   30.2
                 Notes: Figures are per adult equivalent per day. Expenditure is in US$.


   Again, Tables 5 and A.4 provide some intuition for why these results arise. Comparing
columns (1) and (5) we see that the hedonic price of some of the large categories of food
are much lower for a household with the average US preferences in the UK than they are
in the US, or for a household with the average UK preferences in the UK. In addition,


                                                    31
US households value proteins more than UK households (see Table 6), and this leads to
di¤erences in their valuation of products.
   As in the simulations for France, the composition of foods purchased di¤ers substantially
when a household with the average US preferences faces UK prices and attributes compared
to when they are in the US, or compared to a household with the average UK preferences.
The average US household facing UK prices and attributes purchases a higher share of their
calories in Vegetables and Grains and a lower share in Fruit, Meat and Prepared Foods.


4.3     Distributional Implications
Up to now we have focused on the average household in the simulations. However, the
impact of changing prices or product attributes might di¤er across households. We focus
on two di¤erent groups of households –low income households and high calorie (per capita)
households – that are of interest for somewhat di¤erent reasons. Low income households
might be of particular interest, since obesity is negatively correlated with income, and by
looking at low income households we can also check the sensitivity of the results to income
variation. High calorie households are of interest, since they are more likely to be obese, and
therefore might be of more direct policy interest.


4.3.1   Low Income Households

In this section we consider low income households. We de…ne low income by computing for
each household the adult equivalent income and then focus on the bottom quartile in each
country. Households in the lowest income quartile spend less and purchase slightly fewer
calories per adult equivalent than higher income households in all three countries (details
available in an on-line appendix). They get fewer calories from fruits, vegetables and meats
and more from grains. Prices paid by lower income households are lower than prices paid by
households in higher income groups, and the attributes of the products they buy di¤er.
   In the top panel of Table 10 we show a selection of the results from the simulated coun-
terfactuals where we use the mean prices and attributes for households in the bottom income
quartile in the US and France. Broadly we see a similar pattern to when we considered the
average household. However, there are some di¤erences. Simply facing the low income US
household with French food prices, Scenario B in column (3), can no longer explain the bulk


                                              32
of the di¤erences between the low income US and French households. It is only in Scenario
E, where we face the low income US household with the French category e¤ects that the
level of purchases by low income US households nears the level of the low income French
household. In this case the low income US household will purchase around 23% fewer calo-
ries than when faced with the US environment, and around 3% higher than the low income
French household faced with the same environment.
       Table 10: Low Income US Households Facing FR/UK Prices and Attributes
                        (1)    (2)    (3)      (4)    (5)     (6)        (7)
       scenario:        US       A      B        C     D        E   FR/UK
       FR
       Calories     2128.9 2105.5 1805.9 1775.4 2057.1 1639.0         1594.1
       Expenditure     4.26   4.26   3.62     3.82   4.41    3.69       3.67
       Carb (%)        50.5   42.7   64.9     53.2   52.8    41.3       39.3
       Prot (%)        12.0   14.4    8.1     10.7   10.8    13.4       15.0
       Fat (%)         37.5   42.9   27.0     36.1   36.4    45.3       45.7
       UK
       Calories     2128.9 1891.4 2130.3 1954.8 2407.8 2304.4         1841.3
       Expenditure     4.26   4.26   4.00     4.25   5.17    5.62       4.23
       Carb (%)        50.5   46.7   57.8     53.2   53.1    45.1       47.5
       Prot (%)        12.0   15.0   10.3     12.8   12.8    16.0       15.0
       Fat (%)         37.5   38.3   32.0     34.0   34.1    38.9       37.5
               Notes: Figures are per adult equivalent per day. Expenditure is in US$.


   In the bottom panel of Table 10 we show a selection of the results from the simulated
counterfactuals where we use the mean price and attributes for households in the bottom
income quartile in the US and the UK. Here as well we see a broadly similar pattern to when
we consider the average household. Changing attributes alone, while holding quantities
…xed (scenario A), brings the level of calories and the share from each of the macronutrients
closest to the UK household. When we change prices and attribute and allow households
to reoptimize, the US household always purchases a higher level of calories, with more
carbohydrates and less proteins than the average low income household from the UK. As
with the average household, when faced with the “full” UK environment of food prices,
attributes and the price of the outside good and category e¤ects (column (6)), the average
low income US household would purchase around 8% more calories than when faced with
the “full”US environment, and over 25% more than the average low income UK household.
They would also spend considerably more than when faced with the US environment, and
more than the average low income UK household faced with the same environment.

                                                 33
4.3.2   High Calorie Households

We now focus on a di¤erent group of households - those that purchase a high (per capita)
level of calories. These households are of particular interest to any policy aimed at reducing
obesity. We divide households in each country into quartiles based on adult equivalent
calories purchased per person per day. Households in this group in the US purchase on
average 57% more calories per adult equivalent than the average households, 54% more in
France and 43% more in the UK (details available in an on-line appendix). The households
in this group also spend more on food than the average household and buy slightly cheaper
food. However, on other dimensions, such that the share of calories from macronutrients and
from di¤erent food categories, households in this group are not noticeably di¤erent from the
average household.
   Table 11 shows a selection of the simulation results where we use the mean prices and
attributes for households in the top quartile of adult equivalent calorie purchases. The
patterns are broadly the same across the scenarios as they were for the average household,
with a few notable exceptions. For example, in column (4) of the top panel we see a reduction
of 28% in calories purchased, compared to a reduction of 17% for the average household in
Table 8. Similarly, in column (4) of the bottom panel we see a reduction of 10% compared
to column (1), while for the average household we saw a reduction of only 3% in Table 9.

        Table 11: High Calorie US Households Facing FR/UK Prices and Attributes
                         (1)     (2)     (3)      (4)   (5)     (6)         (7)
        scenario:        US        A       B       C     D        E    FR/UK
        FR
        Calories      3460.0 3239.2 2686.6 2475.2 2805.5 2995.2          2875.0
        Expenditure     7.68    7.68    6.47    6.66   7.52    8.65        8.44
        Carb (%)        49.5    41.0    62.9    51.3   51.0    38.1        36.6
        Prot (%)        12.2    15.3     8.4    11.4   11.4    15.0        16.2
        Fat (%)         38.4    43.7    28.6    37.3   37.6    46.9        47.2
        UK
        Calories      3460.0 3105.1 3510.9 3119.9 3725.6 3372.6          2810.7
        Expenditure     7.68    7.68    7.37    7.62   9.04    9.06        7.15
        Carb (%)        49.5    46.4    55.1    51.8   51.4    45.3        47.2
        Prot (%)        12.2    15.3    11.1    13.4   13.5    16.1        15.3
        Fat (%)         38.4    38.3    33.8    34.8   35.1    38.6        37.5
               Notes: Figures are per adult equivalent per day. Expenditure is in US$.




                                                 34
4.4    Robustness
There are two potentially important limitations to our data, a lack of measurement of food
eaten outside of the home, and lack of measurement of food waste.
   Eating out. From other data sources we know that the fraction of calories from food
outside the home di¤ers across countries. For the US the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey suggests that 35% of calories are consumed outside the home (USDA,
2010). In the UK, Gri¢ th and O’Connell (2009) use the Expenditure and Food Survey
(EFS) for 2005/2006 and …nd that 12% of calories are eaten outside of the home. In France,
Afssa (2009) …nds that 18% of total energy consumption intake is outside the home. This
suggests that our descriptive analysis underestimates the cross country calorie di¤erences.
   The lack of food away from home has several implications for our conclusions. First, in
an ideal world we could measure the calories consumed away from home and see how these
change when we change prices of food at home. Second, in the simulations of food at home
we would want to know the impact of changing the price of food away from home. Note,
that due to the large number of …xed e¤ects we would need the price (and availability) of
food away from home to vary by household-quarter. Otherwise, it would be collinear with
the household or time …xed e¤ects.
   We think the best way to interpret our results is as keeping the consumption of food
away from home constant and therefore we miss the …rst e¤ect above. Without more data
we have no way to know how big is the substitution between food at home and food away.
The impact of the second on the simulations is less obvious, especially once we view our
simulations as trying to simulate the e¤ect of changes in prices and/or attributes on food
consumption in the US (and not relative to the average UK/France household). The di¤erent
scenarios we o¤er, especially Scenario E, can help bound the size of the e¤ect.
   Finally, while we think that understanding patterns of food purchase and nutrients out-
side the home is also important, we believe that food purchased for consumption at home is
of interest on its own.
   Food waste. Our data measures food purchases, which we equate to consumption. In
reality, a fraction of the food purchased is thrown away and never consumed. Estimates on
how large this fraction is vary substantially depending on what is being measured. Many of
the reported headline …gures that you see measure total food waste (e.g. by looking at food



                                             35
found in dumps); this includes waste from the catering trade and from retail establishments,
and is not only food wasted by households. We could not …nd estimates that measure
household food waste and that were comparable across countries. In principle, we could try
to apply a fraction of waste, that possibly varies by category and country, in the simulation.
However, in order to model this properly we would need to take a stand on whether this
fraction is policy invariant or whether it would vary as we change prices. It is plausible that
one of the reasons that food waste varies across countries is because of di¤erences in price.



5     Summary and Conclusion
In this paper we document the di¤erences in food purchases made by households in France,
the UK and the US. US households purchase more calories than UK households, who pur-
chase more than French households. Furthermore, the source of the calories di¤ers in terms
of which macro-nutrients they come from, across the countries. We estimate the determi-
nants of demand for nutrients in each of the countries by extending the demand model of
Gorman (1956), that nests classical demand models in product space, as well as models in
characteristics space. Our model departs from the weakly separable case of utility functions
across di¤erent food groups by allowing the marginal utility of each food category to be
a¤ected by the amount of nutrients provided by all other foods. It yields a simple linear
estimating equation, which relates the expenditures on products to the nutritional content.
    The estimates allow us to simulate counterfactual quantities purchased by households
with preferences from one country but facing prices and product attributes from another
country. We use the simulations to learn about the relative importance of preferences versus
the economic environment. We …nd that, the average US household when faced with French
prices and product attributes, will purchase substantially fewer calories, bringing the level
close to that of the average French household when faced with the same environment. How-
ever, the composition of these calories would di¤er. The simulated change is mostly due to
price di¤erences. In contrast, when we simulate the average US household’s food basket with
UK product attributes this has a substantial impact on reducing calories, whereas changing
relative prices in fact increases calories.




                                              36
    From these …ndings we conclude that the economic environment makes a substantial
di¤erence on the consumption basket. However, in general, it is the interaction of preference,
prices and attributes that explains the cross country di¤erences.
    In terms of the “healthiness” of preferences and the environment we can attempt to
rank countries. The French environment generally encourages healthier purchasing habits.
The average US household generally improves her purchasing habits, (while we have not
shown this in the above tables) the same is true for the average UK household. The UK
environment, on the other hand, generates worse outcomes for the average US household (and
the average French household as well). Indeed, the reason the UK households purchase less
calories than US households is because of their preferences and despite their environment,
not because of it.
    While we have made signi…cant progress in understanding the role preferences and the
economic environment play in explaining cross country di¤erences, signi…cant work still
remains. Our model and setup can be used to understand within country di¤erences. For
example, within the US there are signi…cant regional di¤erences, as well as di¤erences across
demographic groups. How much of these di¤erences can be explained by di¤erences in the
economic environment versus preference di¤erences?
    Similarly, our model and methods can be used to evaluate various policies. For example,
imposing a tax on sugar or on fat. Previous studies have examined these questions but
usually in the context of a particular product, say soft drink. We can study the e¤ect more
generally, allowing for substitution across products.
    Finally, as we discussed above the demand model we o¤ered nests demand models in
product space and those in characteristics space. We relied on a particular functional form,
but the basic ideas can be extended and used more broadly to generate ‡exible demand
models with more general income and price e¤ects. Furthermore, the basic methods can be
used to explore demand at a lower level of aggregation.



6     References
Abaluck J. (2011) “What Would We Eat if We Knew More: The Implications of a Large-Scale
Change in Nutrition Labeling”mimeo




                                             37
Acs Z., L. Henderson, D. Levy, A. Lyles and K. Stanton (2007) “The policy framework for
confronting obesity” in Acs and Lyles (eds) Obesity, Business and Public Policy, Edward
Elgar
Afssa (2002) “La Santé vient en mangeant : Document d’accompagnement du guide alimen-
taire pour tous destiné aux professionnels de santé”,
http://www.sante.gouv.fr/IMG/pdf/guide_alimentairepro.pdf
Afssa (2009) “Étude Individuelle Nationale des Consommations Alimentaires 2 (INCA 2)
2006-2007”, http://www.afssa.fr/Documents/PASER-Ra-INCA2.pdf
Atkin D. (2012) “Trade, Tastes and Nutrition in India”, forth. American Economic Review
Bajari P. and L. Benkard (2005) “Hedonic Price Indexes With Unobserved Product Char-
acteristics, and Application to Personal Computers” Journal of Business and Economic
Statistics, 23(1): 61-75.
Bawa S. (2005) “The role of the consumption of beverages in the obesity epidemic”, Per-
spectives in Public Health, Vol. 125 no. 3, 124-128
Berry S., J. Levinsohn and A. Pakes (1995) “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium,”
Econometrica, 63(4): 841-890 (July 1995).
Bleich S., D. Cutler, C. Murray and A. Adams (2007) “Why Is The Developed World Obese?”
NBER Working Paper 12954
Blundell R. and J. M. Robin (2000) “Latent Separability: Grouping Goods Without Weak
Separability”Econometrica, Vol. 68, No. 1, pp. 53-84
Bresnahan T. (1981) “Departures from marginal-cost pricing in the American automobile
industry : Estimates for 1977-1978,” Journal of Econometrics, Elsevier, Vol. 17(2), pages
201-227, November
Bound, J., and A. B. Krueger (1991) “The extent of measurement error in longitudinal
earnings data: Do two wrongs make a right?”Journal of Labor Economics, 9(1), 1–24.
CDC (2011) “Obesity, At a Glance,”Center for Disease Control and Prevention (available at
http://www.cdc.gov/chronicdisease/resources/publications/aag/pdf/2011/Obesity_AAG_WEB_508.pdf
Chou S., M. Grossman and H. Sa¤er (2004) “An economic analysis of adult obesity: results
from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System” Journal of Health Economics, 23,
565-587
Court A. T. (1939) “Hedonic Price Indexes with Automotive Examples”. In The Dynamics
of Automotive Demand, Ed. Charles F. Roos 99-1 17. New York General Motors.
Cutler D., E. Glaeser and J. Shapiro (2003) “Why Have Americans Become More Obese?”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 17 (3), 93-118
Deaton A. (1997) The Analysis of Household Surveys: A microeconometric approach to
development, The John Hopkins University Press: Baltimore Maryland
Drewnowski A.(2004) “Obesity and the Food Environment: Dietary Energy Density and
Diet Costs,”American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 27(3 Suppl):154-62.
Drewnowski A. and S. Specter (2004) “Poverty and Obesity: the Role of Energy Density
and Energy Costs,”The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 79(1):6-16.




                                           38
Drewnowski A., P. Monsivais, M. Maillot and N. Darmon (2007) “Low-Energy-Density are
Associated with Higher Diet Quality and Higher Diet Costs in French Adults,” Journal of
the American Dietetic Association, 107(6):1028-32.
Du¤ey K.J. and B.M. Popkin (2011) “Energy Density, Portion Size, and Eating Occasions:
Contributions to Increased Energy Intake in the United States, 1977-2006”PLOS Medicine,
Vol.8 Issue 6
Einav L., E. Leibtag and A. Nevo (2010) “Recording discrepancies in Nielsen Homescan data:
Are they present and do they matter?” Quantitative Marketing and Economics, volume 8,
Number 2, 207-239
Epple D. (1987) “Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Estimating Demand and Supply
Functions for Di¤erentiated Products”Journal of Political Economy, 95, 59-80.
Finkelstein E. and L. Zuckerman (2008) The Fattening of America: how the economy makes
us fat, if it matters, and what to do about it, John Wiley & Sons: New Jersey.
French S., M. Story, and R. Je¤ery (2001) “Environmental In‡uences on Eating and Physical
Activities,”Annual Review of Public Health, 22:309-35.
Goldman D., D. Lakdawalla and Y. Zheng (2009) “Food Prices and the Dynamics of Body
Weight”NBER Working paper 15096, Forthcoming Economic Aspects of Obesity. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press
Gorman T. (1956) “A possible procedure for analysing quality di¤erentials in the egg mar-
ket”. Reprinted in The Review of Economic Studies (1980)
Gorman T. (1959) “Separable utility and aggregation”Econometrica 27, 469-481.
Gortmaker S., B. Swinburn, D. Ley, R. Carter, P. Mabry, D. Finegood, T. Huang, T. Marsh
and M. Moodie (2011) “Changing the future of obesity: science, policy, and action” The
Lancet, 378: 838-847
Gri¢ th R. and M. O’Connell (2009) “The Use Of Market Research Data For Research Into
Nutrition”Fiscal Studies, Vol. 30, no. 3/4, pp. 339-365
Gri¢ th R. and M. O’Connell (2010) “Public Policy Towards Food Consumption” Fiscal
Studies, Vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 481-507
Griliches Z. (1961) “Hedonic Price Indexes for Automobiles: An Econometric Analysis of
Quality Change.”In The Price Statistics of the Federal Government.
HMSO (1991) Report of the Panel on Dietary Reference Values of the Committee on Medical
Aspects of Food Policy (COMA) 1991, The Stationary O¢ ce, London
Lakdawalla D. and T. Philipson (2002) “The Growth of Obesity and Technological Change:
A Theoretical and Empirical Examination,”NBER Working Papers 8946
Lakdawalla D. and T. Philipson (2009) “The Growth of Obesity and Technological Change”,
Economics and Human Biology, 7, 283-293
Lancaster K. (1966) “A New Approach to Consumer Theory”Journal of Political Economy,
74 (2)
Leicester A. and Z. Old…eld (2009) “Using Scanner Technology to Collect Expenditure Data”
Fiscal Studies, Vol. 30, No. 3-4, December 2009, 309-337
Lewbel A. (1985) “A Uni…ed Approach to Incorporating Demographic or Other E¤ects into
Demand Systems”The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 52, No. 1., pp. 1-18.


                                           39
Lewbel A. and K. Pendakur (2011) “Generalized Random Coe¢ cients With Equivalence
Scale Applications”Boston College Working Paper
Lu Y. et D. Goldman (2010) “The E¤ects of Relative Food Prices on Obesity – Evidence
from China: 1991-2006”, NBER Working Paper 15720
Maillot M., N. Darmon, F. Vieux and A. Drewnowski (2007) “Low-Energy-Density are High
Nutritional Quality Are Each Associated with Higher Diet Costs in French Adults,” Amer-
ican Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 86(6):690-696.
McFadden D. (1974) “Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior,”in P.
Zarembka, eds., Frontiers of Econometrics, New York, Academic Press.
National Academy of Sciences (2013) "US Health in International Perspective: Shorter Lives,
Poorer Health" http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=13497
National Research Council (2011) Crimmins, Eileen M., Samuel H. Preston, and Barney
Cohen (eds), 2011, “Explaining Divergent Levels of Longevity in High-Income Countries”,
Panel on Understanding Divergent Trends in Longevity in High-Income Countries
Nevo, A. (2000) “A Practitioner’s Guide to Estimation of Random Coe¢ cients Logit Models
of Demand,”Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 9(4), 513-548, 2000.
Philipson T. J. and R. A. Posner (2003) “The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a Function
of Technological Change” Perspectives in Biology and Medicine - Volume 46, Number 3
Supplement, Summer 2003, pp. S87-S107.
Philipson T.J. and R.A. Posner (2008) “Is the obesity epidemic a public health problem? a
review of Zoltan J. Acs and Alan Lyles’s Obesity, Business and Public Policy”, Journal of
Economic Literature, 46(4), 974-982
Philipson T. and R. Posner, (2011) “Economics of Obesity: A Decade of Research”, forth-
coming, Journal of Economic Literature
Rosen S. (1974) “Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Di¤erentiation in Pure
Competition,”Journal of Political Economy, 34-55.
Seale J., A. Regmi, J. Bernstein (2003) “The International Evidence on Food Consumption
Patterns”USDA Technical Bulletin Number 1904
Swinburn B., G. Sacks and E. Ravussin (2009) “Increased food energy supply is more than
su¢ cient to explain the US epidemic of obesity”American Journal of Clinical Nutrition Vol.
90 No 6 pp. 1453-1456
UK Department of Health (1991) Dietary Reference Values for Food Energy and Nutrients
for the United Kingdom, Report to the Panel on Dietary Reference Values of the Committee
on Medical Aspects of Food Policy, London: HMSO.
US Department of Agriculture (2010) “Away from Home: Percentage of Selected Nutrients
Contributed by Foods Eaten Away from Home, What We Eat in America, NHANES 2007-
1008,”http://www.ars.usda.gov/Services/docs.htm?docid=18349.




                                            40
A      Data Appendix

In this appendix we provide details on the construction of the data. The data are collected
by market research …rms in each of the three countries. In France and the UK, data are

collected by Taylor Nelson and Sofres (TNS), now a part of the Kantar Group, as part of
their Worldpanel. In the US, data is collected by Nielsen as part of their Homescan data.
    The data are collected in a similar manner in all countries. A panel of households use

scanners in the home to record all food purchases brought into the home. Participants
scan each bar code and record quantity of items purchased; they also record the store of
purchase. This information is transmitted to the market research …rm. Prices are obtained

either directly from the store, if the retailer is part of Nielsen’s store level data, or from the

information the participant records. TNS also uses information on till (cashier) receipts to

con…rm prices and special o¤ers. Thus for each item purchased we know exactly what was

bought (as denoted by the barcode or UPC), the quantity purchased, the price paid, and

exactly when and where it was bought.

    Each participating household collects information on all products with a barcode. Items

without barcodes, often called “random weights” items are not recorded by all households.

These items include some fruit, vegetables, meat and deli items. The way information on
random-weight items is collected varies across countries, as described below.

    Information on household demographics are collected through an annual questionnaire.

    These data are matched with information on the nutrient content of each food item; this
information is collected in a slightly di¤erent manner in each country, as explained below.

Macronutrients are converted from grams to calories by multiplying grams of carbohydrates

by 3.75, grams of proteins by 4, and grams of fats by 9.
    Income is measured in brackets for each country. We used the middle values of intervals

to approximate household income and then used household equivalence scales to equivalize

incomes per adult equivalent.



                                               41
A.1        US data

Each year there are roughly 61,000 participating households out of which a subsample of
roughly 15,000 record random-weight purchases. Nielsen monitors the recording and drops

households it feels are unreliable. The reliable panel, often called the “static” panel has
roughly 40,000 household in total of which 8,000 a year report random-weight purchases.
       We start with the static panel and drop quarters where a household did not report

expenditure in …ve or more of the nine food groups.
       The Nielsen data does not have nutritional information, this information was collected
by Gladson. The Gladson data records information for about 400,000 items, as speci…ed

by the barcode or Universal Product Code (UPC). For each item they record essentially

everything that is on the box, including the nutritional label, as well as attributes of the

box, such as dimensions and weight. To match the Gladson data with Homescan we followed

the following steps. About 60% of the UPCs in Homescan had a direct match in the Gladson

data. It there was no match we used the average nutrients in the Gladson data within product

module (PM)14 , size type, brand, product, ‡avor, and formula (as de…ned by Nielsen).This

adds roughly another 8% match to a total of slightly over 68%. Many of the remaining

items do not match because they are from store brands, which Gladson does not record.
For these case we average within PM, size type, product, variety, type, formula, and style

(i.e., drop the brand requirement). This matches another 25 percentage points for a total of

roughly 93% match. The rest of the information is mostly for random-weight items, which
we manually …ll in using the information from the USDA National Nutrient Database for

Standard Reference.
  14
    Nielsen classi…es each product into a narrowly de…ned group called product module. There are over 600
of these groups.




                                                   42
A.2        French data

Each year there are approximately 14,500 participating households. We drop observations
that are outliers (below the …rst percentile or above the 99th, and also households who

purchase less than 5 of the food categories over the 9 in a quarter).
       Each household is asked to record only certain random-weight categories. For example,
households are asked to report purchases of random-weights of either “fruits and vegetables”

or “meats and …sh”, but not both. We use an imputation method based on the household
observable demographics to impute the value of purchase at the quarter level from other
households reporting their purchase.

       We directly collected nutritional characteristics on macronutrients (calories, proteins,

fats and carbohydrates) and matched these with the products purchased15 . The nutritional

information come from several sources. We primarily used information collected directly from

labels and public sources such as the CIQUAL database (from the public French Information

Center on Food Quality) from Afssa (2008) “Table de composition nutritionnelle des aliments

Ciqual 2008”http://www.afssa.fr/TableCIQUAL/.


A.3        UK data

Each year there are approximately 25,000 participating households. We drop observations

that are outliers (below the …rst percentile or above the 99th). We drop quarters where a
household did not report expenditure in more than …ve of the nine food groups.
       In the UK all households record purchases of all random-weight items.

       TNS collects information on the characteristics of all individual products, which includes
their nutritional content (as shown on the packaging), from a variety of sources including
manufacturer databases and from the packages directly.
  15
    This collection and matching of nutritional characteristics with the food purchases data was done in
2010 by Pierre Dubois and research assistant Yohann Chiu who we thank for his work.




                                                  43
A.4     De…nition of Food Groups

The speci…c food products purchased in each country are very di¤erent, in fact even the food
categories used by market research …rms are di¤erent, re‡ecting di¤erences in the types of

food purchased. We therefore classify products into 52 categories used by the USDA, making
sure that each product is always classi…ed in the same category whatever the country. In
order to facilitate comparison across countries we further aggregate these into nine broad

product categories. The category de…nitions we use are given in Table A1.
                              Table A1: De…nition of food groups
 Name         Main items
 Fruits       fresh, canned or frozen fruit as well as fruit juices
 Vegetables fresh, canned or frozen vegetables and starchy food
 Grain        ‡our, cereals, dry and fresh pasta, rice, couscous, breakfast cereals, and breads
 Dairy        milk, cream, cheese, and yogurt
 Meats        beef, pork, lamb, veal, poultry, as well as bacon, ham, sausages, eggs and
              all …sh and seafood, whether fresh, smoked, frozen or canned; nuts
 Oils         oils, butter, margarine, and lards
 Sweeteners sugar, syrup, honey and arti…cial sweeteners
 Drinks       sodas, water, co¤ee, tea and other beverages
 Prepared     all commercially prepared items, whether sweet savory, frozen, canned or deli


A.5     Adult Equivalence
We construct a household equivalence scale based on daily caloric requirement of all house-
hold members divided by 2500. Daily Caloric Requirement of individual household members
is given in Table A2.
  Table A2: Caloric needs by age and gender
                                Age Categories
  Gender 4-6 7-10 11-14 15-18 19-50 51-59 60-74 75 plus
  Female 1545 1740 1845 2110 1940 1900 1900                    1810
  Male      1715 1970 2220 2755 2550 2380 2330                 2100
Source: HMSO (1991).



A.6     Hedonic prices
As we can see in equation (4) the results in the simulations depend on three key inputs: ^V5 ;
                   P V4
  V3       V2
  j , and pj    ^V5 c bc aVjc1 The …rst two can be found in the respective column for each
simulation and in Table 7, by looking up the appropriate column. The third are the hedonic
prices displayed below. The layout of the columns follows that of Tables 8 and 9.




                                             44
 Table A3: Hedonic prices for          French     food    in the US
                        (1)             (2)       (3)       (4)   (5)   (6)        (7)
 scenario:                               A         B         C     D     E
 attributes (V1 )       US              FR        US        FR    FR    FR         FR
 prices (V2 )           US              US        FR        FR    FR    FR         FR
 category e¤ects (V3 )  US              US        US        US    US    FR         FR
 nutrient pref (V4 )    US              US        US        US    US    US         FR
 price adjustment (V5 )  1               1         1         1   1.079 1.079        1

 Fruits                        1.92     1.92      1.89     1.93    1.92    1.92    1.90
 Vegetables                    2.53     2.53      2.41     2.42    2.41    2.41    2.33
 Grain                         2.89     2.89      3.04     2.96    2.89    2.89    2.57
 Dairy                         1.11     1.11      1.89     1.63    1.50    1.50    1.13
 Meats                         2.36     2.36      6.81     6.25    5.93    5.93    5.10
 Oils                          3.35     3.35      4.07     3.93    3.83    3.83    3.78
 Sweeteners                    3.18     3.18      1.46     1.57    1.46    1.46    1.54
 Drinks                        1.44     1.44      0.76     0.81    0.81    0.81    0.81
 Prepared                      2.45     2.45      3.36     3.08    2.84    2.84    3.43
                                                         P b V4 V1
Notes: The hedonic price is given by pVj 2 ^V5            c c ajc . Prices are per kilo and are in US$ using an
exchange rate of £ 1 = $1.80 and e1 =$1.25.
 Table A4: Hedonic prices for          British food       in the   US
                        (1)             (2) (3)             (4)     (5)   (6)      (7)
 scenario:                               A      B            C       D     E
 attributes (V1 )       US              UK US              UK       UK    UK       UK
 prices (V2 )           US              US UK              UK       UK    UK       UK
 category e¤ects (V3 )  US              US US               US      US    UK       UK
 nutrient pref (V4 )    US              US US               US      US    US       UK
 price adjustment (V5 )  1               1      1            1     1.089 1.089      1

 Fruits                        1.92     1.92      3.01     3.02    3.00    3.00    2.95
 Vegetables                    2.53     2.53      2.21     2.19    2.18    2.18    2.07
 Grain                         2.89     2.89      1.79     1.97    1.91    1.91    1.44
 Dairy                         1.11     1.11      0.84     1.03    0.93    0.93    1.10
 Meats                         2.36     2.36      3.77     3.23    2.87    2.87    3.54
 Oils                          3.35     3.35      2.85     2.91    2.81    2.81    1.59
 Sweeteners                    3.18     3.18      0.95     1.04    0.92    0.92    0.74
 Drinks                        1.44     1.44      2.39     2.40    2.39    2.39    2.35
 Prepared                      2.45     2.45      2.75     2.31    2.03    2.03    2.92

                                                  P b V4 V1
Notes: The hedonic price is given by pVj 2 -^V5    c c ajc . Prices are per kilo and are in US$ using an exchange
rate of £ 1 = $1.80 and e1 =$1.25.




                                                           45
