                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               INCENTIVES AND OUTCOMES:
                             CHINA’S ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY

                                              Jing Wu
                                           Yongheng Deng
                                             Jun Huang
                                           Randall Morck
                                           Bernard Yeung

                                        Working Paper 18754
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18754


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2013




We are grateful to helpful comments by Yang Yao, Colin Lixin Xu, Xiaobo Zhang, Karen Eggleston,
and seminar participants in CCER Peking University, NUS Business School and the 2012 NBER working
group meeting on the Chinese Economy. We gratefully acknowledge Jia He for excellent research
assistance. Randall Morck thanks the SHRC and the Bank of Canada for partial funding. Yongheng
Deng and Jing Wu thanks Institute of Real Estate Studies at National University of Singapore for partial
funding. Jing Wu also thanks the National Natural Science Foundation of China for financial support
(No. 71003060). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Jing Wu, Yongheng Deng, Jun Huang, Randall Morck, and Bernard Yeung. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Incentives and Outcomes: China’s Environmental Policy
Jing Wu, Yongheng Deng, Jun Huang, Randall Morck, and Bernard Yeung
NBER Working Paper No. 18754
February 2013
JEL No. G0,H54,P2,P26,Q56,Q58,R11

                                            ABSTRACT

In generating fast economic growth, China is also generating growing concern about its environmental
record. Using 2000-2009 data, we find that, while spending on environmental infrastructure has visible
positive environmental impact, city spending is strongly tilted towards transportation infrastructure.
Investment in transportation infrastructure correlates strongly with both real GDP growth, a measure
of tangible economic growth relevant to city-level Party and government cadres’ promotion odds,
and with land prices, which affect city governments’ revenues from land lease sales. In contrast, city
governments’ spending on environmental improvements is at best uncorrelated with cadres’ promotion
odds, and is uncorrelated with local GDP growth and land prices. These findings suggest that, were
environmental quality explicitly linked to a cadre’s chance of promotion, or were environmental quality
to affect land prices substantially, city-level public investment in environmental improvement would
rise.


Jing Wu                                            Randall Morck
Institute of Real Estate Studies                   Faculty of Business
Tsinghua University                                University of Alberta
100084 Beijing, P.R.China                          Edmonton, AB T6G 2R6
ireswujing@tsinghua.edu.cn                         CANADA
                                                   and NBER
Yongheng Deng                                      randall.morck@ualberta.ca
Institute of Real Estate Studies
National University of Singapore                   Bernard Yeung
Singapore                                          National University of Singapore
 ydeng@nus.edu.sg                                  Mochtar Riady Building
                                                   15 Kent Ridge Drive
Jun Huang                                          BIZ 1, Level 6, #6-19
School of Accountancy                              Singapore 119245
Shanghai University of Finance & Economics         bizdean@nus.edu.sg
No. 777, Guoding Road
Shanghai
sufehuang@gmail.com
1.      Introduction

China’s phenomenal economic growth in recent decades is widely thought to be related to the

Chinese Communist Party’s (CCP) management of the economy. An important aspect of the

Party’s management system is arguably a merit-based promotion for Party and government

officials, whom we call cadres for brevity. In this system, merit can be demonstrated by having

overseen tangible economic development (e.g., see Maskin, Qian and Xu (2000) for evidence on

the central committee level, Li and Zhou (2005) and Chen, Li and Zhou (2005) for evidence on

the provincial level, and Edin (2003) and Whiting (2004) for evidence on selected

towns/villages).1


        The alleged critical role of this system in China’s economic success motivates our

adoption of an “organizational management” focus: namely, that organizational performance

emerges from individuals’ behavioural responses to their incentives, given their decision rights

and budgetary resources (Jensen, 1998).              Applying this logic, we relate city-governments’

investment in transportation infrastructure versus environmental improvements to cadres’

hierarchical assignment of duties, promotion incentives, and budgetary constraints.


        This exercise focuses on institutional details about China’s hierarchic management

system. The apex of this system is the CCP politburo and central committee. Below them are

the top cadres of China’s provinces and its four “province-level” municipalities.2 Beneath these

are, in descending order, the top cadres of cities, counties, and townships or villages. Cadres are


1
  The literature is not unanimous on this point. For example, Shih, Adolph and Liu (2012) find no significant
correlation between CCP central committee members’ promotions and economic growth performance; consistent
other factors, such as factional ties with current and past top leaders assuming greater importance at very senior
levels in the Party hierarchy.
2
  The four “province-level municipalities” (zhi xia shi) are Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin and Chongqing. These are
directly under the Central Government and with jurisdiction over a city and adjacent districts.

                                                        1
rotated – reassigned to a new position every three or more years, and perhaps to new locations as

well. Conditional on a harmonious political attitude, a cadre’s past performance, evidenced by

having overseen high tangible economic development outcomes, is shown to affect his odds of

promotion (Maskin, Qian and Xu, 2000; Edin, 2003; Whiting, 2004; Li and Zhou, 2005; Chen,

Li and Zhou, 2005).     This arguably merit-based promotion system is thought to induce a

competition between sub-national governments to produce tangible evidence of economic

development at all levels of the management hierarchy.


       This competition is thought to take place within China’s highly decentralized fiscal

expenditure system. The World Bank’s (2012) China 2030 report states that “sub-national

governments account for around 80 percent of total budgetary expenditures and bear

responsibility for the provision of vital public services including basic health and education,

pensions, unemployment insurance, and minimum income support.” Sub-national governments,

primarily city governments, also account for the lion’s share of investment in urban

infrastructure, such as transportation systems and environmental improvements. However, city

government revenues, based on a “tax revenue sharing mechanism and intergovernmental fiscal

transfers, are not commensurate with local government expenditure responsibilities” (World

Bank 2012, p. 55). City governments must therefore find additional revenue sources to finance

their expenditures.


       This mismatch could affect top city-level cadres’ investment and revenue raising

decisions. To the extent that their careers depend on tangible evidence of having successfully

fostered economic growth, the governments they direct are apt to allocate public expenditures

according to their short-run contributions to tangible economic growth, rather than their long-run



                                                2
tangible and intangible contributions to total growth.         Figure 1 illustrates how these

considerations might play out in a local government’s allocation of investment between

transportation infrastructure and environmental improvements. Transportation infrastructure

readily contributes to tangible growth because construction activity elevates measures of

economic activity immediately.


       Also transportation infrastructure raises land prices and local governments raise revenue

by selling long-term land leases to real estate development enterprises. These considerations

plausibly incline local government and Party cadres, seeking to expand their discretionary

spending budgets, to allocate more city funds to transportation infrastructure and less to

environmental improvements. Like considerations might similarly direct local public spending

away from other relatively intangible investments, such as education and healthcare.


       Another possible reason for an emphasis on transportation infrastructure spending might

be the CCPs longstanding technocratic interpretation of economic development as requiring

megaprojects – dams, highways, and other monumental achievements. Huge transportation

projects arguably fill this bill better than green spaces, sewage treatment facilities, or chimney

scrubbers.


       Our empirical tests lead us to five basic conclusions. First, city-level environmental

investment is statistically and economically significantly correlated with better environmental

outcomes.    Second, city-level cadres increase city government transportation infrastructure

investment in response to their province-level superiors emphasizing such investment, but do not

act likewise if their superiors emphasize environmental concerns. Third, higher transportation

infrastructure spending is, while higher environmental spending is not, correlated with higher


                                                3
land prices in the short term; higher land lease revenues in turn raise future spending on

transportation infrastructure.   Fourth, current spending on transportation infrastructure is

correlated with next year’s GDP growth while spending on environment is not. Finally, higher

city-level GDP growth is statistically and economically significantly positively related to greater

odds of the city’s top cadres being promoted. On the contrary, higher city-level environmental

investment is statistically and economically significantly negatively related to better odds of the

city’s top cadres being promoted.


       Obviously, determining China’s socially optimal public spending formula lies far beyond

the scope of this study. The Chinese people may indeed have a collective preference for rapid

income growth and transportation infrastructure spending first, and other aspects of

development, such as environmental improvements, later.          Nonetheless, the findings offer

suggestions as to how the CCP might promote intangible development goals, such as clean air

and water, should it choose to prioritize such goals.


       Equally obviously, our findings reveal correlations, not causes. We lack any credible

means of explicitly confirming what causes what. However, these issues are unlikely to alter our

basic argument: city-level cadres prefer to invest in transportation infrastructure which has a

stronger positive correlation with near-term tangible growth, which in turn is related to higher

promotion odds. Or, this emphasis might reflect a lingering traditional central planning obsession

with megaprojects, such as transportation infrastructure. In addition, investing in transportation

infrastructure boosts land prices, which boost cities’ revenues from land sales, which increases

top city-level cadres’ discretionary spending powers.         These are prima facia plausible




                                                 4
explanations of the correlations we find; however, we welcome alternative interpretations of our

empirical findings.


       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section documents city-

level transportation infrastructure and environmental improvement spending from 2000 to 2009;

and also shows public spending on environmental improvements to correlate positively with air

quality.   This is consistent with spending on environmental improvements alleviating air

pollution. Section III presents empirical evidence consistent with urban infrastructure spending

being constrained by revenues from land lease sales and favouring transportation over

environmental improvements; with two appearing to be substitutes. Section IV presents findings

consistent with investment in transportation directly affecting economic growth and also exerting

an indirect effect by raising land lease revenues and thus loosening local governments’ budget

constraints. This section also replicates prior results consistent with cadres’ promotion odds

rising with measures of tangible economic growth. Section V concludes.




2.     China’s urban infrastructure investment and air quality


2.1    Decreasing environmental investment in the early 2000s


Upon Mr. Hu Jintao assuming the top position in the CCP and China in 2002, the “Scientific

Outlook on Development (ke xue fa zhan guan)” became a major principle of social and

economic development. The importance of environmental protection was repeatedly emphasized

by the central government, just like it currently is in the 12th Five Year Plan.




                                                  5
         However, during this era, local governments actually allocated less resources to urban

environmental improvements, such as “drainage and sewage purification”, “environmental

sanitation and solid waste treatment”, and “gardening and greening”. Figure 2 shows that, at the

national level, environmental improvement investment as a fraction of total urban infrastructure

investment gradually dropped from a peak of 25.4% in 2000 to the nadir of 19.1% in 2006,

before recovering slightly to 21.3% in 2009.                  Figure 2 shows environmental improvement

investment over GDP similarly dropping from a peak of 0.58% in 2003 to a low of 0.41% in

2007, and then rising again somewhat.


         This contrasts starkly with infrastructure investment in urban transportation, including

“roads and bridges” and “public transportation”, also plotted in Figures 2. Over the same decade,

transportation infrastructures as a share of total urban infrastructure investment rose from 60.2%

in 2000 to 72.7% in 2010. Transportation infrastructure over GDP likewise jumped from 0.90%

in 2000 to 1.71% in 2003, and then fluctuated around 1.50% until the 2009 stimulus.3




2.2      Pollution is an important problem


Pollution, especially air pollution, is a serious problem – obvious to any visitor to any large

Chinese city (World Bank, 2007, 2012). For example, in early December 2011, air quality




3
  Besides the three components grouped as environmental improvement investments and the two components
grouped as transportation infrastructure investments, five other components are reported in Ministry of Housing and
Urban-Rural Development’s urban infrastructure investment statistics. Below, we exclude “centralized heating” and
“flood control” because these are significant only in certain cities; and the component “other” because its definition
is opaque. The final two components, “water supply” and “gas supply”, both correspond to basic necessaries, and
thus arguably lie outside the emphasis of this study. Nevertheless, including total investment in water and gas
supply (normalized by GDP) as a control variable generates qualitatively similar results, defined as identical patterns
of signs and significance and comparable point estimates.

                                                          6
reached a “crisis” level in Beijing, attracting global media attention. 4 On Dec 5th, the US

Embassy reported particulate air pollution in Beijing exceeding the standard scale’s maximum of

500, and described the situation as “crazily bad”. The media also reported that the pollution

brought a rush of patients to hospitals during those weeks, most suffering from heart attacks or

respiratory problems. These dramatic visible air pollution problems resurfaced again in Jan 2013.


        Air quality problems persisted through most of the past decade. Since mid-2000, the

Ministry of Environmental Protection has graded air quality in selected cities. Table 1 shows the

annual mean and median fractions of days with the highest grade, calculated across all cities,

beginning to rise only in 2008, the year Beijing hosted the Olympic Games. This improvement

is only partially due to the ministry expanding its coverage to include more cities. Panel B, using

only the 37 cities covered throughout the sample period, also shows an improvement only after

2008.




2.3     Environmental investment and environmental outcomes


Investing in environmental improvements plausibly improves air quality both immediately and in

future years. If so, China’s skimping on investment in environmental improvements through the

past decade could accumulate into its current poor air quality problem.

        To investigate this, Table 2 examines data from 2001 to 2009 for the 82 cities whose air

quality the Ministry of Environmental Protection graded each day. (The four “province-level”

4
 “Victory for U.S. Embassy as Beijing Chokes on ‘Heavy Fog’”, Wall Street Journal, December 5, 2011; “Flights
Grounded in China as Smog Worsens”, Financial Times, December 5, 2011; “Outrage Grows over Air Pollution
and China’s Response”, New York Times, December 6, 2011; “China’s Pollution Data Shrouded in Official Fog”,
Bloomberg BusinessWeek, December 8, 2011; “Death-by-Air in Beijing Shows China’s Heart Risk from Worsening
Pollution”, Bloomberg News, December 16, 2011; “Official Says Air Quality in Beijing is at ‘Crisis’ Level”, Wall
Street Journal, December 16, 2011.

                                                       7
mega cities: Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin, and Chongqing are excluded.)5 Each city’s change in

air quality each year is the fraction of days in which it earned a top “Grade I” in air quality less

the same fraction the prior year. 6 Table 2 regresses this on “environmental development,”

defined as annual urban infrastructure investment in environmental improvements scaled by

local GDP.7 Investment in transportation infrastructures is also included for comparison. In

addition, the regressions control for lagged air quality level and city fixed-effects. The

regressions also include real growth in per capita GDP and its cross term with the lagged real per

capita GDP level to capture any Kuznets curve effect (Stern, Common and Barbier, 1996; Stern,

2004). Including year fixed-effects generates qualitatively similar results – by which we mean

an identical pattern of signs and significance levels and comparable point estimates. Because air

quality in a city may be affected by pollution in surrounding cities and regions, we follow Zheng,

Cao and Kahn (2011) in constructing a proxy for air quality changes in nearby cities: the

weighted average of the changes in the ratios of days reaching “Grade I” air quality in all other

cities that year, weighted by the reciprocal of the exponential function of the distance to that city.

Finally, lagged FDI, normalized by GDP, is also introduced to control for any effect of foreign

investment on air quality of the sort found by Copeland and Taylor (2004). Significance tests in

the tables cluster residuals by province. The definitions and sources of these variables are listed

in the appendix.


5
  We exclude these data for several reasons. First, because these cities are “province-level” administrative units,
their top government and Party officials are considered to be top provincial government and Party cadres, and thus
to have promotion possibilities not comparable to those of top cadres in other cities. Second, the four cities are
much larger and more developed than most other cities during the sample period. Finally, unique occasions – most
notably, the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing and the 2010 Expo in Shanghai – affect data for those cities.
6
  Regressions using the fraction of “Grade I” days, rather than its first difference, as the dependent variable generate
qualitatively similar results.
7
  The tables normalize by local GDP in the same year. Normalizing by population – that is, using per capita
investment on environmental improvement, etc. – generates qualitatively similar results throughout. We relegate
these to a footnote because China’s official population figures account poorly for migrants, and thus may induce a
bias associated with the net internal migration if used as a scaling factor.

                                                           8
        Table 2 reveals a positive and significant correlation between environmental investment

and better air quality in both the concurrent year and two years in the future. Using the

coefficient in column 3, a one standard deviation increase in environmental investment correlates

with a 1.03 percent larger fraction of days reaching “Grade I” in the same year, and with a 1.19

percent increase two years later. 8 These marginal effects are economically significant: on

average, the fraction of days reaching “Grade I” increases by only 0.86 percent per year, so a one

standard deviation increase in environmental investment correlates with a better than doubling of

the baseline improvement trajectory. In contrast, investment in transportation infrastructure is

uncorrelated with air quality improvement.


        The coefficients on the control variables are unsurprising. Per capita GDP growth is

significantly negative, while its cross-term with lagged per capita GDP is significantly positive,

tracing out the U-shaped relationship between air quality and local economic growth of an

environmental Kuznets curve. Calculated using column (1), the turning point corresponds to a

per capita GDP of about ¥127.3 thousand (in constant 2009 RMB). In the sample data, a few of

the most developed Chinese cities approach this point. Nearby cities’ air quality attracts a

positive coefficient, but is not uniformly significant; consistent with the finding of Zheng, Cao

and Kahn (2011) that local factors are predominant determinants of air quality in China. The

FDI variable is insignificant.


        As Table 1 shows, the number of cities graded for air quality increased between 2001 and

2005, so the panel in column (1) through (3) is unbalanced. If cities that entered the data late


8
  For the 86 cities with air quality information, the standard deviation of investment in environmental improvements
(normalized by local GDP) is 0.417 during the sample period. Together with the coefficients in Table 2 (column 3),
this implies a one standard deviation increase in environmental investment corresponds to 0.417 × 0.0247 = 0.0103
(1.03 percent) increase in the dependent variable during the same year, and to a 0.417 × 0.0286 = 0.0119 (1.19
percent) increase two years later.

                                                         9
have systematically different pollution problems, our results might be affected. Columns (4) to

(6) therefore use only data from 2005 on: a balanced panel containing the same cities each year.

Qualitatively similar results ensue; indeed environmental development variable becomes more

significant.


        Reverse causality seems implausible in these regressions. That city officials would wait

until their air quality has improved to invest in environmental improvements seems prima facie

implausible.   That some unknown latent factor causes both investment in environmental

improvement and improves air quality through some other channel, such as closing pollution

intensive SOEs, is possible.




3.      Infrastructure spending


3.1     Local government responsibility for urban infrastructure expenditures


The Ministry of Housing and Urban-Rural Development’s “China Urban Construction Statistics

Yearbook” declares local (city) governments to be primarily responsible for urban infrastructure

investment.    Figure 4 shows that government spending accounting for 26.9% of all urban

infrastructure investments in 2009, and most of this to be by local governments. In contrast, the

central government only contributed about 1.1% of total urban infrastructure investments.

Enterprise spending accounts for another 23.8%; and most infrastructure enterprises are SOEs

controlled by local governments. Local governments can also use debt financing, either on their

own balance sheets or on those of SOEs they control, to magnify their budgets. In 2009, bank

loans and bonds to local governments provided funds for 39.7% of urban infrastructure


                                               10
investments. Thus, the lion’s share of urban infrastructure investment is directed by local

governments, or more precisely, by their top cadres.9




3.2     City government investment and superiors’ “emphasis”


Because local governments are preeminent in infrastructure development, their top cadres’

budget constraints and incentives are important. After a 1994 public finance reform, the central

government collects a large proportion of tax revenue and then allots funds to subsidiary levels

of government. For most local governments, this allotment is designed to cover only basic

operating expenses (chi fan cai zheng). Local governments therefore must access off-budget

financing to fund urban infrastructure. Most of this is either borrowing – that is, bank loans or

bond issues – or revenue from the sale of long-term land leases to property development

enterprises.


        The CCP’s management system entrusts public spending decisions at each level of

government to that level’s top cadres. China’s merit-based management system is based on their

decisions being shaped by their incentives for career advancement. Because we study city-level

data, we focus on the preferences of Party Secretaries of provincial CCP Committees (sheng wei

shu ji), whose recommendations affect the careers of top city-level cadres (mayors and city Party

Secretaries) in their provinces. Obviously, we cannot observe Provincial CCP Secretaries’

preferences; however, we can make plausible inferences about them from their public records.




9
  The Ministry of Housing and Urban-Rural Development does not disaggregate funding by usage, so data for, e.g.
transportation infrastructure investment versus environmental improvement investment, are not available.

                                                       11
        The 27 provinces we study were governed by a total of 82 provincial CCP Secretaries

from 2000 to 2009. An annual index of their preference regarding infrastructure investment is

constructed as follows. An internet search by the name and title of each provincial CCP

Secretary yields a total number of hits. This is the denominator of the index. A second set of

searches, each run within these hits, identifies webpages that also contain relevant keywords that

might occur in these top cadres’ speeches and articles: “infrastructure (ji chu she shi)” or “urban

development (cheng shi jian she)” to flag urban infrastructure investments, “transportation (jiao

tong)” to flag transportation related urban infrastructure investments, and “environmental

protection (huan bao or huan jing bao hu)” to flag urban environmental infrastructure

investments. (Note that, in Chinese, the terms for transportation and environmental protection

are not implicitly subcategories of “infrastructure”). Dividing the number of hits each from these

three joint searches by the denominator yields annual indexes for each provincial CCP

secretary’s connections with each of infrastructure investment in general, transportation

infrastructure investment, and environmental improvement investment. We interpret each index

as reflecting the importance a provincial CCP Secretary assigns to investment in infrastructure in

general, transportation infrastructure, and environmental improvements, respectively, that year.10


       The panel averages of the three indices are 0.16 for infrastructure investment, 0.29 for

“transportation infrastructure investment” and 0.22 for “environmental improvement investment.”

Thus, provincial CCP Secretaries on average emphasize transportation more than the

environment, at least in their on-line coverage.




10
  Zheng et al (2012) uses a similar methodology to construct an internet search-based index of developers’
emphasis on the energy-efficiency of their housing developments in China.

                                                        12
     China’s hierarchical management system turns on city-level cadres, aspiring for promotion,

pursuing investment policies in harmony with goals their provincial Party Secretaries emphasize.

To explore this, we utilize data for 283 of China’s 287 city-level (di ji shi) governments from

2000 through 2009, again excluding the four “province-level” cities.           Table 3 presents

regressions of city-level investment in transportation infrastructures and environmental

improvements, both scaled by local GDP in the same year, on one-year lagged values of three

proxies for local government budget constraints, budgetary allocation from the central

government, revenues from land sales, and outstanding debt, all normalized by local GDP in the

same year, and the lagged internet search-based index on provincial CCP Secretaries’ priorities.

The regressions also control for lagged values of real per capita GDP, FDI, investment other than

urban infrastructure, and government expenditures, all normalized by local GDP. City fixed-

effects are also included, and found to be jointly significant in Hausman tests. Standard error

estimates are clustered by province. More detailed descriptions of the variables are available in

the appendix.


       Table 3 reveals cities’ budgetary allocations from the central government to be unrelated

to investment in transportation or environmental improvements. This is consistent with those

allocations being used for their official purpose – funding basic services. In contrast, revenue

from land sales is significantly positive in explaining transportation infrastructure investment.

The coefficient in column (1) implies that a one standard deviation increase in land sales revenue

corresponds to a 0.14 percentage point increase (2.398 × 0.057 ≈ 0.137) in transportation

investment as a fraction of local GDP the following year, which is equivalent of about 15.3% of

mean transportation investment over GDP in the sample period. However, land sales revenue is

unrelated to environmental investment. Similarly, loan balances are positively and marginally


                                               13
significantly related to transportation infrastructure investment, but insignificant in

environmental investment regressions.


       These results are consistent with local governments using revenues from land auctions

and, less clearly, from loans to finance transportation infrastructure, but not environmental

improvements. A reverse causality scenario would have governments collected more revenues

from land sales in the past because land leasers anticipated more investment in transportation

infrastructure. This is plausible, for better transportation infrastructure might elevate land prices,

thereby increasing local governments’ land sales proceeds.


       The lagged proxies for provincial Party Secretaries’ priorities, the internet search indexes,

reveal their emphasizing infrastructure to be positive and marginally significant in explaining

transportation infrastructure investment, but negative and insignificant in explaining

environmental investment. Provincial-level cadres’ emphasizing transportation infrastructure

investment likewise correlates marginally significantly positively with spending on

transportation infrastructure (column 2).      In contrast, the index gauging provincial cadres’

emphasis on the environment is negative and marginally significant in explaining spending on

environmental investment (column 4).


       These findings are consistent with province-level cadres’ calls for infrastructure

investment motivating city-level cadres to spend more on transportation; but with city-level

cadres essentially ignoring any emphasis their province-level superiors’ assign to the

environment. Reverse causation – province level cadres tailoring their utterances and internet

coverage to reflect city-level cadres’ decisions to invest in transportation infrastructure, rather

than environmental improvement – seems implausible.



                                                 14
      Intriguingly, cities that have attracted foreign direct investment in the past spend more in

environmental amenities. Foreign investors might create pressure for environmental

improvements. We cannot cleanly distinguish this from cleaner air attracting more foreign direct

investment. Nonetheless, if top provincial cadres wish to implement policies conducive to FDI,

either direction suggests that they prepare for higher environmental spending.


      These results are robust. Qualitatively similar findings emerge scaling the two sorts of

investment by their sum, instead of by GDP. Controlling for year fixed effects likewise yields

qualitatively similar results. So does dropping the global financial crisis years 2008 and 2009 to

eliminate observations potentially affected by China’s 2008 slowdown and aggressive 2009

macroeconomic stimuli.




4.     Cadres’ incentives regarding infrastructure


If city-level cadres are inclined towards spending available funds on transportation infrastructure

because this augments their odds of being promoted, this would be evident in their career

advancement paths. Having overseen rapid economic growth in one position is known to

statistically and economically significantly raise provincial-level cadre’s odds of promotion (Li

and Zhou, 2005; Chen, Li and Zhou, 2005). All sorts of city government spending can increase

aggregate demand and thus stimulate a city’s economic growth. However, spending on

transportation infrastructure immediately creates economic activity, and thus might have a more

immediate and tangible impact on economic growth than would spending on environmental

improvements. A better environment might attract migrants and investment, including foreign



                                                15
investment, but its impact on recorded GDP growth is apt to be slower and spread out across the

more distant future.




4.1    Infrastructure Investment and GDP growth


Previous studies suggest that infrastructure investment induces an immediate boost to tangible

measures of local economic growth. Based on Chinese province-level economic growth results,

D´emurger (2001) argues that variation in provinces’ infrastructure capital stocks, especially in

those pertaining to transportation, is a key factor in explaining interprovincial variation in

economic growth rates. Lin and Song (2002) come to a similar conclusion about infrastructure

spending and economic growth using Chinese city-level data. Their cross-section results suggest

that cities that pave their gravel roads more rapidly exhibit faster contemporaneous tangible

economic growth. Fan and Zhang (2004) link infrastructure investment to tangible economic

growth in the rural area of China.


       Because our city-level data do not include capital stock measures, the strategy of Lin and

Song (2002) is tractable while that of D´emurger (2001) is not. Again using data for 283 cities

from 2000 through 2009, Table 4 regresses annual real per capita GDP growth, calculated as first

differences in the log of real per capita GDP, on transportation infrastructure and environmental

investments, both again normalized by local GDP, and controls. The controls include one-year

lagged values of log real per capita GDP level as well as of FDI, total investment excluding

urban infrastructure investment, and government expenditure, all as fractions of local GDP.

Other factors may well enter – population growth rates, natural resource endowments, stocks of

human capital, and so on – but these are not available annually at the city-level. To mitigate


                                               16
these deficiencies, we also include city fixed-effects, which Hausman tests again reveal to be

jointly significant. Standard error estimates are clustered by province.


        Table 4 shows the coefficients of the various control variables to be generally consistent

with prior work: for example, local GDP growth is significantly positively related to investment.

Column (1) shows local GDP growth is also positive and statistically significantly related to

lagged transportation infrastructure investment as a fraction of local GDP. The point estimate

implies that a one standard deviation increase in transportation investment corresponds to an

additional 0.16 percentage point of local per capita GDP growth the next year (exp(0.799 ×

0.0020) ≈ 0.0016). This is in line with the effects found by D´emurger (2001) and Lin and Song

(2002). In contrast, environmental investment is statistically insignificant. In column (2) and (3)

additional lags of urban infrastructure investments are introduced, however neither measure is

significant.


        These results are robust.         Qualitatively similar results ensue from introducing GDP

growth rate as the dependent variable in order to avoid potential errors in the imputed population

indicator 11. Introducing year fixed-effects as control variables and dropping the recession period

of 2008 and stimulus period of 2009 both likewise generate qualitatively similar results.


        These findings are consistent with city governments spending on transportation

infrastructure boosting economic growth. However, a reversal causality scenario – expecting

rapid growth, city government invest more in transportation infrastructure – cannot be excluded.

Both directions of causality are consistent with the premise that city-level cadres more intent on



11
  China collects population statistics every ten years in national censuses, the two most recent being in 2000 and
2010. Population levels in intervening years are imputed based from census data assuming constant annual
population growth rates. We therefore cannot include annual population growth rates in these regressions.

                                                       17
promoting tangible economic growth are also more inclined towards spending local government

funds on transportation infrastructure, rather than on environmental improvements.




4.2    Transportation infrastructure investments and land sales revenue


Rosen (1979) and Roback (1982) show that equilibrium real estate prices are fully determined by

the expected economic growth and quality-of-life (QOL) of a city. Because urban infrastructure

investment could enhance either a city’s QOL or its economic growth, or both, such investment

could raise real estate prices. Because revenue from land sales is an important off-budget

funding source for China’s local governments, higher land prices would loosen local government

cadres’ budget constraints. If investment in transportation infrastructure and investment in

environmental improvements affected land prices differently, local top cadres might have

different inclinations towards these sorts of investment.


       Table 5 again uses panel of data for 283 cities from 2000 through 2009 to run regressions

explaining city-level annual rates of increase in land prices, measured as first differences in

logarithms of prices of land for all usages in constant 2009 yuan. The two key explanatory

variables are lagged values of the two types of urban infrastructure investment over local GDP,

and control variables include lagged values of the logarithm of the average real land price level,

the growth rate (first difference in logarithms) of real per capita GDP, and FDI, total investment

(excluding urban infrastructure investment), and government expenditure, with the last three

scaled by local GDP. Again, city fixed-effects are also included and are jointly significant in

Hausman tests. Standard error estimates are clustered by province.




                                                18
        Table 5 displays these regressions, which show lagged transportation infrastructure

investment significantly positively related to land prices. This effect is economically significant:

the coefficient implies that a one standard deviation increase in transportation infrastructure

investment over GDP corresponds to a land price growth rate higher by 4.5 percentage points the

following year (1.025 × 0.044 ≈ 0.0451). This amounts to a 21.5% increase in the average

annual land price growth rate for the 283 cities during the sample period.                        In contrast,

environmental investment is unrelated to land prices.12


        These results are robust. Qualitatively similar results ensue if we include cities’ land

supply each year, which is controlled by the city government, as another control variable. (We

do not include this control in the table because it is obviously endogenous.) Qualitatively similar

results also ensue from introducing the year fixed-effects and from dropping 2008 and 2009 data.


        The results in Table 5 are consistent with transportation infrastructure investment

substantially raising land prices, and thus increasing city governments’ revenues from land sales.

Together with the results in Table 3, these findings are consistent with the existence of a positive

feedback cycle wherein local governments’ transportation infrastructure investment boosts land

sales income, which finances further transportation infrastructure investment by the city, and so

on ad infinitum. The bidirectional causality in such a feedback loop affects the reliability of the

point estimates in Table 5, but regardless of the direction of causality, city-level cadres would be

prone to invest in transportation infrastructure, as opposed to environmental improvements, if

tangible economic growth elevated their odds of being promoted. Spillover from such a positive

feedback loop might arise if higher land sales revenue can also help finance city governments’

12
  Year-by-year cross sectional regressions without city fixed-effects (not shown) reveal a small and marginally
significant positive coefficient in 2009 only, perhaps not inconsistent with the very tentative advent of a shift
towards environmental factors mattering to land prices.

                                                       19
other investment projects, especially those that also boost local GDP growth. Environmental

improvements would not seem to qualify here either.




4.3     City-level Cadres’ Promotion Odds

Existing empirical work using provincial level data reveals overseeing rapid GDP growth to be

the most important determinant of a cadre being promoted (Li and Zhou, 2005; Chen, Li and

Zhou, 2005). If China’s merit-based management system encompasses city-level cadres, and if

their promotion odds are higher for having overseen rapid local GDP growth, their evident

preference for spending city government funds on transportation infrastructure, rather than

environmental improvements, follows.


        To explore this connection, we estimate probit regressions explaining an indicator

variable set to one if a top city cadre, either its CCP Secretary or its mayor, is promoted within

the year. We say a cadre is promoted, and set the indicator variable to one, only if the next job is

a province-level or higher position; if a city-level mayor’s next job is as a city-level CCP

Secretary (either in the same or another city); if a cadre in other than a provincial capital is

moved to the same position in a provincial capital city; or if the cadre’s new position is similar to

the previous one but also entails selection as the member of the provincial CCP standing

committee (sheng wei chang wei). In all other cases, including retirements, we say the cadre is

not promoted and set the indicator to zero. Dropping these few observations instead yields

similar results to those in the tables.


        “Abnormal” changes – death, arrest for corruption, etc. – are excluded from the sample.

We also drop observations corresponding to cadres’ first year in their positions. Also, because of
                                                 20
data limitations in calculating some of our control variables, we only include data for cadres who

assumed their current positions in or after the year 2000 in order to calculate some of our control

variables reliably. In a few cities, all the cadres during the sample period either were or were not

promoted; these observations are dropped because of the resulting collinearity with city fixed-

effects, which are included throughout. We revisit these observations below as a robustness

check.


         We have two sets of focal explanatory variables. The first contains three measures of the

GDP growth rate of a cadre’s city: its mean GDP growth rate from the first to last year of the

cadre’s tenure; the difference between this and the mean GDP growth rate of all other cities in

the same province during the same period; and the difference between the city’s mean GDP

growth rate during the cadre’s tenure and its mean GDP growth rate during the cadre’s

predecessor’s tenure.


         The second set of focal explanatory variable gauge infrastructure spending.         These

include the two types of urban infrastructure investment; each scaled by GDP and averaged over

the cadre’s tenure from first to last year. Promotions may result from factors other than high

GDP growth.       For example, increased transportation infrastructure or better environmental

outcomes might add to a cadre’s odds of promotion, over and above their effect through

economic growth.


         Control variables include the following. Various personal attributes of cadres might also

affect their odds of promotion. Therefore, we control for them. Detailed definitions of these

variables are provided in the appendix. City fixed-effects are also included, and standard error

estimates are clustered by cadre because any given cadre may appear in the panel multiple times



                                                21
– once for each year in each position.        Because the determinants of promotion for Party

Secretaries and mayors may differ, we run probit regressions separately for each class of city-

level top cadre.


         Table 6 and 7 display these regressions for Party Secretaries and mayors, respectively. In

both tables, the difference between the city’s GDP growth rate during the cadre’s tenure less that

during his predecessor’s tenure is the only GDP growth measure to be significantly positive.

This is consistent with cadres’ promotions depending on outdoing their predecessors in

encouraging rapid economic growth. Province-level cadres judging city-level cadres’

performance primarily against this benchmark is plausible.        Because China’s cities exhibit

substantial economic heterogeneity, a given city’s growth under a prior civic administration is

arguably a better bar than the growth rates of other cities. The finding that mayors’ promotions

are more significantly correlated with GDP growth than are Party Secretaries promotions is

consistent with previous findings regarding provincial-level cadres’ promotions (Li and Zhou,

2005).


         The regression coefficients permit assessment of the economic significance of these

factors in explaining a cadre’s odds of promotion. One standard deviation increase in average

GDP growth rate compared with the predecessor raises the probability of promotion by 4.76

percentage points for secretaries and 10.0 percentage points for mayors. This is consistent with

the fact that typically the tasks for CCP secretaries are more diversified than just the high GDP

growth rate.


         Remarkably, a city’s investment in transportation infrastructure is completely

insignificant in explaining its senior cadres’ odds of promotion.        This finding is perhaps



                                                 22
consistent with spending on transportation infrastructure being motivated by its contribution to

GDP growth.


       Most remarkably of all, a city government’s spending on environmental improvements is

actually significantly negatively related to the odds of its CCP secretary and mayor being

promoted. One standard deviation increase in average GDP scaled environmental improvement

investment lowers the probability of promotion by 8.5 percentage points for secretaries and 6.3

percentage points for mayors. This finding suggests that other factors are at work. Perhaps city-

level “environmentalists” offend province-level cadres whose promotions previous work shows

to be more clearly driven by economic growth. Or perhaps city-level cadres with less hope for

promotion or less career-minded are more apt to invest in environmental improvements. This

interpretation is consistent with the narrative story that “promotion based on tangible growth

performance” induces government leaders competing for promotion invest in transportation

infrastructure, rather than in environmental amenities, because the former contributes more

readily to tangible growth.


       Nevertheless, it is still necessary for local officers to maintain a minimum level of

investment on environmental amenities to secure his/her political career, instead of just cutting

down all the environmental investments. In China “keeping social stability” is always a key

criterion with decisive and veto power (yi piao fou jue) for local officers; in other words, all

other achievements are equal to nothing if collective petitions or massive protests occur in

his/her jurisdiction (Chen, 2012). Therefore, with the emerging environment-related petitions

and protests in China (Xie, 2009), failing to maintain a basic standard of environmental

amenities would be very risky for local officers. Most recently, the central government also

explicitly listed environmental protection as an evaluation indicator for local officers in its latest

                                                 23
“12th Five-year Plan (2010-2015) for Environment Protection” released in 2011, which may

provide more direct incentives for local officers to expand environmental investments.


        The relationships of cadres’ personal attributes to their promotion odds are less surprising.

A cadre’s age upon assuming the current position is most significant, especially for the CCP

Secretaries. Cadres who assumed their current position at an age too near the typical retirement

age are potentially less likely to be further promoted. The effect of gender is opposite in the two

groups of cadres: female CCP secretaries are more likely to be promoted; female mayors are less

likely. Cadres’ educational background is insignificantly related to their promotion odds. Their

previous work experience reveals past positions in other provinces to be helpful for the mayors,

but not for Party Secretaries and past positions in SOEs to weigh against promotion, especially

for Party Secretaries.


        These results are again robust. Including year fixed-effects to control for promotion

decisions being clustered in certain years yields qualitatively similar results to those in the tables.

We also tried including observations where all cadres in a given city were either promoted or not

promoted, and this also yields qualitatively similar results to those shown. Rerunning the probits

using indicators set to one if a cadre is promoted within two, three, or four years, rather than

within one year, also all generate qualitatively similar results. Longer windows mean each cadre

enters the panel only once.13 Running Cox proportional hazard regressions, rather than probits,

also generates qualitatively similar results: environmental investment significantly negatively

affects the promotion odds of both CCP Secretaries and mayors, while transportation

infrastructure investment is insignificant. GDP growth compared with that under the cadre’s


13
  In our data, Party Secretaries spend an average of 3.36 years and mayors an average of 2.91 years before being
promoted or otherwise reassigned.

                                                        24
predecessor is also positive and statistically significant for mayors, but less significant for CCP

Secretaries.




5.     Conclusions


China, while generating miraculously fast economic growth, is also well known for severe air

pollution and a range of other environmental problems. Likewise, its problems in providing of

key public goods, including basic healthcare, universal public education, and social security,

continue to draw both national and international criticism. The China’s 12th five year plan sets

‘green’ achievements and the enhanced provision of public services as important targets. The

World Bank’s “China 2030” report also flags these issues as critical to making China’s growth

sustainable.


       These outcomes appear to be due to the promotion incentives, assigned responsibilities,

and budget constraints with which China’s public governance surrounds city-level Party cadres.

Local governments are assigned the lion’s share of responsibility for providing urban

infrastructure and basic public services. However, local governments’ revenues based on tax

revenue sharing and intergovernmental fiscal transfers are insufficient to cover these expenses.

Party cadres assigned to local governments must resolve this arithmetic impossibility, knowing

that their careers are governed by promotion criteria, applied every three or so years, emphasizes

the delivery of tangible economic growth. Given these duties, these budget constraints, and this

system of career advancement incentives, local government cadres quite rationally invest scare

public funds in investments that produce tangible evidence of growth within a few years.



                                                25
       The results above, exploring spending on urban infrastructure, illustrate this logic. From

2000 through 2009, city-level governments spending on urban infrastructure stressed

transportation over environmental amenities.         Senior cadres’ public statements calling for

transportation infrastructure heralded transportation infrastructure spending; but, like calls for

spending on improving the environment did not similarly stimulate spending on environment –

even as environmental conditions in major Chinese cities worsened palpably, senior central

government cadres’ speeches increasingly drew attention to environmental issues, and data

accumulated shows that spending on environmental amenities significantly improves air quality.


       The empirical results above reveal that spending on transportation infrastructure raises

both GDP growth, a key promotion determinant, and land prices. Because land lease sales are

city-level governments’ sole major source of additional revenues, policies that elevate land

prices held city-level cadres cope with the mismatch of their heavy spending responsibilities and

inadequate fiscal transfers from Beijing. This gives city-level cadres an added incentive to favor

transportation infrastructure spending – it loosens their budget constraints.        Investing in

environmental improvements has no such salubrious consequences.


       Indeed, our empirical results indicate that spending on environmental amenities

negatively affects city-level cadres’ odds of promotion. This is plausibly because funds spent on

the environment do not translate as surely into added local GDP growth; though we cannot reject

the possibility that cadres less keen on rapid promotion might also favor environmental

improvements. Regardless, either interpretation reinforces the point that cadres’ promotion

concerns very likely affect local governments’ spending priorities.




                                                26
        Our empirical findings could also be partially driven by other latent issues that we have

yet to explore. For example, cities with rapid GDP growth might have more resources and

opportunities for cronyism, and top cadres in these cities might be promoted faster. Or, investing

in transportation infrastructure and allowing rapid rises in land prices and real estate might be an

effective way to channel benefits to connected parties.


        Obviously, because we cannot observe China’s collective social welfare function, we

cannot conclude that our findings indicate inefficient resource allocation. It remains plausible

that the governments’ action matches people’s preference: people might want to get rich first,

and only afterwards grow concerned improving the environment, or public education or health

care.


        Regardless, our findings reveal the importance of government officials’ incentives,

assigned responsibilities, and budget constraint. Clearly, even the behavior of career members of

the Chinese Communist Party is shaped by the incentives set before them: cadres appear to

enthusiastically fulfill the parts of their assigned responsibilities that are rewarded and to ignore

those that are not incorporated in the incentive system. Moreover, all this occurs is shaped by a

budgetary process: Chinese Communist Party cadres enthusiastically fulfill assigned

responsibilities that expand their budgets, while ignoring assigned responsibilities that do not.

Communist Party cadres, in short, appear to be card-carrying members of the species hommo

economicus.


        China’s new five year plan emphasizes protecting the environment, raising health care

standards, and enhancing the quality and universality of public education. These policy goals

plausibly have localized idiosyncrasies that justify their delegation to local cadres.            To



                                                 27
implement these policy goals, senior Party cadres may wish to consider carefully the ways in

which lower-level cadres’ career incentives, policy responsibilities, and budget constraints are

likely to interact. Specifically, the analysis above suggests that, should China’s senior leadership

wish to improve air quality, or achieve any other such environmental goal, steps might be taken

to include measurable and tangible evidence of progress towards this in formulae determining

lower level cadres’ promotions and budgets.




                                                28
Appendix: Data Description


(1) City-Level Statistics

By the end of 2009 there are 287 cities which are classified at or above municipal level (di ji shi)

in mainland China. Our empirical analyses cover 283 of them, excluding the four “province-

level” municipalities (namely, Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin, and Chongqing). All the city statistics

variables in our sample are available by annual series between 2000 and 2009, and by cross-

section over 283 cities, except for the air quality, which is available in 82 cities only.


          The variables’ definitions, sources and major statistics are listed in Table A-1. All the

monetary variables are normalized by local GDP volume in the same year unless otherwise

stated.


(2) Information on City Officers

During the sample period between 2000 and 2009, there are totally 976 CCP secretaries and

1075 mayors in the 283 cities. (According to our definition in this paper, if a turnover happens

on or before June 30th, the corresponding city-year will be allocated to the newly-appointed

officer, otherwise it will come to the predecessor.)


          When a secretary or mayor is appointed, his/her official resume will be publicly reported

in local medias, from which we collect the information on the officers’ personal characteristics,

previous working experience, and whether he/she gets promoted or not after current position.

The variables’ definitions, sources and major statistics are listed in Table A-2.




                                                  29
References

Chen, Jing (2012). “Who Participates in Collective Petitions in Rural China,” Journal of Chinese
Political Science, 17(3): 251-268.
Chen, Ye, Hongbin Li and Li-An Zhou (2005). “Relative Performance Evaluation and the
Turnover of Provincial Leaders in China,” Economics Letters, 88(3): 421-425.
Copeland, Brian and Scott Taylor (2004). “Trade, Growth, and the Environment,” Journal of
Economic Literature, 42(1): 7-71.
D´emurger (2001). “Infrastructure Development and Economic Growth: An Explanation for
Regional Disparities in China,” Journal of Comparative Economics, 29(1): 95-117.
Edin, Maria (2003). “State Capacity and Local Agent Control in China: CCP Cadre Management
from a Township Perspective,” The China Quarterly, 173(March): 35-52.
Fan, Shenggen and Xiaobo Zhang (2004). “Infrastructure and Regional Economic Development
in Rural China,” China Economic Review, 15(2): 203-214.
Holmstrom, Bengt and Paul Milgrom (1991). “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive
Contracts, Asset Ownership and Job Design,” Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization, 7(Sp):
24-52
Jensen, Michael (1998). Foundations of Organizational Strategy, Harvard University Press.
Li, Hongbin and Li-an Zhou (2005). “Political Turnover and Economic Performance: The
Incentive Role of Personnel Control in China,” Journal of Public Economics, 89(9/10): 1743-172.
Lin, Shuanglin and Shunfeng Song (2002). “Urban Economic Growth in China: Theory and
Evidence,” Urban Studies, 39(12): 2251-2266.
Maskin, Eric, Yingyi Qian and Chenggang Xu (2000). “Incentives, Information, and
Organizational Form,” Review of Economic Studies, 67(2): 359-378.
Roback, Jennifer (1982). “Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life,” Journal of Political Economy,
90(6): 1257-1278.
Rosen, Sherwin (1979). “Wage-Based Indexes of Urban Quality of Life”, in P. Mieszkowski and
M. Strazheim (eds.), Current Issues in Urban Economics, (Baltimore, MD.: Johns Hopkins
University Press), 74-104.
Shih, Victor, Christopher Adolph and Mingxing Liu (2012). “Getting Ahead in the Communist
Party: Explaining the Advancement of Central Committee Members in China”, American
Political Science Review, 106(1): 166-187.
Stern, David, Michael Common and Edward Barbier (1996). “Economic Growth and
Environmental Degradation: The Environmental Kuznets Curve and Sustainable Development,”
World Development, 24(7): 1151-1160.


                                              30
Stern, David (2004). “The Rise and Fall of the Environmental Kuznets Curve,” World
Development, 32 (8): 1419-1439.
Whiting, Susan (2004). “The Cadre Evaluation System at the Grass Roots: The Paradox of Party
Rule,” in D. Yang, and B. Naughton (eds.), Holding China Together: Diversity and National
Integration in the post-Deng Era, (New York: Cambridge University Press), 101-119.
World Bank (2007). Cost of Pollution in China: Economic Estimates of Physical Damages.
World Bank (2012). China 2030: Building a Modern, Harmonious, and Creative High-Income
Society.
Xie, Tie (2009). Environmental Activism in China, New York: Routledge.
Zheng, Siqi, Jing Cao and Matthew Kahn (2011). “China's Rising Demand for "Green Cities":
Evidence from Cross-City Real Estate Price Hedonics,” Journal of Real Estate Finance and
Economics, forthcoming.
Zheng, Siqi, Jing Wu, Matthew Kahn and Yongheng Deng (2012). “The Nascent Market for
‘Green’ Real Estate in Beijing,” European Economic Review, 56(5): 974-984.




                                            31
                                              City Officer
                                              Promotion


                                                       Increase
                                                      Probability

                                     Boost     Local GDP        Boost
                                                Growth

              Transportation                                             Other
              Infrastructure                                          Government
                Investment                                             Spendings

                                     Raise     Land Sales     Support
                                                Income


                                 Support



                  (A) For the transportation infrastructures:

                                                 Decrease
                                                Probability         City Officer
                                                                    Promotion


                                                                            Increase
                                                                           Probability



                                                                   Local GDP
                                                                     Growth


                           Improve    Environmental
             Local Air
                                        Amenity
              Quality
                                       Investment



                                                                   Land Sales
                                                                     Income



                                                      
                         (B) For the environmental amenities:

Figure 1: Local Governments’ Incentives and Urban Infrastructure Investments




                                              32
   Share in Total Urban
 Infrastructure Investment
    80%


    70%


    60%


    50%


    40%


    30%


    20%


    10%


      0%
           1981     1983     1985     1987      1989     1991     1993     1995     1997      1999     2001     2003    2005   2007   2009

                               Transportation Infrastructures                                 Environmental Amenities



                             Figure 2: Structure of Urban Infrastructure Investments in the National Level
Source: Ministry of Housing and Urban-Rural Development of China, “China Urban Construction Statistics Yearbook”.




                                                                          33
  Ratio Against GDP
   2.00%




   1.50%




   1.00%




   0.50%




   0.00%
           1981     1983      1985     1987     1989      1991     1993     1995      1997     1999     2001        2003   2005   2007   2009

                                Transportation Infrastructures                                  Environmental Amenities



                                     Figure 3: Ratio of Urban Infrastructure Investments against GDP
Source: Ministry of Housing and Urban-Rural Development of China, “China Urban Construction Statistics Yearbook”.




                                                                          34
100%


90%


80%


70%


60%


50%


40%


30%


20%


10%


 0%
       1981      1983      1985      1987       1989      1991      1993        1995     1997      1999       2001    2003      2005        2007   2009

                  Others              FDI                Enterprise Spending              Loan and Bond               Government Spending

                                  Figure 4: Fund Sources of Fixed Asset Investment on Urban Infrastructure
  Source: Ministry of Housing and Urban-Rural Development of China, “China Urban Construction Statistics Yearbook”.



                                                                               35
                                       Table 1: Average Ratio of Days Reaching “Grade I” in Air Quality


      A. All the Cities Included

                       2001           2002           2003           2004           2005       2006     2007     2008     2009     2010

Median               12.53%         13.97%          14.79%         13.39%         12.47%     13.29%   14.79%   15.17%   18.68%   18.14%

Average              18.29%         21.22%          21.13%         20.07%         19.15%     18.14%   18.97%   20.88%   23.54%   23.27%

Std. Dev.            20.81%         23.11%          21.46%         21.42%         19.28%     18.02%   17.46%   18.19%   18.98%   17.17%

Observations            37             47             47             47             84         86       86       86       86       86

 B.     The 37 Cities Appeared in All Years

                       2001           2002           2003           2004           2005       2006     2007     2008     2009     2010

Median               12.53%         13.97%          14.79%         10.38%         14.79%     15.89%   14.79%   16.39%   18.68%   20.33%

Average              18.29%         20.18%          20.10%         19.04%         21.50%     21.63%   21.62%   23.98%   27.55%   28.30%

Std. Dev.            20.81%         21.49%          20.39%         20.48%         20.26%     19.60%   18.97%   20.57%   22.87%   21.09%

Observations            37             37             37             37             37         37       37       37       37       37

Note: A city is included in the analysis only if all the days in that year were monitored.

Source: Ministry of Environmental Protection of China.




                                                                                  36
                                       Table 2: Environmental Amenity Investment and Local Air Quality
                             (Dependent Variable: Change in Ratio of Days Reaching “Grade I” in Air Quality)
Independent Variables                                 (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)
Environmental Amenity Investment                     0.0201        0.0222        0.0247        0.0336       0.0336       0.0363
(normalized by GDP)                                 (1.87)*       (1.99)**      (2.22)**      (2.55)**     (2.52)**     (2.74)***
Transportation Infrastructure Investment            -0.0010       -0.0010       -0.0004        0.0001       0.0004       0.0013
(normalized by GDP)                                (-0.36)       (-0.33)       (-0.14)        (0.03)       (0.11)       (0.35)
Lagged Environmental Amenity Investment                           -0.0085       -0.0174                     0.0028      -0.0062
(normalized by GDP)                                              (-0.71)       (-1.40)                     (0.19)      (-0.42)
Lagged Transportation Infrastructure Investment                   -0.0002       -0.0013                    -0.0017      -0.0035
(normalized by GDP)                                              (-0.05)       (-0.34)                    (-0.37)      (-0.74)
Two Year Lagged Environmental Amenity                                            0.0286                                  0.0328
Investment (normalized by GDP)                                                  (2.35)**                                (2.37)**
Two Year Lagged Transportation Infrastructure                                    0.0012                                  0.0038
Investment (normalized by GDP)                                                  (0.32)                                  (0.87)
Lagged Air Quality Level                            -0.7070       -0.7078       -0.7075        0.2607       0.2582       0.2690
                                                  (-13.50)***   (-13.37)***   (-13.43)***     (4.04)***    (3.95)***    (4.15)***
Per Real Capita GDP Growth                          -3.6434       -3.6257       -3.3039       -3.0852      -3.1389      -3.2256
                                                   (-2.82)***    (-2.78)***    (-2.50)**     (-1.71)*     (-1.72)*     (-1.78)*
Per Real Capita GDP Growth * Lagged Real Per         0.3100        0.3094        0.2768        0.2515       0.2570       0.2640
Capita GDP Level                                    (2.42)**      (2.38)**      (2.10)**      (1.40)       (1.42)       (1.47)
                                                     0.9833        0.9542        0.9681        1.2946       1.2876       1.2546
Weighted Change of Air Quality in Other Cities
                                                    (1.41)        (1.37)        (1.38)        (1.52)       (1.50)       (1.47)
Lagged Foreign Direct Investment                    -0.0014       -0.0013       -0.0014       -0.0007      -0.0007      -0.0019
(normalized by GDP)                                (-0.64)       (-0.57)       (-0.61)       (-0.19)      (-0.19)      (-0.50)
City Fixed Effect                                    Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
R2                                                   0.407         0.408         0.418         0.912        0.912        0.914
Number of observations                               486           486           486           369          369          369
 Note: (1) t statistics in parentheses
       (2) * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                                      37
                                  Table 3: Determinants of City-Level Urban Infrastructure Investments

Dependent Variables                                         Transportation Infrastructure Investment   Environmental Amenity Investment
                                                                      (normalized by GDP)                      (normalized by GDP)
Independent Variables                                             (1)                       (2)            (3)                     (4)
Lagged Local Budgetary allocation from the Central              -0.0149                   -0.0158        -0.0103                 -0.0110
Government                                                     (-0.27)                   (-0.29)        (-0.80)                 (-0.84)
(normalized by GDP)
Lagged Local Land Sales Income                                   0.0572                   0.0585          0.0046                0.0043
(normalized by GDP)                                             (2.61)**                 (2.64)**        (0.71)                (0.68)
Lagged Loan Balance                                              0.0044                   0.0046          0.0003                0.0001
(normalized by GDP)                                             (1.37)                   (1.46)          (0.19)                (0.10)
Lagged Internet Search Index on Infrastructure Investment        0.6739                                  -0.1459
                                                                (1.14)                                  (-0.77)
Lagged Internet Search Index on Transportation                                            0.5761
                                                                                         (1.31)
Lagged Internet Search Index on Environmental Protection                                                                        -0.1868
                                                                                                                               (-1.16)
Lagged Real Per Capita GDP Level                                 0.1299                   0.1650         -0.0072                -0.0087
                                                                (0.58)                   (0.71)         (-0.07)                (-0.09)
Lagged Foreign Direct Investment                                 0.0285                   0.0289          0.0205                 0.0196
(normalized by GDP)                                             (1.04)                   (1.05)          (2.36)**               (2.23)**
Lagged Investment other than Urban Infrastructures               0.0049                   0.0050          0.0011                 0.0011
(normalized by GDP)                                             (1.26)                   (1.29)          (0.90)                 (0.84)
Lagged Government Expenditure                                    0.0109                   0.0122          0.0050                 0.0041
(normalized by GDP)                                             (0.98)                   (1.08)          (0.91)                 (0.78)
City Fixed Effect                                                Yes                      Yes             Yes                    Yes
R2                                                               0.534                    0.535           0.437                  0.437
Number of observations                                           2419                     2419            2419                   2419
Note: (1) the cities are clustered by province.
      (2) t statistics in parentheses.
      (3) * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                      38
                                    Table 4: Urban Infrastructure Investment and Local GDP Growth
                                               (Dependent Variable: log(real Per Capita GDP))
Independent Variables                                                             (1)               (2)          (3)
Lagged Change in Environmental Amenity Investment                               -0.0013           -0.0012      -0.0013
(normalized by GDP)                                                            (-0.53)           (-0.34)      (-0.31)
Lagged Change in Transportation Infrastructure Investment                        0.0020            0.0018       0.0011
(normalized by GDP)                                                             (2.27)**          (1.75)*      (1.04)
Two Year Change in Lagged Environmental Amenity Investment                                        -0.0024      -0.0010
(normalized by GDP)                                                                              (-0.99)      (-0.27)
Two Year Change in Lagged Transportation Infrastructure Investment                                 0.0003       0.0000
(normalized by GDP)                                                                               (0.33)       (0.03)
Three Year Change in Lagged Environmental Amenity Investment                                                    0.0001
(normalized by GDP)                                                                                            (0.02)
Three Year Change in Lagged Transportation Infrastructure Investment                                            0.0008
(normalized by GDP)                                                                                            (0.81)
Lagged real Per Capita GDP Level                                                 0.0126           -0.0012      -0.0204
                                                                                (1.94)*          (-0.15)      (-2.18)**
Lagged Foreign Direct Investment                                                 0.0002            0.0002       0.0006
(normalized by GDP)                                                             (0.44)            (0.37)       (1.30)
Lagged Investment other than Urban Infrastructures                               0.0011            0.0009       0.0006
(normalized by GDP)                                                             (5.30)***         (4.45)***    (3.36)***
Lagged Government Expenditure                                                   -0.0000            0.0005       0.0015
(normalized by GDP)                                                            (-0.03)            (0.82)       (2.50)**
City Fixed Effect                                                                 Yes               Yes          Yes
R2                                                                               0.522             0.545        0.621
Number of observations                                                           2198              1933         1659
Note: (1) the cities are clustered by province.
      (2) t statistics in parentheses.
      (3) * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                       39
                                      Table 5: Urban Infrastructure Investment and Local Land Price
                                                (Dependent Variable: log(average land price))
Independent Variables                                                              (1)               (2)           (3)
Lagged Environmental Amenity Investment                                          -0.0806           -0.0968       -0.1112
(normalized by GDP)                                                             (-0.88)           (-1.07)       (-1.12)
Lagged Transportation Infrastructure Investment                                   0.0441            0.0420        0.0361
(normalized by GDP)                                                              (2.37)**          (2.20)**      (1.64)
Two Year Lagged Environmental Amenity Investment                                                    0.0547        0.0089
(normalized by GDP)                                                                                (0.70)        (0.13)
Two Year Lagged Transportation Infrastructure Investment                                            0.0055       -0.0177
(normalized by GDP)                                                                                (0.36)       (-1.01)
Three Year Lagged Environmental Amenity Investment                                                                0.0017
(normalized by GDP)                                                                                              (0.02)
Three Year Lagged Transportation Infrastructure Investment                                                        0.0471
(normalized by GDP)                                                                                              (1.39)
log (Lagged Average Land Price)                                                  -0.7367           -0.7420       -0.8138
                                                                               (-19.15)***       (-19.78)***   (-15.60)***
Lagged log (Real Per Capita GDP)                                                 1.6369            1.6550       -0.0437
                                                                                 (2.17)**          (2.18)**     (-0.07)
Lagged Foreign Direct Investment                                                 -0.0380           -0.0383       -0.0479
(normalized by GDP)                                                             (-2.21)**         (-2.26)**     (-3.04)***
Lagged Investment other than Urban Infrastructures                                0.0105            0.0102        0.0113
(normalized by GDP)                                                              (5.88)***         (5.62)***     (5.54)***
Lagged Government Expenditure                                                     0.0227            0.0231        0.0252
(normalized by GDP)                                                              (2.10)**          (1.92)*       (1.99)*
City Fixed Effect                                                                  Yes               Yes           Yes
R2                                                                                0.480             0.483         0.492
Number of observations                                                            2162              2153          1889
Note: (1) the cities are clustered by province.
      (2) t statistics in parentheses.
      (3) * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                     40
                                   Table 6: Factors Affecting Prefectural CCP Secretaries’ Promotion Odds
                               (Dependent Variable: whether the CCP secretary gets promotion within the year)
Independent Variables                                 (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)              (5)        (6)
Average GDP Growth Rate during the Tenure            -0.0538      -0.0529
                                                    (-1.83)*     (-1.75)*
Relative GDP Growth Rate Compared with All                                      -0.0510       -0.0650
Other Cities Within the Same Province                                          (-0.97)       (-1.20)
Relative GDP Growth Rate Compared with Last                                                                  0.0543        0.0563
Officer in the Same Position                                                                                (2.39)**      (2.28)**
Average of Ratio between Environmental Amenity                    -0.8448                     -0.9021                     -0.9259
Investment and GDP during the Tenure                             (-2.79)***                  (-2.96)***                  (-2.91)***
Average of Ratio of Transportation Infrastructure                  0.0256                      0.0030                     -0.0436
Investment to GDP during Tenure                                   (0.25)                      (0.03)                     (-0.38)
Whether the Officer is Female                         0.6283       0.6001        0.6845        0.6672         0.7631       0.7475
                                                     (1.65)*      (1.57)        (1.85)*       (1.80)*        (1.95)*      (1.88)*
Whether the Officer is Minority                      -0.1993      -0.2153       -0.2369       -0.2616        -0.4022      -0.4589
                                                    (-0.59)      (-0.62)       (-0.71)       (-0.77)        (-1.13)      (-1.26)
Whether the Officer is Local                          0.2057       0.2589        0.1714        0.2369        -0.0272       0.0109
                                                     (0.70)       (0.86)        (0.58)        (0.78)        (-0.08)       (0.03)
The Age He/She Took Current Position                 -0.1278      -0.1231       -0.1280       -0.1226        -0.1270      -0.1207
                                                    (-5.28)***   (-4.99)***    (-5.25)***    (-4.94)***     (-4.71)***   (-4.38)***
Whether the Officer Has Master/PhD Degree            -0.2258      -0.2298       -0.2540       -0.2507        -0.3178      -0.3184
                                                    (-1.13)      (-1.16)       (-1.27)       (-1.26)        (-1.43)      (-1.44)
Whether the Officer Has Worked in Central            -0.1330      -0.0620       -0.1566       -0.0596         0.0482       0.1923
Government                                          (-0.37)      (-0.17)       (-0.44)       (-0.17)         (0.13)       (0.54)
Whether the Officer Has Worked in Provincial         -0.0339      -0.0465       -0.0558       -0.0653         0.0160       0.0195
Government                                          (-0.21)      (-0.28)       (-0.34)       (-0.40)         (0.09)       (0.11)
Whether the Officer Has Worked in Universities       -0.1278       0.0498       -0.2404       -0.0434         0.0197       0.2333
                                                    (-0.33)       (0.13)       (-0.62)       (-0.11)         (0.05)       (0.54)
Whether the Officer Has Worked as SOE                -1.4128      -1.5279       -1.4469       -1.5621        -1.5615      -1.6650
Executives                                          (-3.61)***   (-3.78)***    (-3.64)***    (-3.80)***     (-4.13)***   (-4.35)***
Whether the Officer Has Worked in China               0.1491       0.1605        0.1656        0.1689         0.3143       0.3272
Communist Youth League                               (0.74)       (0.76)        (0.79)        (0.78)         (1.40)       (1.42)
Whether the Officer Has Worked in Other               0.7487       0.6845        0.7634        0.6904         0.7349       0.6529
Provinces                                            (3.34)***    (3.08)***     (3.37)***     (3.08)***      (3.07)***    (2.79)***
Whether the Officer Has Worked/Studied Abroad        -0.0284       0.0714       -0.0876        0.0261        -0.0370       0.1000
                                                    (-0.11)       (0.27)       (-0.33)        (0.10)        (-0.14)       (0.38)
Whether the Officer Works As Top Officer in a         0.1452       0.1051        0.1674        0.1150         0.0892       0.0181
City for the First Time                              (0.71)       (0.48)        (0.81)        (0.52)         (0.42)       (0.08)
City Fixed Effect                                     Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes
Pseudo R2                                             0.113        0.122         0.110         0.121          0.123        0.132
Number of observations                                789          776           789           776            774          761
                                                                      41
Note: (1) the observations are clustered by secretaries.
      (2) the perfect predictor city dummies are dropped.
      (3) z statistics in parentheses.
      (4) * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                            42
                                       Table 7: Factors Affecting Prefectural Mayor’ Promotion Odds
                                  (Dependent Variable: whether the mayor gets promotion within the year)
Independent Variables                               (1)            (2)         (3)            (1)            (2)          (3)
Average GDP Growth Rate during the Tenure           -0.0122      -0.0080
                                                   (-0.67)      (-0.43)
Relative GDP Growth Rate Compared with All                                    -0.0163        -0.0185
Other Cities Within the Same Province                                        (-0.55)        (-0.62)
Relative GDP Growth Rate Compared with Last                                                                 0.0892        0.0942
Officer in the Same Position                                                                               (5.22)***     (5.29)***
Average of Ratio between Environmental Amenity                   -0.4012                     -0.4069                     -0.5400
Investment and GDP during Tenure                                (-1.76)*                    (-1.81)*                    (-2.11)**
Average of Ratio between Transportation                          -0.0618                     -0.0658                     -0.1162
Infrastructure Investment and GDP during Tenure                 (-0.84)                     (-0.90)                     (-1.42)
Whether the Officer is Female                        -0.4199     -0.4275      -0.4278        -0.4328        -0.4763      -0.4699
                                                   (-1.92)*     (-1.97)**    (-1.95)*       (-2.00)**      (-2.05)**    (-2.06)**
Whether the Officer is Minority                      -0.0977     -0.1197      -0.1056        -0.1255        -0.2292      -0.2929
                                                   (-0.38)      (-0.44)      (-0.41)        (-0.46)        (-0.81)      (-0.98)
Whether the Officer is Local                         -0.2777     -0.3114      -0.2646        -0.3038        -0.3808      -0.4649
                                                   (-1.27)      (-1.40)      (-1.21)        (-1.37)        (-1.67)*     (-2.00)**
The Age He/She Took Current Position                 -0.0401     -0.0393      -0.0405        -0.0391        -0.0341      -0.0304
                                                   (-2.27)**    (-2.21)**    (-2.30)**      (-2.20)**      (-1.82)*     (-1.60)
Whether the Officer Has Master/PhD Degree            -0.0555     -0.0404      -0.0604        -0.0422         0.0278       0.0684
                                                   (-0.45)      (-0.33)      (-0.50)        (-0.34)         (0.21)       (0.52)
Whether the Officer Has Worked in Central             0.4201      0.4039       0.4125         0.4033         0.4102       0.3954
Government                                           (1.55)      (1.48)       (1.53)         (1.49)         (1.53)       (1.46)
Whether the Officer Has Worked in Provincial          0.2185      0.2510       0.2168         0.2519         0.1734       0.2054
Government                                           (2.11)**    (2.36)**     (2.10)**       (2.37)**       (1.60)       (1.83)*
Whether the Officer Has Worked in Universities        0.3128      0.3456       0.3010         0.3362         0.4313       0.4827
                                                     (1.02)      (1.05)       (0.98)         (1.02)         (1.37)       (1.43)
Whether the Officer Has Worked as SOE                -0.2055     -0.1867      -0.2189        -0.1957        -0.2915      -0.2455
Executives                                         (-1.02)      (-0.91)      (-1.09)        (-0.96)        (-1.31)      (-1.07)
Whether the Officer Has Worked in CCYL                0.0644      0.0608       0.0675         0.0601         0.0078       0.0266
                                                     (0.36)      (0.34)       (0.38)         (0.33)         (0.04)       (0.14)
Whether the Officer Has Worked in Other              -0.6255     -0.6188      -0.6299        -0.6188        -0.6950      -0.6894
Provinces                                         (-2.84)***    (-2.88)***   (-2.84)***     (-2.87)***     (-2.94)***   (-3.03)***
Whether the Officer Has Worked/Studied Abroad        -0.0648     -0.0416      -0.0651        -0.0396        -0.0114       0.0319
                                                   (-0.32)      (-0.21)      (-0.32)        (-0.20)        (-0.05)       (0.15)
Whether the Officer Works As Top Officer in a        -0.4418     -0.4106      -0.4393        -0.4052        -0.5148      -0.4397
City for the First Time                            (-2.20)**    (-2.06)**    (-2.17)**      (-2.02)**      (-2.43)**    (-2.12)**
City Fixed Effect                                   Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes
Pseudo R2                                             0.091       0.094        0.091          0.094          0.110        0.116
Number of observations                              1126          1117         1126           1117           1108         1099
                                                                     43
Note: (1) the observations are clustered by mayors.
      (2) the perfect predictor city dummies are dropped.
      (3) z statistics in parentheses.
      (4) * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                            44
                                                               Table A-1: City-Level Variables

         Variable                                              Definition                                             Source                  Mean      Std. Dev
                                Annual investment on urban infrastructures in the categories of
Environmental Amenity           “Drainage Works (including sewage purification)”, “Environmental
                                                                                                          Ministry of Housing and               0.363     0.356
Investment                      Sanitation (including solid waste treatment)”, and “Gardening and
                                                                                                          Urban-Rural Development
                                Greening”; normalized by local GDP in the same year.
                                                                                                          (China Urban Construction
                                Annual investment on urban infrastructures in the categories of
Transportation Infrastructure                                                                             Statistical Yearbook)
                                “Road and Bridges” and “Public Transportation”; normalized by                                                   0.895     1.025
Investment
                                local GDP in the same year.
                                Percentage of days in the year when the air quality reaches “Grade        Ministry of Environmental
Air Quality                                                                                                                                     0.207     0.198
                                I” (the highest grade).                                                   Protection (the official website)
                                Local annual per capita GDP (after adjusting according to two
Per Capita GDP                                                                                                                                  0.507     0.727
                                economic censuses); in thousand yuan RMB (in 2009 price).
                                Local governments’ annual budgetary income (central
Budgetary allocation from
                                government’s allocation of tax revenues); normalized by local GDP         National Bureau of Statistics         5.005     1.770
the Central Government
                                in the same year.                                                         (China City Statistical
                                Local governments’ annual budgetary expenditure; normalized by            Yearbook; China Statistical
Government Expenditure                                                                                                                         11.347     6.326
                                local GDP in the same year.                                               Yearbook for Regional
                                Annual investment (excluding those on urban infrastructures);             Economy; Bulletins of
Total Investment                                                                                                                               42.276    18.759
                                normalized by local GDP in the same year.                                 Population Census in 2000,
                                Commercial banks’ loan balance at the end of the year; normalized         2010)
Loan Balance                                                                                                                                   74.810    38.102
                                by local GDP in the same year.
                                Annual foreign direct investment; normalized by local GDP in the
FDI                                                                                                                                             2.241     3.060
                                same year.
                                Annual land sales revenues; normalized by local GDP in the same
Land Sales Income                                                                                                                               2.144     2.398
                                year.                                                                     Ministry of Land Resource
Land Supply Volume              Annual land sales volume; in million sq.m of land area.                   (China Yearbook of Land               5.070     7.266
                                Average price of land parcels sold during the year; in yuan (in 2009      Resources)
Land Price                                                                                                                                    276.992   326.584
                                price) per sq.m of land area.
                                Index on the density that the corresponding provincial CCP
Google Index on
                                secretary calls for infrastructure investment in the year; see the text                                         0.161     0.063
Infrastructure Investment
                                for more details.
                                Index on the density that the corresponding provincial CCP
Google Index on                                                                                           Authors’ calculations based on
                                secretary calls for environmental protection in the year; see the text                                          0.218     0.094
Environmental Protection                                                                                  Google searches.
                                for more details.
                                Index on the density that the corresponding provincial CCP
Google Index on
                                secretary calls for transportation development in the year; see the                                             0.289     0.092
Transportation Development
                                text for more details.
 Note: The air quality variable covers 86 cities, while all the other variables cover all the 283 cities.

                                                                                   45
                                                            Table A-2: City Officer Variables

                                                                                                      CCP Secretary                 Mayor
         Variable                                       Definition
                                                                                                    Mean       Std. Dev.   Mean          Std. Dev.
                        Whether the officer in position at the beginning of the year gets
Promotion               promoted within the year (see the text for detailed definition of            0.110        0.313     0.201          0.401
                        promotion); 1=yes, 0=o/w.
Gender                  Gender of the officer in the city-year; 1=female, 0=male.                    0.024        0.152     0.043          0.202
                        Whether the officer in the city-year is of a minority ethnic group;
Ethnic Group                                                                                         0.069        0.253     0.058          0.233
                        1=yes, 0=o/w.
                        Whether the officer in the city-year was born in this city; 1=yes,
Home Town                                                                                            0.050        0.217     0.097          0.296
                        0=o/w.
                        Age of the officer in the city-year when he/she first occupied current
Age                                                                                                 49.817        3.614    48.175          3.943
                        position.
                        Whether the officer in the city-year is with a master or higher degree;
Education Level                                                                                      0.692        0.462     0.701          0.458
                        1=yes, 0=o/w.
Working Experience in   Whether the officer in the city-year has worked as a senior officer in
                                                                                                     0.049        0.216     0.053          0.223
Central Government      the central government; 1=yes, 0=o/w.
Working Experience in   Whether the officer in the city-year has worked as a senior officer in a
                                                                                                     0.603        0.489     0.483          0.500
Provincial Government   provincial government; 1=yes, 0=o/w.
Working Experience in   Whether the officer in the city-year has worked as a senior officer in a
                                                                                                     0.041        0.199     0.035          0.185
Universities            university or research institute; 1=yes, 0=o/w.
Working Experience in   Whether the officer in the city-year has worked as a senior officer in a
                                                                                                     0.055        0.229     0.087          0.282
SOEs                    state-owned enterprise; 1=yes, 0=o/w.
Working Experience in
                        Whether the officer in the city-year has worked as a senior officer in
Chinese Communist                                                                                    0.133        0.340     0.098          0.298
                        the Chinese Communist Youth League; 1=yes, 0=o/w.
Youth League
Working Experience in   Whether the officer in the city-year has worked in other provinces;
                                                                                                     0.101        0.302     0.068          0.251
Other Government        1=yes, 0=o/w.
Working/Study           Whether the officer in the city-year has worked or studied outside
                                                                                                     0.073        0.261     0.094          0.292
Experience Abroad       mainland China; 1=yes, 0=o/w.
Working Experience as   Whether this is the first time for the officer in the city-year to be the
                                                                                                     0.276        0.447     0.894          0.308
City Officer            top officer in a prefectural level city; 1=yes, 0=o/w.




                                                                                  46
