                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           IT PAYS TO SET THE MENU:
                 MUTUAL FUND INVESTMENT OPTIONS IN 401(K) PLANS

                                           Veronika K. Pool
                                            Clemens Sialm
                                           Irina Stefanescu

                                        Working Paper 18764
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18764


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2013




We thank Pierluigi Balduzzi, Keith Brown, Lauren Cohen, Van Harlow, Frank de Jong, Olivia Mitchell,
Jonathan Reuter, Paul Schultz, Laura Starks, Steve Utkus, Marno Verbeek, Scott Yonker, and seminar
participants at the American Economic Association Meeting in San Diego, DePaul University, Indiana
University, INSEAD, the IU-Notre Dame-Purdue Summer Symposium, the NETSPAR spring workshop,
the Nova Finance Conference on Pensions and Retirement, and the Second MSUFCU Conference
on Financial Institutions and Investments at Michigan State University for helpful comments, and
NETSPAR, Indiana University, and the University of Texas at Austin for financial support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Veronika K. Pool, Clemens Sialm, and Irina Stefanescu. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
It Pays to Set the Menu: Mutual Fund Investment Options in 401(k) Plans
Veronika K. Pool, Clemens Sialm, and Irina Stefanescu
NBER Working Paper No. 18764
February 2013
JEL No. G02,G11,G23,H55

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper investigates whether mutual fund families acting as trustees of 401(k) plans display favoritism
toward their own funds. Using a hand-collected dataset on retirement investment options, we show
that poorly-performing funds are less likely to be removed from and more likely to be added to a 401(k)
menu if they are affiliated with the plan trustee. We find no evidence that plan participants undo this
affiliation bias through their investment choices. Finally, the subsequent performance of poorly-performing
affiliated funds indicates that these trustee decisions are not information driven and are costly to retirement
savers.


Veronika K. Pool                                       Irina Stefanescu
Kelley School of Business                              Kelley School of Business
Indiana University                                     Indiana University
1309 E 10th Street                                     1309 E. Tenth Street
Bloomington, IN 47405                                  Bloomington, IN 47405
vkpool@indiana.edu                                     stefanei@indiana.edu

Clemens Sialm
University of Texas at Austin
McCombs School of Business
1 University Station; B6600
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
clemens.sialm@mccombs.utexas.edu
1         Introduction

Employer-sponsored 401(k) accounts have gained significant importance around the world.

In the United States, the value of 401(k) assets reached $3.5 trillion at the end of the third
quarter of 2012.1 Their growth represents important business opportunities for mutual funds
as they manage approximately half of the 401(k) investment pool. Moreover, mutual fund

families often serve as trustees of these defined contribution (DC) plans and play an active
role in creating the menu of investment options for the plans’ participants.2

        While the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) requires trustees to

be prudent in selecting a suitable set of investment choices for their 401(k) clients, mutual fund

trustees have a competing interest to maximize investments in their own proprietary funds.

Surprisingly, little is known about whether and how these conflicting incentives influence the

menu of options in 401(k) plans. This is concerning given that DC accounts are a main

source of retirement income for many of the beneficiaries. Since retirement savings compound

over long horizons, any inefficiency or trustee bias in this setting can significantly affect the

employees’ wealth at retirement and thus have important welfare consequences for society in

general.

        In this paper, we provide the first study of the conflicting incentives of mutual fund trustees.

Focusing on fund entry and exit, we hypothesize that if the trustees’ decisions are driven by
their own financial interests, mutual fund trustees may be more inclined to include their own
funds in the fund lineup – even when more suitable options are available from other fund

families – and subsequently more reluctant to remove them. Moreover, they may also be less
    1
        Federal Reserve Statistical Releases and Investment Company Institute (ICI).
    2
      The trustee is the entity who holds the assets of the plan in trust. Trustees are typically appointed by the
employer who sponsors the plan and have a fiduciary responsibility to administer the plan for the exclusive
benefit of plan members. They must act in accordance with reasonable standards of prudence and offer a
diversified set of options to participants and sponsors. Cohen and Schmidt (2009) describe in detail the role
of the trustee in the decision process.


                                                        1
sensitive to the performance of these affiliated funds when making menu altering decisions.
   To investigate this favoritism hypothesis, we hand collect information on the menu of

mutual fund options offered in a large sample of defined contribution plans for the period 1998
to 2009 from annual filings of Form 11-K with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC). Our sample includes plans that are trusteed by a mutual fund family as well as plans

with non-mutual fund trustees. Most 401(k) plans in our sample that have a mutual fund
trustee adopt an open architecture whereby investment options include not only funds from the
trustee’s family but from other mutual fund families as well. Therefore, an interesting feature

of our dataset is that a given fund often contemporaneously appears on several 401(k) menus

that are administered by different trustees. This means that open architecture allows the same

fund to be an affiliated fund (“trustee fund”) on some menus and an unaffiliated fund (“non-

trustee fund”) on others. This data feature provides us with a unique identification strategy

and allows us to contrast how the very same fund is viewed across two different menus: one

on which it is a trustee fund and another on which it is not.

   We find that despite their fiduciary responsibilities, trustees have a strong preference for

their own funds. Trustee funds are less likely to be removed from the plan across the board.

Moreover, the biggest difference between how trustee and non-trustee funds are treated on

the menu occurs for the worst performing funds, which have been shown to exhibit significant
performance persistence (Carhart, 1997). For example, mutual funds ranked in the lowest

decile based on past performance (among the universe of funds in the same style category

over the prior 36 months), are approximately two and a half times more likely to be deleted
from those menus on which they are unaffiliated with the trustee than from those where they

are affiliated with the trustee.

   Similarly, we find that trustees are substantially more likely to add their own funds to
the menu across all performance deciles. Furthermore, trustee fund additions exhibit lower

                                              2
prior performance than non-trustee additions and the probability of adding a trustee fund is
less sensitive to performance than the probability of adding a non-trustee fund. Interestingly,

mirroring our results for deletions, we also find that addition probabilities are inversely related
to performance among poorly performing trustee funds.
   The trustee’s tilt toward affiliated funds need not affect plan participants however. Al-

though the investment opportunity set of the plan is determined by the menu choices selected
by the employer and the trustee, participants can freely allocate their contributions within
the opportunity set. If participants anticipate trustee biases or are simply sensitive to poor

performance, they can undo favoritism in their own portfolios by, for instance, not allocating

capital to poorly performing trustee funds. Therefore to investigate whether trustee favoritism

has an impact on the overall allocation of plan assets, we examine the sensitivity of partici-

pant flows to the performance of trustee and non-trustee funds. We show that participants

are generally not sensitive to poor performance and thus they do not undo the trustee bias.

This in turn indicates that plan participants are affected by the trustee’s behavior.

   Finally, while our evidence on favoritism is consistent with adverse trustee incentives,

trustees are also likely to have private information about their own proprietary funds. There-

fore, it is possible that they show a strong preference for these funds in menu altering decisions

not because they are biased toward them, but rather, due to positive information they possess
about these funds. To investigate this possibility, we examine future fund performance. For

instance, if – despite the lackluster past performance – the decision to keep poorly performing

trustee funds on the menu is information driven, then they should perform better in the future.
We find that this is not the case: trustee funds that rank poorly based on past performance

but are not delisted from the menu do not perform well in the subsequent year. We estimate

that on average they underperform by approximately 3.6% annually on a risk-adjusted basis.
This figure is large in and of itself, but its economic significance is magnified in the retirement

                                                3
context by compounding. Our results suggest that the trustee bias we document in this paper
has important implications for the employees’ income in retirement.

       Our study belongs to a nascent literature on trustees in defined contribution plans. Davis
and Kim (2007) and Cohen and Schmidt (2009) study conflicts of interest that exist in the
trustee relationship. Both papers argue that to protect the valuable business relation that

arises between the sponsoring company and the trustee family, fund families cater to the
sponsors while compromising their own fiduciary responsibilities. In particular, Cohen and
Schmidt (2009) find that trustee mutual fund families overinvest in the sponsoring company’s

stock. They also show that when other mutual funds sell the stock, trustee funds tend to

trade in the opposite direction thereby creating liquidity for these shares and supporting the

stock price of distressed firms. Davis and Kim (2007) document that the way trustee funds

vote in shareholder meetings is influenced by the business ties they have as a trustee.

       While these studies find that the sponsor can draw important benefits from appointing

mutual fund trustees, mutual funds may also enjoy positive externalities from these arrange-

ments in addition to capturing the large 401(k) asset pool. One such externality may be the

opportunity to gain an information advantage about the sponsoring company through the

trustee’s access and connection to the company’s management. Duan, Hotchkiss, and Jiao

(2012) show that trustee families may indeed obtain valuable information about the sponsor,
which provides them with profitable trading opportunities. We contribute to this literature

by highlighting how adverse trustee incentives affect the fund lineup of the menu.

       Our paper is also related to two additional areas of study. First, we contribute to the
broader literature that focuses on the design and characteristics of defined contribution plans.3
   3
    Papers on the design of employer-sponsored retirement accounts include Benartzi and Thaler (2001);
Madrian and Shea (2001); Choi et al. (2002, 2004); Del Guercio and Tkac (2002); Duflo and Saez (2002);
Agnew, Balduzzi, and Sunden (2003); Elton, Gruber, and Blake (2006, 2007); Brown, Liang, and Weisbenner
(2007); Huberman and Jiang (2006); Rauh (2006); Goyal and Wahal (2008); Carroll et al. (2009); Tang et al.
(2010); Balduzzi and Reuter (2012); Brown and Harlow (2012); Christoffersen and Simutin (2012); Mitchell


                                                    4
While papers in this literature commonly employ data that are either limited to plans offered
by a single trustee or, alternatively, to a single year snapshot of the industry, our database

contains a large cross-section of plans, trustees, and sponsors as well as an eleven-year time-
series providing a rich laboratory for 401(k) research.
   Second, our paper is related to the mutual fund literature on favoritism within fund fam-

ilies. Gaspar, Massa, and Matos (2006) show that mutual fund families strategically transfer
performance across member funds to favor those funds that are more likely to increase overall
family profits. They show that family organization generates distortions in delegated asset

management. Reuter (2006) provides evidence that lead underwriters will use allocations of

underpriced IPOs to reward those institutions with which they have strong business rela-

tionships. Kuhnen (2009) investigates whether business networks mitigate agency conflicts

by facilitating efficient information transfers or whether they are channels for inefficient fa-

voritism. She finds that fund directors and advisory firms that manage the funds hire each

other preferentially based on the intensity of their past interactions. Our paper provides evi-

dence that mutual fund families favor their own affiliated funds when they act as trustees of

401(k) pension plans.4
   The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes our data collection and

provides summary statistics of our 401(k) plans as well as the mutual funds offered in the

plans’ menu. Sections 3–6 discuss our results. Section 7 concludes.

and Utkus (2012); Sialm and Starks (2012); and Sialm, Starks, and Zhang (2012).
  4
    Additional papers studying favoritism within asset management companies include Nanda, Wang, and
Zheng (2004); Ritter and Zhang (2007); Massa and Rehman (2008); Evans (2010); Bhattacharya, Lee, and
Pool (2012); and Chaudhuri, Ivkovic, and Trzcinka (2012).




                                                   5
2     Data and Summary Statistics

This section describes the sample selection process and provides summary statistics for our

sample of 401(k) menus.


2.1    Data collection

We collect the investment options offered in 401(k) plans from Form 11-K filed with the

U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). All plans offering the company stock as
an investment option for plan participants are required to file this form with the SEC. The

filing provides an overall description of the plan, identifies the trustee, all individual choices

available to participants (the menu), and the accumulated value of assets invested in each of

these vehicles at the end of the fiscal year. We manually collect these tables as disclosure is

not standardized across plans and firms.

    We start by webcrawling the SEC’s website from 1998 to 2009 to identify all companies

that report Form 11-K. We collect 26,624 links to 11-K filings but restrict this sample to

companies covered by COMPUSTAT. We eliminate filings that have been submitted to the

SEC in duplicate and consolidate amendments with the corresponding original filings. From

these documents we collect all tables that describe the “Schedule of Assets” of the plan. In

most cases, the table reports the complete set of investment options offered by the plan,

including the employers’ own stock, other common stocks, mutual funds, or commingled
trusts, as well as the current value of investments in these options at the end of the fiscal year.
Occasionally, the table describes only those investment options that capture more than 5% of

the plan’s assets or alternatively, only mutual fund investments. We supplement our Form 11-
K information with plan level data from Form 5500, as described below. The resulting dataset
has more than 302,000 observations, containing information at the firm-year-plan-menu level.



                                                6
      To obtain information on the characteristics of the mutual funds included in DC plans, we
match all funds listed on the menus to the CRSP Survivorship Bias-Free U.S. Mutual Fund

database. To aid our matching task, we proceed in several steps. We start by filtering our
menu options for non-mutual fund assets. These include, for instance, common stocks, bonds,
or guaranteed investment contracts. In approximately 20% of the cases, the SEC Form 11-K

contains information on the number of shares of each asset held by the plan in addition to
the market value of the position. This allows us to calculate the net asset value (NAV) of
the position on the report date. When the NAV information is available, we match the menu

choice to the CRSP mutual fund files by NAV and date. For the rest of the sample, we hand

match the 11-K funds to the mutual fund database by name.

      Since most plans do not identify the exact share class of the fund offered on the menu, we

establish the link between our 401(k) sample and the CRSP Survivorship Bias-free Mutual

Fund database at the fund-level, that is, we combine information on all available share classes

of each fund in CRSP into fund-level variables. Accordingly, fund age is calculated as the age

of the oldest share class, fund size is the sum of the total net assets of all share classes, and

fund returns and expense ratios are calculated as the total net asset value weighted average

returns and expense ratios of the share classes, respectively. We also classify each mutual fund

in our sample as “balanced,” “bond,” “domestic equity,” “international equity,” or “other.”
We create separate dummy variables for money market funds, target date funds, and index

funds. We manually group funds into target date and index fund categories based on fund

name. Around 62% of the funds in the average plan in our sample are equity funds and
20% are bond funds. There is a steady increase in the number of target date funds over our

sample period, especially after the passage of the Pension Protection Act (PPA) of 2006, also

documented by Mitchell and Utkus (2012).5

  5
      Following the PPA (2006), the Department of Labor added a new fiduciary protection to ERISA for default


                                                      7
    Finally, we perform two additional data steps to complete our sample. First, we assign
unique plan IDs to create time-series at the plan level. Form 11-K does not always disclose

the plan number. Companies occasionally sponsor multiple plans for different subsidiaries,
salaried and hourly employees, or unionized and non-unionized workers. In order to track
the same plan over time, we collect the plan Employer Identification Number (EIN) and

Plan Number (PN) by searching Form 5500 by plan name and assets. Once established,
the link with Form 5500 allows us to collect additional information on total participants,
active participants, employer and employee contributions, total assets, and whether the plan

is collectively bargained or not.

    We manually collect the trustee name (and any trustee change occurring during the year)

from the plan description available in Form 11-K. We supplement and cross check this infor-

mation with the name of the trustee disclosed in Form 5500.

2.2     Sample description

Table 1 describes the composition of our sample by year. Our data covers 2,645 distinct plans

sponsored by 1,853 firms from 1998 to 2009 (companies can sponsor multiple plans). Overall,

the final dataset has 13,585 plan-year observations. The number of plans is smaller during

the early part of the sample as disclosures on investments were generally less standardized.

Similarly, our data for 2009 are potentially incomplete as they do not include late filers or
filers who have a late fiscal year end. More than 56% of the menu options are mutual fund

choices.6

investments. Section 404(c)(5) stipulates that if participants wave the right to direct their investments, the
fiduciaries (sponsors and trustees) are protected from suits about the default investment option’s market
performance if those participants are invested in a qualified default investment alternative (QDIA). Eligible
QDIAs include target-date funds, traditional balanced funds, and managed account advice services.
  6
    For robustness, we also run our analyses below by excluding the first and the last years of our sample.
This has no significant effects on our results.




                                                      8
      The table also provides information about plan trusteeship and architecture. About 77%
of plans in our sample are trusteed by a mutual fund family. The remaining plans are trusteed

by commercial banks, consulting companies, individuals, or by the sponsoring company itself.
We do not differentiate between these later categories and collapse them into one group which
we refer to as “Other Trustees” or “Non-Mutual Fund Trustee.” The ratio between the number

of plans trusteed by management companies and by other entities has been slightly increasing
over time but experienced a small decrease in the later years as a response to the increased
competition in this market.7

      The table shows an increase in the number of mutual fund investment options offered in

the average plan over time. To summarize the growing importance of including funds from a

number of different mutual fund families on the menu, which we refer to as open architecture,

we report three metrics. Trustee share represents the proportion of total plan assets invested

in mutual funds that are offered by the trustee family. Since this is zero for plans with non-

mutual fund trustees, trustee share in this table provides the overall proportion of retirement

assets invested with affiliated funds. We also report the average number of management

companies that offer at least one investment option on the menu and the Herfindahl index

of the menu calculated based on the dollar share of each of these management companies.

These measures indicate a decline in the share of the assets managed by trustee families and

an increase in the popularity of offering mutual funds from several different families.
      In our sample, the average size of a 401(k) plan is approximately $280 million (with a

median of $60 million), suggesting that our dataset covers several very large, well-established
plans. The average plan size generally increases over our sample period, peaking at $364
million in 2007. On aggregate, our plans cover $376 billion in retirement assets in 2009
  7
   See for instance, the Bloomberg article on March 23, 2011: http://www.bloomberg.com/news/print/
2011-03-23/banks-angle-for-bigger-share-of-4-trillion-retirement-market.html



                                                 9
($485 billion in 2007) and over 9 million total participants per year. The typical account size
is $41,365 and employees contribute $5,200 per year. The percentage of assets invested in

employer securities varies across plans and years, with a mean of 17% of assets and a median
of 10%. About 13% of our plans are collectively negotiated (i.e. unionized). Our sample
is representative of the universe of plans sponsored by public companies filing Form 5500

with the Department of Labor in terms of plan size, number of participants, and industry
composition.8

       Table 2 describes the characteristics of mutual funds that have been added, kept, or deleted

from the menu, by their trustee affiliation. We also report the difference between trustee and

non-trustee characteristics along with the results of paired t-tests that evaluate the statistical

significance of the difference. The corresponding standard errors are two-way clustered at the

plan and fund levels.

       Our sample contains 19,003 fund deletions, 139,182 fund-year observations that stay in the

sample for at least two consecutive years, and 28,193 fund additions. Overall, funds that are

deleted from the plans in our sample have the lowest average performance across the three

groups, as measured by their percentile performance rank among funds of the same style in

the CRSP mutual fund universe using past one-, three-, and five-year returns. Added funds

are younger and come with better performance records than those that are kept or deleted

from the menus. Trustee funds that are kept or added generally have lower performance over
the past three and five years.

       The table also shows that fees charged by trustee funds are, on average, significantly lower

than those of non-trustee funds. Since in most cases we are not able to identify the exact
   8
    Our sample covers 30-35% of the 401(k) assets of plans sponsored by publicly listed companies that report
Form 5500. Filing Form 5500 with the Department of Labor (DOL) and Internal Revenue Service (IRS) is
mandatory for all employee benefit plan that qualify under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of
1974 (ERISA).



                                                     10
share class of the fund offered in the plan, we calculate fees as the weighted average expense
ratio of all share classes reported in CRSP with the total net assets of each share class as

weights. The difference between the expense ratios of trustee and non-trustee funds may be
driven by the difference in fund styles across the two groups. To investigate this possibility,
we also report average style-adjusted fees. We calculate the style-adjusted average expense

ratio by subtracting from each fund’s expense ratio the value weighted average expense ratio
of all funds in its investment category as determined by its Lipper Objective Code. We find
that trustee funds are cheaper on a style-adjusted basis as well.9

        These results point to a potential benefit of employing mutual fund trustees, as they typ-

ically offer their own low-fee funds. Nevertheless, and probably the least explored dimension

of this relationship in the literature, is the potential cost engendered by trustee favoritism.

This paper investigates this hypothesis.


3         Fund Deletions

Investment allocations in 401(k) accounts are driven by both plan providers and plan partici-

pants. In a first step, the trustee, along with the sponsor and other plan fiduciaries, determines

the investment options for the plan. In a second step, plan participants allocate their retire-

ment savings and contributions to the various investment options. It is also the responsibility
of the provider to insure that the plan continuously offers a suitable set of choices. Therefore,

trustees dynamically adjust 401(k) menus by deleting some investment options and adding

others. In this section, we study whether plan trustees favor their own mutual funds relative
to funds affiliated with other mutual fund companies during these menu altering decisions.
    9
    In unreported analyses, we find that the expense ratio of trustee funds is significantly lower even after
controlling for fund size, age, turnover, as well as various plan characteristics.




                                                     11
3.1    Univariate Relationship

We first provide univariate analyses to investigate whether the propensity to delete a fund

from the menu depends on whether the fund is affiliated with the trustee. A mutual fund can
be an investment option in a 401(k) plan where its management company is the plan’s trustee
(“trustee fund”), as well as in a plan offered by an unaffiliated trustee (“non-trustee fund”).

Therefore, in each year, for each fund, we count the number of menus on which the fund is
a trustee fund and the number of menus on which it is a non-trustee fund, respectively. We
then count the number of affiliated and the number of unaffiliated menus from which the fund

is delisted during the year. This allows us to determine the deletion frequencies for each fund

for each year by affiliation.

   To make the comparison between the deletion frequencies of trustee and non-trustee funds

more meaningful, we also group funds into deciles based on past performance. In particular,

we compute the style-adjusted returns of all mutual funds in the CRSP mutual fund database

over the prior one, three, and five years. Funds are then sorted into decile portfolios based on

their style-adjusted performance.

   Figure 1 reports the mean annual deletion frequencies by trustee affiliation for each per-

formance decile using the prior 36 months to evaluate performance. We construct the figure

by first computing the average deletion rates for each fund in each year in affiliated and un-
affiliated 401(k) plans, as described above. In a second step, we average the deletion rates

within the performance deciles by year. Finally, we average the decile deletion rates across

time. Panel A shows the results based on all funds in our sample. In Panel B, we focus only
on those funds that contemporaneously appear on multiple 401(k) menus, at least once as a

trustee fund and at least once as a non-trustee fund. By comparing the deletion probabilities

of the same fund across plans managed by different trustees, our results are not contaminated



                                              12
by different fund characteristics or performance records.
   The figure shows that a fund is significantly less likely to be deleted from a plan in which it is

a trustee fund than from those in which it is a non-trustee fund regardless of past performance.
For example, Panel A indicates that the average trustee fund has a deletion rate of 11.6%
across all performance deciles, whereas a non-trustee fund has an average deletion rate of

21.4%. Furthermore, we find that the differences in deletion rates widen significantly if we
focus on poorly performing funds. For example, funds in the lowest performance ranking decile
in Panel A have a probability of deletion of 29.6% for non-trustee funds and a probability of

deletion of only 11.9% for trustee funds. Indeed we observe that the deletion rate of trustee

funds in the lowest performance decile is actually lower than the deletion rates of trustee

funds in deciles two through four. This is surprising provided that Carhart (1997) documents

performance persistence among poorly performing funds.

   Panel B shows similar results for the subsample of funds that are simultaneously offered

as both trustee and non-trustee funds. In this analysis the funds in each decile are identical

across the affiliated and unaffiliated groups. Thus, our results are not driven by differences in

fund characteristics.

   Table 3 summarizes the corresponding deletion frequencies by performance deciles based

on one, three, and five year evaluation horizons. The table reports the deletion frequencies
for trustee funds and non-trustee funds, as well as the difference between them. Analogously

to Figure 1, average frequencies in Panel A are based on all funds in our sample, while Panel

B calculates deletion probabilities using only those funds in our sample that simultaneously
appear as trustee and non-trustee funds. Overall, we find that a fund is significantly more

likely to be deleted from those menus on which it is not a trustee fund regardless of past

performance under all three performance ranking horizons. Moreover, the difference between
deletion probabilities is largest for poorly performing funds.

                                                13
3.2        Multivariate Relation

Restricting our attention to those funds that simultaneously appear on several different menus

offered by different trustees allows us to hold fund characteristics constant in our univariate
analyses. To investigate whether the results in Section 3.1 are robust to controlling for various
menu characteristics and to examine the performance sensitivity of affiliated and unaffiliated

fund deletions, we estimate the following model:

             DELp,f,t = β0 + β1 × T Fp,f,t + β2 × LowRankp,f,t + β3 × HighRankp,f,t

                          + β4 × T Fp,f,t × LowRankp,f,t + β5 × T Fp,f,t × HighRankp,f,t
                             0
                          + Zp,f,t γ + p,f,t ,                                                             (1)

 where DELp,f,t is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if mutual fund f has

been deleted from plan p at time t and zero otherwise, and T Fp,f,t is an indicator variable for

whether the trustee of pension plan p is affiliated with the management company of mutual

fund f . LowRank and HighRank are defined as LowRankp,f,t = min(Rankp,f,t , 0.5) and

HighRankp,f,t = min(Rankp,f,t − LowRankp,f,t , 0.5), where Rankp,f,t is the performance rank

of mutual fund f over the previous one, three, or five years. Performance ranks are formed

based on the style-adjusted returns of all mutual funds in the CRSP mutual fund database

over the prior one, three, and five years, as described in the previous section.

       The other control variables Z include the natural logarithm of the option size (plan assets
invested in the fund), the number of options, the expense ratio of the fund, the turnover of
the fund’s holdings, the natural logarithm of the fund’s size, fund age, the standard deviation

of the fund’s return, and unreported indicator variables for specific fund types (e.g., domestic
equity, international equity, balanced, bond, target date, index, and money market funds) and
time (year) fixed effects.10
  10
       While fund-year fixed effects would allow for identification based on the same fund appearing on multiple

                                                        14
       In our baseline model described in equation (1), we use two performance segments, eval-
uating the trustee’s response to performance separately for below median and above median

ranks. For robustness however, we also estimate our model using quintile based performance
segments following Sirri and Tufano (1998) as well as a one-segment (linear) model. Favoritism
toward affiliated funds implies that, all else equal, trustee funds are less likely to be delisted

(i.e., β1 < 0) and that trustee deletions are less sensitive to poor prior performance (i.e.,
β4 > 0).
       Table 4 reports the coefficient estimates. We estimate equation (1) using a linear probabil-

ity model, which allows for a straightforward interpretation of the piecewise linear terms and

the corresponding interactions. The standard errors in the table are two-way clustered at the

plan and fund levels.11 Consistent with Figure 1 we find that trustee funds are significantly

less likely to be deleted. A trustee fund has a lower probability of being delisted that ranges

between 9.9% and 14%, depending on the specification. Consistent with performance chasing,

we find that the probability of deletions decreases significantly with fund performance. For

example, a ten percentage point increase in the fund’s performance rank decreases the prob-

ability of deletions by between 1.8% and 3.2% for below median funds. Finally, we also find

that deletions of trustee funds are less sensitive to poor performance than non-trustee funds

as indicated by the highly significant positive β4 coefficient. For trustee funds, the sensitivity
of deletions to inferior fund performance is less than half of that of non-trustee funds.

       The additional control variables indicate that funds with large plan investments are less

menus, as in our univariate setup, a fund’s performance only varies over time. Therefore, to estimate the
performance sensitivity of fund deletions, we do not use fund-year fixed effects.
  11
    In Table A1 of the Appendix, we report the corresponding estimation results using a probit specification.
The table displays the estimated marginal effects. For the interaction terms, these are calculated using the
INTEFF command based on Ai and Norton (2003) and correspond to the average estimated marginal effect.
Figure A1 of the Appendix provides a more complete picture and displays the individual marginal effect
estimates of the interaction terms for each observation of our sample along with the corresponding z-statistics.
The findings in the table and the corresponding inteff graphs are qualitatively identical to those in Table 4.
In the rest of the paper, we only report our estimates using a linear probability model.


                                                      15
likely to be deleted and that plans with more investment options are less likely to delete a
specific fund. Plan providers are also more likely to delete funds with high expense ratios,

funds with high turnover, and smaller funds. Overall, our baseline results indicate that trustee
funds are significantly less likely to be deleted from 401(k) plans than non-trustee funds and
that this bias is particularly pronounced for poorly performing funds.


3.3     Robustness Tests

In this section, we report additional robustness tests for the base-case results summarized in

Section 3.2.

3.3.1   Alternative Performance Ranking

In our baseline specification we rank mutual funds according to the style-adjusted returns

of all mutual funds in the CRSP mutual fund database. We refer to this global ranking as

“Overall Ranking.” For robustness we now compute two alternative ranking methods, where

the percentile performance rank of a fund is either measured relative to the other investment

options in a specific 401(k) plan (“Plan Ranking”) or relative to the other funds offered by the

fund’s family (“Family Ranking”). The overall ranking method captures the performance of a

fund relative to the universe of available mutual funds in the U.S., which could be viewed as the

most comprehensive metric. When a fund underperforms compared to the other investment
choices included in the plan or the other options in the fund family, the trustee may be

pressured to remove the fund from the menu as underperformance in this setting is perhaps

more transparent.
   Table 5 summarizes the coefficient estimates from equation (1) when Rankp,f,t is defined

using the alternative ranking methodologies. The results are qualitatively and quantitatively

similar to the base-case results reported in Table 4. Thus, our findings are not affected by


                                               16
whether we benchmark mutual funds relative to the universe of mutual funds or relative to
other funds included in the same 401(k) plan or other funds offered by the same fund family.

3.3.2   Linear Performance

In columns 1-3 of Table 6, we reestimate our baseline regression using a linear performance

model (single performance segment) for robustness. For brevity, the table only reports the
results using the three year horizon. Column 1 is based on performance ranking relative
to funds in the same objective codes (i.e., overall ranking) and columns 2 and 3 report the

corresponding results using the fund’s performance rank relative to the 401(k) plan or the fund

family. Consistent with the base-case specification from Table 4, we find that trustee funds

are significantly less likely to be deleted with the difference in probabilities ranging from 5.1%

to 9.5%. As in our baseline results, the sensitivity of trustee fund deletions to performance is

significantly smaller for trustee funds.

3.3.3   Sensitivity to Extreme Performance

To analyze in more depth the sensitivity of deletions to extreme performance, we estimate a

specification using three piecewise linear segments instead of the two segments from equation

(1). The performance segments are 1) the lowest performance quintile, 2) the highest perfor-

mance quintile, and 3) the three middle performance quintiles, which are pulled together to

represent a single performance segment. Following Sirri and Tufano (1998), the performance in
the lowest quintile is given by LowQRankp,f,t = min(Rankp,f,t , 0.2), the performance in the
three middle quintiles is given by M idQRankp,f,t = min(Rankp,f,t − LowQRankp,f,t , 0.6),
and the performance in the highest quintile is given by HighQRankp,f,t = (Rankp,f,t −

LowQRankp,f,t − M idQRankp,f,t ).
   Columns 4-6 of Table 6 report the estimates from the three piecewise linear segments


                                               17
using our alternative ranking methods, based on the three year horizon. Consistent with
the base-case specification from Table 4, we find that deletions are less sensitive to poor and

intermediate performance for trustee funds. Interestingly, in our overall ranking model, we
find that the deletions of non-trustee funds that rank in the highest performance quintile
relative to other funds in the same objective codes actually increase with the performance

rank.

3.3.4   Subsample Analysis

Table 7 shows the results of our linear probability model specified in equation (1) for various

subsamples. For brevity, we only report the results using the three year horizon with the overall

performance ranking. In the first four columns, we confirm that our results are consistent

across different trustees. In the first column, we exclude the three largest trustees each year.

These are the only trustees in our sample that have over 10% of all retirement assets. In column

2, we report our estimates for the three largest trustees only. Overall, we find qualitatively

similar results across the two subsamples. Whereas affiliated trustee funds are 13.9% less

likely to be deleted from the menu for non-top mutual fund trustees, we find that trustee

funds are 12.7% less likely to be deleted from the menu for top-three mutual fund trustees.

In addition, we find that trustee fund deletions are less sensitive to poor fund performance

for both large and small mutual fund trustees. In column 3, we include trustee fixed effects

since deletion probabilities might depend on the identity of the trustee. Our favoritism results
remain after controlling for trustee fixed effects. In column 4, we reestimate our results using
information only on those plans that are trusteed by a mutual fund family.

   Columns 5 and 6 restrict the sample of mutual funds considered. In column 5 we exclude
all target date funds, since these funds are often used as default investment options. In column
6, we restrict our sample to equity funds. The results in these specifications are very consistent


                                               18
with the results in our base-case specification.
      The Pension Protection Act of 2006 (PPA) introduced comprehensive new legislation for

U.S. pension plans to protect retirement plan participants. Although the majority of the
reforms concerned defined benefit plans, it also affected defined contribution plans by allow-
ing companies to offer objective investment advice to participants and by requiring plans to

provide specific benefit statements to participants.12 Furthermore, several class action law-
suits were filed in the mid 2000s against large employers for breaches of fiduciary obligations
with respect to their 401(k) accounts.13 To investigate whether these lawsuits and regulatory

reforms affect our results, we divide our sample into two subperiods (1998-2006 and 2007-

2009). Columns 7 and 8 of Table 7 indicate that our key results do not differ between the two

subperiods. We find that trustee funds exhibit a lower propensity to be deleted from 401(k)

menus and that deletions for trustee funds are less sensitive to prior fund performance for

both subperiods.


4       Fund Additions

The previous section provides evidence that trustees are substantially less likely to delete their

own funds from the menus, and even more so when these funds are poorly performing. In

this section, we document that similar biases exist for fund additions as well. We first provide
univariate analyses to investigate whether the propensity to add a fund to a menu depends

on the fund’s affiliation with the trustee. We then examine the characteristics of newly listed

trustee and non-trustee funds in a multivariate framework.
  12
     The detailed regulations from the 2006           Pension   Protection   Act   can   be   obtained   from
http://www.dol.gov/ebsa/pensionreform.html.
 13
      See Ruiz-Zaiko and Williams (2007) for additional information on the lawsuits.




                                                      19
4.1    Univariate Relationship

We begin our analyses by calculating addition frequencies for affiliated and unaffiliated invest-

ment options, respectively. In Section 3.1, we compute mean deletion frequencies by averaging
across the deletion propensities of all funds that could be deleted from a 401(k) plan in a given
year. Our sample of 401(k) investment options represents the set of these funds. Analogously,

to calculate mean addition frequencies we first determine the addition propensities of each
fund that could be added to a 401(k) menu in a given year. For additions, the set of funds
that could be added is represented by the CRSP mutual fund universe.

   To investigate how a fund’s propensity to be added to a menu depends on its affiliation

with the trustee, for each fund in CRSP we determine its addition frequency as an affiliated

and unaffiliated menu choice, respectively. The affiliated (unaffiliated) addition frequency of

a fund is defined as the number of affiliated (unaffiliated) plans to which the fund is added

as a new investment option during the year divided by the number of affiliated (unaffiliated)

plans in which the fund is not already offered as an option at the end of the previous year

(i.e., the total number of affiliated (unaffiliated) menus to which it could be added).

   Consistent with Figure 1 and Table 3 for fund deletions, each year we also sort funds in

the CRSP universe into deciles according to their style-adjusted performance over the prior

one, three, and five years. Figure 2 and Table 8 report the average affiliated and unaffiliated
addition frequencies by past performance decile. In both cases, Panel A summarizes the results

using all existing mutual funds, whereas the average frequencies in Panel B are based on funds

from only those families that act as a trustee for at least one of our 401(k) plans during the
year. Thus, Panel B excludes funds that could not be added as trustee funds during the year.

This restriction allows us to examine the addition frequency of the same fund to an affiliated

or unaffiliated menu, respectively, consistent with our analyses for deletions in Section 3.1



                                               20
above.
    Figure 2 shows a substantial difference between the average addition frequencies for trustee

and non-trustee funds using past performance rankings based on the previous 36 months. In
the overall sample, the average addition frequency equals 1.08% for trustee funds and just
0.02% for non-trustee funds. Thus, trustee funds are more than fifty times more likely to

be added to a plan than non-trustee funds, indicating a substantial trustee bias for fund
additions.14 This result extends to using performance rankings based on the previous one and
five years, as summarized in Table 8.

    We also find that addition frequencies increase disproportionately more with fund perfor-

mance for non-trustee funds than for trustee-funds, indicating that non-trustee additions are

much more sensitive to performance. An improvement in performance from the lowest to the

highest decile increases the addition probability for non-trustee funds approximately eight-

fold from 0.005% to 0.039%. At the same time, an equivalent improvement in performance for

trustee funds results in only a 2.5 times larger addition probability (from 0.69% to 1.68%).

    Finally, the results indicate that trustee funds in the bottom performance decile are more

likely to be added to 401(k) plans than trustee funds in the second performance decile. For

example, trustee funds in the lowest performance decile over the prior three years have an

addition frequency of 0.69%, whereas trustee funds in the second performance decile have an
addition probability of just 0.47%. In contrast, we do not find such non-monotonicities for

non-trustee funds. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that plan trustees support

their affiliated poorly-performing funds by adding them to 401(k) plans.
    Panel B of Figure 2 and Table 8 replicates these results for the subsample of funds offered

by families that serve as trustees of 401(k) plans. The affiliated addition frequencies are

  14
     The difference in addition frequencies is similarly stark when we limit our analysis to only those investment
styles in the CRSP universe that appear on 401(k) menus in our sample.



                                                       21
exactly identical between the two panels. However, the addition frequencies of non-trustee
funds are slightly higher for the subsample in Panel B since funds offered by families that

serve as trustees are more likely to be selected by other unaffiliated trustees for their 401(k)
plans.15


4.2       Sample of Additions

Next, we investigate the characteristics of affiliated and unaffiliated funds based on our sample
of newly added funds. Table 2 from Section 2 provides univariate evidence that newly listed

trustee funds exhibit lower past performance than non-trustee funds in the same category.

We confirm this finding in Figure 3. The figure describes the distribution of trustee and non-

trustee fund additions separately, by performance deciles. Fund performance is measured by

the percentile performance rank of each fund in its style category in the past one, three, and

five years, respectively, using the CRSP universe of mutual funds. The graph shows results

based on fund performance in the past three years, but using one or five year ranks produces

qualitatively similar patterns. The results reveal that the proportion of non-trustee funds

with strong past performance is larger compared to that of trustee funds, while trustee funds

are more likely to come to the menu with a mediocre performance record.

       To further explore the difference in past performance across newly added trustee and

non-trustee funds, we estimate the following linear probability model for trustee additions:

                                                                0
                         T F ADD p,f,t = β0 + β1 × Rankp,f,t + Zp,f,t γ + p,f,t ,                       (2)

where the dependent variable takes the value of one if fund f added to plan p at time t
is a trustee fund, and zero otherwise. Since the sample used in this analysis includes only
  15
    In an unreported robustness test we estimate the addition proportions for trustee and non-trustee funds
using only mutual funds that are included in at least one 401(k) plan. Although the addition proportions are
around three times higher using this fund subsample, the results are qualitatively unaffected relative to the
base-case specification.

                                                     22
fund additions, it reflects the choice between selecting a trustee fund over a non-trustee fund.
Rankp,f,t is the percentile performance rank of mutual fund f over the previous one, three, or

five years based on overall rankings and it enters the analysis as a linear term. Our additional
controls include various fund characteristics and plan level variables, such as the number of
menu options and plan size.

    The results are reported in Table 9 with standard errors two-way clustered at the plan
and fund levels. Consistent with trustee favoritism, trustee fund additions are associated
with worse past performance even after controlling for other fund characteristics. This is

represented by our Rankp,f,t coefficient estimates, which are significantly negative at the one

percent level for each of our performance measures.16


5     Participant Flows

While the investment opportunity set of the plan is determined by the menu choices selected

by the employer and the trustee, participants can freely allocate their contributions within

the opportunity set. If participants anticipate trustee biases or are simply sensitive to poor

performance, they can undo favoritism in their own portfolios by, for instance, not allocating

capital to poorly performing trustee funds that are not removed from the menu. In this

section, we investigate whether trustee favoritism has an impact on the overall allocation of

plan assets by examining the sensitivity of participant flows to the performance of trustee and
non-trustee funds.
    Our primary definition of the growth rate of new money of fund f held in 401(k) plan p

at time t is based on the following definition of fund flows:
                                                Vp,f,t − Vp,f,t−1 (1 + Rf,t )
                                N M G1p,f,t =                                 .                           (3)
                                                     Vp,f,t−1 (1 + Rf,t )
   16
      These results are reported using trustee fixed effects but are qualitatively equivalent when the trustee
fixed effects are not included.

                                                     23
       The numerator captures the dollar change in the value of participants’ investments (Vp,f,t )
in fund f in plan p in year t after adjusting for the price appreciation of plan assets Rf,t (i.e.,

fund return) during the year. The denominator is defined as the projected value of the lagged
plan position in the fund without any new flow of money. If an investment option is deleted
from a plan menu, then N M G1 equals exactly -100%. This definition of new money growth

allows us to decompose fund flows to existing menu options17 into a component that is driven
by the plan sponsor and the trustee (i.e., fund deletions, which are extensive margin flows of
-100%) and a component that is driven primarily by plan participants (i.e., all other changes

in the value invested in the menu option, which are intensive margin flows above -100%).18

The analysis of extensive margin flows representing the decisions of plan sponsors and trustees

is summarized in Section 3.2. To remove outliers, we winsorize N M G1 at the 95% level.

       Figure 4 depicts the histograms of the percentage flows into various plan options for trustee

and non-trustee funds in the lowest performance quintile over the previous three years based

on various ranking methodologies. Consistent with Figure 1, which focuses on a special subset

of the funds in our sample, we find that non-trustee options are significantly more likely to be

deleted than trustee options overall. Figure 4 also shows that deletions contribute significantly

to the total flows of new money, consistent with Sialm, Starks, and Zhang (2012).

       Since equation (3) is not defined for fund additions, we also adopt two alternative measures
for the growth rate of new money of fund f held in 401(k) plan p at time t using two alternative

denominators for equation (3). The denominator of our first alternative measure (N M G2) is

  17
       N M G1 is not defined for newly listed funds as for these, the value of the lagged plan position is 0.
  18
    Whereas the extensive margin NMG1 rates are fund deletions, which are fully driven by choices of the
plan sponsors and trustees, the intensive margin NMG1 rates are not only affected by plan participants but
also by plan sponsors and trustees (e.g., additions of new funds that compete with old funds, preventing
contributions to certain funds but grandfathering balances held by participants in these funds, selecting some
funds as default investment options).




                                                         24
Vp,f,t + Vp,f,t−1 (1 + Rf,t ):

                                                 Vp,f,t − Vp,f,t−1 (1 + Rf,t )
                                 N M G2p,f,t =                                 .               (4)
                                                 Vp,f,t + Vp,f,t−1 (1 + Rf,t )

    Under this definition, new money growth takes a value in the interval [-1,1]. In particular,

it equals -100% for a fund that is eliminated as an investment option, as before, and +100%
for a fund that is newly added to the pension plan. More gradual inflows and outflows into
the fund are represented by intermediate values. Extensive margin new money growth that

equals -100% or +100% corresponds to menu changes by sponsors and trustees. Intermediate

values correspond to the changes plan participants make to their asset allocations.

    Finally, the denominator of our second alternative new money growth measure (N M G3)

is the plan value from the previous year:

                                                 Vp,f,t − Vp,f,t−1 (1 + Rf,t )
                                 N M G3p,f,t =     P                           .               (5)
                                                      f Vp,f,t−1 (1 + Rf,t )


    To remove outliers, we winsorize N M G3 at the 95% level. While the values N M G3 takes

under this third definition are not restricted to a specific range, we separate participant actions

from those of the sponsors and the trustees by removing the set of additions and deletions

from that of the rest of our sample.

    To investigate the sensitivity of fund flows to prior performance, we estimate the following

OLS regression using the three alternative definitions of N M G:

          N M Gp,f,t = β0 + β1 × T Fp,f,t + β2 × LowRankp,f,t + β3 × HighRankp,f,t

                         + β4 × T Fp,f,t × LowRankp,f,t + β5 × T Fp,f,t × HighRankp,f,t
                            0
                         + Zp,f,t γ + p,f,t .                                                 (6)

 Equation (6) is analogous to our baseline equation (1) with two exceptions. First, our new

dependent variable in equation (6) is N M G, a continuous variable under all three definitions

                                                      25
(which replaces fund deletions, i.e., extensive margin N M G of -100%). Second, if participants
use the same allocation rule every year, growth occurs mechanically due to the additional

money contributed to the retirement accounts over time. To capture this mechanical charac-
teristic of intensive margin flows, we add plan growth as an additional control variable.19

       Table 10 reports the corresponding coefficient estimates using the overall performance

ranking based on the past 36 months. The first three columns report the coefficient estimates
using the full sample of N M G including both extensive and intensive margin flows. The
last three columns report the coefficient estimates using only the intensive margin N M G

(including flows strictly larger than -100% for the first definition and including flows strictly

between -100% and +100% for the second, for example).

       The main results in columns 1–3 using total fund flows are broadly consistent with the

deletion results from Table 4. Trustee funds attract more new money than non-trustee funds.20

We find that flows into various plan options increase with prior fund performance consistent

with Chevalier and Ellison (1997), Sirri and Tufano (1998), and Huang, Wei, and Yan (2007).

The interaction effects indicate that overall flows are significantly less sensitive to poor per-

formance for trustee funds. For example, a ten percentage point increase in the performance

rank over the previous three years for below-median funds increases flows over the next year

by 6% for non-trustee funds and by only 1% for trustee funds. The additional control variables
indicate that the growth rates tend to be larger for smaller investment options, for funds with

lower expense ratios, for larger funds, and for younger funds.

       To investigate the importance of participant flows, we restrict our attention to the intensive
  19
     We calculate plan growth, using information in From 5500 on total contributions, total expenses and total
assets.
  20
    Our framework is significantly different from the flow benefit analysis in Cohen and Schmidt (2009). While
they show that funds offered by the trustees in 401(k) menus have generally higher inflows and lower outflows
(both retirement and retail flows), our paper investigates the different treatment funds are subject to when
they belong to the trustee and when they do not.



                                                     26
margin money flows in the last three columns of Table 10. We find that participant flows are
at best only marginally higher for trustee funds. Thus, the higher overall flows to trustee funds

are primarily driven by the decisions of plan trustees and sponsors. The coefficients on the two
performance ranking segments indicate that participants chase prior fund performance. It is
interesting that most of the inflows into above-median performers are due to plan participants,

whereas most of the outflows out of below-median performers are due to plan trustees. The
interaction effects between trustee funds and performance ranks indicate that plan participants
do not differentiate much between trustee and non-trustee funds.

    Overall, we find that plan participants do not offset the biased decisions of plan sponsors

and trustees. Our results indicate that decisions of plan trustees have a substantial impact

on flows to mutual funds. Mutual fund trustees can benefit by obtaining higher money flows

into their affiliated funds and by avoiding large outflows for their poorly performing funds.


6     Future Performance

Our previous results indicate that 401(k) plan sponsors are less likely to delete trustee funds

from their menus and that deletions of trustee funds are less sensitive to prior fund per-

formance. We also document a similar behavior for fund additions. Finally, we show that

participants do not direct flows away from the biased options offered by the trustee.

    Still, favoritism toward affiliated funds may not hurt plan participants if the underperform-
ing trustee funds exhibit superior subsequent performance. Indeed trustees may keep poor

performers not because they are biased toward them, but rather, due to positive information
they possess about the future returns of these funds.
    To investigate this hypothesis, in this section we examine the performance of trustee and

non-trustee funds that are kept, deleted, or added in the plans. At the end of each calendar
year, we form equal-weighted portfolios of trustee and non-trustee funds separately based on

                                               27
whether the funds were kept, deleted, or added to the 401(k) menu (“No Changes,” “Dele-
tions,”and “Additions”) during the calendar year. We restrict our sample to domestic equity

funds in these analyses. This creates six portfolios. We then further subdivide these six groups
based on past performance. In particular, “All Funds,” refers to all funds in the original six
portfolios and “Lowest Quintile,” (“Lowest Decile”) refers to a subportfolio in each group

that contains only those funds that also rank in the lowest performance quintile (decile) based
on past performance. We use the overall performance rankings during the prior three years
as our baseline specification. For example, “Trustee Funds/Deletions/All Funds” refers to

the equally-weighted portfolio of all trustee funds that are deleted from a menu during the

year, while “Non-trustee Funds/Deletions/Lowest Decile” represents the portfolio of poorly

performing non-trustee funds that are deleted from a menu. We rebalance our portfolios at

the end of each year and calculate the portfolios’ return for each of the next 12 months keeping

the portfolios’ composition fixed.

   The abnormal return αf,t of fund portfolio f at time t is computed using the Fama-French-

Carhart four-factor model (FFM) over our complete sample period using monthly fund return

data from the CRSP Mutual Fund database:

                                     M                       SM B
             Rf,t − RT B,t = αf,t + βf,t (RM,t − RT B,t ) + βf,t  (RS,t − RB,t )
                                 HM L                   UMD
                               +βf,t  (RH,t − RL,t ) + βf,t (RU,t − RD,t ) + f,t .         (7)


The return of fund portfolio f during time period t is denoted by Rf,t . The index M corre-

sponds to the market portfolio and the index T B to the risk-free Treasury bill rate. Portfolios
of small and large stocks are denoted by S and B, respectively; portfolios of stocks with high
and low ratios between their book values and their market values are denoted by H and L,

respectively; and portfolios of stocks with relatively high and low returns during the previ-
ous year are denoted by U and D, respectively. We obtain monthly factor returns and the

                                              28
risk-free rate from Kenneth French’s website. The Carhart (1997) model nests the CAPM
model (which includes only the market factor) and the Fama and French (1993) model (which

includes the size and the book-to-market factors in addition to the market factor).
   Table 11 reports the abnormal returns of the various mutual fund portfolios. Panels A, B,
and C report the Carhart alphas, the Fama-French alphas, and the CAPM alphas, respectively.

The average Carhart alpha for trustee funds kept for at least two consecutive periods in the
401(k) plan is -0.04% per month and is not significantly different from zero. Similarly, the
corresponding alpha for non-trustee funds is -0.06% per month.

   More importantly, we find that trustee funds that were kept in the 401(k) plans by their

sponsors despite their poor performance exhibit significantly negative Carhart and Fama-

French alphas. For example, trustee funds ranked in the lowest performance quintile (decile)

over the prior three years exhibit a Carhart alpha of -0.24% (-0.30%) per month. The re-

sults using the Carhart and the Fama-French alphas are both statistically and economically

significant. On the other hand, the results are less pronounced using CAPM alphas. This

represents an underperformance of between 2.9% and 3.6% per year, on a risk-adjusted basis.

Compounded until retirement, these losses can have a large impact on the welfare of retirees.

   Our results in Table 11 reveal that plan participants do not benefit from the private

information trustees may have about their own proprietary funds: trustee choices in 401(k)
plans are not information driven. Instead, consistent with Carhart (1997), poor performance

persists. Overall, plan participants invested into affiliated funds favored by trustees would

have obtained a higher risk-adjusted performance had they switched their retirement savings
from the underperforming trustee funds to other trustee funds.




                                             29
7     Conclusion

Mutual fund families serving as trustees of 401(k) plans have a fiduciary duty to act in

the interest of participants but they also have a competing incentive to attract and retain
retirement contributions into their own proprietary funds. In this paper, we examine how
trustee incentives influence the set of investment choices offered in the plan.

    Despite the increasing importance of 401(k) plans as a retirement vehicle, little research
has evaluated the consequence of offering the trusteeship of the plan to a mutual fund com-
pany. This is surprising, provided that small inefficiencies in the selection of investments

options, especially early in the participant’s career, can have an significant impact on retire-

ment income.

    Our paper takes a first step in this direction. We find that mutual fund trustees display

favoritism toward their own funds. In particular, we show that trustee funds are less likely

to be removed from the menu relative to non-trustee funds, independent of their performance

record. Moreover, the difference in deletion propensities between trustee and non-trustee

funds is largest among the worst performing funds. We find similar results for mutual fund

additions.

    Interestingly, mutual fund affiliation does not affect how participants allocate their con-

tributions, suggesting that participants do not understand these biases. We also show that
trustees’ resistance to remove their own poorly performing funds generates a significant sub-

sequent negative abnormal return of 2.9–3.6% per year for participants investing in those

funds.
    One question that we do not address in this paper is whether or not sponsoring companies

should employ mutual fund families as plan trustees. Instead, we take a first step to uncover

the various incentives that accompany the trustee relation and their effect on plan design.


                                               30
Future research should explore and contrast additional costs and benefits of employing mutual
fund and non-mutual fund trustees in the management of 401(k) plans.




                                             31
References
Agnew, J., P. Balduzzi, and A. Sunden (2003). Portfolio choice and trading in a large 401(k)
  plan. American Economic Review 93, 193–215.
Ai, C. and E. C. Norton (2003). Interaction terms in logit and probit models. Economics
  Letters 80, 123–129.
Balduzzi, P. and J. Reuter (2012). Heterogeneity in target-date funds and the pension pro-
  tection act of 2006. Working paper .
Benartzi, S. and R. H. Thaler (2001). Naive diversification strategies in defined contribution
  saving plans. American Economic Review 91 (1), 79–98.
Bhattacharya, U., J. H. Lee, and V. K. Pool (2012). Conflicting family values in mutual fund
  families. Forthcoming: Journal of Finance.
Brown, J. R., N. Liang, and S. Weisbenner (2007). Individual account investment options and
  portfolio choice: Behavioral lessons from 401(k) plans. Journal of Public Economics 91,
  1992–2013.
Brown, K. C. and W. V. Harlow (2012). How good are the investment options provided
  by defined contribution plan sponsors? International Journal of Portfolio Analysis and
  Management 1, 3–31.
Carhart, M. M. (1997). On the persistence of mutual fund performance. Journal of Fi-
  nance 52 (1), 57–82.
Carroll, G. D., J. J. Choi, D. Laibson, B. C. Madrian, and A. Metrick (2009). Optimal defaults
  and active decisions. Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 1639–1674.
Chaudhuri, R., Z. Ivkovic, and C. Trzcinka (2012). Strategic performance allocation in insti-
 tutional asset management firms: Behold the power of stars and dominant clients. Working
 paper .
Chevalier, J. A. and G. D. Ellison (1997). Risk taking in mutual funds as a response to
 incentives. Journal of Political Economy 105 (6), 1167–1200.
Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, B. C. Madrian, and A. Metrick (2002). Defined contribution pensions:
 Plan rules, participant decisions, and the path of least resistance. In J. M. Poterba (Ed.),
 Tax Policy and the Economy, pp. 67–113. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, B. C. Madrian, and A. Metrick (2004). For better or for worse. Default
 effects and 401(k) savings behavior. In D. A. Wise (Ed.), Perspectives on the Economics of
 Aging, pp. 81–121. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Christoffersen, S. K. and M. Simutin (2012). Risk-taking and retirement investing in mutual
 funds. Working Paper .
Cohen, L. and B. Schmidt (2009). Attracting flows by attracting big clients. The Journal of
  Finance 64 (5), 2125–2151.
Davis, G. F. and E. H. Kim (2007). Business ties and proxy voting by mutual funds. Journal
  of Financial Economics 85 (2), 552–570.

                                              32
Del Guercio, D. and P. Tkac (2002). The determinants of the flow of funds of managed
  portfolios: Mutual funds versus pension funds. Journal of Financial and Quantitative
  Analysis 37, 523–557.
Duan, Y., E. S. Hotchkiss, and Y. Jiao (2012). Business ties and information advantage:
 Evidence from mutual fund trading. Working Paper .
Duflo, E. and E. Saez (2002). Participation and investment decisions in a retirement plan:
 The influence of colleagues’ choices. Journal of Public Economics 85 (1), 121–148.
Elton, E. J., M. J. Gruber, and C. R. Blake (2006). The adequacy of investment choices
  offered by 401(k) plans. Journal of Public Economics 90, 1299–1314.
Elton, E. J., M. J. Gruber, and C. R. Blake (2007). Participant reaction and the performance
  of funds offered by 401(k) plans. Journal of Financial Intermediation 16, 249–271.
Evans, R. B. (2010). Mutual fund incubation. Journal of Finance 65, 1581–1611.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1993). Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
  bonds. Journal of Financial Economics 33 (1), 3–56.
Gaspar, J. M., M. Massa, and P. Matos (2006). Favoritism in mutual fund families? Evidence
 on strategic cross-fund subsidization. Journal of Finance 61, 73–104.
Goyal, A. and S. Wahal (2008). The selection and termination of investment management
 firms by plan sponsors. Journal of Finance 63, 1805–1847.
Huang, J., K. D. Wei, and H. Yan (2007). Participation costs and the sensitivity of fund flows
 to past performance. Journal of Finance 62, 1273–1311.
Huberman, G. and W. Jiang (2006). Offering versus choice in 401(k) plans: Equity exposure
 and number of funds. Journal of Finance 61, 763–801.
Kuhnen, C. M. (2009). Business networks, corporate governance, and contracting in the
 mutual fund industry. Journal of Finance 64, 2185–2220.
Madrian, B. C. and D. F. Shea (2001). The power of suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) participation
 and savings behavior. Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 1149–1187.
Massa, M. and Z. Rehman (2008). Information flows within financial conglomerates: Evidence
 from the banks mutual funds relation. Journal of Financial Economics 89, 288–306.
Mitchell, O. S. and S. Utkus (2012). Target-date funds in 401(k) retirement plans. Working
 Paper .
Nanda, V., Z. J. Wang, and L. Zheng (2004). Family values and the star phenomenon:
  Strategies of mutual fund families. Review of Financial Studies 17 (3), 667–698.
Rauh, J. (2006). Own company stock in defined contribution pension plans: A takeover
  defense? Journal of Financial Economics 81 (2), 379–410.
Reuter, J. (2006). Are IPO allocations for sale? Evidence from mutual funds. Journal of
  Finance 61, 2289–2324.


                                             33
Ritter, J. R. and D. Zhang (2007). Affiliated mutual funds and the allocation of initial public
  offerings. Journal of Financial Economics 86, 337–368.
Ruiz-Zaiko, L. and B. Williams (2007). Plan sponsors besieged by 401(k) fee lawsuits. Pensions
 & Benefits Management Bridgebay Financial .
Sialm, C. and L. Starks (2012). Mutual fund tax clienteles. Journal of Finance 67, 1397–1422.
Sialm, C., L. Starks, and H. Zhang (2012). Defined contribution pension plans: Sticky or
  discerning money? Working Paper .
Sirri, E. R. and P. Tufano (1998). Costly search and mutual fund flows. Journal of Fi-
  nance 53 (5), 1598–1622.
Tang, N., O. S. Mitchell, G. R. Mottola, and S. P. Utkus (2010). The efficiency of sponsor and
  participant portfolio choices in 401(k) plans. Journal of Public Economics 94, 1073–1085.




                                              34
                             Panel A: Overall Sample




Panel B: Subsample of Funds on Both Affiliated and Unaffiliated Menus




Figure 1: Fraction of Fund Deletions by Trustee and Non-Trustee Funds.
The figure depicts the mean annual fund deletion frequencies by trustee affiliation and
performance decile. Panel A includes the overall sample of mutual funds. Panel B
includes the subsample of funds, where funds appear contemporaneously on multiple
401(k) menus, at least once as a trustee fund and at least once as a non-trustee fund.
Every year, we calculate the ratio of the number of affiliated (unaffiliated) menus from
which the fund is delisted during the year to the total number of affiliated (unaffiliated)
menus associated with the fund. Performance is ranked using style-adjusted returns over
the prior three years relative to the universe of mutual funds in CRSP. We then average
across the funds’ deletion frequencies by performance and affiliation.


                                            35
                             Panel A: Overall Sample




Panel B: Subsample of Funds on Both Affiliated and Unaffiliated Menus




Figure 2: Fraction of Fund Additions by Mutual Fund and Non-Mutual Fund
Trustees. The figure depicts the mean annual fund addition frequencies by trustee
affiliation and performance decile. Panel A includes the overall sample of mutual funds.
Panel B includes the subsample of funds, which are offered by fund families that serve as
trustees for some firms in our sample. Every year, we calculate the ratio of the number
of affiliated (unaffiliated) menus to which the fund is added during the year to the total
number of affiliated (unaffiliated) menus that do not yet include the fund as an option.
Performance is ranked using style-adjusted returns over the prior three years relative
to the universe of mutual funds in CRSP. We then average across the funds’ addition
frequencies by performance and affiliation.



                                           36
Figure 3: The Distribution of Mutual Funds Additions by Performance Decile and
Fund Affiliation.

The figure shows the distribution of the funds that are added to a 401(k) menu at some point
during our sample period by performance decile and affiliation. The dark line shows the fractions
of trustee funds in the various performance deciles, while the grey line provides the corresponding
values for non-trustee funds. Performance deciles are created from percentile performance ranks.
These are calculated using overall overall rankings, in which fund performance is ranked relative
to all other mutual funds with the same investment style in CRSP, based on returns in the prior
36 months.




                                               37
                      Panel A: Trustee Funds                                                            Panel B: Non-Trustee Funds
                           (Overall Rankings)                                                                  (Overall Rankings)
              0.30                                                                                    0.30




              0.20                                                                                    0.20




                                                                                         Proportion
 Proportion




              0.10                                                                                    0.10




              0.00                                                                                    0.00
                     Ͳ1.0 Ͳ0.9 Ͳ0.7 Ͳ0.5 Ͳ0.3 Ͳ0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6                       Ͳ1.0 Ͳ0.9 Ͳ0.7 Ͳ0.5 Ͳ0.3 Ͳ0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6
                                           NewMoneyGrowth                                                                        NewMoneyGrowth


                      Panel C: Trustee Funds                                                            Panel D: Non-Trustee Funds
                            (Plan Rankings)                                                                     (Plan Rankings)
              0.30                                                                                    0.30




              0.20                                                                                    0.20
                                                                                         Proportion
 Proportion




              0.10                                                                                    0.10




              0.00                                                                                    0.00
                     Ͳ1.0 Ͳ0.9 Ͳ0.7 Ͳ0.5 Ͳ0.3 Ͳ0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6                       Ͳ1.0 Ͳ0.9 Ͳ0.7 Ͳ0.5 Ͳ0.3 Ͳ0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6
                                           NewMoneyGrowth                                                                       NewMoneyGrowth




Figure 4: New Money Growth of Lower Performance Quintiles for Mutual Fund
and Non-Mutual Fund Trustee Funds.

The figure displays the distribution of fund flows to poorly performing mutual funds on the
menu by affiliation. Fund flows, or the growth rate of new money N M Gp,f,t of fund f held in
401(k) plan p at time t is defined by N M Gp,f,t = [Vp,f,t −Vp,f,t−1 (1+Rf,t )]/[Vp,f,t−1 (1+Rf,t )].
The numerator captures the dollar change in the value of participants’ investments (Vp,f,t )
in fund f in plan p in year t after adjusting for the price appreciation Rf,t (i.e., fund return)
during the year. The denominator is defined as the projected value of the lagged plan
position in the fund without any new flow of money. If an investment option is deleted
from a plan menu, then N M G equals exactly -100%. In Panel A and B, the distributions
describe fund flows to those trustee and non-trustee funds, respectively, that fall into the
worst performance decile of the universe of mutual funds in their style category. Panels C
and D depict the distributions of the corresponding flows using performance rankings based
on only those mutual funds that are offered on the same 401(k) menu.
     Table 1: Trustee Summary Statistics.
     The table provides descriptive statistics by year. Columns 1 and 2 report the number of plans and plan sponsors captured in
     our sample, respectively. Columns 3 and 4 show the total number of mutual fund and non-mutual fund trustees, respectively,
     while columns 5 and 6 report the corresponding distinct number of trustees by type. In columns 7-11, we provide information
     about the architecture of the plan. These include the number of mutual fund options offered, the trustee share calculated
     as the overall proportion of retirement assets invested with affiliated funds, the average number of management companies
     that offer at least one investment option on the menu, and the Herfindahl index of the menu calculated based on the dollar
     share of each of these management companies.

      Year                 Total Number                     Distinct Number                    Plan Architecture
              Sponsors     Plans     Mutual      Other     Mutual      Other      No. of    No. of    Trustee   No. of    Herfin-
                                      Fund      Trustees    Fund      Trustees    Options   Trustee    Share    Mgmt.      dahl
                                     Trustees              Trustees                         Options             Comp.     Index




39
      1998         621         735       439       296        73         57         6.98      2.35      0.34       2.96    0.67
      1999         766         924       637       287        90         83         7.83      2.85      0.34       3.46    0.64
      2000         835      1, 035       758       277        89         95         9.25      3.54      0.36       3.98    0.59
      2001         923      1, 125       838       287        91        100        10.39      4.13      0.38       4.45    0.57
      2002      1, 013      1, 250       955       295        97        107        11.45      4.63      0.38       4.97    0.55
      2003      1, 104      1, 341    1, 116       225       101        113        12.00      4.75      0.36       5.33    0.51
      2004      1, 105      1, 333    1, 112       221       100        112        13.16      5.23      0.34       5.76    0.48
      2005      1, 095      1, 298    1, 086       212        93        101        13.79      5.42      0.33       6.06    0.45
      2006      1, 034      1, 238       968       270        93         93        14.58      5.83      0.32       6.25    0.44
      2007      1, 000      1, 183       891       292        86         96        15.96      5.95      0.29       6.65    0.42
      2008         970      1, 135       859       276        82         82        17.23      6.53      0.29       7.06    0.42
      2009         849         988       743       245        70         73        17.85      6.43      0.27       7.41    0.40
      Total    11, 315     13, 585   10, 402    3, 183     1, 065     1, 112       13.11      5.07      0.33       5.62    0.494
     Table 2: Mutual Funds Summary Statistics.
     Panels A, B, and C of the table describe the funds that are deleted from, kept, or added to a 401(k) menu in our sample.
     We report the average fund age, fund size (in millions), the volatility of monthly fund returns, turnover, the raw and
     style-adjusted expense ratio, and the funds’ mean percentile performance ranks. Performance ranks are calculated over
     the previous one, three, or five years based on overall rankings. The overall performance rank of each fund represents the
     performance of the fund relative to other funds in the same objective code. With the exception of fund age and fund size,
     all values are expressed as percentages. The averages are reported for trustee and non-trustee funds separately, along with
     the results of the paired t-test testing whether the difference is significantly different from zero. Standard errors for this test
     are two-way clustered at the plan and fund levels. Significance levels are denoted by *, **, ***, which correspond to 10%,
     5%, and 1% levels, respectively.


        Panel A: Mutual Funds Deletions
        Trustee        N          Fund         Fund       Return    Turnover     Exp.       Exp.        Perf       Perf      Perf
         Fund                     Age          Size        Std.                  Ratio      Ratio       Rank       Rank      Rank
                                                           Dev.                           Style Adj.    1 Yr.      3 Yr.     5 Yr.
           0      15, 380        17.98       7, 810.90     4.08       92.49       1.06       0.17      48.00      50.67      55.13
           1       3, 623        17.55       7, 249.91     3.43       78.86       0.79      −0.03      50.61      51.39      52.79
          Diff                  −0.42        −560.99      −0.65∗∗∗ −13.63∗∗∗ −0.27∗∗∗       −0.20∗∗∗     2.61∗∗    0.72     −2.34∗∗




40
        Panel B: Mutual Funds Kept
        Trustee        N          Fund         Fund       Return    Turnover     Exp.       Exp.        Perf       Perf      Perf
         Fund                     Age          Size        Std.                  Ratio      Ratio       Rank       Rank      Rank
                                                           Dev.                           Style Adj.    1 Yr.      3 Yr.     5 Yr.
           0      86, 522        19.39     15, 323.91      4.00       77.87       0.94       0.06      54.89      60.05      63.42
           1      52, 660        17.35     12, 176.73      3.37       51.93       0.56      −0.22      55.44      58.07      59.28
          Diff                  −2.03      −3, 147.18∗∗∗ −0.62∗∗∗ −25.94∗∗∗ −0.38∗∗∗        −0.29∗∗∗     0.55     −1.98∗∗∗ −4.15∗∗∗



        Panel C: Mutual Funds Additions
        Trustee        N          Fund         Fund       Return    Turnover     Exp.       Exp.        Perf       Perf      Perf
         Fund                     Age          Size        Std.                  Ratio      Ratio       Rank       Rank      Rank
                                                           Dev.                           Style Adj.    1 Yr.      3 Yr.     5 Yr.
           0      21, 196        15.10       9, 962.67     3.99       83.80       0.96       0.07      62.31      67.39      68.61
           1       6, 997        10.32       5, 443.62     3.23       55.78       0.59      −0.22      58.69      63.78      65.11
          Diff                  −4.78∗∗∗ −4, 519.06∗      −0.77∗∗∗ −28.02∗∗∗ −0.36∗∗∗       −0.28∗∗∗ −3.62∗∗∗ −3.62∗∗∗ −3.50∗∗∗
     Table 3: Fund Deletion Proportions by Performance Deciles.
     The table summarizes the mean annual fund deletion frequencies (as a %) by trustee affiliation and performance decile.
     Panel A includes the overall sample of mutual funds. Panel B includes the subsample of funds, where funds appear contem-
     poraneously on multiple 401(k) menus, at least once as a trustee fund and at least once as a non-trustee fund. Every year,
     we calculate the ratio of the number of affiliated (unaffiliated) menus from which the fund is delisted during the year to the
     total number of affiliated (unaffiliated) menus associated with the fund. Performance is ranked using style-adjusted returns
     over the prior three years relative to the universe of mutual funds in CRSP. We then average across the funds’ deletion
     frequencies by performance and affiliation. Significance levels are denoted by *, **, ***, which correspond to 10%, 5%, and
     1% levels, respectively and are based on standard errors that are clustered at the fund level.

        Panel A: All Funds
        Performance                1 Year                              3 Years                             5 Years
        Decile            T         NT        T-NT            T          NT        T-NT            T         NT        T-NT
                                                  ∗∗∗                                  ∗∗∗
        1              10.8        25.5      −14.7          11.9        29.6     −17.7          13.1        27.2      −14.2∗∗∗
        2              15.2        23.7       −8.6∗∗∗       16.2        27.2     −11.0∗∗∗       15.3        27.9      −12.6∗∗∗
        3              13.1        23.1      −10.0∗∗∗       15.5        24.5      −9.0∗∗∗       13.8        24.8      −10.9∗∗∗
        4              12.9        23.4      −10.5∗∗∗       12.6        22.9     −10.3∗∗∗       11.3        24.3      −13.0∗∗∗
        5              11.8        19.6       −7.7∗∗∗       10.6        20.8     −10.2∗∗∗       11.7        21.2       −9.5∗∗∗
        6              11.1        19.1       −7.9∗∗∗        9.3        20.3     −10.9∗∗∗       10.7        20.9      −10.2∗∗∗
        7               8.5        19.4      −10.9∗∗∗       10.0        17.8      −7.9∗∗∗        9.8        19.8      −10.1∗∗∗




41
        8              10.5        18.7       −8.2∗∗∗        9.0        18.1      −9.1∗∗∗        9.3        17.0       −7.7∗∗∗
        9               8.5        18.0       −9.5∗∗∗        8.3        16.2      −7.9∗∗∗        9.3        15.9       −6.7∗∗∗
        10             10.9        17.3       −6.5∗∗∗       12.2        16.9      −4.7∗∗∗       11.3        17.0       −5.8∗∗∗

        Panel B: Subsample of Funds on Both Affiliated and Unaffiliated Menus
        Performance                1 Year                              3 Years                             5 Years
        Decile            T         NT        T-NT            T          NT        T-NT            T         NT        T-NT
        1               9.1        21.3      −12.2∗∗∗       10.5        27.0     −16.5∗∗∗       13.5        25.9      −12.4∗∗∗
        2              13.5        21.7       −8.2∗∗∗       15.4        22.6      −7.2∗∗∗       13.4        25.6      −12.3∗∗∗
        3              13.4        20.4       −7.0∗∗∗       13.5        22.7      −9.2∗∗∗       11.8        21.5       −9.7∗∗∗
        4              11.5        20.9       −9.4∗∗∗       11.6        18.6      −7.1∗∗∗       11.6        19.3       −7.7∗∗∗
        5              12.4        19.0       −6.6∗∗∗       11.8        17.0      −5.2∗∗∗       11.0        18.9       −7.9∗∗∗
        6               9.1        15.8       −6.7∗∗∗        9.0        19.6     −10.6∗∗∗       11.0        18.6       −7.6∗∗∗
        7               6.9        14.7       −7.8∗∗∗        8.3        16.1      −7.8∗∗∗        9.0        18.3       −9.3∗∗∗
        8               9.5        15.5       −6.0∗∗∗        7.9        15.3      −7.4∗∗∗        7.9        15.5       −7.5∗∗∗
        9               8.3        16.7       −8.4∗∗∗        7.8        13.3      −5.5∗∗∗        7.9        11.9       −4.0∗∗∗
        10              9.3        14.5       −5.3∗∗∗       10.0        14.7      −4.6∗∗         9.7        13.7       −4.0∗∗
Table 4: Linear Probability Model for Fund Deletions.
The table reports the OLS coefficient estimates of the following model for fund deletions: DELp,f,t =
β0 +β1 ×T Fp,f,t +β2 ×LowRankp,f,t +β3 ×HighRankp,f,t +β4 ×T Fp,f,t ×LowRankp,f,t +β5 ×T Fp,f,t ×
                     0
HighRankp,f,t + Zp,f,t γ + p,f,t , where DELp,f,t is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if
mutual fund f has been deleted from plan p at time t and zero otherwise, and T Fp,f,t is an indicator
variable for whether the trustee of pension plan p is affiliated with the management company of
mutual fund f . LowRank and HighRank are defined as LowRankp,f,t = min(Rankp,f,t , 0.5) and
HighRankp,f,t = min(Rankp,f,t − LowRankp,f,t , 0.5), where Rankp,f,t is the percentile performance
rank of mutual fund f over the previous one, three, or five years based on the performance of the
fund relative to other CRSP funds in the same objective code. The other control variables Z include
the natural logarithm of the option size, the number of options, the expense ratio of the fund, the
turnover of the fund’s holdings, the natural logarithm of the fund’s size, fund age, the standard
deviation of the fund’s return, and unreported indicator variables for specific fund types and year
fixed effects. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the plan and fund levels and are reported in
parentheses. Significance levels are denoted by *, **, ***, which correspond to 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels, respectively.

                                             1 Year            3 Years           5 Years
                                                  ∗∗∗               ∗∗∗
             Trustee Fund                  −0.099            −0.140            −0.119∗∗∗
                                            (0.015)           (0.018)           (0.022)
             LowRank                       −0.181∗∗∗         −0.324∗∗∗         −0.230∗∗∗
                                            (0.029)           (0.034)           (0.037)
             HighRank                      −0.054∗∗          −0.072∗∗∗         −0.164∗∗∗
                                            (0.024)           (0.023)           (0.024)
             LowRank*Trustee Fund            0.171∗∗∗          0.247∗∗∗          0.152∗∗∗
                                            (0.035)           (0.042)           (0.052)
             HighRank*Trustee Fund         −0.020            −0.003              0.085∗∗∗
                                            (0.030)           (0.027)           (0.030)
             Log(Option Size)              −0.007∗∗∗         −0.007∗∗∗         −0.008∗∗∗
                                            (0.002)           (0.002)           (0.002)
             No. of Options                −0.001∗∗∗         −0.001∗∗∗         −0.001∗∗∗
                                            (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)
             Exp. Ratio                      5.070∗∗∗          4.611∗∗∗          5.169∗∗∗
                                            (0.948)           (0.931)           (0.976)
             Turnover                        0.013∗∗∗          0.013∗∗∗          0.014∗∗∗
                                            (0.004)           (0.004)           (0.004)
             Log(Fund Size)                −0.023∗∗∗         −0.021∗∗∗         −0.019∗∗∗
                                            (0.002)           (0.002)           (0.002)
             Fund Age                        0.000∗∗           0.000             0.000
                                            (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)
             Std. Dev.                     −0.046              0.262             0.370∗
                                            (0.207)           (0.207)           (0.206)
             Observations                   99,967             99,967            99,967
             R-Squared                      0.061              0.069             0.066




                                                      42
Table 5: Linear Probability Model for Fund Deletions: Alternative Rankings.
The table reports the OLS coefficient estimates of the following model for fund deletions: DELp,f,t =
β0 +β1 ×T Fp,f,t +β2 ×LowRankp,f,t +β3 ×HighRankp,f,t +β4 ×T Fp,f,t ×LowRankp,f,t +β5 ×T Fp,f,t ×
                   0
HighRankp,f,t + Zp,f,t γ + p,f,t , where DELp,f,t is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if
mutual fund f has been deleted from plan p at time t and zero otherwise, and T Fp,f,t is an indicator
variable for whether the trustee of pension plan p is affiliated with the management company of
mutual fund f . LowRank and HighRank are defined as LowRankp,f,t = min(Rankp,f,t , 0.5) and
HighRankp,f,t = min(Rankp,f,t − LowRankp,f,t , 0.5), where Rankp,f,t is the percentile performance
rank of mutual fund f over the previous one, three, or five years based either on the fund’s percentile
rankings within a specific 401(k) plan or on the fund’s percentile rankings within the fund’s family.
The other control variables Z include the natural logarithm of the option size, the number of options,
the expense ratio of the fund, the turnover of the fund’s holdings, the natural logarithm of the fund’s
size, fund age, the standard deviation of the fund’s return, and unreported indicator variables for
specific fund types and year fixed effects. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the plan and
fund levels and are reported in parentheses. Significance levels are denoted by *, **, ***, which
correspond to 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                        Plan Ranking                              Family Ranking
                              1 Year      3 Years          5 Years     1 Year        3 Years       5 Years
 Trustee Fund              −0.081∗∗∗     −0.088∗∗∗     −0.103∗∗∗     −0.070∗∗∗      −0.075∗∗∗    −0.076∗∗∗
                            (0.012)       (0.014)       (0.015)       (0.014)        (0.016)      (0.017)
 LowRank                   −0.135∗∗∗     −0.231∗∗∗     −0.185∗∗∗     −0.073∗∗∗      −0.164∗∗∗    −0.159∗∗∗
                            (0.020)       (0.024)       (0.020)       (0.024)        (0.029)      (0.033)
 HighRank                  −0.042∗       −0.055∗∗      −0.186∗∗∗     −0.052∗∗       −0.052∗∗     −0.078∗∗∗
                            (0.023)       (0.022)       (0.019)       (0.025)        (0.025)      (0.027)
 LowRank*Trustee Fund        0.134∗∗∗      0.139∗∗∗      0.110∗∗∗      0.099∗∗∗       0.116∗∗∗     0.106∗∗
                            (0.030)       (0.031)       (0.024)       (0.033)        (0.041)      (0.044)
 HighRank*Trustee Fund     −0.015          0.019         0.105∗∗∗    −0.020         −0.038       −0.013
                            (0.030)       (0.030)       (0.024)       (0.033)        (0.036)      (0.036)
 Log(Option Size)          −0.007∗∗∗     −0.007∗∗∗     −0.008∗∗∗     −0.007∗∗∗      −0.007∗∗∗    −0.007∗∗∗
                            (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)      (0.002)
 No. of Options            −0.002∗∗∗     −0.002∗∗∗     −0.001∗∗∗     −0.002∗∗∗      −0.002∗∗∗    −0.002∗∗∗
                            (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.000)
 Exp. Ratio                  5.553∗∗∗      5.465∗∗∗      5.246∗∗∗      5.439∗∗∗       5.424∗∗∗     5.619∗∗∗
                            (0.953)       (0.938)       (0.971)       (0.960)        (0.948)      (0.943)
 Turnover                    0.012∗∗∗      0.011∗∗∗      0.014∗∗∗      0.013∗∗∗       0.013∗∗∗     0.013∗∗∗
                            (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)      (0.003)
 Log(Fund Size)            −0.024∗∗∗     −0.022∗∗∗     −0.020∗∗∗     −0.024∗∗∗      −0.024∗∗∗    −0.023∗∗∗
                            (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)      (0.002)
 Fund Age                    0.000∗∗       0.000         0.000         0.000∗∗        0.000∗∗      0.000∗
                            (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.000)
 Std. Dev.                 −0.116          0.131         0.383∗      −0.003           0.106        0.264
                            (0.213)       (0.215)       (0.211)       (0.217)        (0.208)      (0.205)
 Observations                100,299      100,299          100,299    100,269        100,269       100,269
 R-squared                   0.059        0.065            0.066      0.057          0.059         0.060




                                                      43
Table 6: Linear Probability Model for Fund Deletions: Alternative Functional Forms.
The table reports the OLS coefficient estimates of the model for fund deletions described in Table 4
using a linear performance specification (one-segment model) in columns 1-3, and a three-segment
piecewise linear specification in columns 4-6. For the three-segment specification, the performance
segments are 1) the lowest performance quintile, 2) the highest performance quintile, and 3) the
three middle performance quintiles, which are pulled together to represent a single performance
segment. Following Sirri and Tufano (1998), the performance in the lowest quintile is given by
LowQRankp,f,t = min(Rankp,f,t , 0.2), the performance in the three middle quintiles is given by
M idQRankp,f,t = min(Rankp,f,t − LowQRankp,f,t , 0.6), and the performance in the highest quintile
is given by HighQRankp,f,t = (Rankp,f,t − LowQRankp,f,t − M idQRankp,f,t ), where Rankp,f,t is
the percentage performance rank of mutual fund f over the previous three years based on either
overall rankings, 401(k) plan rankings, and fund family rankings. Standard errors in this table are
two-way clustered at the plan and fund levels and are reported in parentheses. Significance levels
are denoted by *, **, ***, which correspond to 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                    Linear Performance                      Three Segments
   Ranking                    Overall      Plan       Family      Overall       Plan         Family
   Trustee Fund              −0.095∗∗∗ −0.071∗∗∗ −0.051∗∗∗       −0.164∗∗∗ −0.106∗∗∗ −0.105∗∗∗
                              (0.012)   (0.012)   (0.012)         (0.031)   (0.025)   (0.027)
   Rank                      −0.181∗∗∗ −0.145∗∗∗ −0.103∗∗∗
                              (0.015)   (0.017)   (0.015)
   LowQRank                                                      −0.467∗∗∗ −0.576∗∗∗ −0.407∗∗∗
                                                                  (0.120)    (0.094)  (0.112)
   MidQRank                                                      −0.210∗∗∗ −0.111∗∗∗ −0.082∗∗∗
                                                                  (0.019)    (0.015)  (0.020)
   HighQRank                                                       0.215∗∗∗ −0.026   −0.068
                                                                  (0.074)    (0.095)  (0.077)
   Rank*Trustee Fund           0.103∗∗∗    0.079∗∗∗    0.034∗
                              (0.017)     (0.019)     (0.018)
   LowQRank*Trustee Fund                                           0.479∗∗∗  0.293∗∗       0.359∗∗
                                                                 (0.164)    (0.126)       (0.145)
   MidQRank*Trustee Fund                                           0.112∗∗∗  0.064∗∗∗      0.012
                                                                 (0.023)    (0.020)       (0.025)
   HighQRank*Trustee Fund                                        −0.176∗     0.001       −0.009
                                                                 (0.095)    (0.123)       (0.122)
   Log(Option Size)          −0.007∗∗∗ −0.007∗∗∗ −0.007∗∗∗       −0.007∗∗∗ −0.007∗∗∗     −0.007∗∗∗
                              (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)         (0.002)   (0.002)       (0.002)
   No. of Options            −0.001∗∗∗ −0.002∗∗∗ −0.002∗∗∗       −0.001∗∗∗ −0.002∗∗∗     −0.002∗∗∗
                              (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)         (0.000)   (0.000)       (0.000)
   Exp. Ratio                  4.884∗∗∗  5.524∗∗∗  5.485∗∗∗        4.539∗∗∗  5.470∗∗∗      5.376∗∗∗
                              (0.941)   (0.940)   (0.949)         (0.934)   (0.937)       (0.947)
   Turnover                    0.013∗∗∗  0.012∗∗∗  0.013∗∗∗        0.014∗∗∗  0.011∗∗∗      0.013∗∗∗
                              (0.004)   (0.003)   (0.004)         (0.004)   (0.003)       (0.004)
   Log(Fund Size)            −0.021∗∗∗ −0.022∗∗∗ −0.024∗∗∗       −0.021∗∗∗ −0.022∗∗∗     −0.024∗∗∗
                              (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)         (0.002)   (0.002)       (0.002)
   Fund Age                    0.000     0.000     0.000∗          0.000     0.000         0.000∗
                              (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)         (0.000)   (0.000)       (0.000)
   Std. Dev.                   0.326     0.180     0.126           0.247     0.111         0.107
                              (0.213)   (0.216)   (0.206)         (0.204)   (0.216)       (0.209)
   Observations                99,967     100,299   100,269       99,967       100,299       100,269
   R-squared                   0.067       0.064 44 0.059         0.069         0.065         0.060
     Table 7: Linear Probability Model for Fund Deletions: Robustness Tests.
     The table reports the OLS coefficient estimates of the model for fund deletions described in Table 4 for various subsamples
     of our data. We exclude the three largest trustees each year in the first column, estimate the model for the three largest
     trustees in the second, and estimate our model with trustee fixed effects in column 3. Column 4 reestimates our results
     using information only on those plans that are trusteed by a mutual fund family. Column 5 excludes target date funds and
     column 6 excludes all non-equity funds. Finally, in columns 7 and 8, we divide our sample into the subperiods 1998-2006
     and 2007-2009, respectively. Standard errors in this table are two-way clustered at the plan and fund levels and are reported
     in parentheses. Significance levels are denoted by *, **, ***, which correspond to 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                               Exclude                    Include       Only         Exclude      Only        Prior to       After
                               Top 3 MF     Top 3 MF      Trustee        MF        Target Date   Equity        2007          2006
                                Trustees     Trustees       FE         Trustees       Funds      Funds
      Trustee Fund             −0.139∗∗∗    −0.127∗∗∗    −0.157∗∗∗    −0.149∗∗∗     −0.131∗∗∗    −0.117∗∗∗    −0.117∗∗∗    −0.147∗∗∗
                                (0.022)      (0.037)      (0.017)      (0.020)       (0.020)      (0.023)      (0.029)      (0.022)
      LowRank                  −0.316∗∗∗    −0.312∗∗∗    −0.320∗∗∗    −0.329∗∗∗     −0.366∗∗∗    −0.385∗∗∗    −0.305∗∗∗    −0.334∗∗∗
                                (0.034)      (0.074)      (0.034)      (0.039)       (0.035)      (0.038)      (0.051)      (0.041)
      HighRank                 −0.068∗∗∗    −0.128∗∗∗    −0.076∗∗∗    −0.065∗∗      −0.083∗∗∗    −0.098∗∗∗    −0.125∗∗∗    −0.020
                                (0.023)      (0.045)      (0.021)      (0.027)       (0.024)      (0.024)      (0.030)      (0.030)
      LowRank*Trustee Fund       0.178∗∗∗     0.247∗∗∗     0.242∗∗∗     0.254∗∗∗      0.208∗∗∗     0.181∗∗∗     0.236∗∗∗     0.228∗∗∗
                                (0.055)      (0.082)      (0.040)      (0.047)       (0.045)      (0.052)      (0.065)      (0.051)




45
      HighRank*Trustee Fund      0.009        0.036        0.008      −0.012          0.030        0.023        0.036      −0.037
                                (0.037)      (0.048)      (0.026)      (0.032)       (0.031)      (0.033)      (0.038)      (0.034)
      Log(Option Size)         −0.008∗∗∗    −0.006∗      −0.008∗∗∗    −0.008∗∗∗     −0.009∗∗∗    −0.009∗∗∗    −0.007∗∗∗    −0.008∗∗∗
                                (0.002)      (0.003)      (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)
      No. of Options           −0.001∗∗∗    −0.003∗∗∗    −0.002∗∗∗    −0.002∗∗∗     −0.001∗∗∗    −0.001∗∗∗    −0.001∗∗∗    −0.001∗∗∗
                                (0.000)      (0.001)      (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.001)      (0.000)
      Exp. Ratio                 3.920∗∗∗     9.453∗∗∗     4.534∗∗∗     4.870∗∗∗      4.413∗∗∗     3.343∗∗∗     5.876∗∗∗     4.303∗∗∗
                                (1.025)      (1.963)      (0.890)      (1.057)       (1.024)      (1.114)      (1.385)      (1.088)
      Turnover                   0.011∗∗∗     0.020∗∗∗     0.011∗∗∗     0.012∗∗∗      0.011∗∗∗     0.026∗∗∗     0.015∗∗∗     0.009∗∗
                                (0.003)      (0.007)      (0.003)      (0.004)       (0.003)      (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.004)
      Log(Fund Size)           −0.023∗∗∗    −0.023∗∗∗    −0.024∗∗∗    −0.020∗∗∗     −0.021∗∗∗    −0.020∗∗∗    −0.025∗∗∗    −0.019∗∗∗
                                (0.002)      (0.004)      (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.003)      (0.002)
      Fund Age                   0.000∗∗      0.000        0.000∗       0.000         0.000∗       0.000        0.000        0.000
                                (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)
      Std. Dev.                  0.496∗∗    −0.603∗∗       0.188        0.263         0.474∗∗      0.600∗∗    −1.009∗∗∗      0.579∗∗∗
                                (0.228)      (0.239)      (0.133)      (0.227)       (0.207)      (0.239)      (0.364)      (0.225)
      Observations              63,996       36,303       94,153       82,295        85,899      66,341       49,412        50,887
      R-squared                  0.059        0.091       0.093        0.073          0.065       0.076        0.075        0.068
     Table 8: Fund Addition Proportions by Performance Deciles.
     The table summarizes the mean annual fund addition frequencies (as a %) by trustee affiliation and performance decile.
     Panel A includes the overall sample of mutual funds. Panel B includes the subsample of funds, which are offered by fund
     families that serve as trustees for some firms in our sample. Every year, we calculate the ratio of the number of affiliated
     (unaffiliated) menus to which the fund is added during the year to the total number of affiliated (unaffiliated) menus that
     do not yet include the fund as an option at the beginning of the year. Performance is ranked using style-adjusted returns
     over the prior three years relative to the universe of mutual funds in CRSP. We then average across the funds’ addition
     frequencies by performance and affiliation. Significance levels are based on standard errors that are clustered at the fund
     level and are denoted by *, **, ***, which correspond to 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

            Panel A: All Funds
            Performance              1 Year                           3 Years                          5 Years
            Decile           T          NT       T-NT          T         NT       T-NT          T         NT       T-NT
            1               1.038       0.008   1.030∗∗∗     0.690       0.005   0.685∗∗∗     0.573       0.005   0.569∗∗∗
            2               0.613       0.009   0.604∗∗∗     0.470       0.007   0.463∗∗∗     0.497       0.005   0.492∗∗∗
            3               0.930       0.012   0.919∗∗∗     0.820       0.008   0.812∗∗∗     0.789       0.009   0.780∗∗∗
            4               0.896       0.014   0.881∗∗∗     0.813       0.011   0.801∗∗∗     0.658       0.011   0.647∗∗∗
            5               0.949       0.017   0.932∗∗∗     0.924       0.014   0.909∗∗∗     0.863       0.014   0.849∗∗∗
            6               1.045       0.020   1.025∗∗∗     1.223       0.020   1.203∗∗∗     0.916       0.016   0.900∗∗∗
            7               1.042       0.020   1.022∗∗∗     1.327       0.021   1.305∗∗∗     1.424       0.020   1.404∗∗∗




46
            8               1.328       0.024   1.304∗∗∗     1.142       0.024   1.118∗∗∗     1.375       0.027   1.348∗∗∗
            9               1.530       0.030   1.500∗∗∗     1.681       0.037   1.644∗∗∗     1.861       0.040   1.820∗∗∗
            10              1.434       0.034   1.400∗∗∗     1.676       0.039   1.637∗∗∗     1.856       0.039   1.817∗∗∗

            Panel B: Subsample of Funds on Both Affiliated and Unaffiliated Menus
            Performance              1 Year                           3 Years                          5 Years
            Decile           T          NT       T-NT          T         NT       T-NT          T         NT       T-NT
                                                     ∗∗∗                              ∗∗∗
            1               1.038       0.017   1.021        0.690       0.009   0.681        0.573       0.008   0.565∗∗∗
            2               0.613       0.011   0.601∗∗∗     0.470       0.010   0.459∗∗∗     0.497       0.006   0.490∗∗∗
            3               0.930       0.019   0.912∗∗∗     0.820       0.013   0.807∗∗∗     0.789       0.015   0.775∗∗∗
            4               0.896       0.023   0.873∗∗∗     0.813       0.019   0.794∗∗∗     0.658       0.021   0.638∗∗∗
            5               0.949       0.027   0.922∗∗∗     0.924       0.029   0.895∗∗∗     0.863       0.028   0.835∗∗∗
            6               1.045       0.034   1.011∗∗∗     1.223       0.034   1.189∗∗∗     0.916       0.030   0.887∗∗∗
            7               1.042       0.032   1.009∗∗∗     1.327       0.037   1.290∗∗∗     1.424       0.032   1.392∗∗∗
            8               1.328       0.039   1.289∗∗∗     1.142       0.036   1.106∗∗∗     1.375       0.036   1.339∗∗∗
            9               1.530       0.047   1.483∗∗∗     1.681       0.051   1.630∗∗∗     1.861       0.061   1.800∗∗∗
            10              1.434       0.044   1.390∗∗∗     1.676       0.056   1.619∗∗∗     1.856       0.060   1.796∗∗∗
Table 9: Linear Probability Model for Trustee Additions.
The table reports the OLS coefficient estimates of the following model for trustee fund additions:
                                        0
T F ADD p,f,t = β0 + β1 × Rankp,f,t + Zp,f,t γ + p,f,t , where T F ADD p,f,t is an indicator variable equal
to one if mutual fund f added to the plan p at time t is affiliated with the management company
acting as the plan’s trustee and zero otherwise. Rankp,f,t is the performance rank of mutual fund f
over the previous one, three, or five years based on overall rankings, and is included as a percentage.
The overall performance rank of each fund depends on the performance of the fund relative to other
funds in the same objective code. The other control variables Z include the number of options,
the expense ratio of the fund, the turnover of the fund, the natural logarithm of the fund’s size,
fund age, the standard deviation of the fund’s return (all measured during the previous year), and
unreported indicator variables for specific fund styles, and year and trustee fixed effects. Standard
errors are two-way clustered at plan and fund levels and are reported in parentheses. Significance
levels are denoted by *, **, ***, which correspond to 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                1 Year     3 Years     5 Years


                           Rank (1 Yr.)       −0.136∗∗∗
                                              (0.028)
                           Rank (3 Yrs.)                  −0.191∗∗∗
                                                           (0.037)
                           Rank (5 Yrs.)                              −0.226∗∗∗
                                                                      (0.043)
                           No. of Options     −0.001∗∗    −0.001∗∗    −0.001∗∗
                                              (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)
                           Log(Plan Assets)   −0.016∗∗∗   −0.016∗∗∗   −0.016∗∗∗
                                              (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.003)
                           Exp. Ratio         −0.138∗∗∗   −0.135∗∗∗   −0.131∗∗∗
                                              (0.024)      (0.024)     (0.024)
                           Turnover            0.000      −0.001      −0.002
                                              (0.010)      (0.010)     (0.010)
                           Log(Fund Size)     −0.006      −0.004      −0.000
                                              (0.007)      (0.007)     (0.007)
                           Fund Age           −0.002∗∗    −0.002∗∗∗   −0.002∗∗∗
                                              (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)
                           Std. Dev.           0.026        0.050       0.054∗
                                              (0.033)      (0.033)     (0.033)


                           Observations         16,511      16,511      16,511
                           R-squared             0.741      0.742       0.743




                                                    47
Table 10: Fund Flow Regressions.
The table reports the coefficient estimates of the following OLS regression: N M Gp,f,t = β0 + β1 ×
T Fp,f,t + β2 × LowRankp,f,t + β3 × HighRankp,f,t + β4 × T Fp,f,t × LowRankp,f,t + β5 × T Fp,f,t ×
                     0
HighRankp,f,t + Zp,f,t  γ + p,f,t , where the explanatory variables of the regression are analogous to
those in Table 4 with the exception of Plan Growth, which is a new variable added in this table. Our
first dependent variable (with corresponding results reported in columns 1 and 4 for all flows and
                                                                                     V   −Vp,f,t−1 (1+Rf,t )
participants, respectively) is new money growth defined as N M G1p,f,t = p,f,t         Vp,f,t−1 (1+Rf,t )    , where
Vp,f,t is the value of participants’ investments in fund f in plan p in year t and Rf,t is the fund’s
return during the year. We use two additional definitions for new money growth. N M G2 is new
                                            Vp,f,t −Vp,f,t−1 (1+Rf,t )
money growth defined as N M G2p,f,t = Vp,f,t       +Vp,f,t−1 (1+Rf,t ) , with corresponding results reported in
columns 2 and 5. Finally, N M G3 shares the numerator with the previous two definitions but we
replace the denominator by lagged plan size. Regression results using N M G3 as the dependent
variable are reported in columns 3 and 6. The performance rank of mutual fund f is calculated over
the previous three years based on the overall ranking. Standard errors in this table are two-way
clustered at the plan and fund levels and are reported in parentheses. Significance levels are denoted
by *, **, ***, which correspond to 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                           All Fund Flows                        Participant Flows Only
                                  NMG1         NMG2           NMG3           NMG1         NMG2         NMG3
   Trustee Fund                    0.249∗∗∗     0.178∗∗∗   1.009∗∗∗           0.064∗       0.022∗       0.004
                                  (0.041)      (0.024)    (0.246)            (0.036)      (0.013)      (0.132)
   LowRank                         0.006∗∗∗     0.004∗∗∗   0.037∗∗∗           0.002∗∗∗     0.001∗∗∗     0.012∗∗∗
                                  (0.001)      (0.000)    (0.005)            (0.001)      (0.000)      (0.003)
   HighRank                        0.004∗∗∗     0.002∗∗∗   0.018∗∗∗           0.003∗∗∗     0.001∗∗∗     0.009∗∗∗
                                  (0.001)      (0.000)    (0.003)            (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.003)
   LowRank*Trustee Fund          −0.005∗∗∗    −0.003∗∗∗ −0.012∗∗            −0.001       −0.000       −0.005
                                  (0.001)      (0.001)    (0.006)            (0.001)      (0.000)      (0.003)
   HighRank*Trustee Fund           0.001        0.000    −0.013∗∗∗            0.000      −0.000       −0.002
                                  (0.001)      (0.000)    (0.004)            (0.001)      (0.000)      (0.003)
   Plan Growth                     0.871∗∗∗     0.394∗∗∗   5.912∗∗∗           0.886∗∗∗     0.374∗∗∗     7.669∗∗∗
                                  (0.073)      (0.041)    (0.432)            (0.069)      (0.026)      (0.397)
   Log(Option Size)              −0.086∗∗∗    −0.024∗∗∗ −0.241∗∗∗           −0.111∗∗∗    −0.036∗∗∗    −0.075∗∗∗
                                  (0.005)      (0.003)    (0.017)            (0.004)      (0.002)      (0.011)
   No. Options                   −0.001         0.000      0.009∗∗          −0.003∗∗     −0.001∗∗∗    −0.020∗∗∗
                                  (0.001)      (0.001)    (0.004)            (0.001)      (0.000)      (0.003)
   Exp. Ratio                   −12.121∗∗∗    −6.913∗∗∗ −26.163∗∗           −6.923∗∗∗    −2.228∗∗∗      1.897
                                  (2.153)      (1.239)   (11.041)            (1.790)      (0.617)      (6.032)
   Turnover                      −0.018∗∗     −0.015∗∗∗ −0.077∗∗∗             0.001        0.000      −0.002
                                  (0.007)      (0.005)    (0.025)            (0.006)      (0.002)      (0.018)
   Log(Fund Size)                  0.027∗∗∗     0.025∗∗∗   0.232∗∗∗         −0.001         0.001        0.083∗∗∗
                                  (0.005)      (0.003)    (0.029)            (0.005)      (0.002)      (0.017)
   Fund Age                      −0.001∗∗∗    −0.001∗∗   −0.003             −0.001∗∗∗    −0.000∗∗∗    −0.001
                                  (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.003)            (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.002)
   Std. Dev.                     −0.530       −0.371       5.085∗∗∗           0.215        0.046        2.517∗∗
                                  (0.486)      (0.291)    (1.756)            (0.348)      (0.123)      (1.218)
   Observations                   89,276        89,276        89,276         77,911       77,911       77,911
   R-squared                       0.168        0.105          0.056         0.251        0.222        0.108


                                                         48
Table 11: Abnormal Returns of Mutual Fund and Non-Mutual Fund Trustees.
Panels A, B, and C of the table report the abnormal return αf,t of fund portfolio f at time t using the
Fama-French-Carhart four-factor model (FFM), the Fama and French (1993) model, and the CAPM
model, respectively, over our complete sample period using monthly fund return data. At the end
of each calendar year, we form equal-weighted portfolios of trustee and non-trustee domestic equity
funds separately based on whether the funds were kept, deleted, or added to the 401(k) menu (“No
Changes,” “Deletions,”and “Additions”) during the calendar year. This creates six portfolios. We
then further subdivide these six groups based on past performance. In particular, “All Funds,” refers
to the original six portfolios and “Lowest Quintile,” (“Lowest Decile”) refers to a sub-portfolio in
each group that contains only those funds that also rank in the lowest performance quintile (decile)
based on past performance. The panels report results using the overall performance rankings during
the prior three years. The performance measures are reported in % per month. Robust standard
errors are reported in parentheses. Significance levels are denoted by *, **, ***, which correspond
to 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

  Panel A: Carhart Alphas
                          No Changes                      Deletions                   Additions
                    Trustee    Non-Trustee       Trustee      Non-Trustee    Trustee      Non-Trustee
                    Funds        Funds           Funds          Funds        Funds          Funds
  All Funds         −0.04         −0.06         −0.08            −0.06      −0.04            −0.06
                     (0.04)        (0.04)        (0.06)           (0.04)     (0.05)           (0.04)
  Lowest Quintile   −0.24∗∗       −0.09         −0.18            −0.12      −0.15            −0.01
                     (0.10)        (0.09)        (0.13)           (0.10)     (0.15)           (0.11)
  Lowest Decile     −0.30∗∗       −0.07         −0.35∗∗          −0.16        0.03             0.08
                     (0.13)        (0.14)        (0.17)           (0.16)     (0.28)           (0.18)


  Panel B: Fama-French Alphas
                          No Changes                      Deletions                   Additions
                    Trustee    Non-Trustee       Trustee      Non-Trustee    Trustee      Non-Trustee
                    Funds        Funds           Funds          Funds        Funds          Funds
  All Funds         −0.04         −0.06         −0.08            −0.06      −0.04            −0.06
                     (0.04)        (0.04)        (0.06)           (0.04)     (0.05)           (0.04)
  Lowest Quintile   −0.24∗∗       −0.09         −0.18            −0.12      −0.15            −0.00
                     (0.10)        (0.10)        (0.13)           (0.11)     (0.15)           (0.11)
  Lowest Decile     −0.30∗∗       −0.07         −0.35∗∗          −0.16        0.02             0.08
                     (0.13)        (0.16)        (0.17)           (0.17)     (0.28)           (0.19)


  Panel C: CAPM Alphas
                          No Changes                      Deletions                   Additions
                    Trustee    Non-Trustee       Trustee      Non-Trustee    Trustee      Non-Trustee
                    Funds        Funds           Funds          Funds        Funds          Funds
  All Funds           0.02          0.02        −0.04            −0.00      −0.00              0.04
                     (0.05)        (0.04)        (0.06)           (0.05)     (0.05)           (0.04)
  Lowest Quintile     0.00          0.17        −0.07              0.10       0.02             0.24
                     (0.14)        (0.15)        (0.14)           (0.16)     (0.16)           (0.15)
  Lowest Decile     −0.07           0.24        −0.22              0.09       0.08             0.34
                     (0.16)        (0.26)        (0.21)           (0.29)     (0.31)           (0.24)
                                                  49
                                             Appendix
Table A1: Probit Model for Fund Deletions: Two Piecewise Linear Segments.
The table reports the estimated marginal effects of the following probit model for fund deletions:
DELp,f,t = β0 +β1 ×T Fp,f,t +β2 ×LowRankp,f,t +β3 ×HighRankp,f,t +β4 ×T Fp,f,t ×HighRankp,f,t +
                                0
β5 ×T Fp,f,t ×LowRankp,f,t +Zp,f,t γ+p,f,t , where DELp,f,t is an indicator variable that takes the value
of one if mutual fund f has been deleted from plan p at time t and zero otherwise, and T Fp,f,t is an
indicator variable for whether the trustee of pension plan p is affiliated with the management company
of mutual fund f . LowRank and HighRank are defined as LowRankp,f,t = min(Rankp,f,t , 0.5) and
HighRankp,f,t = min(Rankp,f,t − LowRankp,f,t , 0.5), where Rankp,f,t is the performance rank of
mutual fund f over the previous one, three, or five years based on overall rankings, and is included
as a percentage. The overall performance rank of each fund depends on the performance of the fund
relative to other funds in the same objective code, whereas the inside performance rank only depends
on the fund’s ranking within the 401(k) plan. The other control variables Z include the natural
logarithm of the option size, the number of options, the expense ratio of the fund, the turnover of
the fund’s holdings, the natural logarithm of the fund’s size, fund age, the standard deviation of
the fund’s return, and unreported indicator variables for specific fund types and year fixed effects.
The marginal effects for the interaction terms are computed using the INTEFF command based on
Standard errors are clustered at the plan level and are reported in parentheses. Significance levels
are denoted by *, **, ***, which correspond to 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                                          Overall Ranking                          Plan Ranking
                                  1 Yr.       3 Yrs.         5 Yrs.        1 Yr.       3 Yrs.       5 Yrs.
                                       ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
      Trustee Fund              −0.065       −0.074         −0.059       −0.059       −0.051       −0.052∗∗∗
                                 (0.008)      (0.008)        (0.010)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)
      LowRank                   −0.129∗∗∗    −0.208∗∗∗      −0.130∗∗∗    −0.093∗∗∗    −0.155∗∗∗    −0.134∗∗∗
                                 (0.011)      (0.013)        (0.014)      (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.009)
      HighRank                  −0.051∗∗∗    −0.070∗∗∗      −0.145∗∗∗    −0.045∗∗∗    −0.060∗∗∗    −0.115∗∗∗
                                 (0.012)      (0.012)        (0.013)      (0.011)      (0.010)      (0.010)
      LowRank*Trustee Fund        0.105∗∗∗     0.132∗∗∗       0.062∗∗∗     0.080∗∗∗     0.064∗∗∗     0.060∗∗∗
                                 (0.021)      (0.022)        (0.023)      (0.017)      (0.016)      (0.016)
      HighRank*Trustee Fund     −0.003         0.028∗         0.084∗∗∗     0.018        0.047∗∗∗     0.064∗∗∗
                                 (0.018)      (0.018)        (0.019)      (0.017)      (0.019)      (0.019)
      Log(Plan Size)            −0.007∗∗∗    −0.007∗∗∗      −0.007∗∗∗    −0.007∗∗∗    −0.006∗∗∗    −0.006∗∗∗
                                 (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)
      Options                   −0.001∗∗∗    −0.001∗∗∗      −0.001∗∗∗    −0.002∗∗∗    −0.002∗∗∗    −0.002∗∗∗
                                  0.000       (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)
      Fee                         4.393∗∗∗     3.938∗∗∗       4.405∗∗∗     4.762∗∗∗     4.619∗∗∗     4.757∗∗∗
                                 (0.536)      (0.539)        (0.542)      (0.538)      (0.530)      (0.529)
      Turnover                    0.008∗∗∗     0.008∗∗∗       0.009∗∗∗     0.008∗∗∗     0.007∗∗∗     0.007∗∗∗
                                 (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)
      Log(Fund Size)            −0.021∗∗∗    −0.019∗∗∗      −0.017∗∗∗    −0.021∗∗∗    −0.020∗∗∗    −0.018∗∗∗
                                 (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)
      Fund Age                    0.000∗∗∗     0.000∗∗∗       0.000        0.000∗∗∗     0.000∗∗∗     0.000
                                 (0.000)      (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)
      Std. Dev.                 −0.033         0.242∗∗        0.328∗∗∗   −0.092         0.129        0.356∗∗∗
                                 (0.120)      (0.120)        (0.115)      (0.131)      (0.130)      (0.121)
      Observations               99,967       99,967         99,967      100,299      100,299      100,299
      Adj. R-Squared             0.080        0.088          0.086        0.077        0.084        0.086
                                                       50
Figure A1: Robustness of Interaction Effect Between Trustee Indicator Variable and
Performance Rank.

The following graphs display the interaction effects and corresponding z-statistics on the interaction
variable between the trustee dummy and the performance ranks in Table A1 of the Appendix,
estimated using Norton, Wang, and Ai (2004). The interaction effect is defined as the change
in the predicted probability of deletion for a change in both the fund performance and the fund
affiliation.




                                                51
