                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          CLIMATIC FLUCTUATIONS AND THE DIFFUSION OF AGRICULTURE

                                           Quamrul Ashraf
                                        Stelios Michalopoulos

                                        Working Paper 18765
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18765


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2013




We thank the editor, Philippe Aghion, two anonymous referees, Ofer Bar-Yosef, Gregory Dow, Oded
Galor, Nippe Lagerlöf, Ashley Lester, Yannis Ioannides, Clyde Reed, David Weil, and seminar participants
at the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Brown University, the First and Second Conferences on
Early Economic Developments, the 2010 DEGIT XV Conference, and the 2011 Annual Conference
of the Royal Economic Society for their comments and suggestions. Ashraf gratefully acknowledges
research support from the Hellman Fellows Program and from the National Science Foundation (SES-1338738).
This paper was partly written while Ashraf was visiting Harvard Kennedy School and the Center for
International Development at Harvard University. All errors are ours. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Quamrul Ashraf and Stelios Michalopoulos. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Climatic Fluctuations and the Diffusion of Agriculture
Quamrul Ashraf and Stelios Michalopoulos
NBER Working Paper No. 18765
February 2013, Revised April 2014
JEL No. O11,O13,O31,O33,O44,Q54,Q55,Q56

                                             ABSTRACT

This research examines the climatic origins of the diffusion of Neolithic agriculture across countries
and archaeological sites. The theory suggests that a foraging society s history of climatic shocks shaped
the timing of its adoption of farming. Specifically, as long as climatic disturbances did not lead to
a collapse of the underlying resource base, the rate at which hunter-gatherers were climatically propelled
to experiment with their habitats determined the accumulation of tacit knowledge complementary
to farming. Consistent with the proposed hypothesis, the empirical investigation demonstrates that,
conditional on biogeographic endowments, climatic volatility has a hump-shaped effect on the timing
of the adoption of agriculture.


Quamrul Ashraf
Williams College
Department of Economics
24 Hopkins Hall Drive
Williamstown, MA 01267
Quamrul.H.Ashraf@williams.edu

Stelios Michalopoulos
Brown University
Department of Economics
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
smichalo@brown.edu
1    Introduction
The impact of the transition from hunting and gathering to agriculture on the long-run socioeconomic
transformation of mankind is perhaps only comparable to that of the Industrial Revolution. Hunting and
gathering, a mode of subsistence that entails the collection of wild plants and the hunting of wild animals,
prevailed through most of human history. The prehistoric transition from foraging to farming has been
referred to as the Neolithic Revolution, a term that captures both the general period in history when the
transition took place and the profound socioeconomic changes associated with it.
         This research theoretically and empirically examines the di¤usion of agriculture. It advances and
tests the hypothesis that a society’s history of climatic ‡uctuations determined the timing of its adoption of
farming. The theory suggests that climatic volatility induced foragers to intensify their subsistence activities
and expand their dietary spectrum. To the extent that climatic shocks did not eliminate the underlying
subsistence resource base, societies that were frequently propelled to exploit their habitats accumulated tacit
knowledge complementary to agricultural practices, thereby facilitating the adoption of farming when the
technology di¤used from the Neolithic frontier. In contrast, extremely volatile or stationary environments
were less conducive to the adoption of agriculture. At one end, societies facing static climatic conditions were
not su¢ ciently coerced to take advantage of their habitats. At the other end, extreme climatic shocks (e.g.,
a return to semi-glacial or arid conditions) prevented the type of ecological experimentation instrumental
for the accumulation of knowledge complementary to farming.
         The current approach weaves together two distinct in‡uential theories from the archaeological
literature regarding the onset of agriculture in the Near East, namely the “Broad Spectrum Revolution”and
the “climate change” hypotheses. According to the “Broad Spectrum Revolution” argument, pioneered by
Binford (1968) and Flannery (1973), exogenous population growth instigated the exploitation of new species,
leading to the deliberate cultivation of certain plants, especially wild cereals, and setting the stage for their
domestication (see Weiss et al., 2004, for recently uncovered evidence). On the other hand, proponents of the
“climate change” hypothesis, including Byrne (1987), Bar-Yosef and Belfer-Cohen (1989), and Richerson,
Boyd and Bettinger (2001), highlight how the advent of agriculture took place as a result of unusual climatic
changes in the early Holocene.
         Motivated by these two prominent insights, the proposed theory links climatic variability with the
more e¢ cient exploitation of existing resources and the inclusion of previously unexploited species into the
dietary spectrum. It illustrates the importance of climatic shocks in transforming foraging activities and
augmenting societal practices complementary to the adoption of agriculture (expansion of tool assemblages,
more intense habitat-clearing and plant-interventionist operations, etc.). The study thus identi…es the spatial
heterogeneity of regional climatic sequences as a fundamental source of the di¤erential timing of the adoption
of farming across regions.
         The predictions of the theory are tested using cross-sectional data on the timing of the adoption of
agriculture. Consistent with the theory, the results demonstrate a highly statistically signi…cant and robust
hump-shaped relationship between the intertemporal standard deviation of temperature and the timing of
the Neolithic Revolution. Speci…cally, the analysis exploits cross-country variation in temperature volatility
to explain the variation in the timing of the agricultural transition across countries. Due to the unavailability
of worldwide prehistoric temperature data, the analysis employs highly spatially disaggregated monthly time-
series data between 1901 and 2000 to construct country-level measures of the mean and standard deviation
of temperature over the course of the last century. The interpretation of the empirical results is thus based


                                                       1
on the identifying assumption that the cross-regional distribution of temperature volatility during the 20th
century was not signi…cantly di¤erent from that which existed prior to the Neolithic Revolution. While this
may appear to be a somewhat strong assumption, it is important to note that the spatial distribution of
climatic factors is determined in large part by spatial di¤erences in microgeographic characteristics, which
remain fairly stationary within a given geological epoch, rather than by global temporal events (e.g., an ice
age) that predominantly a¤ect the worldwide temporal distribution of climate. Nevertheless, to partially
relax the identifying assumption, the analysis additionally employs a volatility measure constructed from
new time-series data on historical temperature over the 1500–1900 time period (albeit for a smaller set of
countries), uncovering …ndings that are qualitatively similar to those revealed using temperature volatility
over the course of the last century.
         Arguably, the ideal unit of analysis for examining the relationship between climatic endowments and
the di¤usion of farming would be at the human-settlement level rather than the country level. It is precisely
along this dimension that the empirical investigation is augmented. Speci…cally, the analysis employs data
on the timing of Neolithic settlements in Europe and the Middle East to explore the role of local, site-speci…c
climatic sequences in shaping the adoption of farming across reliably excavated and dated archaeological sites.
Consistent with the predictions of the theory, and in line with the pattern uncovered by the cross-country
analysis, Neolithic sites endowed with moderate climatic volatility are found to have transited earlier into
agriculture. The recurrent …nding that climatic volatility has had a non-monotonic impact on the adoption
of farming, across countries and archaeological sites alike, sheds new light on the climatic origins of the
Neolithic Revolution.1
         In revealing the climatic origins of the adoption of agriculture, this research contributes to a vibrant
body of work within economics that has explored the deeply-rooted determinants of comparative economic
development (see Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2013, for an excellent review of this literature). Speci…cally,
Diamond (1997) emphasizes that the transition to agriculture led to the rise of civilizations and conferred
a developmental head-start to early agriculturalists, via the rapid development of written language, science,
military technologies, and statehood. In line with this argument, Olsson and Hibbs (2005) show that
geography and biogeography may, in part, predict contemporary levels of economic development through the
timing of the transition to agriculture, whereas Ashraf and Galor (2011) establish the Malthusian link from
technological advancement to population growth, demonstrating the explanatory power of the timing of the
Neolithic Revolution for population density in pre-industrial societies.2 Moreover, Galor and Moav (2002,
2007) and Galor and Michalopoulos (2012) argue that the Neolithic Revolution triggered an evolutionary
process that a¤ected comparative development, whereas Comin, Easterly and Gong (2010) …nd that historical
technology adoption, largely shaped by the timing of the transition to agriculture, has a signi…cant impact
on contemporary economic performance.
         By investigating the interplay between climatic ‡uctuations and technological evolution in the very
long run, this study also contributes to a growing body of theoretical and empirical work regarding the
relationships between economic growth, technical change, and the environment (e.g., Acemoglu et al., 2012;
Dell, Jones and Olken, 2012; Peretto, 2012).
    1 The distribution of contemporary hunter-gatherer societies is also in line with the proposed theory. Hunter-gatherers today

are typically found either in areas characterized by extreme climatic conditions, like the poles and deserts, or in rich coastal
regions that possess little climatic variation (see, e.g., Keeley, 1995).
    2 Interestingly, using both cross-country and cross-archeological-site data (as in the current study), Olsson and Paik (2012)

provide new evidence, showing that within the Western agricultural core (i.e., Southwest Asia, Europe, and North Africa), there
is a negative association between the onset of farming and contemporary economic and institutional development.



                                                               2
         The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 brie‡y reviews the economic literature on the
origins of agriculture. Section 3 lays out the conceptual framework, followed by a simple model of climatic
shocks and the adoption of agriculture. Section 4 discusses the empirical …ndings from the cross-country and
cross-archaeological-site analyses, and, …nally, Section 5 concludes.


2     Related Literature
The Neolithic Revolution has been a long-standing subject of active research among archaeologists, historians,
and anthropologists, recently receiving increasing attention from economists. The focus of this study is on
the role of climatic shocks in the adoption of farming. Nevertheless, the historical and archaeological record
on instances of pristine agricultural transitions also emphasizes the role of climatic changes in transforming
hunter-gatherer activities (see Ashraf and Michalopoulos, 2011, for a detailed summary of complementary
research …ndings among archaeologists, paleoclimatologists, and ethnographers). The brief review below is
hardly meant to be exhaustive, and it is mostly indicative of hypotheses advanced by economists with respect
to pristine agricultural transitions (see Pryor, 1983, and Weisdorf, 2005, for surveys).
         Early work by Smith (1975) examines the overkill hypothesis, whereby the Pleistocene extinction
of large mammals, as a consequence of excessive hunting, led to the rise of agriculture. In pioneering the
institutional view, North and Thomas (1977) argue that population pressure, coupled with the shift from
common to exclusive communal property rights, su¢ ciently altered rational incentive structures to foster
technological progress with regard to domestication and cultivation techniques. Moreover, Locay (1989)
suggests that population growth, due to excessive hunting, resulted in smaller land-holdings per household,
thereby inducing a more sedentary lifestyle and favoring farming over foraging.
         More recently, Marceau and Myers (2006) provide a model of coalition formation where, at low levels
of technology, a grand coalition of foragers prevents the over-exploitation of resources. Once technology
reaches a critical level, however, the cooperative structure breaks down and ultimately leads to a food crisis
that paves the way to agriculture. Focusing on the spread of farming, Rowthorn and Seabright (2010) argue
that early farmers had to invest in defense due to imperfect property rights, thus lowering the standard of
living for incipient agriculturalists.3 In other work, Weisdorf (2003) proposes that the emergence of non-
food specialists played a critical role in the transition to agriculture, while Olsson (2001) theoretically revives
Diamond’s (1997) argument that regional geographic and biogeographic endowments, with respect to the
availability of domesticable species, made agriculture feasible only in certain parts of the world.
         Finally, Baker (2008) develops and estimates a model of the transition to agriculture using cross-
cultural data on the incidence of farming, …nding that cultures located farther from pristine centers of
agricultural transition experienced a later onset of farming. The empirical analysis in this study establishes
a similar pattern wherein distance to the closest Neolithic frontier has a negative impact on the timing of
the transition to agriculture, both across countries and across archaeological sites. The current study is also
complementary to recent work by Dow, Olewiler and Reed (2009) that examines the onset of the Neolithic
   3 Relatedly, some studies in the economics literature on pristine transitions (e.g., Weisdorf, 2009; Robson, 2010; Guzmán and

Weisdorf, 2011) have focused on attempting to explain the puzzle of the emergence of farming, given that early agriculturalists
are known to have been worse-o¤ than their hunter-gatherer predecessors (Cohen, 1977). While interesting, this issue does not
pertain to heterogeneity across societies in the timing of the onset of agriculture, and as such, it is not germane to the current
analysis.




                                                                3
Revolution in the Near East. According to their analysis, a single abrupt climatic reversal forced migration
into a few ecologically favorable sites, thereby making agriculture more attractive in these locales.


3     The Proposed Theory
3.1    Conceptual Framework
Before presenting the model, it is useful to brie‡y review the main elements of the proposed theory and their
interplay in transforming the hunter-gatherer regime. As illustrated in Figure 1, moderate climatic shocks
increase the risk of acquiring existing resources for subsistence. As a result, hunter-gatherers are forced
to experiment with novel food-extraction and processing techniques, thus altering their resource acquisition
patterns and incorporating previously unexploited species into their diet. Such transformations in subsistence
activities may be manifested as increased investments in tool making, more intense habitat-clearing and
plant-management practices, or the development of a more sedentary infrastructure.


          Moderate climatic stress                   Investment in intermediate
            (i.e., higher risk of               activities (e.g., tools, infrastructure,
           acquiring resources)                  habitat-clearing) to mitigate risk




                                                 Expansion of the tool assemblage
                                                    and the dietary spectrum




                                                          Accumulation of                          Diffusion of
                                                          tacit knowledge                        agriculture from
                                                         complementary to                         the Neolithic
                                                               farming                                frontier




                                                                             Adoption of agriculture



                            Figure 1: The Main Elements of the Proposed Theory

         The aforementioned transformations permanently enhance society’s knowledge with respect to the
collection and processing of a broad spectrum of resources. This is a novel channel for recurrent climatic
shocks to gradually increase the set of foraging activities. The main mechanism for the adoption of agriculture
is that, given a sequence of non-extreme climatic shocks, the knowledge accumulated from exploiting an ever
broader spectrum of resources is complementary to agricultural techniques. Hence, societies endowed with a
history of moderate climatic ‡uctuations are more likely to adopt farming, once the agricultural technology
arrives from the Neolithic frontier.




                                                        4
3.2        A Simple Model of Climatic Shocks and the Adoption of Agriculture
Consider a simple hunter-gatherer economy where activities extend over in…nite discrete time, indexed by
t = 0; 1; 2; : : : 1. In each period, the economy produces a single homogeneous …nal good (food), using
a production technology that combines labor with a continuum of intermediate input varieties. These
intermediate input varieties may be interpreted broadly as di¤erent types of tools and techniques that
enable the extraction of di¤erent subsistence resources (plant and animal species). Land is not a scarce
factor of production in this primitive stage of development, so the quantity of food produced is constrained
only by the availability of labor, the breadth of the dietary spectrum, and the intensity with which each
subsistence resource is exploited. In every period, individuals are endowed with one unit of time, and the
size of the labor force remains constant over time.4
         Consider …rst how food gets produced in this foraging economy when it is climatically unperturbed.
Final output at time t, Yt , in such an environment is given by:
                                                       2N                   3
                                                        Zt
                                                  Yt = 4   1
                                                          Xi;t          di5 L ,
                                                            0


where 2 (0; 1); L > 0 is the (…xed) size of the labor force; Xi;t is the amount of intermediate good (the
type of tool, for instance) used to acquire resource i at time t; and Nt is the total number of intermediate
input varieties, and thus the total number of di¤erent resources that foragers can extract, at time t. N0 > 0
is given, and Nt stays constant over time as long as the environment remains climatically static. As will
become apparent, however, Nt will grow endogenously over time in a climatically dynamic environment,
where foragers are forced to experiment with their habitat in order to partially counteract the detrimental
e¤ects of climatic shocks on output. Food is non-storable, so the amount produced in any given period is
fully consumed in the same period.
         Given a climatically static environment, the gross quantity of food per hunter-gatherer at time t is:

                                                             ZNt
                                                         yt = x1i;t         di,
                                                                0


where yt Yt =L; and xi;t Xi;t =L.
        Intermediate inputs fully depreciate every period, and given the primitive nature of the economy,
there are no property rights de…ned over either these inputs or the knowledge required to create and apply
them. Once the know-how for creating and applying a new intermediate input (that allows the processing
of a new resource) becomes available, anyone in society can produce one unit of that input at a marginal
cost of > 0 units of food. Hence, the quantity of food per hunter-gatherer at time t, net of the cost of
producing intermediate inputs, is:
                                            ZNt          ZNt
                                                1
                                       y~t = xi;t di         xi;t di.
                                                     0                  0
   4 The  assumptions regarding the non-scarcity of land as a productive factor and constant population size imply that the
current model does not admit a long-run Malthusian equilibrium. These abstractions permit the setup to focus on highlighting
the role of climatic volatility in determining the timing of the adoption of agriculture. Incorporating Malthusian considerations
does not qualitatively alter the key theoretical predictions. See Ashraf and Michalopoulos (2011).




                                                                    5
        Maximization of net food per forager implies that the quantity demanded of the intermediate input
used to acquire resource i at time t, xi;t , will be the same across the di¤erent resource varieties at time t.
Speci…cally,
                                                                1
                                                          1
                                             xi;t = x             .

          Thus, in equilibrium, the gross and net quantities of food per hunter-gatherer at time t will be:

                                           yt    = Nt x1        ;
                                                          1
                                           y~t   = Nt x              Nt x = Nt x1                     .

Intuitively, in any given period, the amount of (gross or net) food per forager will be directly proportional
to (i) the breadth of the hunter-gatherer dietary spectrum, as re‡ected in the total number of intermediate
input varieties; and (ii) the intensity with which each species is exploited, as re‡ected in the quantity of the
intermediate input used to acquire and process the resource. Furthermore, net output re‡ects the proportion
  of gross output that accrues to labor as food, once the costly production of intermediate inputs has been
taken into account.
         Suppose now that the environment at time t is a¤ected by a deviation of a climatic characteristic
(such as temperature) from its long-run intertemporal mean.5 Food production now becomes subject to an
“erosion e¤ect” due to adverse changes in the subsistence resource base, resulting from this perturbation to
the environment.6 Speci…cally, net food per forager is now given by:

                                                            ZNt                      ZNt
                                                                1
                                            y~t = [1     t ] xi;t        di                xi;t di,
                                                           0                         0


where t 2 [0; 1) is the size of the erosion at time t. Note that the erosion will reduce food per hunter-
gatherer both directly and indirectly. The indirect e¤ect arises from the fact that, taking t as given, the
lower marginal productivity of the intermediate inputs (tools) results in lower quantities of these inputs
being used for resource acquisition. In particular, the quantity demanded of the intermediate input used to
acquire resource i at time t, xi;t , will now be:
                                                                                                  1
                                                                [1        ]          [1      t]
                                            xi;t = x
                                                   ^( t ) =                                           .


         The erosion of …nal output, however, can be mitigated by the reallocation of time (or labor) from
food production to experimentation (R&D activities), in an attempt to partially counteract the overall
decline in resource abundance. Speci…cally,

                                                           t   = (et ;        t ),
   5 Since the current setup is intended to exclusively highlight the e¤ect of climatic shocks, it abstracts from the role of average

climatic conditions in determining the timing of the adoption of agriculture. Nevertheless, this possibility is explicitly accounted
for in the empirical analysis.
   6 Note that both positive and negative deviations in climatic conditions, like increases or decreases in temperature, may have

an adverse impact on the subsistence resource base. This is consistent with the notion that each species in nature thrives under
speci…c climatic conditions, and thus, a deviation from this “optimum” decreases its abundance.




                                                                     6
where et 0 is the size of the climatic shock; and t 2 [0; 1) is the fraction of time spent on (or, equivalently,
the fraction of the labor force devoted to) experimentation. In addition, for et 2 [0; e), (0; t ) = 0, e > 0,
 ee < 0,    < 0,     > 0, and e < 0. For et e, however, (et ; t ) = > 0. In words, there is no erosion in
absence of a climatic shock, and for shocks larger than e (that represent, say, a reversion to extreme climatic
conditions), the size of the erosion is constant at a high level, . For moderate shocks (i.e., deviations smaller
than e), the erosion increases in the size of the climatic shock at a diminishing rate, and it decreases in the
allocation of labor to experimentation at a diminishing rate. Moreover, as long as climatic shocks are not
extreme, their eroding impact on output can be mitigated by raising the degree of experimentation.
         Thus, under a moderate climatic shock, the equilibrium allocation of labor (between food production
and experimentation) will be determined by the trade-o¤ between (i) the bene…t of having foragers experiment
with new methods of exploiting existing resources, in an e¤ort to overcome the erosion e¤ect; and (ii) the
cost of lowering output by diverting hunter-gatherers from food acquisition. Speci…cally, for et 2 [0; e), the
allocation of labor will be chosen to maximize net food per forager, [1        t ]~
                                                                                  yt , given the optimal quantity
demanded of each intermediate input, x    ^( (et ; t )). Formally,
                                               2                                                                    3
                                                                     ZNt                         ZNt
                   t   = argmax [1        t]
                                               4[1         (et ; t )] x1i;t                 di         xi;t di5                                 .
                            t
                                                                          0                      0                      xi;t =^
                                                                                                                              x( (et ;   t ))



The …rst-order condition for this problem simpli…es to:

                                F (et ;   t)        [1       t]        (et ;      t)   + [1          (et ;   t )]   = 0.

Given the speci…ed properties of (et ; t ), the partial derivative of this condition with respect to                                                t   is positive.
In particular,
                           F (et ; t ) = [1      t]  (et ; t ) [1 + ] (et ; t ) > 0,

which ensures the existence of a unique solution to the labor-allocation problem (via the implicit function
theorem) for a given et ,
                                                 t = (et ).

Moreover, the partial derivative of the …rst-order condition with respect to et is negative,

                                 Fe (et ;      t)   = [1          t]     e (et ;       t)        e (et ;     t)   < 0,

which, together with F (et ; t ) > 0, implies that the e¤ect of et on t , 0 (et ), is positive. Hence, for
non-extreme climatic shocks, an increase in the size of the shock will increase the allocation of labor
towards experimentation, in an e¤ort to temporarily improve the e¤ectiveness with which resources currently
incorporated into the diet (and that are now more scarce in supply) are acquired. Note, however, that there
will be no incentive to engage in experimentation either in the absence of a climatic shock (i.e., when et = 0)
or when the deviation is too large (i.e., if et e). Speci…cally, (0) = 0 and (et )jet e = 0.
         The analysis now turns to characterize the evolution of the total number of intermediate input
varieties (and thus the expansion of the hunter-gatherer dietary spectrum) over time. To this end, suppose
that the contemporaneous e¤ort to mitigate climatic risk via experimentation results in intertemporal
knowledge spillovers for the development of new varieties of intermediate inputs that facilitate access to


                                                                              7
new species.7 Intuitively, experimentation by hunter-gatherers to improve the productivity of their current
toolkit inadvertently generates some technical knowledge for the creation of production methods (new tool
varieties) that can be used to incorporate previously unexploited resources into the dietary spectrum. To
help …x ideas, suppose that the extent of these spillovers is proportional to the current labor allocation to
experimentation. That is,
                                         Nt Nt+1 Nt = (et )L,

where > 0. Hence, non-extreme climatic shocks confer permanent “rachet e¤ects” on the breadth of the
dietary spectrum over time –a climatic deviation at time t will result in a permanent increase in the number
of species exploited from time t + 1 onward even if the shock is transitory, in the sense that it dissipates
completely by time t + 1.8
         At this stage, the model can be easily applied to link the cross-sectional distribution of the breadth
of the dietary spectrum at a point in time with the cross-sectional distribution of climatic history up to that
point. Speci…cally, consider three societies, A, B, and C, at some arbitrary time T > 0, and suppose that
they have identical initial conditions (speci…cally, with respect to the initial number of species exploited, N0 )
                                                                            T
but that they di¤er in their historical sequences of climatic shocks, eit t=0 , i 2 fA; B; Cg. In particular, for
all t T , e > eB       A
                 t > et = 0, and for some t      T 1, eC            B          C    B
                                                          t > e > et , with et = et for all other t. That is, A
has had a climatically static environment, B a history of strictly moderate climatic shocks, and C a climatic
history similar to B, except for at least one period when the deviation in C temporarily resulted in extreme
climatic conditions. Then, in light of the aforementioned rachet e¤ect associated with non-extreme climatic
deviations, it follows that NTB > NTC > NTA = N0 . Hence, the number of intermediate input varieties (and,
correspondingly, the breadth of the dietary spectrum) at time T will be largest in the hunter-gatherer society
with the history of strictly moderate climatic shocks.
         The …nal step of the argument involves relating the above result to the di¤erential timing of the
adoption of agriculture. To illustrate this link in a parsimonious manner, suppose that in every period, the
model foraging economy has the opportunity to costlessly adopt an agricultural production technology from
the world technological frontier. Food production using this alternative technology is:

                                                     Yt = A(Nt jA)L,

where A(Nt jA) is the level of agricultural productivity. Speci…cally, agricultural productivity depends on
how tacit ecological knowledge accumulated by the recipient hunter-gatherer society, and manifested in
the breadth of its dietary spectrum, Nt , compares with the level of knowledge necessary for the adoption
of farming, A > 0. When the agricultural technology di¤uses across space, the hunter-gatherer society
that has been climatically propelled to modify its food acquisition practices by incorporating a broad set
of resources in its diet is more likely to have the appropriate know-how for successfully implementing the
arriving innovation. A simple formulation of this argument is given by:

                                             A(Nt jA) = A         minf1; Nt =Ag,
   7 Note that the current setup does not permit experimentation to permanently increase the e¢ ciency with which existing

resources are extracted. Allowing the contemporaneous R&D e¤ort to permanently lower the cost of producing intermediate
inputs, , does not qualitatively alter the main theoretical predictions.
   8 Inspired by the broader conceptual framework developed by Ashraf and Michalopoulos (2011), Dow and Reed (2011) present

a theoretical model that provides some plausible microfoundations for such “rachet e¤ects” of climatic shocks on the knowledge
base (pertaining to the exploitation of latent resources) of a foraging society over time.



                                                              8
where A > 0 is su¢ ciently large to ensure that if Nt      A, agricultural output will be larger than hunter-
gatherer output net of tool costs, thus resulting in the immediate and permanent adoption of farming. If
Nt < A, however, the likelihood that agriculture would be adopted in the current period will be lower
the smaller is Nt relative to A. While a broader hunter-gatherer dietary spectrum makes farming more
appropriate for adoption in the present formulation, it may admittedly also be associated with increased
specialization in foraging, thus making the adoption of farming less likely. As will become apparent, however,
the empirical results suggest that the quantitatively dominant channel is the one where a broader spectrum
of resource exploitation favors the adoption of agriculture over further hunter-gatherer specialization. In
other words, had the increased-specialization channel been the dominant one, the reduced-form e¤ect of
climatic volatility on the timing of the adoption of agriculture would not be hump-shaped.
         Consider now the earlier thought experiment with societies A, B, and C. In light of the setup for
the adoption of agriculture discussed above, the likelihood that agriculture will have been adopted by time
T will be higher in the society with the history of non-extreme climatic shocks (i.e., society B) than either
the society with the history of climatic stagnation (i.e., society A) or the society with historical episodes
of extreme climatic disturbances (i.e., society C). This reduced-form prediction of the model regarding the
non-monotonic (hump-shaped) e¤ect of intertemporal climatic volatility on the timing of the adoption of
agriculture is explored empirically in the subsequent section.


4     Empirical Evidence
4.1     Cross-Country Analysis
This section provides empirical evidence consistent with the proposed theory, demonstrating a statistically
signi…cant and robust hump-shaped relationship between measures of the intertemporal standard deviation
of temperature and the timing of the Neolithic Revolution across countries. Speci…cally, the analysis exploits
cross-country variation in temperature volatility as well as in other geographic determinants, such as mean
temperature, distance to the closest Neolithic frontier (i.e., one of seven localities around the world that
experienced a pristine agricultural transition), absolute latitude, land area, topographic conditions, and
biogeographic endowments, to explain the cross-country variation in the timing of the Neolithic Revolution.
Due to the unavailability of worldwide prehistoric temperature data, however, the analysis employs highly
spatially disaggregated monthly time-series data between 1901 and 2000 to construct country-level measures
of the intertemporal mean and standard deviation of temperature over the last century.9
          The monthly time-series data on temperature, 1901–2000, are obtained from the University of East
Anglia’s Climate Research Unit’s CRU TS 2.0 data set, compiled by Mitchell et al. (2004). This data set
employs reports from climate stations across the globe, providing 1,200 monthly temperature observations
(i.e., spanning a century) for each grid cell at a 0.5-degree resolution. To construct country-level measures
of the mean and standard deviation of temperature using this data set, the analysis at hand …rst computes
the intertemporal moments of temperature across monthly observations at the grid-cell level and then
averages these moments across grid cells that correspond to a given country.10 As such, the volatility
    9 Section C of the supplemental appendix provides detailed de…nitions and sources of all the variables employed by the

empirical investigation.
  1 0 This sequence of computations was speci…cally chosen to minimize the information loss that inevitably results from

aggregation. Note that an alternative (but not equivalent) sequence would have been to perform the spatial aggregation
to the country level …rst and then compute the intertemporal moments. To see why this alternative is inferior, consider the



                                                            9
of temperature between 1901 and 2000 for a given country should be interpreted as the volatility prevalent
in the “representative” grid cell within that country.
         The qualitative interpretation of the empirical results is thus based on the identifying assumption
that the cross-country distribution of temperature volatility during the 20th century was not signi…cantly
di¤erent from that which existed prior to the Neolithic Revolution. To relax this assumption somewhat, the
analysis also employs a volatility measure constructed from new time-series data on historical temperature
over the 1500–1900 time period (albeit for a smaller set of countries), revealing …ndings that are qualitatively
similar to those uncovered using temperature volatility over the last century.
         The historical time-series data on temperature are obtained from the European Seasonal Temperature
Reconstructions data set of Luterbacher et al. (2006), which is based, in turn, on the earlier data sets of
Luterbacher et al. (2004) and Xoplaki et al. (2005). These data sets make use of both directly measured
data and, for earlier periods in the time series, proxy data from documentary evidence, tree rings, and ice
cores to provide seasonal (from 1500 to 1658) and monthly (from 1659 onwards) temperature observations
at a 0.5-degree resolution, primarily for the European continent. The current analysis then applies to
these data an aggregation procedure, similar to that used for computing the measures of the intertemporal
moments of contemporary temperature, in order to derive measures of the intertemporal mean and standard
deviation of historical temperature at the country level. It should be noted that, while reliable historical
and contemporary temperature data are commonly available for 45 countries (as depicted in the correlation
plots in Figures 2 and 3), only 25 of these countries appear in the 97-country sample actually employed by
the regressions to follow. This discrepancy is due to the unavailability of information on the timing of the
agricultural transition and on some of the control variables employed by the regression analyses.11
         Consistent with the assertion that the spatial variation in temperature volatility remains largely
stable over long periods of time, temperature volatility during the 20th century and that during the
preceding four centuries are highly positively correlated across countries, possessing a correlation coe¢ cient
of 0.995 in the 45-country sample. This relationship is depicted on the scatter plot in Figure 2, where it
is important to note that the rank order of the vast majority of countries is maintained across the two
time horizons. Moreover, as depicted in Figure 3, a similarly strong correlation exists between the mean of
temperature during the 20th century and that during the preceding four centuries, lending further credence
to the identifying assumption that contemporary data on climatic factors can be meaningfully employed as
informative proxies for prehistoric ones.
         The country-level data on the timing of the Neolithic Revolution are obtained from the data set of
Putterman (2008), who assembles this variable using a wide variety of both region-speci…c and country-
speci…c archaeological studies, as well as more general encyclopedic works on the Neolithic transition,
including MacNeish (1992) and Smith (1995).12 Speci…cally, the reported measure captures the number
of thousand years elapsed, relative to the year 2000, since the earliest recorded date when a region within
a country’s present borders underwent the transition from primary reliance on hunted and gathered food
sources to primary reliance on cultivated crops (and livestock).
extreme example of a country comprised of two grid cells that have identical temperature volatilities, but whose temperature
‡uctuations are perfectly negatively correlated. In this case, the alternative methodology would yield no volatility at all for the
country as a whole, whereas the methodology adopted would yield the volatility prevalent in either of its grid cells.
  1 1 The distinction between the 45- and 25-country samples is evident in Figures 2 and 3, where observations appearing only

in the 25-country sample are depicted as …lled circles.
  1 2 For a detailed description of the primary and secondary data sources employed by the author in the construction of this

variable, the reader is referred to the website of the Agricultural Transition Data Set .




                                                                10
                    Figure 2: Contemporary vs. Historical Interseasonal Temperature Volatility

Notes : (i) Filled circles represent observations, comprising 25 countries in total, that appear in the samples exploited by the
regression analyses in Tables 1–4, where sample sizes are constrained by the availability of data on covariates; (ii) The Pearson
correlation between the interseasonal standard deviation of temperature in the 1901–2000 time period and that in the 1500–1900
time period is 0.993 in the restricted 25-country sample, and it is 0.995 in the unrestricted 45-country sample.


        Formally, in light of the theoretical prediction regarding the non-monotonic relationship between
climatic volatility and the timing of the transition to agriculture, the following quadratic speci…cation is
estimated:

                                                                                                              0           0
Y STi =     0   +   1V   OLi +   2V   OL2i +   3 T M EANi   +   4 LDISTi    +    5 LATi   +   6 AREAi    +    7   i   +   8   i   + "i ,

where Y STi is the number of thousand years elapsed since the Neolithic Revolution in country i, as
reported by Putterman (2008); V OLi is the temperature volatility prevalent in country i during either the
contemporary (1901–2000) or the historical (1500–1900) time horizon; T M EANi is the mean temperature
(in degrees Celsius) of country i during the corresponding time period; LDISTi is the log of the great-circle
distance (in kilometers) to the closest Neolithic frontier, included here as a control for the timing of the
arrival of agricultural practices via spatial technological di¤usion from the frontier;13 LATi is the absolute
latitude (in degrees) of the geodesic centroid of country i, as reported by the CIA World Factbook ; AREAi
is the total land area (in millions of square kilometers) of country i, as reported by the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators;14 i is a vector of continental dummies; i is a vector of biogeographic variables
  1 3 Distances to the closest Neolithic frontier are computed with the haversine formula, using the coordinates of modern country

capitals as spatial endpoints. The set of seven global Neolithic frontiers, considered in the determination of the closest frontier
for each observation, comprises Syria, China, Ethiopia, Niger, Mexico, Peru, and Papua New Guinea. To maximize the degrees
of freedom exploited by the regressions – i.e., permitting them to incorporate all the available information, including that on
the frontiers themselves – the log transformation is applied to one plus the underlying distance variable.
  1 4 The inclusion of land area as a control variable is meant to capture the potentially confounding e¤ects of population and

geographic scale on innovative activity (Kremer, 1993). Speci…cally, in a world where (i) population size is increasing in land



                                                                11
                    Figure 3: Contemporary vs. Historical Interseasonal Mean Temperature

Notes : (i) Filled circles represent observations, comprising 25 countries in total, that appear in the samples exploited by the
regression analyses in Tables 1–4, where sample sizes are constrained by the availability of data on covariates; (ii) The Pearson
correlation between the interseasonal mean of temperature in the 1901–2000 time period and that in the 1500–1900 time period
is 0.998 in both the restricted 25-country sample and the unrestricted 45-country sample.


employed by the study of Olsson and Hibbs (2005), such as climate, the size and geographic orientation of
the landmass, and the numbers of prehistoric domesticable species of plants and animals, included here as
controls for the impact of biogeographic endowments as hypothesized by Diamond (1997); and, …nally, "i is
a country-speci…c disturbance term.15
         To …x priors, the reduced-form prediction of the theory – i.e., that intermediate levels of climatic
volatility should be associated with an earlier adoption of agriculture – implies that, in the context of the
regression speci…cation, the timing of the Neolithic Revolution, Y STi , and temperature volatility, V OLi ,
should be characterized by a hump-shaped relationship across countries –i.e., 1 > 0, 2 < 0, and V OL =
   1 = (2 2 ) 2 V OL
                     min
                         ; V OLmax .16
         Before proceeding to the empirical …ndings, one issue that merits further discussion is the use of
countries as the unit of analysis. While arguments could be made regarding the extent to which regions
delineated by modern national borders are related to economically meaningful regions from thousands of
years ago, there are at least two reasons for following this particular course. First, comparable data with
uniform global coverage on the timing of the Neolithic Revolution are currently only available at the country
level. Second, given that previous literature has linked the timing of the Neolithic Revolution to both
area and (ii) the incidence of an innovation amongst the population in any given location follows a point-Poisson process, larger
land areas are expected to be associated with more innovations – i.e., an a priori earlier transition to agriculture in the context
of the current study.
  1 5 The issue of spatial autocorrelation across disturbance terms is addressed rigorously further below.
  1 6 These conditions ensure not only strict concavity, but also that the optimal volatility implied by the …rst- and second-order

coe¢ cients falls within the domain of temperature volatility observed in the cross-country sample.




                                                                12
contemporary and historical comparative development across countries, one would naturally like to explore
the forces behind the emergence of agriculture at this level of aggregation. Regardless of these considerations,
however, as will become evident, the uncovered relationship between temperature volatility and the timing
of the agricultural transition does not appear to be a statistical artifact of the chosen unit of analysis, since
a qualitatively similar …nding is obtained when exploiting observed heterogeneity either across countries or
across archaeological sites.

4.1.1    Results with Contemporary Volatility

Table 1 reveals the results from regressions employing temperature volatility computed from contemporary
time-series data. Speci…cally, the measure of volatility used is the intertemporal standard deviation of
monthly temperature (in degrees Celsius) across 1,200 observations spanning the 1901–2000 time horizon.
For the sample of 97 countries employed by this exercise, the volatility measure assumes a minimum value
of 0.548 (for Rwanda), a maximum value of 10.082 (for China), and a sample mean and standard deviation
of 3.995 and 2.700, respectively.17
         Column 1 of Table 1 reveals a highly statistically signi…cant hump-shaped relationship between the
timing of the Neolithic Revolution and temperature volatility, conditional on mean temperature, log-distance
to the closest Neolithic frontier, absolute latitude, land area, and continent …xed e¤ects. In particular, the
…rst- and second-order coe¢ cients on temperature volatility are both statistically signi…cant at the 1% level
and possess their expected signs. The coe¢ cients of interest imply that the optimal level of temperature
volatility for the Neolithic transition to agriculture is 8.203, an estimate that is also statistically signi…cant
at the 1% level. To interpret the overall metric e¤ect implied by these coe¢ cients, a one-degree-Celsius
change in temperature volatility on either side of the optimum is associated with a delay in the onset of the
Neolithic Revolution by 79 years.18
         As for the control variables in the speci…cation from Column 1, the signi…cant negative coe¢ cient on
log-distance to the Neolithic frontier is consistent with priors regarding the spatial di¤usion of agricultural
practices from the frontier, whereas the positive (albeit statistically insigni…cant) coe¢ cient on land area
is in line with Kremer’s (1993) …ndings regarding the presence of scale e¤ects throughout human history.
Moreover, the coe¢ cient on absolute latitude indicates that latitudinal bands closer to the equator are
associated with an earlier transition to agriculture.
         The remainder of the analysis in Table 1 is concerned with ensuring that the relationship between
volatility and the timing of the Neolithic is not an artefact of the correlation between climatic volatility
and other geographic and biogeographic endowments that have been deemed important for the adoption of
agriculture by the previous literature. Thus, the speci…cation examined in Column 2 augments the preceding
analysis with controls for geographic variables from the study of Olsson and Hibbs (2005), including an index
gauging climatic favorability for agriculture, as well as the size and orientation of the landmass, which, as
  1 7 These descriptive statistics, along with those of the control variables employed by the analysis, are collected in Table B.1

in Section B of the supplemental appendix, with the relevant correlations appearing in Table B.2.
  1 8 Note that this is di¤erent from the marginal e¤ect, which by de…nition would be zero at the optimum. The di¤erence

between the marginal and metric e¤ects arises from the fact that a one-degree-Celsius change in temperature volatility does not
constitute an in…nitesimal change in this variable, as required by the calculation of its marginal e¤ect. It is easy to show that the
metric e¤ect of a V OL change in volatility at the level V OL is given by Y ST = 1 V OL + 2 2V OL + V OL                       V OL.
Evaluating this expression at the optimum for a one-degree-Celsius change in volatility, i.e., setting V OL = 1 and V OL =
    1 = (2 2 ), yields the relevant metric e¤ect reported in the text. Alternatively, setting V OL equal to one standard deviation
of the cross-sectional temperature volatility distribution yields the “standardized” metric e¤ect, which for the regression in
Column 1 of Table 1, translates to a 574-year delay in the onset of farming.



                                                                 13
                            Table 1: The Timing of the Neolithic Revolution and Contemporary Intermonthly Temperature Volatility


                                                         (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)
                                                                      Dependent Variable is Thousand Years Elapsed since the Neolithic Revolution
                  Temperature Volatility              1.292***     0.814***     0.998***     1.183***     1.053***     0.924***     0.940***     1.187***     1.180***
                                                      (0.298)      (0.239)      (0.288)      (0.246)      (0.233)      (0.217)      (0.237)      (0.358)      (0.386)
                  Temperature Volatility Square       -0.079***    -0.050**     -0.070***    -0.085***    -0.075***    -0.064***    -0.071***    -0.083***    -0.088***
                                                      (0.028)      (0.022)      (0.026)      (0.022)      (0.021)      (0.019)      (0.021)      (0.030)      (0.033)
                  Mean Temperature                    0.022        0.074**      0.034        -0.018       -0.003       0.030        0.004        0.037        0.014
                                                      (0.041)      (0.028)      (0.037)      (0.036)      (0.035)      (0.028)      (0.033)      (0.069)      (0.072)
                  Log Distance to Frontier            -0.260***    -0.273***    -0.262***    -0.208***    -0.235***    -0.209***    -0.239***    -0.220***    -0.247***
                                                      (0.091)      (0.049)      (0.075)      (0.063)      (0.065)      (0.047)      (0.060)      (0.052)      (0.067)
                  Absolute Latitude                   -0.097***    -0.073***    -0.066**     -0.129***    -0.117***    -0.104***    -0.101***    -0.110***    -0.109***
                                                      (0.024)      (0.023)      (0.029)      (0.018)      (0.018)      (0.019)      (0.020)      (0.033)      (0.031)
                  Land Area                           0.021        0.101        0.081        0.193*       0.148*       0.204*       0.163**      0.192        0.132
                                                      (0.065)      (0.069)      (0.058)      (0.100)      (0.085)      (0.107)      (0.081)      (0.124)      (0.087)
                  Climate                                          0.991***                                            0.577***                  0.530**
                                                                   (0.196)                                             (0.208)                   (0.234)
                  Orientation of Landmass                          -0.682***                                           -1.103***                 -1.083***
                                                                   (0.231)                                             (0.284)                   (0.339)
                  Size of Landmass                                 0.042***                                            0.049***                  0.048***
                                                                   (0.012)                                             (0.011)                   (0.012)
                  Geographic Conditions                                         0.593***                                            0.273**                   0.299
                                                                                (0.184)                                             (0.130)                   (0.181)
                  Domesticable Plants                                                        0.121***                  0.116***                  0.118***
                                                                                             (0.027)                   (0.024)                   (0.027)
                  Domesticable Animals                                                       -0.005                    -0.182                    -0.186




14
                                                                                             (0.121)                   (0.110)                   (0.119)
                  Biogeographic Conditions                                                                1.287***                  1.165***                  1.121***
                                                                                                          (0.265)                   (0.260)                   (0.286)
                  Mean Elevation                                                                                                                 0.030        0.043
                                                                                                                                                 (0.049)      (0.051)
                  Mean Ruggedness                                                                                                                -0.050       -0.133
                                                                                                                                                 (0.115)      (0.126)
                  % Land in Tropical Zones                                                                                                       0.679        0.554
                                                                                                                                                 (0.419)      (0.546)
                  % Land in Temperate Zones                                                                                                      0.702        0.789
                                                                                                                                                 (0.437)      (0.494)
                  Landlocked Dummy                    No           No           No           No           No           No           No           Yes          Yes
                  Small Island Dummy                  No           No           No           No           No           No           No           Yes          Yes
                  Continent Dummies                   Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
                  Optimal Temperature Volatility      8.203***     8.141***     7.124***     6.960***     7.062***     7.260***     6.627***     7.167***     6.673***
                                                      (1.378)      (1.859)      (1.272)      (0.610)      (0.780)      (0.842)      (0.805)      (0.848)      (0.793)
                  F -test p-value                     <0.001       0.002        0.003        <0.001       <0.001       <0.001       0.001        0.002        0.009
                  Observations                        97           97           97           97           97           97           97           97           97
                  Adjusted R2                         0.73         0.83         0.76         0.84         0.83         0.88         0.84         0.88         0.84

     Notes : (i) Temperature volatility is the intermonthly standard deviation of monthly temperature across 1,200 observations spanning the 1901–2000 time period, and mean
     temperature is the intermonthly average across these observations; (ii) Geographic conditions is the …rst principal component of climate, and the size and orientation of
     the landmass; (iii) Biogeographic conditions is the …rst principal component of domesticable plants and animals; (iv) The excluded continental category in all regressions
     is Oceania; (v) A single continental category is used to represent the Americas, which is appropriate for the prehistoric outcome variable being examined; (vi) The F -test
     p-value is from the joint-signi…cance test of the linear and quadratic terms of temperature volatility; (vii) Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are reported in
     parentheses; (viii) The standard error estimate for the optimal temperature volatility is computed via the delta method; (ix) *** denotes statistical signi…cance at the 1%
     level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
Figure 4: Contemporary Intermonthly Temperature Volatility vs. the Timing of the Neolithic Revolution

Notes : (i) The depicted relationship re‡ects a quadratic …t of the relevant data on an “augmented component plus residual”
plot (see the discussion in footnote 20 for additional details); (ii) The underlying regression corresponds to the speci…cation
examined in Column 8 of Table 1.


argued by Diamond (1997), played an important role by enhancing the availability of domesticable species
and by facilitating the di¤usion of agricultural technologies along similar environments. Column 3 repeats
this analysis using the …rst principal component of the aforementioned geographic controls, a variable used
by Olsson and Hibbs (2005) to test Diamond’s (1997) hypothesis.
         The baseline speci…cation from Column 1 is augmented with controls for the numbers of prehistoric
domesticable species of plants and animals in Column 4, while Column 5 replicates this same exercise using
the …rst principal component of these biogeographic variables. The next two columns demonstrate robustness
to the combined set of geographic and biogeographic controls from Olsson and Hibbs’s (2005) empirical
exercise, with the relevant controls entering the regression speci…cation either as individual covariates
in Column 6 or as principal components in Column 7. Finally, Columns 8 and 9 further augment the
speci…cations from the previous two columns with controls for elevation, a measure capturing the degree
of terrain undulation, the percentages of land in tropical and temperate climatic zones, and small island
and landlocked dummies, capturing additional …xed e¤ects potentially important for the di¤usion and
implementation of agricultural technologies.19
         The overall hump-shaped e¤ect of temperature volatility on the timing of the Neolithic transition,
conditional on the full set of controls in Column 8, is depicted on the scatter plot in Figure 4, while the
associated …rst- and second-order partial e¤ects of volatility – i.e., the regression lines corresponding to its
  1 9 In terms of the data sources for the additional controls, the data on mean elevation and terrain undulation (ruggedness)

are derived from the Geographically based Economic data (G-Econ) project (Nordhaus, 2006), while data on the percentages of
land area in tropical and temperate climatic zones are taken from the data set of Gallup, Sachs and Mellinger (1999). Finally,
the island and landlocked dummies are constructed based on data from the CIA World Factbook .




                                                             15
                    (a) The First-Order E¤ect                                    (b) The Second-Order E¤ect



  Figure 5: The First- and Second-Order E¤ects of Contemporary Intermonthly Temperature Volatility

Notes : (i) Each depicted relationship re‡ects a linear …t of the relevant data on an “added variable” (partial regression) plot;
(ii) The underlying regression corresponds to the speci…cation examined in Column 8 of Table 1.


…rst- and second-order coe¢ cients – are depicted in Figures 5(a)–5(b).20 As illustrated in Figure 4, the
coe¢ cients of interest from Column 8 imply that a one-degree-Celsius change in temperature volatility on
either side of the optimum is associated with an 83-year delay in the onset of agriculture.21
         As is evident from Table 1, the hump-shaped e¤ect of temperature volatility on the timing of the
Neolithic Revolution, revealed in Column 1, remains both quantitatively and qualitatively robust when
subjected to a variety of controls for geographic and biogeographic endowments. With regard to the control
variables, absolute latitude and log-distance to the Neolithic frontier appear to consistently confer e¤ects
across speci…cations that are in line with priors, whereas the e¤ects associated with the geographic and
biogeographic variables, as examined by Olsson and Hibbs (2005), are largely consistent with the results of
their empirical exercise.
         To summarize, the …ndings uncovered in Table 1, while validating the importance of technology
di¤usion and geographic and biogeographic endowments, provide reassurance that the signi…cant hump-
shaped e¤ect of temperature volatility on the timing of the Neolithic Revolution is not simply a spurious
relationship, attributable to other channels highlighted in the previous literature, but one that plausibly
re‡ects the novel empirical predictions of the proposed theory.

Accounting for Seasonality One obvious shortcoming of the measure of temperature volatility employed
by the analysis thus far is that, since it is derived as the intermonthly standard deviation of temperature
in the 1901–2000 time frame, it captures a systematic component of temperature volatility that is purely
  2 0 It should also be noted that Figures 4, 6, 7, and 9 are “augmented component plus residual” plots and not the typical

“added variable” plots of residuals against residuals. In particular, the vertical axes in these …gures represent the component
of transition timing that is explained by temperature volatility and its square, plus the residuals from the corresponding
regression. The horizontal axes, on the other hand, simply represent temperature volatility rather than the residuals obtained
from regressing volatility on the covariates. This methodology permits the illustration of the overall non-monotonic e¤ect of
temperature volatility in one scatter plot per regression, with the regression line being generated by a quadratic …t of the y-axis
variable (explained above) on the x-axis variable (temperature volatility).
  2 1 The corresponding “standardized”metric e¤ect (as de…ned in footnote 18) translates to a delay in the adoption of agriculture

by 604 years.


                                                                16
due to seasonality. Given that seasonality may potentially be correlated with unobserved (or observed but
noisily measured) geographic determinants of the timing of the Neolithic Revolution, if seasonality alone is
driving the observed hump-shaped pattern, then the interpretation of the results as being supportive of the
proposed theory becomes somewhat suspect. Indeed, while the inclusion of absolute latitude as a control
variable in the speci…cations partially mitigates the seasonality issue, it is far from perfect.
         To rigorously address this issue, the analysis at hand employs measures of season-speci…c interannual
temperature volatility over the 1901-2000 time horizon. In constructing these volatility measures, the
monthly temperature observations from the CRU TS 2.0 data set are …rst aggregated into seasonal ones
while accounting for North-South hemisphericity –i.e., for locations in the Northern/Southern Hemisphere,
the mapping of months into seasons is de…ned as follows: March-April-May (Spring/Autumn), June-July-
August (Summer/Winter), September-October-November (Autumn/Spring), December-January-February
(Winter/Summer). For any given season, the relevant temperature-volatility measure is then calculated as
the interannual standard deviation of seasonal temperature (in degrees Celsius) across the 100 season-speci…c
observations spanning the 1901–2000 time period.22
         Table 2 presents the results from regressions examining, one at a time, each of the four season-speci…c
temperature-volatility measures as a non-monotonic determinant of the timing of the Neolithic Revolution.
In particular, for each season-speci…c volatility measure, two speci…cations are considered, one with the
baseline set of controls (corresponding to Column 1 of Table 1), and the other with the full set of controls
(corresponding to Column 9 of Table 1). As is evident from the table, for each season examined, the
regressions reveal a statistically signi…cant and qualitatively robust hump-shaped e¤ect of volatility on the
timing of the Neolithic Revolution. Speci…cally, the estimated …rst- and second-order coe¢ cients on volatility
not only appear with their expected signs, but they also maintain statistical signi…cance and remain largely
stable in magnitude when subjected to the full set of controls for geographic and biogeographic endowments.
The same general pattern is re‡ected by the corresponding estimates of optimal volatility implied by these
…rst- and second-order coe¢ cients.
         The scatter plots in Figures 6(a)–6(d) depict the overall hump-shaped e¤ects of the four season-
speci…c temperature-volatility measures on the timing of the Neolithic transition, conditional on the full set
of controls.23 To interpret the overall metric e¤ect associated with each season-speci…c set of coe¢ cient
estimates, a one-degree-Celsius change on either side of the optimum in spring, summer, autumn, and winter
temperature volatility delays the adoption of Neolithic agriculture by 3,440, 8,226, 3,864, and 1,566 years,
respectively.24
         The following thought experiment places the aforementioned e¤ects of season-speci…c volatility into
perspective. If the Republic of Congo’s low spring temperature volatility of 0.308 were increased to Greece’s
  2 2 The relevant descriptive statistics of the four season-speci…c volatility measures and their correlations with the control

variables employed by the regressions to follow are reported in Section B of the supplemental appendix, in Tables B.3 and B.4,
respectively.
  2 3 The associated …rst- and second-order partial e¤ects of the season-speci…c temperature-volatility measures – i.e., the

regression lines corresponding to their …rst- and second-order coe¢ cients – are depicted in panels (a) and (b), respectively,
of Figures A.1–A.4 in Section A of the supplemental appendix.
  2 4 While these metric e¤ects are substantially larger in comparison to those revealed by the analysis in Table 1, it is important

to note that a one-degree-Celsius change in each of the season-speci…c volatility measures represents a rather large move in
the data, re‡ecting between 2 and 5 standard deviations of the relevant cross-country volatility distribution, depending on the
season considered. In contrast, a one-degree-Celsius change in intermonthly temperature volatility corresponds to only two-…fths
of a standard deviation from its cross-country distribution. As such, for the purposes of comparing metric e¤ects across the
di¤erent volatility measures, it is more informative to employ the “standardized” metric e¤ect (as de…ned in footnote 18). In
this case, for spring, summer, autumn, and winter temperature volatility, the “standardized” metric e¤ect translates to a delay
in the onset of the Neolithic transition by 245, 393, 274, and 470 years, respectively.



                                                                17
                   Table 2: The Timing of the Neolithic Revolution and Contemporary Interannual Season-Speci…c Temperature Volatility


                                                                 (1)          (2)          (3)       (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)
                                                                        Dependent Variable is Thousand Years Elapsed since the Neolithic Revolution
                                                              Interannual Volatility and Mean of Seasonal Temperature (1901–2000) using Observations on:
                                                                Spring Seasons           Summer Seasons         Autumn Seasons            Winter Seasons
                          Temperature Volatility              9.766***      6.054***   10.591**   9.984**    12.180***    7.374**    6.295***     4.905***
                                                              (2.646)       (2.211)    (4.634)    (4.733)    (3.578)      (3.688)    (1.200)      (1.538)
                          Temperature Volatility Square       -4.844***     -3.440*** -6.869*     -8.226**   -5.586***    -3.864*    -2.031***    -1.566***
                                                              (1.335)       (1.138)    (3.630)    (3.499)    (1.995)      (1.987)    (0.367)      (0.438)
                          Mean Temperature                    -0.013        0.066      0.094**    0.080      0.052        0.098      -0.001       0.079
                                                              (0.038)       (0.048)    (0.045)    (0.052)    (0.042)      (0.064)    (0.035)      (0.053)
                          Log Distance to Frontier            -0.273***     -0.212*** -0.278***   -0.200*** -0.265***     -0.215*** -0.252***     -0.191***
                                                              (0.090)       (0.053)    (0.081)    (0.048)    (0.081)      (0.054)    (0.078)      (0.051)
                          Absolute Latitude                   -0.030        -0.049**   -0.007     -0.041*    -0.046*      -0.047*    -0.035       -0.041
                                                              (0.025)       (0.024)    (0.021)    (0.022)    (0.024)      (0.025)    (0.022)      (0.025)
                          Land Area                           0.054         0.135*     0.047      0.102      0.033        0.130      0.028        0.111
                                                              (0.075)       (0.079)    (0.067)    (0.070)    (0.069)      (0.090)    (0.081)      (0.090)
                          Geographic Conditions                             0.515***              0.582***                0.482***                0.514***
                                                                            (0.155)               (0.166)                 (0.172)                 (0.160)
                          Biogeographic Conditions                          1.145***              1.066***                1.034***                1.025***
                                                                            (0.293)               (0.285)                 (0.285)                 (0.291)
                          Mean Elevation                                    0.075*                0.071                   0.080*                  0.105**




18
                                                                            (0.042)               (0.043)                 (0.048)                 (0.050)
                          Mean Ruggedness                                   -0.213                -0.226*                 -0.155                  -0.255*
                                                                            (0.131)               (0.128)                 (0.126)                 (0.138)
                          % Land in Tropical Zones                          -0.218                -0.133                  0.159                   -0.107
                                                                            (0.468)               (0.619)                 (0.629)                 (0.450)
                          % Land in Temperate Zones                         0.966*                0.535                   0.767                   0.803
                                                                            (0.540)               (0.475)                 (0.536)                 (0.537)
                          Landlocked Dummy                    No            Yes        No         Yes        No           Yes        No           Yes
                          Small Island Dummy                  No            Yes        No         Yes        No           Yes        No           Yes
                          Continent Dummies                   Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes
                          Optimal Temperature Volatility      1.008***      0.880***   0.771***   0.607***   1.090***     0.954***   1.550***     1.566***
                                                              (0.086)       (0.105)    (0.133)    (0.063)    (0.126)      (0.154)    (0.094)      (0.172)
                          F -test p-value                     0.002         0.012      0.052      0.046      0.002        0.141      <0.001       0.002
                          Observations                        97            97         97         97         97           97         97           97
                          Adjusted R2                         0.69          0.84       0.69       0.83       0.71         0.83       0.71         0.84

     Notes : (i) Temperature volatility is the interannual standard deviation of seasonal temperature across 100 season-speci…c observations spanning the 1901–2000 time period,
     and mean temperature is the interannual average across these observations; (ii) Monthly temperature observations are …rst aggregated into seasonal ones while accounting for
     North-South hemisphericity, that is, in the Northern/Southern Hemisphere, the seasons are de…ned as follows: Spring/Autumn (Mar-Apr-May), Summer/Winter (Jun-Jul-
     Aug), Autumn/Spring (Sep-Oct-Nov), Winter/Summer (Dec-Jan-Feb); (iii) Geographic conditions is the …rst principal component of climate, and the size and orientation
     of the landmass; (iv) Biogeographic conditions is the …rst principal component of domesticable plants and animals; (v) The excluded continental category in all regressions
     is Oceania; (vi) A single continental category is used to represent the Americas, which is appropriate for the prehistoric outcome variable being examined; (vii) The F -test
     p-value is from the joint signi…cance test of the linear and quadratic terms of temperature volatility; (viii) Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are reported
     in parentheses; (ix) The standard error estimate for the optimal temperature volatility is computed via the delta method; (x) *** denotes statistical signi…cance at the 1%
     level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
                       (a) Spring Volatility                                      (b) Summer Volatility




                      (c) Autumn Volatility                                        (d) Winter Volatility



Figure 6: Contemporary Interannual Season-Speci…c Temperature Volatility vs. the Timing of the Neolithic
Revolution

Notes : (i) Each depicted relationship re‡ects a quadratic …t of the relevant data on an “augmented component plus residual”
plot (see the discussion in footnote 20 for additional details); (ii) The underlying regressions correspond to the speci…cations
examined in even-numbered columns of Table 2.


spring volatility of 0.877, which is in the neighborhood of the optimum, then, all else equal, agriculture
would have appeared in the Republic of Congo by 4,125 Before Present (BP) instead of 3,000 BP, reducing
the gap in the timing of the transition between the two countries by allowing the Republic of Congo to
reap the bene…ts of agriculture 1,125 years earlier. At the other end of the spectrum, lowering Latvia’s high
spring temperature volatility of 1.604 to that of Greece would have accelerated the adoption of farming in
the regions belonging to Latvia today by 1,802 years.
         Comparing the magnitudes of the coe¢ cients of interest across seasons in Table 2, the regressions
indicate a lower relative importance of interannual winter temperature volatility. This pattern is corroborated
by Table 3, which collects the results from Wald tests conducted to examine whether the …rst- and second-
order e¤ects of winter volatility, as presented in Table 2, are signi…cantly di¤erent from the corresponding
e¤ects of the volatility measures for the other seasons. The relatively weaker impact of winter volatility,



                                                              19
                Table 3: Wald Tests for Assesing the Relative Importance of Winter Volatility


                                                     (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)
                                                    2 (1)Statistic from Wald Tests of the Null Hypotheses that the
                                                   E¤ects of Winter Volatility are not Di¤erent from the E¤ects of:
                                                   Spring Volatility       Summer Volatility        Autumn Volatility
                                                  Baseline      Full       Baseline     Full       Baseline      Full
                                                   M o del     M o del      M o del    M o del      M o del     M o del

             Test on the First-Order E¤ect        2.490       0.438        1.075      1.846        3.844**     0.774
                                                  [0.115]     [0.508]      [0.300]    [0.174]      [0.050]     [0.379]
             Test on the Second-Order E¤ect       6.426**     5.034**      2.087      5.082**      4.215**     2.033
                                                  [0.011]     [0.025]      [0.149]    [0.024]      [0.040]     [0.154]


Notes : (i) Odd-numbered columns of this table compare the relevant coe¢ cient estimates from the speci…cation presented in
Column 7 of Table 2 with corresponding ones presented in Columns 1, 3, and 5, respectively, of that table; (ii) Even-numbered
columns of this table compare the relevant coe¢ cient estimates from the speci…cation presented in Column 8 of Table 2 with
corresponding ones presented in Columns 2, 4, and 6, respectively, of that table; (iii) p-values of the 2 (1) statistics are reported
in square brackets; (iv) *** denotes statistical signi…cance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.


revealed in Table 2, is entirely consistent with the prior that knowledge accumulation in the hunter-gatherer
regime was more likely to have been useful for agriculture when the possibility of farming was present, which
is less so during winter seasons.25 This …nding is also in line with the argument that the greater constraint
on resource availability during winter seasons would have been rationally anticipated by hunter-gatherers
and thus accounted for in their food procurement activities. As such, winter temperature volatility should
be expected to have played a relatively smaller role in shaping the subsistence strategies and the associated
knowledge accumulation of hunter-gatherers towards the adoption of agriculture.
          In sum, the results uncovered in Table 2, while being quantitatively di¤erent from those associated
with the baseline measure of temperature volatility in Table 1, establish the qualitative robustness of the
baseline …ndings to the issue of seasonality.26 This lends support to the assertion that the signi…cant and
robust hump-shaped e¤ect of temperature volatility on the timing of the Neolithic Revolution is not being
driven by systematic intertemporal ‡uctuations due to seasonality, a …nding that would otherwise have been
at odds with the predictions of the proposed theory.

4.1.2    Results with Historical Volatility

As discussed earlier, the interpretation of the results for measures of contemporary temperature volatility
rests on the identifying assumption that the cross-country distribution of temperature volatility during the
20th century was not signi…cantly di¤erent from that which existed prior to the Neolithic Revolution. In
an e¤ort to relax this assumption, this section focuses on establishing qualitatively similar …ndings using a
measure of volatility computed from historical time-series temperature data.
         In particular, given that the historical time series is partially composed of seasonal (rather than
monthly) temperature observations, the measure of volatility employed by this exercise is the intertemporal
  2 5 An alternative way to gauge the relative importance of the season-speci…c volatilities would have been to simultaneously

include all four season-speci…c measures in the same regression speci…cation. Nevertheless, given the high sample correlations
between these respective measures, as evident in Table B.4 in Section B of the supplemental appendix, the resulting regression
would be rather uninformative due to the well-known consequences of multicollinearity.
  2 6 The …nding that the metric e¤ects of the season-speci…c temperature-volatility measures are larger than those uncovered in

Table 1 may re‡ect the fact that non-seasonality-adjusted volatility additionally captures expected movements in temperature
over time, which, by virtue of having been rationally anticipated, were less likely to instigate novel changes in hunter-gatherer
subsistence strategies.


                                                                 20
                   Table 4: The Timing of the Neolithic Revolution and Historical vs. Contemporary Interseasonal Temperature Volatility


                                                                 (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)
                                                                        Dependent Variable is Thousand Years Elapsed since the Neolithic Revolution
                                                                             Interseasonal Volatility and Mean of Seasonal Temperature for the:
                                                                       Historical Period (1500–1900)                        Contemporary Period (1901–2000)
                         Temperature Volatility              5.367***      4.642***    4.521***        3.712***   5.063***      4.224***    4.123***    3.185***
                                                             (0.767)       (0.710)     (1.068)         (0.875)    (0.680)       (0.618)     (1.093)     (0.968)
                         Temperature Volatility Square       -0.402***     -0.343***   -0.354***       -0.287*** -0.389***      -0.318***   -0.335***   -0.256***
                                                             (0.061)       (0.053)     (0.077)         (0.060)    (0.055)       (0.045)     (0.079)     (0.064)
                         Mean Temperature                    0.173**       0.145**     -0.047          -0.088     0.164**       0.127       -0.124      -0.191
                                                             (0.061)       (0.067)     (0.377)         (0.314)    (0.062)       (0.073)     (0.344)     (0.296)
                         Log Distance to Frontier            -0.054        -0.100      -0.176          -0.239*    -0.002        -0.079      -0.157      -0.256
                                                             (0.125)       (0.120)     (0.128)         (0.129)    (0.124)       (0.121)     (0.137)     (0.152)
                         Absolute Latitude                   -0.096**      -0.096**    -0.203          -0.204     -0.106**      -0.107**    -0.248      -0.259
                                                             (0.035)       (0.035)     (0.183)         (0.155)    (0.037)       (0.039)     (0.169)     (0.147)
                         Land Area                           1.589         1.900*      2.972***        3.301***   1.360         1.827*      2.789***    3.282**
                                                             (1.170)       (1.005)     (0.853)         (1.062)    (1.176)       (1.020)     (0.872)     (1.205)
                         Climate                             -0.940                    -0.981                     -1.070*                   -1.045
                                                             (0.541)                   (0.627)                    (0.573)                   (0.683)
                         Orientation of Landmass             2.498***                  2.547**                    2.168**                   2.183**
                                                             (0.808)                   (0.968)                    (0.763)                   (0.926)
                         Size of Landmass                    -0.163***                 -0.148**                   -0.144***                 -0.126**




21
                                                             (0.037)                   (0.052)                    (0.034)                   (0.050)
                         Geographic Conditions                             -0.787***                   -0.541**                 -0.700***               -0.424*
                                                                           (0.213)                     (0.237)                  (0.191)                 (0.237)
                         Mean Elevation                                                -0.318          -0.349                               -0.344      -0.394
                                                                                       (0.281)         (0.243)                              (0.263)     (0.244)
                         Mean Ruggedness                                               0.302           0.403                                0.275       0.390
                                                                                       (0.257)         (0.234)                              (0.245)     (0.233)
                         Landlocked Dummy                    No            No          Yes             Yes        No            No          Yes         Yes
                         Europe Dummy                        Yes           Yes         Yes             Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes
                         Optimal Temperature Volatility      6.680***      6.772***    6.392***        6.478***   6.506***      6.645***    6.157***    6.221***
                                                             (0.236)       (0.214)     (0.398)         (0.386)    (0.242)       (0.222)     (0.418)     (0.475)
                         F -test p-value                     <0.001        <0.001      0.002           0.001      <0.001        <0.001      0.004       0.001
                         Observations                        25            25          25              25         25            25          25          25
                         Adjusted R2                         0.90          0.89        0.90            0.89       0.89          0.89        0.90        0.89

     Notes : (i) For the 1500–1900 time period, temperature volatility is the interseasonal standard deviation of seasonal temperature across 1,604 observations spanning this
     period, and mean temperature is the interseasonal average across these observations; (ii) For the 1901–2000 time period, temperature volatility is the interseasonal standard
     deviation of seasonal temperature across 400 observations spanning this period, and mean temperature is the interseasonal average across these observations; (iii) For the
     1901–2000 time period, monthly temperature observations are …rst aggregated into seasonal ones, and since all countries in the sample appear in the Northern Hemisphere,
     the seasons are de…ned as follows: Spring (Mar-Apr-May), Summer (Jun-Jul-Aug), Autumn (Sep-Oct-Nov), Winter (Dec-Jan-Feb); (iv) Geographic conditions is the …rst
     principal component of climate, and the size and orientation of the landmass; (v) The excluded continental category in all regressions is Asia; (vi) The F -test p-value is from
     the joint signi…cance test of the linear and quadratic terms of temperature volatility; (vii) Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses;
     (viii) The standard error estimate for the optimal temperature volatility is computed via the delta method; (ix) *** denotes statistical signi…cance at the 1% level, ** at
     the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
   Figure 7: Historical Interseasonal Temperature Volatility vs. the Timing of the Neolithic Revolution

Notes : (i) The depicted relationship re‡ects a quadratic …t of the relevant data on an “augmented component plus residual”
plot (see the discussion in footnote 20 for additional details); (ii) The underlying regression corresponds to the speci…cation
examined in Column 3 of Table 4.


standard deviation of seasonal temperature (in degrees Celsius) across 1,604 observations spanning the
1500–1900 time period. As mentioned previously, the cross-country sample considered here comprises 25
primarily European observations, selected based on the condition that data on the standard set of control
variables are available for these countries and that they also appear in the 97-country sample considered
earlier. This permits fair comparisons of the e¤ects of the volatility measures for the contemporary versus
historical time frames in the same sample of countries.27 In this modest 25-country sample, the measure of
historical temperature volatility assumes a minimum value of 3.345 (for Ireland), a maximum value of 8.736
(for Finland), and a sample mean and standard deviation of 6.265 and 1.317, respectively.28
         Columns 1–4 of Table 4 reveal the results from regressions using the historical temperature-volatility
measure. In line with theoretical predictions, and despite sample size limitations, Column 1 shows a highly
statistically signi…cant hump-shaped relationship between the timing of the Neolithic Revolution and the
measure of historical volatility, conditional on mean historical temperature, log-distance to the closest
Neolithic frontier, absolute latitude, land area, geographic factors from the exercise of Olsson and Hibbs
(2005), and a Europe …xed e¤ect.29 Moreover, this non-monotonic e¤ect, along with the estimate of optimal
  2 7 While historical time-series temperature data are available for some countries in North Africa and the Near East as well,

the data are considered to be far more reliable for European countries, where the number of weather stations is substantially
larger and more uniformly distributed across space. In addition, there is no evidence of systematic climatic reversals amongst
European countries since the Last Glacial Maximum, unlike, for example, in North Africa where expansions of the Sahara has
resulted in increased deserti…cation over time.
  2 8 The reader is referred to Tables B.5 and B.6 in Section B of the supplemental appendix for additional descriptive statistics

and correlations pertaining to this 25-country sample.
  2 9 Since Olsson and Hibbs (2005) report data on biogeographic endowments – i.e., the numbers of prehistoric domesticable

species of plants and animals – at a macroregional level, and because the European continent is treated as one macroregion in



                                                               22
volatility, remains qualitatively and quantitatively robust when the speci…cation is modi…ed to use the …rst
principal component of the geographic-endowment variables in Column 2, and when it is further augmented
to include controls for elevation, terrain quality, and a landlocked dummy in Columns 3 and 4.30
          The overall hump-shaped e¤ect of historical temperature volatility on the timing of the Neolithic
transition, conditional on the full set of controls in Column 3, is depicted on the scatter plot in Figure 7.31
To interpret the associated metric e¤ect, a one-degree-Celsius change in historical temperature volatility at
the optimal volatility level of 6.392 is associated with a delay in the onset of the Neolithic Revolution by 354
years.32
          The …nal four columns of Table 4 repeat the preceding analyses in the same 25-country sample
using contemporary temperature volatility, measured as the intertemporal standard deviation of seasonal
temperature across 400 observations spanning the 1901–2000 time period. This permits a fair assessment
of the identifying assumption that the cross-country distribution of temperature volatility remains stable
over long periods of time and therefore that the observed spatial distribution of contemporary temperature
volatility may indeed be used to proxy for the unobserved distribution of prehistoric volatility. As is evident
from Table 4, and as foreshadowed by the high correlation between the measures of contemporary and
historical volatility in Figure 2, the results in Columns 5–8 are strikingly similar to those presented in
Columns 1–4, thereby lending further credence to the identifying assumption underlying this exercise. Taken
together, these empirical …ndings provide compelling evidence in support of the proposed theory, suggesting
that spatial variation in climatic volatility was indeed a fundamental force behind the di¤erential timing of
the adoption of Neolithic agriculture across regions of the world.


4.2     Cross-Archaeological-Site Analysis
Precise estimates of the timing of the agricultural transition are obtained from the radiocarbon dating of
archaeological excavations at early Neolithic sites. Thus, while Putterman’s (2008) country-level estimates,
based on standard archaeological sources and a multitude of country-speci…c historical references, provide
a valuable and, indeed, the only source that covers a large cross-section of countries, this information is
undoubtedly a noisy proxy of the actual timing of the Neolithic Revolution. This section supplements the
empirical investigation using a novel cross-archaeological-site data set. In particular, local climatic sequences
are constructed from grid-cell-level temperature data and combined with high quality data on radiocarbon
dates for 750 early Neolithic settlements in Europe and the Middle East to explore the climatic determinants
of the timing of the agricultural transition at the site level.
         The site-level data on the timing of the Neolithic transition are obtained from the recent data set
compiled by Pinhasi, Fort and Ammerman (2005). In constructing their data set, the authors selected the
earliest date of Neolithic occupation for each of 750 sites in Europe and the Middle East, using uncalibrated
their data set, there is hardly any cross-sectional variation in these biogeographic variables within the 25-country sample being
considered. As such, controls for biogeographic endowments are omitted from these regressions.
  3 0 The small island dummy is not considered here since there are no observations in the 25-country sample that are classi…ed

as small islands. While the British Isles are included in the sample, the fact that the UK and Ireland share a border prevents
the strict quali…cation of these countries as small island nations. Relaxing this strict de…nition of a small island nation to treat
the UK and Ireland as small islands does not signi…cantly alter the results.
  3 1 The associated …rst- and second-order partial e¤ects of historical temperature volatility – i.e., the regression lines

corresponding to its …rst- and second-order coe¢ cients –are depicted in Figures A.5(a)–A.5(b) in Section A of the supplemental
appendix.
  3 2 The “standardized” metric e¤ect (as de…ned in footnote 18) translates, in this case, to a delay in the adoption of farming

by 613 years.




                                                                23
                                   Figure 8: The Spatial Distribution of Neolithic Sites


radiocarbon dates that have standard errors of less than 200 radiocarbon years, and omitting all dates
with higher error intervals as well as outlier dates. According to the authors, the resulting collection of
archaeological sites and the corresponding dates provide a secure sample for the earliest appearance of each
of the early Neolithic cultures in the regions covered by the data set. The map in Figure 8 shows the spatial
distribution of these archaeological sites.
         As in the cross-country analysis, measures of the mean and standard deviation of temperature are
constructed from Mitchell et al.’s (2004) monthly time-series temperature data over the 1901–2000 time
horizon.33 Unlike the country-level measures, however, the site-level measures are constructed by averaging
the grid-cell-level intertemporal moments of temperature across grid cells that fall within a 50-kilometer
radius from each site. Thus, temperature volatility for a given site provides a measure of the volatility
prevalent in the “average” grid cell within 50 kilometers of the site.
         A quadratic speci…cation similar to the one used in the cross-country analysis is employed to test
the proposed non-monotonic e¤ect of climatic volatility on the timing of the transition to agriculture across
archaeological sites:

                                                                                                                   0
         Y STi =     0   +   1V   OLi +   2V   OL2i +   3 T M EANi    +   4 LDISTi    +   5 LATi   +   6   i   +   7   i   +   i;
   3 3 Given that the historical time-series temperature data, used in the cross-country analysis, do not cover all the archaeological

sites, the contemporary temperature data are employed instead.




                                                                 24
where Y STi is the number of thousand years elapsed since the earliest date of Neolithic occupation at site i,
as reported by Pinhasi, Fort and Ammerman (2005); V OLi is the temperature volatility at site i during the
contemporary (1901–2000) time horizon; T M EANi is the mean temperature (in degrees Celsius) at site i
during this time horizon; LDISTi is the log of the great-circle distance (in kilometers) of site i from Cayönü,
one of the Neolithic frontiers identi…ed by Pinhasi, Fort and Ammerman (2005); LATi is the absolute latitude
(in degrees) of site i; i is a Europe dummy; i is a vector of local microgeographic variables, including an
index of climatic suitability for heavy-seed cultivation, elevation, and distance to the coast; and, …nally, i
is a site-speci…c disturbance term.34 All control variables are site-speci…c, constructed using high-resolution
grid-cell-level data, aggregated across grid cells located within a 50-kilometer radius of each site.35 It should
also be noted that these sites belong to countries that have identical biogeographic conditions in terms of the
numbers of prehistoric domesticable species of plants and animals, according to the data set of Olsson and
Hibbs (2005). Hence, the sample considered provides a natural setup to explore whether spatial heterogeneity
in climatic sequences generates di¤erences in the timing of the transition to agriculture across regions that
have access to common biogeographic endowments.
          Table 5 collects the regression results from the cross-archaeological-site analysis. The measure of
volatility used in Columns 1 and 2 is the intermonthly standard deviation of temperature over the 1901–2000
time period at the site level (analogous to the country-level volatility measure in Table 1). For the sample
of 750 archaeological sites, the volatility measure has a sample mean and standard deviation of 6.264 and
1.416, respectively.36
          Consistent with the theory, Column 1 of Table 5 shows a statistically signi…cant hump-shaped
relationship between the timing of the Neolithic Revolution and temperature volatility, conditional on mean
temperature, log-distance to the Neolithic frontier, absolute latitude, and a Europe …xed e¤ect. In particular,
the …rst- and second-order coe¢ cients on temperature volatility are both statistically signi…cant at the 5%
level, and they possess their expected signs. The coe¢ cients of interest imply that the optimal level of
temperature volatility for the Neolithic transition in this sample of sites is 7.288. It is interesting to note
that the magnitude of optimal volatility is very similar to the optimum of 7.167 found for the sample of the
97 countries in Column 8 of Table 1. To interpret the overall metric e¤ect implied by these coe¢ cients, a
one-degree-Celsius change in temperature volatility at the optimum is associated with a delay in the onset
of the Neolithic Revolution across sites by 50 years.37
          As for the control variables in Column 1, the signi…cant negative coe¢ cient on log-distance to the
Neolithic frontier is consistent with the spatial di¤usion of agricultural technology from the frontier, while
the coe¢ cient on absolute latitude indicates that, conditional on climatic characteristics, hunter-gatherers
at latitudinal bands closer to the poles experienced a delayed onset of farming. Column 2 augments the
  3 4 The standard errors are clustered at the country level to account for spatial autocorrelation in
                                                                                                         i . Applying the correction
method proposed by Conley (1999), however, yields similar results (not reported). The issue of spatial dependence is addressed
more rigorously further below.
  3 5 The site-level measure of climatic suitability for agriculture is constructed by applying Olsson and Hibbs’s (2005) de…nition

of climatic suitability to geospatial data on the global distribution of Köppen-Geiger climate zones at a 0.5-degree resolution
from Kottek et al. (2006). Elevation is calculated using geospatial data at a 5-minute resolution from the TerrainBase Global
Digital Terrain Model, Version 1.0 of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) National Geophysical
Data Center. Finally, distance to the sea is computed (after omitting the data on the coastlines of lakes) using high-resolution
geospatial data on the “coastlines of seas, oceans, and extremely large lakes” from the Seamless Digital Chart of the World,
Base Map Version 3.0 , published by Global Mapping International.
  3 6 These descriptive statistics along with those of the control variables employed by the analysis are collected in Table B.7 in

Section B of the supplemental appendix, with the relevant correlations appearing in Table B.8.
  3 7 In this case, the “standardized” metric e¤ect (as de…ned in footnote 18) translates to a delay in the adoption of Neolithic

agriculture at the site level by 101 years.



                                                                25
                                Table 5: The Timing of the Neolithic Revolution and Temperature Volatility across Archaeological Sites


                                                     (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)          (7)        (8)           (9)       (10)
                                                                        Dependent Variable is Thousand Years Elapsed since the Neolithic Revolution
                                                      Intertemporal Volatility and Mean of Monthly or Seasonal Temperature (1901–2000) using Observations on:
                                                      All Months               Spring Seasons         Summer Seasons         Autumn Seasons             Winter Seasons
              Temperature Volatility             0.732**      0.752**      10.086***    9.753***   10.676***   10.286*** 12.238***      12.973*** 2.453*        2.285
                                                 (0.322)      (0.323)      (2.067)      (2.241)    (3.795)     (3.727)    (1.867)       (2.492)     (1.366)     (1.398)
              Temperature Volatility Square      -0.050**     -0.053**     -4.854***    -4.708*** -5.450**     -5.273**   -5.934***     -6.447*** -0.802*       -0.764*
                                                 (0.025)      (0.026)      (1.039)      (1.130)    (2.272)     (2.143)    (1.033)       (1.379)     (0.403)     (0.417)
              Mean Temperature                   -0.042       -0.025       -0.046       -0.044     0.001       0.006      -0.015        -0.017      -0.038      -0.038
                                                 (0.038)      (0.034)      (0.035)      (0.038)    (0.028)     (0.028)    (0.031)       (0.029)     (0.036)     (0.038)
              Log Distance to Frontier           -0.791***    -0.744*** -0.698***       -0.659*** -0.757***    -0.662*** -0.572***      -0.539*** -0.755***     -0.727***
                                                 (0.228)      (0.249)      (0.184)      (0.186)    (0.200)     (0.202)    (0.149)       (0.144)     (0.203)     (0.207)
              Absolute Latitude                  -0.077***    -0.078*** -0.094***       -0.100*** -0.078***    -0.085*** -0.092***      -0.102*** -0.089***     -0.094***
                                                 (0.021)      (0.022)      (0.017)      (0.020)    (0.018)     (0.022)    (0.017)       (0.023)     (0.013)     (0.019)
              Climate                                         0.148                     0.098                  0.151                    0.084                   0.095
                                                              (0.119)                   (0.100)                (0.092)                  (0.078)                 (0.124)
              Mean Elevation                                  0.003                     -0.010                 -0.002                   -0.020                  -0.010
                                                              (0.030)                   (0.031)                (0.026)                  (0.027)                 (0.031)
              Distance to Coast                               0.040                     0.030                  0.048*                   0.055**                 0.030
                                                              (0.044)                   (0.034)                (0.027)                  (0.026)                 (0.031)
              Europe Dummy                       Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes
              Optimal Temperature Volatility     7.288***     7.029***     1.039***     1.036***   0.979***    0.975***   1.031***      1.006***    1.530***    1.496***




26
                                                 (0.773)      (0.982)      (0.034)      (0.043)    (0.071)     (0.061)    (0.039)       (0.037)     (0.155)     (0.170)
              F -test p-value                    0.050        0.055        <0.001       <0.001     <0.001      0.003      <0.001        <0.001      0.093       0.115
              Observations                       750          750          750          750        750         750        750           750         750         750
              Adjusted R2                        0.69         0.69         0.71         0.71       0.70        0.71       0.73          0.73        0.69        0.69
                                                                               2 (1) Statistic from Wald Tests of the Null Hypotheses that the

                                                                              E¤ects of Winter Volatility are not Di¤erent from the E¤ects of:
                                                                              Spring Volatility      Summer Volatility       Autumn Volatility
              Test on the 1st-Order E¤ect                                  25.183***    22.945*** 6.344**      6.678***   44.059***     30.577***
                                                                           [<0.001]     [<0.001]   [0.012]     [0.010]    [<0.001]      [<0.001]
              Test on the 2nd-Order E¤ect                                  25.500***    21.256*** 4.942**      5.428**    34.344***     23.030***
                                                                           [<0.001]     [<0.001]   [0.026]     [0.020]    [<0.001]      [<0.001]


     Notes : (i) In Columns 1–2 of the top panel, temperature volatility is the intermonthly standard deviation of monthly temperature across 1,200 observations spanning the
     1901–2000 time period, while mean temperature is the intermonthly average across these observations; (ii) In Columns 3–10 of the top panel, temperature volatility is
     the interannual standard deviation of seasonal temperature across 100 season-speci…c observations spanning the 1901–2000 time period, while mean temperature is the
     interannual average across these observations; (iii) For the analyses in Columns 3–10 of the top panel, monthly temperature observations are …rst aggregated into seasonal
     ones, and since all sites in the sample appear in the Northern Hemisphere, the seasons are de…ned as follows: Spring (Mar-Apr-May), Summer (Jun-Jul-Aug), Autumn
     (Sep-Oct-Nov), Winter (Dec-Jan-Feb); (iv) The excluded regional category in all regressions is the Middle East; (v) The F -test p-value is from the joint signi…cance test of
     the linear and quadratic terms of temperature volatility; (vi) Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates (clustered at the country level) are reported in parentheses
     below the regression coe¢ cients; (vii) The standard error estimate for the optimal temperature volatility is computed via the delta method; (viii) Odd-numbered columns
     of the bottom panel compare the relevant coe¢ cient estimates from the speci…cation presented in Column 9 of the top panel with corresponding ones presented in Columns
     3, 5, and 7, respectively, of the top panel; (ix) Even-numbered columns of the bottom panel compare the relevant coe¢ cient estimates from the speci…cation presented in
     Column 10 of the top panel with corresponding ones presented in Columns 4, 6, and 8, respectively, of the top panel; (x) p-values of the 2 (1) statistics are reported in
     square brackets; (xi) *** denotes statistical signi…cance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
Figure 9: Contemporary Interannual Spring Temperature Volatility vs. the Timing of the Neolithic
Revolution across Archaeological Sites

Notes : (i) The depicted relationship re‡ects a quadratic …t of the relevant data on an “augmented component plus residual”
plot (see the discussion in footnote 20 for additional details); (ii) The underlying regression corresponds to the speci…cation
examined in Column 4 of Table 5.


analysis by introducing site-speci…c controls for climatic favorability towards agriculture, distance to the
sea, and elevation. Consistent with priors, Neolithic sites possessing climatic conditions more suitable for
farming underwent an earlier transition, although the point estimate is statistically insigni…cant. Moreover,
the positive coe¢ cient on distance to the sea implies that settlements closer to the coast experienced a later
transition to agriculture. To the extent that distance to the coast captures the dependence of prehistoric
hunter-gatherers on aquatic resources, this …nding is consistent with the archaeological and ethnological
record of cultures whose particular subsistence pattern, involving a heavier reliance on aquatic resources,
resulted in a delayed adoption of farming.
          The remaining columns of Table 5 address the issue of seasonality, discussed previously in the cross-
country analysis, by constructing season-speci…c measures of interannual temperature volatility at the site
level (analogous to the country-level volatility measures in Table 2). In particular, for each season-speci…c
volatility measure, two speci…cations are considered, one with the baseline set of controls (corresponding
to the one from Column 1 of Table 5) and the other with the full set of controls (corresponding to the
one from Column 2 of Table 5). As is evident from the table, the regressions generally reveal statistically
signi…cant and robust hump-shaped e¤ects of the di¤erent season-speci…c volatility measures on the timing
of the Neolithic transition. Speci…cally, for each season, the estimated …rst- and second-order coe¢ cients on
volatility appear with their expected signs and remain largely stable in magnitude when subjected to the
full set of controls for geographic endowments. Note that, consistent with the …ndings in the cross-country
analysis, the impact of winter temperature volatility is quantitatively less important, and incidentally also
less precisely estimated, than the e¤ects of the volatility measures for the rest of the seasons. This pattern is


                                                             27
more rigorously con…rmed by the bottom panel of Table 5, which shows that the e¤ects of winter volatility,
as presented in the top panel of the table, di¤er systematically from the corresponding e¤ects of spring,
summer, and autumn volatility, respectively.
         To better gauge the quantitative impact of climatic volatility on the advent of farming across
sites, consider the following scenario involving spring temperature volatility. Within Germany, the earliest
Neolithic site is that of Klein Denkte, possessing a spring volatility of 1.059 and an estimated transition date
of 7,930 BP. Note that Klein Denkte’s spring volatility is close to the estimated optimum of 1.039, presented
in Column 3 of Table 5. On the other hand, the German Neolithic sites of Prenzlau and Kaster both transited
to agriculture around 5,500 BP but display signi…cantly di¤erent spring volatilities. In particular, Prenzlau
has the highest spring volatility within Germany at 1.234, whereas Kaster has one of the lowest at 0.945.
Endowing the settlement at Prenzlau with the spring volatility of Klein Denkte would have accelerated the
advent of farming in the former by 184 years, whereas the same experiment for Kaster would have given
rise to agricultural dependence at this location 41 years earlier. The scatter plot in Figure 9 depicts the
overall hump-shaped e¤ect of spring temperature volatility on the timing of the Neolithic transition across
archaeological sites, conditional on the full set of controls in Column 4.38
         In sum, the analysis in this section employed data on the timing of Neolithic settlements in Europe
and the Middle East to explore the role of local, site-speci…c climatic sequences in shaping the transition to
farming across reliably excavated and dated archaeological entities. Consistent with theoretical predictions,
and in line with the systematic pattern revealed by the cross-country analysis, Neolithic sites endowed with
moderate levels of climatic volatility transited earlier into agriculture, conditional on local microgeographic
characteristics. The recurrent …nding that climatic volatility has had a non-monotonic impact on the
emergence of farming, across countries and archaeological sites alike, sheds new light on the climatic origins
of the adoption of agriculture.


4.3     Potential Alternative Mechanisms and Additional Robustness Checks
The theory advanced by this research highlights the importance of moderate levels of climatic volatility for
instigating transformations in hunter-gatherer subsistence activities, thereby spurring the accumulation of
tacit knowledge appropriate for the adoption of farming. Admittedly, however, the reduced-form empirical
evidence, while consistent with the proposed theory, could potentially also be reconcilable with alternative
mechanisms.
         One possibility is that the observed hump-shaped e¤ect of temperature volatility on the timing of
the Neolithic Revolution could simply be re‡ecting the in‡uence of an “ideal agricultural climate,” such
that conditions away from this optimum, by increasing the incidence of crop failures, reduce the incentive
of hunter-gatherers to adopt farming. There are two statistically related pieces of evidence, however,
that mitigate this concern. First, as shown in Table A.1 in Section A of the supplemental appendix,
while the results from both cross-country and cross-archaeological-site regressions of climatic suitability
for agriculture on (a quadratic in) temperature volatility reveal a hump-shaped pattern between these
variables, the estimated relationships are generally weak and statistically imprecise. Second, had (high
levels of) climatic suitability for agriculture and (intermediate levels of) temperature volatility both been
noisy proxies of the true but unobserved “ideal agricultural climate,” with the latter being the less noisy
  3 8 The associated …rst- and second-order partial e¤ects of spring temperature volatility –i.e., the regression lines corresponding

to its …rst- and second-order coe¢ cients – are depicted in Figures A.6(a)–A.6(b) in Section A of the supplemental appendix.



                                                                 28
of the two proxies, one should not expect to …nd a statistically signi…cant positive coe¢ cient on climatic
suitability in a speci…cation that regresses the timing of the agricultural transition on both climatic suitability
and (a quadratic in) temperature volatility. The results presented in Table 1, however, run contrary to this
prediction. Taken together, these …ndings indicate that climatic suitability for agriculture and (moderate
levels of) temperature volatility are not as strongly correlated as priors may suggest and, therefore, that the
statistical relationships that these variables possess with the timing of the Neolithic Revolution, conditional
on one another, are plausibly re‡ective of two distinct and independent dimensions of the in‡uence of climate
on the adoption of farming.
         A second alternative mechanism that could rationalize the reduced-form empirical …ndings is that
of risk diversi…cation across di¤erent subsistence strategies. Speci…cally, if hunter-gatherers happened to
possess the prior that agricultural production would mitigate the adverse e¤ects of future climatic shocks
on foraging output, then they would have had a strong incentive to adopt farming when the agricultural
technology arrived.39 Moreover, to the extent that hunter-gatherers in climatically static environments were
not likely to have bene…ted from increased diversi…cation, while those typically facing extreme climatic events
might have found agriculture to be unproductive, it follows that farming would have been adopted earlier in
locations characterized by moderate climatic shocks.
         Given su¢ cient data on the intertemporal variance-covariance structure of output across prehistoric
foraging and farming activities, as well as data on the breadth of the hunter-gatherer dietary spectrum prior
to the adoption of agriculture, one could potentially conduct a discriminatory test of the aforementioned
risk-diversi…cation mechanism versus the espoused knowledge-accumulation channel –i.e., by assessing their
relative importance in mediating the reduced-form hump-shaped e¤ect of climatic volatility on the timing
of the Neolithic Revolution. Alternatively, one could exploit data on climatic volatility across di¤erent time
horizons prior to the onset of agriculture. Since the knowledge-accumulation mechanism emphasizes the
deep history of climatic events, whereas the risk-diversi…cation channel highlights expectations of future
shocks when farming becomes available for adoption, to the extent that the recent history of climatic
‡uctuations was more heavily weighted in the formation of such expectations, the relative importance
of climatic volatility across longer versus shorter time horizons in explaining the timing of the Neolithic
Revolution could potentially re‡ect the relative signi…cance of these two mechanisms. Unfortunately, the
absence of detailed archaeological and prehistoric climatological data makes such tests infeasible at the
moment, remaining interesting avenues to explore in future research. Nevertheless, both mechanisms are
complementary in highlighting the role of climatic volatility in the adoption of farming.

4.3.1     Accounting for Spatial Dependence across Observations

Setting aside the question of alternative mechanisms, a potentially more germane issue is whether the
reduced-form empirical …ndings can themselves be considered valid, given the statistical assumption of
independence of observations in the preceding least-squares regression analyses. Speci…cally, since farming
most likely di¤used across space not due to direct technology transfer from the Neolithic frontier but as
a result of iterative intermediate adoptions across neighboring societies, and because climatological factors
are also known to be strongly correlated across contiguous territories, the estimated e¤ects of temperature
volatility on the timing of the agricultural transition could well be both biased and ine¢ cient.
  3 9 Whileit is unclear how societies with no previous operational experience with farming would come to possess such a prior,
the argument that they may have come into frequent contact with early neighboring agriculturalists (and thereby gained the
relevant knowledge) leaves open this possibility.


                                                              29
         This issue is formally addressed in this section by way of conducting spatial regressions that employ
the maximum-likelihood estimator of Drukker, Prucha and Raciborski (2013), which allows for …rst-order
spatial autoregression in both the dependent variable and the disturbance term (SARAR). In particular, the
estimated SARAR models are of the form:

                                                 y   =     Wy + X + u;
                                                 u =       Mu + ,

where y is an n 1 vector of observations on the dependent variable; W and M are n n spatial weighting
matrices (with diagonal elements equal to zero and o¤-diagonal elements corresponding to inverse great-circle
distances between geodesic centroids);40 Wy and Mu are n 1 vectors representing spatial lags; and are
non-zero scalar parameters re‡ecting the spatial autoregressive processes; X is an n k matrix of observations
on k independent variables and is its associated k 1 parameter vector; and …nally, is an n 1 vector of
residuals. Reassuringly, as revealed in Table A.2 in Section A of the supplemental appendix, following this
methodology to modify the main empirical speci…cations from the cross-country and cross-archaeological-
site analyses – i.e., allowing for spatial dependence, both in the timing of the Neolithic Revolution and in
unobserved heterogeneity, across observations –does not qualitatively alter the key …nding of a statistically
signi…cant hump-shaped e¤ect of temperature volatility on the timing of the adoption of agriculture.


5     Concluding Remarks
This research theoretically and empirically examines the di¤usion of agriculture. The theory emphasizes the
role of a foraging society’s history of climatic shocks in determining the timing of its adoption of farming.
It argues that hunter-gatherers facing moderately volatile environments were forced to take advantage of
their productive endowments at a faster pace, thereby accumulating tacit knowledge complementary to the
adoption of agriculture. Static climatic conditions, on the contrary, by not inducing foragers to exploit
the marginal resources available in their habitats, limited the accumulation of such knowledge. Similarly,
extreme environmental ‡uctuations, by drastically altering the resource base and forcing foragers to enact
radically di¤erent subsistence strategies, delayed the adoption of farming.
         The key theoretical prediction regarding a hump-shaped e¤ect of climatic volatility on the adoption
of agriculture is empirically demonstrated. Conducting a comprehensive empirical investigation that exploits
variations both across countries and across archaeological sites, the analysis establishes that, conditional on
biogeographic endowments, climatic volatility has a non-monotonic e¤ect on the timing of the transition to
agriculture. Farming was adopted earlier in regions characterized by intermediate levels of climatic volatility,
with regions subject to either too high or too low intertemporal variability systematically transiting later.
Reassuringly, the results hold at di¤erent levels of aggregation and using alternative sources of climatic
sequences. The …ndings are consistent with the proposed theory, suggesting that heterogeneity in climatic
volatility was a fundamental force behind the di¤erential timing of the prehistoric transition to agriculture,
both at a local and at a global scale.


  4 0 Employing  a contiquity matrix rather than an inverse-distance matrix for the spatial weighting matrices does not
qualitatively a¤ect the results of the spatial regressions. The results are also qualitatively insensitive to the truncation of
spatial weights (to zero) below various thresholds of inverse distances.


                                                              30
Supplemental Appendix

A      Auxiliary Figures and Regression Results




                    (a) The First-Order E¤ect                                   (b) The Second-Order E¤ect



Figure A.1: The First- and Second-Order E¤ects of Contemporary Interannual Spring Temperature
Volatility

Notes : (i) Each depicted relationship re‡ects a linear …t of the relevant data on an “added variable” (partial regression) plot;
(ii) The underlying regression corresponds to the speci…cation examined in Column 2 of Table 2 in the paper.




                    (a) The First-Order E¤ect                                   (b) The Second-Order E¤ect



Figure A.2: The First- and Second-Order E¤ects of Contemporary Interannual Summer Temperature
Volatility

Notes : (i) Each depicted relationship re‡ects a linear …t of the relevant data on an “added variable” (partial regression) plot;
(ii) The underlying regression corresponds to the speci…cation examined in Column 4 of Table 2 in the paper.




                                                               31
                    (a) The First-Order E¤ect                                   (b) The Second-Order E¤ect



Figure A.3: The First- and Second-Order E¤ects of Contemporary Interannual Autumn Temperature
Volatility

Notes : (i) Each depicted relationship re‡ects a linear …t of the relevant data on an “added variable” (partial regression) plot;
(ii) The underlying regression corresponds to the speci…cation examined in Column 6 of Table 2 in the paper.




                    (a) The First-Order E¤ect                                   (b) The Second-Order E¤ect



Figure A.4: The First- and Second-Order E¤ects of Contemporary Interannual Winter Temperature
Volatility

Notes : (i) Each depicted relationship re‡ects a linear …t of the relevant data on an “added variable” (partial regression) plot;
(ii) The underlying regression corresponds to the speci…cation examined in Column 8 of Table 2 in the paper.




                                                               32
                    (a) The First-Order E¤ect                                   (b) The Second-Order E¤ect



   Figure A.5: The First- and Second-Order E¤ects of Historical Interseasonal Temperature Volatility

Notes : (i) Each depicted relationship re‡ects a linear …t of the relevant data on an “added variable” (partial regression) plot;
(ii) The underlying regression corresponds to the speci…cation examined in Column 3 of Table 4 in the paper.




                    (a) The First-Order E¤ect                                   (b) The Second-Order E¤ect



Figure A.6: The First- and Second-Order E¤ects of Contemporary Interannual Spring Temperature
Volatility across Archaeological Sites

Notes : (i) Each depicted relationship re‡ects a linear …t of the relevant data on an “added variable” (partial regression) plot;
(ii) The underlying regression corresponds to the speci…cation examined in Column 4 of Table 5 in the paper.




                                                               33
                     Table A.1: Climatic Suitability for Agriculture and Temperature Volatility across Countries and Archaeological Sites


                                                         (1)        (2)              (3)     (4)              (5)    (6)             (7)     (8)             (9)     (10)
                                                                             Dependent Variable is the Index of Climatic Suitability for Agriculture
                                                       Intertemporal Volatility and Mean of Monthly or Seasonal Temperature (1901–2000) using Observations on:
                                                          All Months             Spring Seasons         Summer Seasons          Autumn Seasons            Winter Seasons
                                                       Baseline     Full        Baseline     Full       Baseline     Full      Baseline      Full      Baseline      Full
                                                        M o del    M o del       M o del    M o del      M o del    M o del     M o del     M o del     M o del     M o del

                                                                                                   Panel A: Cross-Country Analyses
                    Temperature Volatility             0.274      0.910       3.868*        3.300      7.676        7.886     5.783**      5.163      1.389        -1.720
                                                       (0.309)    (0.554)     (2.337)       (3.417)    (4.978)      (7.554)   (2.701)      (4.769)    (1.400)      (2.239)
                    Temperature Volatility Square      -0.017     -0.091** -2.649**         -3.072     -5.769       -9.590* -4.473***      -7.499*** -0.808**      -0.376
                                                       (0.028)    (0.046)     (1.301)       (1.961)    (4.142)      (5.516)   (1.437)      (2.892)    (0.369)      (0.588)
                    Log Pseudolikelihood               -83.14     -59.94      -80.50        -58.89     -82.64       -57.22    -80.90       -52.10     -80.05       -57.27




34
                    Pseudo R2                          0.32       0.51        0.34          0.52       0.32         0.53      0.34         0.57       0.34         0.53
                                                                                           Panel B: Cross-Archaeological-Site Analyses
                    Temperature Volatility             0.055      0.022       1.659         1.558      3.728        2.344     5.986**      4.987**    1.105        1.212*
                                                       (0.289)    (0.296)     (1.669)       (1.742)    (2.817)      (2.918)   (2.273)      (2.108)    (0.697)      (0.687)
                    Temperature Volatility Square      -0.012     -0.008      -1.371*       -1.291     -2.457       -1.642    -3.899***    -3.269*** -0.464**      -0.422**
                                                       (0.025)    (0.026)     (0.812)       (0.829)    (1.903)      (1.958)   (1.184)      (1.100)    (0.216)      (0.205)
                    Adjusted R2                        0.70       0.71        0.74          0.74       0.70         0.71      0.73         0.73       0.70         0.71

     Notes : (i) For the cross-country analyses (Panel A), given the ordinal nature of the index of climatic suitability for agriculture at the country level, all regressions employ
     the ordered probit maximum-likelihood estimator, whereas for the cross-archaeological-site analyses (Panel B), all regressions are estimated using the OLS estimator, since
     the climatic suitability index is a continuous variable at the site level; (ii) For the cross-country analyses (Panel A), the set of control variables in speci…cations examined in
     odd-numbered columns respectively correspond to those in Column 1 of Table 1 and in odd-numbered columns of Table 2, whereas the set of control variables in speci…cations
     examined in even-numbered columns respectively correspond to those in Column 9 of Table 1 and in even-numbered columns of Table 2; (iii) For the cross-archaeological-site
     analyses (Panel B), the set of control variables in the speci…cation examined in a given column corresponds to that in the identically numbered column of Table 5; (iv)
     The regression coe¢ cients associated with control variables are not reported in the interest of saving space and maintaining clarity; (v) Heteroskedasticity robust standard
     error estimates are reported in parentheses; (vi) For the cross-archaeological-site analyses (Panel B), the standard error estimates are clustered at the country level; (vii)
     *** denotes statistical signi…cance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
                            Table A.2: Robustness to Accounting for Spatial Dependence across Countries and Archaeological Sites


                                                (1)          (2)             (3)       (4)              (5)        (6)             (7)      (8)           (9)       (10)
                                                                       Dependent Variable is Thousand Years Elapsed since the Neolithic Revolution
                                                       Intertemporal Volatility and Mean of Monthly or Seasonal Temperature (1901–2000) using Observations on:
                                                  All Months                Spring Seasons             Summer Seasons             Autumn Seasons          Winter Seasons
                                              Baseline       Full         Baseline     Full           Baseline     Full       Baseline      Full       Baseline     Full
                                               M odel       M o del        M o del    M o del          M o del    M o del      M o del     M o del      M o del    M o del

                                                                                                Panel A: Cross-Country Analyses
           Temperature Volatility            0.814***      0.665**       5.264**     4.480**        8.736**      8.086**     9.609***     7.409***    1.981       3.139***
                                             (0.237)       (0.292)       (2.142)     (1.979)        (3.568)      (3.695)     (2.535)      (2.845)     (1.217)     (1.148)
           Temperature Volatility Square     -0.061***     -0.057**      -3.312***   -3.432***      -7.122***    -7.274***   -6.304***    -5.156***   -0.905**    -1.206***
                                             (0.021)       (0.025)       (1.099)     (1.000)        (2.549)      (2.582)     (1.484)      (1.602)     (0.357)     (0.332)
           Spatial-Lag AR(1),                0.130***      0.085*        0.155***    0.038          0.146***     0.091**     0.126***     0.078*      0.128***    0.051
                                             (0.044)       (0.046)       (0.044)     (0.044)        (0.044)      (0.045)     (0.043)      (0.044)     (0.048)     (0.047)
           Spatial-Error AR(1),              1.024***      1.015***      0.771***    1.024***       1.027***     1.016***    1.032***     1.021***    1.020***    1.021***
                                             (0.050)       (0.055)       (0.044)     (0.047)        (0.048)      (0.053)     (0.045)      (0.050)     (0.050)     (0.049)

                                                                                       Panel B: Cross-Archaeological-Site Analyses




35
           Temperature Volatility            0.703***      0.688***      9.985***    9.734***       11.226***    10.914***   13.258***    14.248***   2.912***    2.830***
                                             (0.169)       (0.172)       (1.206)     (1.230)        (1.635)      (1.675)     (1.217)      (1.346)     (0.588)     (0.575)
           Temperature Volatility Square     -0.047***     -0.045***     -4.840***   -4.723***      -5.788***    -5.610***   -6.609***    -7.263***   -0.889***   -0.927***
                                             (0.013)       (0.014)       (0.602)     (0.612)        (0.998)      (1.019)     (0.675)      (0.766)     (0.169)     (0.168)
           Spatial-Lag AR(1),                -0.026***     -0.026***     -0.020**    -0.020**       -0.018*      -0.017*     -0.022**     -0.022**    -0.027***   -0.028***
                                             (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.010)     (0.010)        (0.010)      (0.010)     (0.009)      (0.009)     (0.004)     (0.006)
           Spatial-Error AR(1),              0.727***      0.727***      0.370***    0.369***       0.368***     0.367***    0.365***     0.362***    1.160***    0.708***
                                             (0.033)       (0.034)       (0.024)     (0.024)        (0.024)      (0.024)     (0.026)      (0.027)     (0.024)     (0.035)


     Notes : (i) All regressions employ the maximum-likelihood estimator of Drukker, Prucha and Raciborski (2013) that allows for …rst-order spatial autoregression in both the
     dependent variable and the disturbance term (SARAR) – i.e., the estimated model is of the form y = Wy + X + u with u = Mu + , where y is an n 1 vector of
     observations on the dependent variable, W and M are n n spatial weighting matrices (with diagonal elements equal to zero and o¤-diagonal elements corresponding to
     the inverse great-circle distances between geodesic centroids), Wy and Mu are n 1 vectors representing spatial lags, and are non-zero scalar parameters re‡ecting the
     spatial autoregressive processes, X is an n k matrix of observations on k independent variables and        is its associated k 1 parameter vector, and …nally, is an n 1
     vector of residuals; (ii) For the cross-country analyses (Panel A), the speci…cations examined in odd-numbered columns respectively correspond to those in Column 1 of
     Table 1 and in odd-numbered columns of Table 2, whereas the speci…cations examined in even-numbered columns respectively correspond to those in Column 9 of Table 1
     and in even-numbered columns of Table 2; (iii) For the cross-archaeological-site analyses (Panel B), the speci…cation examined in a given column corresponds to that in the
     identically numbered column of Table 5; (iv) The regression coe¢ cients associated with control variables are not reported in the interest of saving space and maintaining
     clarity; (v) Standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; (vi) For the cross-country analyses (Panel A), the point and standard error estimates of the spatial AR(1)
     parameters, and , are rescaled (divided by 100) to permit reporting of these parameter estimates with greater precision; (vii) *** denotes statistical signi…cance at the
     1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
     B      Descriptive Statistics and Correlations

                                                    Table B.1: Descriptive Statistics for the 97-Country Sample


                                                                                              M ean        SD        M in       M ax
                                                       (1)    Tem p erature Volatility        3.995      2.700      0.548     10.082
                                                       (2)    M ean Tem p erature            18.751      7.623      0.982     28.194
                                                       (3)    Years since Transition          4.516      2.249      1.000     10.500
                                                       (4)    Log Distance to Frontier        7.066      2.070      0.000      8.420
                                                       (5)    Absolute Latitude              25.170     17.101      1.000     64.000
                                                       (6)    Land Area                       0.629      1.338      0.003      9.327
                                                       (7)    Clim ate                        1.577      1.049      0.000      3.000
                                                       (8)    Orientation of Landm ass        1.530      0.687      0.500      3.000
                                                       (9)    Size of Landm ass              30.812     13.594      0.065     44.614
                                                      (10)    Geographic Conditions           0.150      1.389     -2.126      2.145
                                                      (11)    Dom esticable Plants           13.742     13.618      2.000     33.000
                                                      (12)    Dom esticable Anim als          3.845      4.169      0.000      9.000
                                                      (13)    Biogeographic Conditions        0.082      1.395     -1.092      1.985
                                                      (14)    M ean Elevation                 5.767      4.764      0.181     24.897
                                                      (15)    M ean Ruggedness                1.217      1.102      0.036      5.474
                                                      (16)    % Land in Tropical Zones        0.349      0.414      0.000      1.000
                                                      (17)    % Land in Tem p erate Zones     0.299      0.415      0.000      1.000




36
                                                    Table B.2: Pairwise Correlations for the 97-Country Sample


                                             (1)      (2)       (3)      (4)      (5)       (6)       (7)        (8)        (9)    (10)     (11)     (12)     (13)     (14)     (15)     (16)
      (1)   Tem p erature Volatility       1.000
      (2)   M ean Tem p erature           -0.790    1.000
      (3)   Years since Transition         0.622   -0.443     1.000
      (4)   Log Distance to Frontier      -0.038   -0.108    -0.220    1.000
      (5)   Absolute Latitude              0.860   -0.899     0.497    0.155    1.000
      (6)   Land Area                      0.068    0.026     0.105   -0.292   -0.096    1.000
      (7)   Clim ate                       0.651   -0.717     0.655    0.139    0.748   -0.131     1.000
      (8)   Orientation of Landm ass       0.610   -0.545     0.686   -0.014    0.569   -0.050     0.528     1.000
      (9)   Size of Landm ass              0.574   -0.413     0.509    0.023    0.431   -0.049     0.361     0.669      1.000
     (10)   Geographic Conditions          0.736   -0.672     0.750    0.053    0.702   -0.090     0.750     0.909      0.812      1.000
     (11)   Dom esticable Plants           0.744   -0.731     0.688    0.094    0.832   -0.213     0.826     0.639      0.508      0.791    1.000
     (12)   Dom esticable Anim als         0.776   -0.726     0.789    0.092    0.794   -0.086     0.809     0.749      0.522      0.841    0.890    1.000
     (13)   Biogeographic Conditions       0.782   -0.749     0.760    0.096    0.836   -0.154     0.841     0.714      0.530      0.840    0.972    0.972    1.000
     (14)   M ean Elevation                0.019   -0.157     0.001   -0.220   -0.145    0.219    -0.140    -0.044      0.120     -0.029   -0.174   -0.124   -0.154    1.000
     (15)   M ean Ruggedness               0.189   -0.349     0.221    0.007    0.174   -0.075     0.188     0.339      0.104      0.267    0.151    0.241    0.202    0.549    1.000
     (16)   % Land in Tropical Zones      -0.796    0.659    -0.414    0.065   -0.735   -0.029    -0.504    -0.323     -0.416     -0.490   -0.582   -0.548   -0.581   -0.166   -0.125    1.000
     (17)   % Land in Tem p erate Zones    0.684   -0.825     0.414    0.197    0.863   -0.163     0.691     0.483      0.343      0.608    0.736    0.689    0.733   -0.204    0.124   -0.609
                          Table B.3: Descriptive Statistics for the Seasonal Variables


                                                                         M ean       SD        M in     M ax
                       (1)   Tem p erature Volatility   for Spring       0.753     0.267      0.308    1.604
                       (2)   Tem p erature Volatility   for Sum m er     0.636     0.219      0.328    1.110
                       (3)   Tem p erature Volatility   for Autum n      0.699     0.267      0.309    1.432
                       (4)   Tem p erature Volatility   for W inter      0.940     0.548      0.328    2.667
                       (5)   M ean Tem p erature for    Spring          19.121     8.528     -0.646   31.220
                       (6)   M ean Tem p erature for    Sum m er        22.819     4.792     10.601   32.752
                       (7)   M ean Tem p erature for    Autum n         19.106     7.309      1.565   28.529
                       (8)   M ean Tem p erature for    W inter         13.952    10.717    -10.035   27.338




                         Table B.4: Pairwise Correlations for the Seasonal Variables


                                                       (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)
      (1)   Tem p erature Volatility for Spring      1.000
      (2)   Tem p erature Volatility for Sum m er    0.824      1.000
      (3)   Tem p erature Volatility for Autum n     0.892      0.924     1.000
      (4)   Tem p erature Volatility for W inter     0.914      0.838     0.913     1.000
      (5)   M ean Tem p erature for Spring          -0.716     -0.788    -0.804    -0.806    1.000
      (6)   M ean Tem p erature for Sum m er        -0.451     -0.546    -0.548    -0.601    0.880     1.000
      (7)   M ean Tem p erature for Autum n         -0.711     -0.764    -0.794    -0.808    0.986     0.915    1.000




37
      (8)   M ean Tem p erature for W inter         -0.808     -0.832    -0.875    -0.860    0.969     0.775    0.961    1.000
      (9)   Years since Transition                   0.533      0.476     0.490     0.488   -0.464    -0.198   -0.406   -0.526
     (10)   Log Distance to Frontier                -0.002      0.054     0.046     0.046   -0.102    -0.180   -0.122   -0.063
     (11)   Absolute Latitude                        0.843      0.872     0.892     0.877   -0.900    -0.692   -0.887   -0.929
     (12)   Land Area                               -0.014     -0.037    -0.037    -0.046    0.043     0.084    0.023   -0.012
     (13)   Geographic Conditions                    0.684      0.640     0.669     0.715   -0.675    -0.461   -0.653   -0.724
     (14)   Biogeographic Conditions                 0.753      0.762     0.764     0.765   -0.772    -0.522   -0.722   -0.793
     (15)   M ean Elevation                         -0.129     -0.117    -0.066    -0.180   -0.126    -0.222   -0.169   -0.133
     (16)   M ean Ruggedness                         0.078      0.045     0.104     0.049   -0.354    -0.348   -0.343   -0.323
     (17)   % Land in Tropical Zones                -0.674     -0.788    -0.787    -0.619    0.648     0.397    0.639    0.747
     (18)   % Land in Tem p erate Zones              0.655      0.750     0.748     0.736   -0.837    -0.706   -0.817   -0.808
                                             Table B.5: Descriptve Statistics for the 25-Country Sample


                                                                                          M ean        SD         M in        M ax
                                              (1)     Hist. Tem p erature Volatility      6.265      1.317       3.345       8.736
                                              (2)     Hist. M ean Tem p erature           8.630      4.153       0.978      17.787
                                              (3)     Cont. Tem p erature Volatility      6.144      1.336       3.258       8.583
                                              (4)     Cont. M ean Tem p erature           8.911      4.114       0.979      17.831
                                              (5)     Years since Transition              6.492      1.666       3.500      10.500
                                              (6)     Log Distance to Frontier            7.496      1.608       0.000       8.294
                                              (7)     Absolute Latitude                  48.927      7.672      35.000      64.000
                                              (8)     Land Area                           0.200      0.193       0.003       0.770
                                              (9)     Clim ate                            2.840      0.374       2.000       3.000
                                             (10)     Orientation of Landm ass            2.217      0.480       0.500       2.355
                                             (11)     Size of Landm ass                  41.057     12.310       0.070      44.614
                                             (12)     Geographic Conditions               1.803      0.908      -1.266       2.145
                                             (13)     M ean Elevation                     3.879      2.992       0.181      11.784
                                             (14)     M ean Ruggedness                    1.374      1.253       0.036       5.017




                                             Table B.6: Pairwise Correlations for the 25-Country Sample


                                                (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)      (9)    (10)    (11)    (12)    (13)
      (1)   Hist. Tem p erature Volatility    1.000




38
      (2)   Hist. M ean Tem p erature        -0.336      1.000
      (3)   Cont. Tem p erature Volatility    0.993     -0.297    1.000
      (4)   Cont. M ean Tem p erature        -0.344      0.998   -0.313     1.000
      (5)   Years since Transition            0.045      0.781    0.114     0.756       1.000
      (6)   Log Distance to Frontier         -0.269     -0.528   -0.305    -0.513      -0.643      1.000
      (7)   Absolute Latitude                 0.186     -0.907    0.144    -0.899      -0.854      0.493      1.000
      (8)   Land Area                         0.111      0.059    0.180     0.034       0.376     -0.050     -0.126       1.000
      (9)   Clim ate                         -0.482      0.594   -0.486     0.603       0.299     -0.109     -0.556      -0.259    1.000
     (10)   Orientation of Landm ass          0.612      0.006    0.594     0.006       0.220     -0.137     -0.180       0.060   -0.128   1.000
     (11)   Size of Landm ass                 0.617      0.004    0.599     0.004       0.224     -0.138     -0.179       0.070   -0.129   0.997   1.000
     (12)   Geographic Conditions             0.521      0.125    0.502     0.127       0.284     -0.160     -0.293       0.013    0.073   0.979   0.979   1.000
     (13)   M ean Elevation                   0.088      0.109    0.136     0.080       0.446     -0.210     -0.468       0.342    0.085   0.279   0.281   0.299   1.000
     (14)   M ean Ruggedness                 -0.053      0.022   -0.020     0.000       0.259      0.061     -0.365       0.089    0.058   0.200   0.202   0.214   0.856
                                                Table B.7: Descriptve Statistics for the Cross-Archaeological-Site Sample


                                                                                                       M ean       SD       M in      M ax
                                                       (1)   Tem p erature Volatility Overall          6.264     1.416     2.966    10.038
                                                       (2)   Tem p erature Volatility for Spring       0.930     0.172     0.404     1.559
                                                       (3)   Tem p erature Volatility for Sum m er     0.860     0.133     0.346     1.269
                                                       (4)   Tem p erature Volatility for Autum n      0.925     0.158     0.351     1.285
                                                       (5)   Tem p erature Volatility for W inter      1.411     0.400     0.420     2.566
                                                       (6)   M ean Tem p erature O verall             11.662     4.447     3.764    28.601
                                                       (7)   M ean Tem p erature for Spring           10.680     4.406     2.761    28.198
                                                       (8)   M ean Tem p erature for Sum m er         19.402     4.775    11.327    35.178
                                                       (9)   M ean Tem p erature for Autum n          12.576     4.783     4.598    28.880
                                                      (10)   M ean Tem p erature for W inter           3.976     4.669    -4.914    23.971
                                                      (11)   Years since Transition                    6.322     1.279     4.500    10.890
                                                      (12)   Log Distance to Frontier                  7.615     0.751     0.000     8.329
                                                      (13)   Absolute Latitude                        44.936     8.365    13.900    58.530
                                                      (14)   Clim ate                                  2.558     0.868     0.000     3.000
                                                      (15)   M ean Elevation                           3.997     3.168     0.181    28.719
                                                      (16)   Distance to Coast                         1.793     1.663     0.093    11.929




                                               Table B.8: Pairwise Correlations for the Cross-Archaeological-Site Sample




39
                                                       (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)     (10)     (11)     (12)     (13)     (14)     (15)
      (1)   Tem p erature Volatility Overall         1.000
      (2)   Tem p erature Volatility for Spring      0.703    1.000
      (3)   Tem p erature Volatility for Sum m er    0.127    0.471    1.000
      (4)   Tem p erature Volatility for Autum n     0.631    0.797    0.662     1.000
      (5)   Tem p erature Volatility for W inter     0.631    0.855    0.451     0.750     1.000
      (6)   M ean Tem p erature Overall              0.043   -0.336   -0.507    -0.477    -0.537      1.000
      (7)   M ean Tem p erature for Spring           0.064   -0.299   -0.511    -0.452    -0.487      0.989     1.000
      (8)   M ean Tem p erature for Sum m er         0.404   -0.065   -0.419    -0.215    -0.273      0.930     0.923     1.000
      (9)   M ean Tem p erature for Autum n          0.067   -0.316   -0.495    -0.454    -0.530      0.995     0.975     0.934     1.000
     (10)   M ean Tem p erature for W inter         -0.379   -0.609   -0.515    -0.708    -0.765      0.907     0.882     0.692     0.893     1.000
     (11)   Years since Transition                   0.500    0.106   -0.160     0.096    -0.061      0.556     0.539     0.688     0.590     0.303    1.000
     (12)   Log Distance to Frontier                -0.625   -0.236    0.268    -0.117    -0.126     -0.463    -0.434    -0.649    -0.512    -0.168   -0.744    1.000
     (13)   Absolute Latitude                       -0.216    0.230    0.420     0.288     0.436     -0.892    -0.896    -0.891    -0.892    -0.728   -0.685    0.545    1.000
     (14)   Clim ate                                -0.108    0.112    0.381     0.329     0.330     -0.756    -0.792    -0.718    -0.742    -0.638   -0.433    0.336    0.752    1.000
     (15)   M ean Elevation                          0.454    0.070   -0.041     0.144     0.018      0.182     0.183     0.335     0.199    -0.027    0.499   -0.461   -0.475   -0.207   1.000
     (16)   Distance to Coast                        0.625    0.515    0.167     0.453     0.550     -0.150    -0.075     0.082    -0.167    -0.413    0.203   -0.240   -0.001   -0.032   0.300
C     Variable De…nitions and Sources
Variables at the Country Level:

Years since Neolithic Transition. The number of thousand years elapsed (as of the year 2000) since
the earliest recorded date when a region located within a country’s modern national borders underwent the
transition from primary reliance on hunted and gathered food sources to primary reliance on cultivated crops
(and livestock). This measure, compiled by Putterman (2008), was assembled using a wide variety of both
region-speci…c and country-speci…c archaeological studies, as well as more general encyclopedic works on
the Neolithic transition from hunting and gathering to agriculture. The interested reader is referred to the
website of the Agricultural Transition Data Set for additional details on the data sources and methodological
assumptions employed in the construction of this variable.

Contemporary Intermonthly Mean Temperature and Temperature Volatility. The intermonthly
mean and standard deviation of temperature (in degrees Celsius) in a country over the 1901–2000 time
period, computed using geospatial monthly time-series temperature data at a 0.5-degree resolution from
the University of East Anglia’s Climate Research Unit’s CRU TS 2.0 data set (Mitchell et al., 2004). The
measures of intermonthly mean temperature and temperature volatility (across 1,200 monthly temperature
observations) are …rst computed at the grid-cell level, and they are then aggregated up to the country level
by averaging across the grid cells that are located within a country’s national borders.

Contemporary Interannual Season-Speci…c Mean Temperature and Temperature Volatility.
The interannual season-speci…c mean and standard deviation of temperature (in degrees Celsius) in a country
over the 1901–2000 time period, computed using geospatial monthly time-series temperature data at a
0.5-degree resolution from the University of East Anglia’s Climate Research Unit’s CRU TS 2.0 data set
(Mitchell et al., 2004). For the construction of these measures, the monthly temperature observations at
the grid-cell level are …rst aggregated into seasonal ones while accounting for North-South hemisphericity
– i.e., for locations in the Northern/Southern Hemisphere, the mapping of months into seasons is de…ned
as follows: March-April-May (Spring/Autumn), June-July-August (Summer/Winter), September-October-
November (Autumn/Spring), December-January-February (Winter/Summer). Following this procedure, for
any given season (i.e., Spring, Summer, Autumn, or Winter), the measures of interannual season-speci…c
mean temperature and temperature volatility (across the 100 seasonal temperature observations pertaining
to that season) are …rst computed at the grid-cell level, and they are then aggregated up to the country level
by averaging across the grid cells that are located within a country’s national borders.

Contemporary Interseasonal Mean Temperature and Temperature Volatility. The interseasonal
mean and standard deviation of temperature (in degrees Celsius) in a country over the 1901–2000 time
period, computed using geospatial monthly time-series temperature data at a 0.5-degree resolution from
the University of East Anglia’s Climate Research Unit’s CRU TS 2.0 data set (Mitchell et al., 2004). For
the construction of these measures, the monthly temperature observations at the grid-cell level are …rst
aggregated into seasonal ones while accounting for North-South hemisphericity – i.e., for locations in the
Northern/Southern Hemisphere, the mapping of months into seasons is de…ned as follows: March-April-May
(Spring/Autumn), June-July-August (Summer/Winter), September-October-November (Autumn/Spring),
December-January-February (Winter/Summer). Following this procedure, the measures of interseasonal
mean temperature and temperature volatility (across all 400 seasonal temperature observations) are …rst


                                                     40
computed at the grid-cell level, and they are then aggregated up to the country level by averaging across
the grid cells that are located within a country’s national borders.

Historical Interseasonal Mean Temperature and Temperature Volatility. The interseasonal mean
and standard deviation of temperature (in degrees Celsius) in a country over the 1500–1900 time period,
computed using geospatial seasonal time-series temperature data at a 0.5-degree resolution from the European
Seasonal Temperature Reconstructions data set of Luterbacher et al. (2006), which is based, in turn, on the
earlier data sets of Luterbacher et al. (2004) and Xoplaki et al. (2005). The measures of interseasonal mean
temperature and temperature volatility (across 1,604 seasonal temperature observations) are …rst computed
at the grid-cell level, and they are then aggregated up to the country level by averaging across the grid cells
that are located within a country’s modern national borders.

Log Distance to the Neolithic Frontier. The log of the great-circle distance (in kilometers) of a country
from the closest of seven global frontiers –i.e., Syria, China, Ethiopia, Niger, Mexico, Peru, and Papua New
Guinea –that are deemed by the archaeological record to have undergone a pristine transition to agriculture
during the Neolithic Revolution. Distance computations are based on the haversine formula, employing the
coordinates of modern capital cities from the CIA World Factbook as spatial endpoints. To maximize the
degrees of freedom exploited by the analysis, i.e., permitting the regressions to incorporate all the available
information, including that on the frontiers themselves, the log transformation is applied after adding one
to the underlying distance variable.

Absolute Latitude. The absolute value of the latitude (in degrees) of a country’s approximate geodesic
centroid, as reported by the CIA World Factbook .

Land Area. The total land area (in millions of square kilometers) of a country, as reported for the year
2000 by the World Bank’s World Development Indicators.

Climate. An ordinal index, as reported in the data set of Olsson and Hibbs (2005), of the suitability of a
country’s climate for agriculture, based on the Köppen-Geiger climate classi…cation system.

Orientation of Landmass. The East-West versus North-South orientation of the landmass (or continent)
to which a country belongs. This measure, as reported in the data set of Olsson and Hibbs (2005), is calculated
as the ratio of the largest longitudinal (East-West) distance to the largest latitudinal (North-South) distance
of the landmass (or continent) of the country.

Size of Landmass. The total land area of the landmass (or continent) to which a country belongs, as
reported in the data set of Olsson and Hibbs (2005).

Geographic Conditions. The …rst principal component of (i) climatic suitability for agriculture, (ii) the
orientation of the landmass, and (iii) the size of the landmass, computed following the methodology of Olsson
and Hibbs (2005).

Domesticable Plants. The number, as reported in the data set of Olsson and Hibbs (2005), of domesticable
annual and perennial wild grass species (with a mean kernel weight exceeding 10 milligrams) that were
prehistorically native to the region to which a country belongs.

Domesticable Animals. The number, as reported in the data set of Olsson and Hibbs (2005), of
domesticable large mammalian species (weighing in excess of 45 kilograms) that were prehistorically native
to the region to which a country belongs.

                                                      41
Biogeographic Conditions. The …rst principal component of (i) the number of prehistoric domesticable
species of plants and (ii) the number of prehistoric domesticable species of animals, computed following the
methodology of Olsson and Hibbs (2005).

Mean Elevation. The mean elevation (in hundreds of meters above sea level) of a country, computed using
geospatial elevation data at a 1-degree resolution from the Geographically based Economic data (G-Econ)
project (Nordhaus, 2006), which is based, in turn, on similar but more spatially disaggregated data at a
10-minute resolution from New et al. (2002). The grid-cell-level measure of elevation is aggregated up to the
country level by averaging across the grid cells that are located within a country’s national borders. The
interested reader is referred to the website of the G-Econ project for additional details.

Mean Ruggedness. The mean value of an index of terrain ruggedness (in hundreds of meters above sea
level) of a country, computed using geospatial surface undulation (roughness) data at a 1-degree resolution
from the Geographically based Economic data (G-Econ) project (Nordhaus, 2006), which is based, in turn, on
more spatially disaggregated elevation data at a 10-minute resolution from New et al. (2002). The grid-cell-
level measure of ruggedness is aggregated up to the country level by averaging across the grid cells that are
located within a country’s national borders. The interested reader is referred to the website of the G-Econ
project for additional details.

Percentage of Land in Tropical Zones. The fraction of a country’s total land area (as of the year 1996)
that is located in regions classi…ed as tropical zones by the Köppen-Geiger climate classi…cation system. This
measure, compiled by Gallup, Sachs and Mellinger (1999), is available from the Research Datasets repository
maintained by Harvard University’s Center for International Development.

Percentage of Land in Temperate Zones. The fraction of a country’s total land area (as of the year
1996) that is located in regions classi…ed as temperate zones by the Köppen-Geiger climate classi…cation
system. This measure, compiled by Gallup, Sachs and Mellinger (1999), is available from the Research
Datasets repository maintained by Harvard University’s Center for International Development.

Landlocked Dummy. An indicator for whether a country is landlocked, determined using data from the
CIA World Factbook on the length of the country’s coastline.

Small Island Dummy. An indicator for whether a country is a small island nation, determined by
comparing data from the CIA World Factbook on the length of the country’s national borders with the
length of its coastline.

Variables at the Archaeological-Site Level:

Years since Neolithic Transition. The uncalibrated radiocarbon date (in thousands of years Before
Present) of the earliest Neolithic occupation at an archaeological site. This measure was compiled by Pinhasi,
Fort and Ammerman (2005), using data from various online archaeological databases. In assembling their
radiocarbon data set, the authors only selected those dates with standard errors of the mean of less than
200 radiocarbon years, giving preference whenever possible to dates coming from charcoal or bone collagen
rather than shells, and they also omitted all outlier dates (i.e., early occupation dates that are rejected by
most archaeologists as being erroneously too early or too late). The interested reader is referred to the
“Materials and Methods” section of Pinhasi, Fort and Ammerman (2005) for additional details on the data
sources and methodological assumptions employed in the construction of this variable.


                                                     42
Contemporary Intermonthly Mean Temperature and Temperature Volatility. The intermonthly
mean and standard deviation of temperature (in degrees Celsius) in the area surrounding an archaeological
site over the 1901–2000 time period, computed using geospatial monthly time-series temperature data at
a 0.5-degree resolution from the University of East Anglia’s Climate Research Unit’s CRU TS 2.0 data
set (Mitchell et al., 2004). The measures of intermonthly mean temperature and temperature volatility
(across 1,200 monthly temperature observations) are …rst computed at the grid-cell level, and they are then
aggregated up to the site level by averaging across the grid cells that are located within 50 kilometers of an
archaeological site.

Contemporary Interannual Season-Speci…c Mean Temperature and Temperature Volatility.
The interannual season-speci…c mean and standard deviation of temperature (in degrees Celsius) in the area
surrounding an archaeological site over the 1901–2000 time period, computed using geospatial monthly time-
series temperature data at a 0.5-degree resolution from the University of East Anglia’s Climate Research
Unit’s CRU TS 2.0 data set (Mitchell et al., 2004). For the construction of these measures, the monthly
temperature observations at the grid-cell level are …rst aggregated into seasonal ones, and because all
locations in the relevant cross-section appear in the Northern Hemisphere, the mapping of months into
seasons is de…ned as follows: March-April-May (Spring), June-July-August (Summer), September-October-
November (Autumn), December-January-February (Winter). Following this procedure, for any given season
(i.e., Spring, Summer, Autumn, or Winter), the measures of interannual season-speci…c mean temperature
and temperature volatility (across the 100 seasonal temperature observations pertaining to that season) are
…rst computed at the grid-cell level, and they are then aggregated up to the country level by averaging across
the grid cells that are located within 50 kilometers of an archaeological site.

Log Distance to the Neolithic Frontier. The log of the great-circle distance (in kilometers) of an
archaeological site from Cayönü, a Neolithic settlement in southern Turkey, generally considered by the
archaeological literature (e.g., Ammerman and Cavalli-Sforza, 1971; Pinhasi, Fort and Ammerman, 2005) as
one of the probable centers of the di¤usion of agriculture throughout Europe and the Near East. This distance
measure is reported directly in the data set of Pinhasi, Fort and Ammerman (2005). To maintain symmetry
with the cross-country analysis, the log transformation is applied after adding one to the underlying distance
variable. The interested reader is referred to the “Materials and Methods” section of Pinhasi, Fort and
Ammerman (2005) for additional details.

Absolute Latitude. The absolute value of the latitude (in degrees) of an archaeological site, based on the
site’s coordinates reported by Pinhasi, Fort and Ammerman (2005).

Climate. The mean value of an index of climatic suitability for agriculture in the area surrounding an
archaeological site, computed by applying Olsson and Hibbs’s (2005) de…nition of climatic suitability to
geospatial data on the global distribution of Köppen-Geiger climate zones at a 0.5-degree resolution from
Kottek et al. (2006), available at the World Maps of Köppen-Geiger Climate Classi…cation website. The
measure of climatic suitability is …rst computed at the grid-cell level and then aggregated up to the site level
by averaging across the grid cells that are located within 50 kilometers of an archaeological site.

Mean Elevation. The mean elevation (in hundreds of meters above sea level) of the area surrounding an
archaeological site, computed using geospatial elevation data at a 5-minute resolution from the TerrainBase
Global Digital Terrain Model, Version 1.0 of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
National Geophysical Data Center, Boulder, Colorado, United States. The grid-cell-level measure of elevation

                                                      43
is aggregated up to the site level by averaging across the grid cells that are located within 50 kilometers of
an archaeological site.

Distance to the Coast. The great-circle distance (in hundreds of kilometers) of an archaeological site
from the nearest coast, computed using high-resolution geospatial data on the “coastlines of seas, oceans,
and extremely large lakes”from the Seamless Digital Chart of the World, Base Map Version 3.0 , published
by Global Mapping International, Colorado Springs, Colorado, United States. The measure is based on the
haversine formula, and its computation ignores the data on the coastlines of lakes.




                                                     44
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion, Leonardo Bursztyn, and David Hemous. 2012. “The
   Environment and Directed Technical Change.” American Economic Review, 102(1): 131–166.
Ammerman, Albert J., and L. Luca Cavalli-Sforza. 1971. “Measuring the Rate of Spread of Early
  Farming in Europe.” Man, New Series, 6(4): 674–688.
Ashraf, Quamrul, and Oded Galor. 2011. “Dynamics and Stagnation in the Malthusian Epoch.”
   American Economic Review, 101(5): 2003–2041.
Ashraf, Quamrul, and Stelios Michalopoulos. 2011. “The Climatic Origins of the Neolithic Revolution:
   Theory and Evidence.” Working Paper No. 2010-02, Department of Economics, Williams College.
Baker, Matthew J. 2008. “A Structural Model of the Transition to Agriculture.” Journal of Economic
   Growth, 13(4): 257–292.
Bar-Yosef, Ofer, and Anna Belfer-Cohen. 1989. “The Origins of Sedentism and Farming Communities
    in the Levant.” Journal of World Prehistory, 3(4): 447–497.
Binford, Lewis R. 1968. “Post-Pleistocene Adaptations.”In New Perspectives in Archaeology. , ed. Sally R.
    Binford and Lewis R. Binford, 313–341. Chicago, IL:Aldine Publishing Co.
Byrne, Roger. 1987. “Climatic Change and the Origins of Agriculture.” In Studies in the Neolithic and
   Urban Revolutions: The V. Gordon Childe Colloquium, Mexico, 1986. , ed. Linda Manzanilla, 21–34.
   Oxford, UK:British Archaeological Reports.
Cohen, Mark N. 1977. The Food Crises in Prehistory: Overpopulation and the Origins of Agriculture.
   New Haven, CT:Yale University Press.
Comin, Diego, William Easterly, and Erick Gong. 2010. “Was the Wealth of Nations Determined in
   1000 BC?” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(3): 65–97.
Conley, Timothy G. 1999. “GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence.”Journal of Econometrics,
   92(1): 1–45.
Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2012. “Temperature Shocks and Economic
    Growth: Evidence from the Last Half Century.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
    4(3): 66–95.
Diamond, Jared. 1997. Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. New York, NY:W. W.
   Norton & Co.
Dow, Gregory K., and Clyde G. Reed. 2011. “Stagnation and Innovation before Agriculture.”Journal
   of Economic Behavior and Organization, 77(3): 339–350.
Dow, Gregory K., Nancy Olewiler, and Clyde G. Reed. 2009. “Climate Reversals and the Transition
   to Agriculture.” Journal of Economic Growth, 14(1): 27–53.
Drukker, David M., Ingmar R. Prucha, and Rafal Raciborski. 2013. “Maximum Likelihood
   and Generalized Spatial Two-Stage Least-Squares Estimators for a Spatial-Autoregressive Model with
   Spatial-Autoregressive Disturbances.” Stata Journal, 13(2): 221–241.
Flannery, Kent V. 1973. “The Origins of Agriculture.” Annual Review of Anthropology, 2: 271–310.



                                                   45
Gallup, John L., Je¤rey D. Sachs, and Andrew D. Mellinger. 1999. “Geography and Economic
    Development.” International Regional Science Review, 22(2): 179–232.
Galor, Oded, and Omer Moav. 2002. “Natural Selection and the Origin of Economic Growth.”Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 117(4): 1133–1191.
Galor, Oded, and Omer Moav. 2007. “The Neolithic Revolution and Contemporary Variations in Life
    Expectancy.” Working Paper No. 2007-14, Department of Economics, Brown University.
Galor, Oded, and Stelios Michalopoulos. 2012. “Evolution and the Growth Process: Natural Selection
    of Entrepreneurial Traits.” Journal of Economic Theory, 147(2): 759–780.
Guzmán, Ricardo A., and Jacob L. Weisdorf. 2011. “The Neolithic Revolution from a Price-Theoretic
   Perspective.” Journal of Development Economics, 96(2): 209–219.
Keeley, Lawrence H. 1995. “Protoagricultural Practices among Hunter-Gatherers: A Cross-Cultural
   Survey.”In Last Hunters, First Farmers: New Perspectives on the Prehistoric Transition to Agriculture.
   , ed. Anne B. Gebauer and T. Douglas Price, 243–272. Santa Fe, NM:School of American Research Press.
Kottek, Markus, Jürgen Grieser, Christoph Beck, Bruno Rudolf, and Franz Rubel. 2006. “World
   Map of the Köppen-Geiger Climate Classi…cation Updated.”Meteorologische Zeitschrift, 15(3): 259–263.
Kremer, Michael. 1993. “Population Growth and Technological Change: One Million B.C. to 1990.”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(3): 681–716.
Locay, Luis. 1989. “From Hunting and Gathering to Agriculture.” Economic Development and Cultural
    Change, 37(4): 737–756.
Luterbacher, Jürg, Daniel Dietrich, Elena Xoplaki, Martin Grosjean, and Heinz Wanner. 2004.
    “European Seasonal and Annual Temperature Variability, Trends, and Extremes Since 1500.” Science,
    303(5663): 1499–1503.
Luterbacher, Jürg, Daniel Dietrich, Elena Xoplaki, Martin Grosjean, and Heinz Wanner.
    2006. “European Seasonal Temperature Reconstructions.” IGBP PAGES/World Data Center for
    Paleoclimatology Data Contribution Series No. 2006-060, NOAA/NCDC Paleoclimatology Program.
MacNeish, Richard S. 1992. The Origins of Agriculture and Settled Life. Norman, OK:University of
   Oklahoma Press.
Marceau, Nicolas, and Gordon M. Myers. 2006. “On the Early Holocene: Foraging to Early
   Agriculture.” Economic Journal, 116(513): 751–772.
Mitchell, Timothy D., Timothy R. Carter, Philip D. Jones, Mike Hulme, and Mark New. 2004.
    “A Comprehensive Set of High-Resolution Grids of Monthly Climate for Europe and the Globe: The
    Observed Record (1901-2000) and 16 Scenarios (2001-2100).” Working Paper No. 55, Tyndall Centre
    for Climate Change Research.
New, Mark, David Lister, Mike Hulme, and Ian Makin. 2002. “A High-Resolution Data Set of
   Surface Climate over Global Land Areas.” Climate Research, 21(1): 1–25.
Nordhaus, William D. 2006. “Geography and Macroeconomics: New Data and New Findings.”
   Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103(10): 3510–3517.
North, Douglass C., and Robert P. Thomas. 1977. “The First Economic Revolution.” Economic
   History Review, 30(2): 229–241.

                                                   46
Olsson, Ola. 2001. “The Rise of Neolithic Agriculture.”Working Paper No. 57, Department of Economics,
    University of Gothenburg.
Olsson, Ola, and Christopher Paik. 2012. “A Western Reversal Since the Neolithic? The Long-
    Run Impact of Early Agriculture.” Working Paper No. 552, Department of Economics, University
    of Gothenburg.
Olsson, Ola, and Douglas A. Hibbs, Jr. 2005. “Biogeography and Long-Run Economic Development.”
    European Economic Review, 49(4): 909–938.
Peretto, Pietro F. 2012. “Resource Abundance, Growth, and Welfare: A Schumpeterian Perspective.”
    Journal of Development Economics, 97(1): 142–155.
Pinhasi, Ron, Joaquim Fort, and Albert J. Ammerman. 2005. “Tracing the Origin and Spread of
    Agriculture in Europe.” PLoS Biology, 3(12): 2220–2228.
Pryor, Frederick. 1983. “Causal Theories about the Origins of Agriculture.”Research in Economic History,
   8: 93–124.
Putterman, Louis. 2008. “Agriculture, Di¤usion, and Development: Ripple E¤ects of the Neolithic
    Revolution.” Economica, 75(300): 729–748.
Richerson, Peter J., Robert Boyd, and Robert L. Bettinger. 2001. “Was Agriculture Impossible
    During the Pleistocene but Mandatory during the Holocene? A Climate Change Hypothesis.”American
    Antiquity, 66(3): 387–411.
Robson, Arthur J. 2010. “A Bioeconomic View of the Neolithic Transition to Agriculture.” Canadian
   Journal of Economics, 43(1): 280–300.
Rowthorn, Robert, and Paul Seabright. 2010. “Property Rights, Warfare, and the Neolithic
   Transition.” TSE Working Paper No. 10-207, Toulouse School of Economics.
Smith, Bruce D. 1995. The Emergence of Agriculture. New York, NY:W. H. Freeman & Co.
Smith, Vernon L. 1975. “The Primitive Hunter Culture, Pleistocene Extinction, and the Rise of
   Agriculture.” Journal of Political Economy, 84(4): 727–755.
Spolaore, Enrico, and Romain Wacziarg. 2013. “How Deep Are the Roots of Economic Development?”
    Journal of Economic Literature, 51(2): 325–369.
Weisdorf, Jacob L. 2003. “Stone Age Economics: The Origins of Agriculture and the Emergence of Non-
   Food Specialists.” Discussion Paper No. 03-34, Institute of Economics, University of Copenhagen.
Weisdorf, Jacob L. 2005. “From Foraging to Farming: Explaining the Neolithic Revolution.” Journal of
   Economic Surveys, 19(4): 561–586.
Weisdorf, Jacob L. 2009. “Why did the First Farmers Toil? Human Metabolism and the Origins of
   Agriculture.” European Review of Economic History, 13(2): 157–172.
Weiss, Ehud, Wilma Wetterstrom, Dani Nadel, and Ofer Bar-Yosef. 2004. “The Broad
   Spectrum Revisited: Evidence from Plant Remains.”Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
   101(26): 9551–9555.
Xoplaki, Elena, Jürg Luterbacher, Heiko Paeth, Daniel Dietrich, Niklaus Steiner, Martin
   Grosjean, and Heinz Wanner. 2005. “European Spring and Autumn Temperature Variability and
   Change of Extremes over the Last Half Millennium.” Geophysical Research Letters, 32(15).

                                                  47
