                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     IS THERE EVIDENCE OF A REAL ESTATE COLLATERAL CHANNEL EFFECT
                   ON LISTED FIRM INVESTMENT IN CHINA?

                                               Jing Wu
                                           Joseph Gyourko
                                           Yongheng Deng

                                        Working Paper 18762
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18762


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2013




We appreciate the comments of Jie Gan, Matthew Turner, Gabriel Ehrlich, and participants at presentations
at the “2012 Symposium on China’s Housing Financial Markets” held at Peking University’s Guanghua
School of Management, the 2012 NBER Working Group Meeting on the Chinese Economy, the 2013
AREUEA Annual Conference, and Tsinghua University. Gyourko thanks the Research Sponsors Program
of the Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center and the Global Research Initiatives Project at Wharton for financial
support. Deng and Wu thank the Institute of Real Estate Studies at National University of Singapore
for financial support. Wu also thanks the National Natural Science Foundation of China for financial
support (No. 71003060). We gratefully acknowledge Jia He, Chaoqun Ren and Mingyue Li for excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18762.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Jing Wu, Joseph Gyourko, and Yongheng Deng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Is There Evidence of a Real Estate Collateral Channel Effect on Listed Firm Investment in
China?
Jing Wu, Joseph Gyourko, and Yongheng Deng
NBER Working Paper No. 18762
February 2013
JEL No. E22,G11,G31,R11,R3,R39

                                            ABSTRACT

Previous research on the United States and Japan finds economically large impacts of changing real
estate collateral value on firm investment. Working with unique data on land values in 35 major Chinese
markets and a panel of firms outside the real estate industry, we estimate investment equations that
yield no evidence of a collateral channel effect. One reason for this stark difference appears to be
that some of the most dominant firms in China are state-owned enterprises (SOEs) which are unconstrained
in the sense that they do not need to rely on rising underlying property collateral values to obtain all
the financing necessary to carry out their desired investment programs. However, we also find no
collateral channel effect for non-SOEs when we perform our analysis on disaggregated sets of firms.
 Norms and regulation in the Chinese capital markets and banking sector can account for why there
is no collateral channel effect operating among these firms. We caution that our results do not mean
that there will be no negative fallout from a potential real estate bust on the Chinese economy. There
are good reasons to believe there would be, just not through a standard collateral channel effect on
firm investment.


Jing Wu                                            Yongheng Deng
Institute of Real Estate Studies                   Institute of Real Estate Studies
Tsinghua University                                National University of Singapore
100084 Beijing, P.R.China                          Singapore
ireswujing@tsinghua.edu.cn                          ydeng@nus.edu.sg

Joseph Gyourko
University of Pennsylvania
Wharton School of Business
3620 Locust Walk
1480 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
gyourko@wharton.upenn.edu
   I.      Introduction

        In a world without complete contracting, economists long ago realized that pledging

collateral such as owned real estate can allow firms to borrow more, and thus, to invest more

(Barro (1976), Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) and Hart and Moore (1994)). Macroeconomists quickly

realized the implication this insight had for amplifying the business cycle via a collateral channel

effect (Bernanke and Gertler (1987); Kiyotaki and Moore (1997)). Falling asset values reduce

the debt capacity of credit constrained firms, which depresses their investment on the downside

of the cycle. An analogous impact occurs on the upside of the cycle when collateral values are

increasing for these firms.

        Empirically, recent research on the United States and Japan supports this theory and has

shown that rises and declines in property values substantially amplify the volatility of investment

by non-real estate firms (Chaney, et. al. (2012), Cvijanovic (2011), Gan (2007a, 2007b), and Lin,

Wang and Zhu (2011)). That these effects are large economically is evident from Chaney, et.

al.’s (2012) finding that a one standard deviation increase in underlying real estate collateral

value is associated with over one-quarter of a standard deviation higher level of corporate

investment. This implies about six cents added investment for every dollar increase in collateral

value. Earlier research by Bernanke (1983) concludes that this factor helps account for the

extraordinarily large variation in output during America’s Great Depression.

        The remarkable boom and recent cresting of China’s property markets, as well as that

country’s growing importance in the global economy, naturally raises the question of whether its

cycle is being magnified by a collateral channel effect on investment. This is an empirical

question that cannot be solved by theory. As will be discussed more fully below, two conditions

are necessary (but not sufficient) for a collateral channel effect to operate: (a) the existence of



                                                                                                      2
financially constrained firms; and (b) their ability to pledge collateral to increase debt capacity

so that that investment can be ramped up when desired.

        While the aforementioned research indicates these conditions exist in the United States

and Japan, it is not clear this is so in China. Some of the most important Chinese firms are state-

owned enterprises (SOEs), which are claimed to be politically favored and to have special access

to capital (e.g., Lin and Tan (1999), Allen, Qian and Qian (2005), and Poncet, Steingress and

Vandenbussche (2010)). Thus, they could be financially unconstrained in the sense that their

ability to borrow to fund investment programs is not dependent upon underlying collateral value.

However, non-SOEs seem much more likely to be financially constrained. We document below

that Chinese firms’ properties can be pledged as collateral for loans and that they do get taken

back in the event of default, so that the two aforementioned conditions appear to be met for at

least a subset of Chinese firms.1

        This still leaves the possibility that other Chinese financial market regulations and

practices shut down any collateral channel effect. For example, binding loan quotas could do

this. To see this more clearly, consider a situation like that depicted in Figure 1, in which the

government imposes a rule that aggregate loans may not exceed L1 in amount. This quota binds

when property values exceed P1. In the absence of such a regulation, increases in underlying

property collateral value from (say) P1 to P2 would allow the amount of debt to increase from L1

to L2 (i.e., the movement from point A to point B along the line relating property value to debt

capacity in Figure 1). This is the graphical version of the collateral channel in operation: higher



1
  Even though local governments technically own all urban land as we describe more fully in the next section, the
so-called “Guarantee Law” and “Property Law” provide the legal underpinning for firms to use their leasehold estate
interests in land as collateral for borrowing. There is much collateralized lending in China (although not all
collateral is property-based). According to the financial reports of sixteen commercial banks listed on the Shanghai
or Shenzhen exchanges, at the end of 2011 their total loan balance was 38.13 trillion yuan RMB, of which
collateralized loans accounted for 19.75 trillion yuan (or 51.8%).

                                                                                                                  3
quality collateral supports more debt, which enables greater investment by the firm. However,

this effect is turned off when the quota binds. Even if property values increase from P1 to P2,

debt cannot increase from L1 to L2, and firms do not move from point A to point B. Loan

quotas clearly exist in China (He and Wang (2012), Allen, et. al. (2012)), but whether they bind

is unknown. Plus, they did get materially raised in that country’s recent stimulus period (Deng,

et. al., 2011).

        The only way to tell whether there is an economically meaningful collateral channel

effect is with an empirical test. That this issue has not yet been studied for China probably is due

to data limitations. Because of the likely endogenous relationship between aggregate investment

and property prices, convincing tests rely on firm panels. At a minimum, this requires high

quality data on individual companies, especially their property holdings and investment

programs, in addition to property market prices themselves. An important contribution of this

paper is to construct two unique data sets which can be used to estimate a potential collateral

channel effect in China.

        The first is a panel on constant quality land prices from 2003-2011 for the 35 major

Chinese cities depicted in Figure 2. This is the first comprehensive series on land values outside

the capital of Beijing. Our measure is constructed from sales of vacant land by local

governments to residential property developers and builds on previous work we have done

(Deng, Gyourko and Wu, 2012). We are able to control for site quality, which does change over

time in important ways. As is discussed more fully in the next section, this makes our series far

superior to alternatives such as those on house prices reported by the Chinese government.

        The second data set constructed is a panel of 444 firms from outside the real estate

industry that were continuously listed on the Shanghai and Shenzhen exchanges between 2003-



                                                                                                    4
2011. Accounting variables typically used in standard collateral channel effect estimation are

collected from Wind Info, which provides the equivalent of Compustat data on Chinese publicly-

listed firms. We then manually collected and merged information on firms’ real estate assets

from their annual financial reports. Market values of their property holdings, adjusting for

depreciation, were recovered via procedures described more fully below. This provides us a

unique data set on listed firms’ real estate asset holdings in China, which is then merged with the

land price index data. The variation in land prices over time within a market is used to impute

changes in underlying real estate collateral for firms located in the relevant market.

       These data sources are combined to provide the first estimate of the impact of changing

real estate collateral values on the investment behavior of Chinese firms outside the real estate

sector. In stark contrast to the recent findings referenced above for America and Japan, we find

no evidence of a collateral channel effect among non-real estate firms in China. This conclusion

is robust to a wide range of permutations. For example, there is no evidence of asymmetry in the

collateral channel effect depending upon whether property markets are rising or falling. We also

do not see heterogeneity in impact by measures of likely financial constraint. For example, there

is no difference in our baseline results depending upon whether the firm is a low versus high

dividend payer. Nor is there any meaningful effect (or difference in impact) depending upon

whether or not the firm is a state-owned enterprise (SOE). We can also rule out the possibility

that our results might be driven by financially constrained firms tending to be located in markets

without good investment opportunities (so that they rationally would not want to invest even if

collateral value increased substantially to lessen the degree to which they are constrained).

Actual growth rates of local GDP were high in absolute terms among the slowest growing of our

35 markets during our sample period, so it seems likely that there are profitable investment



                                                                                                    5
opportunities even in those places. And, there is no evidence of a larger (or non-zero) collateral

channel effect among firms headquartered in the markets with the strongest growth trends.

       Naturally, this important difference in impacts between China and the U.S. (or Japan)

requires explanation, and we investigate a number of possibilities. First, we rule out

specification bias from a defect in our empirical strategy. As is discussed more fully in Section

III, the typical concern when running reduced form neoclassical investment equations of the type

done by us and others in this literature is that the estimates are biased up, not down, due to

endogeneity. Hence, it is unlikely that our results are being driven by standard specification

error concerns about this type of work. Data quality issues involving measurement error also

seem highly unlikely to be able to account for our findings.

       We argue that what can do so are specific features of Chinese firms and the capital

markets in which they operate. For example, state-owned enterprises, which tend to be the

largest firms in China, represent about three quarters of our sample of publicly-traded firms. Our

findings are consistent with the claims by others noted above that these firms are financially

unconstrained and do not need to pledge their underlying real estate holdings as collateral to

secure all the funding needed to finance their desired investment programs. However, we also

find no collateral channel impact on investment for purely private firms who are not SOEs.

These private firms are highly likely to be financially constrained, so that collateral value should

be a relevant factor for the financing of their investment programs. Regulation in the Chinese

lending market can account for the absence of a collateral channel impact among this group of

firms. The presence of binding loan quotas imposed by the central government is one such

example.




                                                                                                     6
        While this could account for the absence of a collateral channel effect as long as the

quota is binding, it also suggests that we are more likely to observe a collateral channel effect for

financially constrained private firms when loan quotas have been lifted and no longer bind. The

2009-2010 stimulus period following the global financial crisis is likely to have been just such a

time, but we find no evidence of a collateral channel effect during those years either. Other

norms in the Chinese lending market can account for the absence of an impact in that case. Even

in the absence of a binding quota, purely private firms find it very difficult, if not impossible, to

renegotiate loans no matter how underlying collateral quality might have improved. One piece

of evidence consistent with this is the nearly complete absence of loan prepayments by

corporations in China. If existing loan terms could be restructured, one would expect to see

prepayments and new loans taken out when collateral quality improves. That we do not see such

behavior among the Chinese corporations most likely to be financially constrained appears due

to financial and banking sector regulation that prohibits or is very cautious about permitting

firms to leverage increased asset values. While purely private firms did not invest more during

the recent stimulus period, we do find evidence they borrowed more and hired a few more

employees, lengthened the maturity of their debt, and built cash reserves.

        This still leaves the question of whether these results are representative of the nation as a

whole. Our sample of publicly-listed firms includes the very large manufacturing sector which is

responsible for nearly half of aggregate national investment outside the real estate sector in

recent years.2 Hence, what happens in this sector is likely to be fairly representative of the

country as a whole. However, listed firms are not as numerous or as representative of the


2
 There was about 10.3 trillion yuan of investment undertaken with the manufacturing sector in 2011. Given total
aggregate investment that year of 31.1 trillion yuan, with 8.2 trillion yuan within the real estate sector, the
manufacturing sector was responsible for 45% of all non-real estate sector investment that year (10.3/22.9~0.45).
All figures are from the National Bureau of Statistics of China.

                                                                                                                    7
corporate universe in China as they are in the United States and Japan which have more

developed equity markets.3 Data limitations prevent us from replicating our analysis on non-

traded firms.4 That said, there is no reason to suspect the results would be different for non-

traded firms. The SOEs among that group are no more likely to be financially constrained than

those that are listed. And, the regulations and rules that turn off the collateral channel effect for

publicly-traded private firms are even more likely to bind for those that are not listed. 5

         Our empirical work concludes by analyzing whether there is any evidence of a collateral

channel effect on investment among local SOEs involved in providing infrastructure. While this

sector is not nearly as large as manufacturing,6 if there is an economically meaningful impact to

be found, it is likely to be here for the following reason. Local governments in China that want

infrastructure created typically capitalize a locally-controlled state-owned enterprise with land

grants. That land serves as collateral for loans from banks which provide the financial resources

needed to build the infrastructure. Thus, this sector contains a very special type of SOE in which

the collateral channel is most likely to operate precisely because the ‘equity’ component of its

capital structure is made up of local land.

3
  A recent report by the consulting firm Grant Thornton reports over 5,091 companies listed on major American
stock exchanges as of early 2011. [These numbers include foreign firms listed in the U.S., and thus are not all
domestic in nature.] This compares with little more than 1,000 such firms listed on the Shanghai and Shenzhen
exchanges in China. The Central Intelligence Agency’s World Factbook reports that U.S. publicly traded companies
had a market value of $17.1 trillion at the end of 2011, which was over three times the $4.8 trillion for China. These
figures are in U.S. dollars and the relevant table can be accessed at https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-
world-factbook/rankorder/2200rank.html. On a per dollar of output basis, the difference is larger, as U.S. GDP is
estimated by the same source to have been only 1.34 larger than China’s on a purchasing power parity basis at the
same time (the relevant data may be accessed: https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-
factbook/rankorder/2001rank.html).
4
  There are lists of such firms and some balance sheet information on them (which is completely unaudited, and
therefore of very uncertain quality), but it does not include data on their property holdings (whether buildings or
land). Hence, there is no way for us to investigate a relationship between real estate collateral value and investment
for this group.
5
  For example, a World Bank survey on the financing patterns of over 1,300 Chinese firms in 2003 suggested that on
average the non-listed privately held firms found it more difficult to access commercial bank loans compared to their
publicly-listed counterparts (Ayyagari, Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic, 2010).
6
  According to the statistics published by the Ministry of Housing and Urban-Rural Development, in 2011 the total
investment on urban infrastructure was 1.4 trillion yuan RMB, or about 18% of the investment undertaken by the
manufacturing sector.

                                                                                                                    8
         Unfortunately, there is no individual firm-level information available for this sector, so

our empirical strategy using listed firms cannot be replicated. However, we do observe the

aggregate amount of investment across local SOEs in the infrastructure provision business plus

whatever the local government itself directly provides. This sum is a city-level measure of such

investment. We then use a city-level measure of land available for sale by the city to private

developers at the beginning of our sample period and apply our land price index series to

measure the changing value of each city’s real estate collateral value. We find a consistently

positive correlation between changing local real estate collateral value and investment in local

infrastructure (transportation infrastructure especially), but the correlation is not always

statistically significant at conventional levels. The most optimistic case for a large collateral

channel case in this sector is that a one standard deviation increase in local land values is

associated with about one-fifth of a standard deviation greater transportation infrastructure

investment. However, this estimate should be interpreted with caution, as it is likely to be biased

upward because it is from a specification clearly subject to endogeneity concerns.

         Before getting to the results, the next section describes the unique real estate and firm

data we bring to bear in our estimation of the collateral channel effect. Section III then discusses

our estimation strategy and reports results. There is a brief conclusion.



   II.      Data on Land Values and Listed Firms

         We bring two new data sources to bear on the question of whether there is a collateral

channel effect on Chinese firm investment. Both are unique to the study of the Chinese

economy. The first is a panel on land prices across 35 Chinese cities, and the second is a panel

on firms not directly involved in the real estate industry.



                                                                                                      9
II.A. Land Value Data

         Our land price series is based on sales of raw land by local governments, and is described

more fully in Deng, Gyourko and Wu (2012). While raw land sales are rarely observed in most

countries, this is not the case in China. Local governments own all the urban land in the country

and allow private parties to purchase use rights of up to 70 years for residential purposes (i.e.,

technically, this is a leasehold estate).7 We treat the upfront lump sum payment as the

transactions price for land because there are no further rental payments required.

         Our data series begins in 2003 because of an important 2002 ruling by the Ministry of

Land and Resources that required local governments to sell land via some type of public auction

process and to publicly report the winning bidder along with the transactions price.8 Because of

this new process, these prices can reasonably be treated as free market values. We also typically

observe the land parcel’s precise address, designated usage, land conditions upon delivery, and

certain planning indicators such as the floor-to-area ratio.

         Building upon prior research on the city of Beijing in Wu, Gyourko and Deng (2012), we

worked with a leading residential real estate data vendor in China (Soufun) to collect data on all

residential usage land sales to private parties from 2003-2011 in the 35 major markets mapped

above in Figure 2. The geographic breadth of our sample is noteworthy. We are not limited to a

7
  Not only does Chinese law facilitate the use of such leasehold estates in urban areas as collateral for borrowing, but
the data confirm that they can and will be transferred to the lender if the borrower defaults. For example, 14 of the
16 commercial banks listed on the Shanghai or Shenzhen exchanges regularly report the value and breakdown of
repossessed assets seized because of defaulted loans. At the end of 2011, the total book value of their repossessed
assets was 10.79 billion yuan RMB, of which the leasehold estates associated with properties accounted for 8.79
billion yuan RMB (or 81.4%). The remainder was comprised of plant and equipment, securities, etc.
8
  Prior to this ruling called the 11th Provision, most transactions of urban land parcels were done by negotiation
between a developer and a local government. This process was criticized for being opaque and open to corruption.
For our purposes, the prices that resulted seem likely to be below free market levels, with the degree unknown and
possibly changing over time depending upon local circumstances. Currently, all transactions must be done via
public auctions, including regular English auctions (pai mai), two-stage auctions (gua pai), and sealed bids (zhao
biao). See Cai, Henderson and Zhang (2009) for a comparison of these three types of auctions.

                                                                                                                    10
few coastal-region markets that allegedly had the biggest booms. Table 1 reports summary

statistics on the sample. We have complete data dating back to 2003 for 15 markets, with the

rest entering the sample in subsequent years. The number of transactions per market ranges from

25-50 depending upon the year.

       Land parcels in China are priced in terms of the floor area of housing permitted to be

built on the parcel, instead of in terms of the land area. Real prices in constant 2009 yuan per

square meter of permitted space are computed by deflating with the relevant monthly CPI series

for each city. Figure 3’s plot of the simple means of these real values over time for each market

illustrates the substantial heterogeneity in real price levels across markets. That said, the

growing dispersion apparent in this figure is somewhat misleading, as it is partially due to the

inclusion of added markets over time. If we restrict the analysis to the 15 markets with complete

data throughout our sample period, land was nearly eight times more costly in the most

expensive market in 2003 (2,693 yuan per square meter of floor area in Hangzhou) than in the

least expensive city that year (352 yuan in Chongqing). By 2011, the gap was just over five

times (i.e., with Shanghai at 5,470 yuan and Nanning at 997 yuan). This is not a small absolute

difference by any means, but still pales in comparison to the nearly 25 times gap between

Shanghai and Wulumuqi (222 yuan) in 2011 for the full sample.

       We do not work with these unadjusted transactions prices because the raw means may be

driven by quality changes over time. For example, a city government might decide to sell the

best locations first, in which case the change in the unadjusted mean values would understate the

true constant quality rate of land price appreciation. On the other hand, local governments might

reserve the good parcels and only list them during the more recent booming periods of the

stimulus years, which would result in an overestimation of price growth in the simple average



                                                                                                   11
series. In addition, some land parcels in a few cities were not leveled on delivery in the early

years of our sample. Not controlling for that would result in the overestimation of true, constant

quality price growth.9 It also is possible that sales of high quality parcels occur whenever the

local government has the greatest need for revenue.10 Thus, the bias could go in either direction

for different markets. Consequently, we follow Wu, Gyourko and Deng (2012) in creating

constant quality land price indexes for each market.

         Our city-level hedonic is estimated via ordinary least squares (OLS), with the log of the

real transaction price in constant 2009 yuan as the dependent variable.11 Quality controls on the

right-hand side include: (a) the parcel’s distance to the center of the corresponding city, which is

measured after mapping the precise location of each site with GIS software; (b) the distance to

the nearest subway station; this variable is relevant in 10 of the 35 cities with operating subway

systems during our sample period; (c) district dummies which control for local/neighborhood-

level fixed effects not captured by the two previous location controls12; (d) a set of physical

attributes including the size of the parcel (in land area), the density permitted on the site when

built, and whether the parcel is leveled on delivery; (e) in some cases, a small portion of a

residential land parcel is designated for affiliated commercial properties, public establishments,

or public housing units; we control for such conditions via a set of dummies; (f) the parcel’s

9
  If a land parcel is not leveled on delivery, the purchaser has to pay additional costs for relocating previous
occupiers of the parcel, removing the existing buildings, and so forth, which would negatively affect the transaction
price of the parcel. Before 2003, whether a parcel was leveled upon delivery was a key part of the negotiation
between the developer and the local government. After that, most land parcels sold via public auctions are leveled
on delivery, although there were a few exceptions in some cities, especially during the early years. We directly
control for this in the hedonic estimation as described below.
10
   Our 2012 paper reports evidence consistent with this hypothesis.
11
   We also conducted a two-stage Heckman estimation to control for potential bias arising from the fact that there
were a total of 614 parcels listed that failed to result in transactions (either because there were no bidders if there
was an auction or the bid prices were lower than the local governments’ reserve prices, which is relevant for cases
involving sealed bids). If these failures are disproportionately concentrated in certain periods such as the financial
crisis, selection bias would result in an overestimation of the price index for that period. That said, we could not
find any statistically significant impact for the inverse Mills ratio estimated from our first-stage probit model.
12
   These controls serve much the same purpose as grid dummies do in the creation of recent land price series using
U.S. data. See Nichols, et. al. (2013) for a recent example.

                                                                                                                   12
transaction form as reflected in whether it was purchased via sealed bidding, regular English

auction, or two-stage auction; and (g) year dummies, whose coefficients are used to create the

constant quality price index.13

         Figure 4 plots real constant quality land price appreciation rates based on the results of

our hedonic estimation. There clearly was a boom in land prices in most cities in China,

although it is incorrect to claim that there is a single national land market, as there is substantial

variation in land price appreciation across and within cities over time. Many cities, not just the

big east coast region markets of Beijing, Shanghai and Shenzhen, have experienced considerable

booms and busts in land values over time. There are only two in which constant quality land

price growth has been appreciating at an average per annum compound rate below 10%

(Nanchang and Qingdao, at 7.8% and 5.9%, respectively). Nine have experienced average

compound annual growth rates above 20%, with the rest of our sample cities in between.

Naturally, this implies large increases in real estate values, as a 10% compound annual average

rate of price appreciation implies more than a doubling in real value between 2003 and 2011

(i.e., 1.18=2.14); analogously, a 20% compound annual rate implies that prices were over three

times greater at the end of 2011 than at the beginning in 2003 (i.e., 1.28=4.30).

         Table 2, which is taken from Deng, Gyourko and Wu (2012), reports summary statistics

on average annual land price growth over time. Table 3, also from Deng, Gyourko and Wu

(2012), highlights that land values are much more volatile than house prices (and other factors of

production in housing) as theory predicts for the residual claimant on property value. Standard




13
   Our land price hedonic works well in each of the 35 cities. The city-level coefficients are almost always
consistent with expectations, and the null that there is no explanatory power for our right-hand side variables always
is easily rejected. See Deng, Gyourko and Wu (2012) for more on the hedonic model. All underlying results are
available upon request.

                                                                                                                  13
deviations in land prices typically are in the 20%-40% range, which is about four times that of

any other variable reported in Table 3.

        While there clearly is substantial volatility in land values over time across markets, there

is no doubt that constant quality land prices are higher now in every market than they were in

2003. Hence, if Chinese firms are financially constrained and collateral value is important in

obtaining the desired amount of debt, there has been a huge increase in those values over time on

average, with economically large variation across markets. It is the cross sectional and time

series variation in these constant quality land price series which we use to impute the change in

firms’ real estate collateral value.14

        We believe these data are far superior to any alternative, the most prominent of which are

two government-provided series on house prices. One is called the Average Selling Price of

Newly-Built Residential Units. This reports the simple average of transactions prices as

measured by total sales values divided by the total amount of housing square footage permitted

on the land. This series makes no attempt to control for quality differences across markets or

drift over time. As our results and those of Wu, Deng and Liu (2011) show, not effectively

controlling for quality leads to substantial biases.15 The other government-provided house price

series, officially termed “Price Indices in 70 Large and Medium-Sized Cities”, is a measure of

the change in average prices on unit sales within individual housing complexes over time. More

specifically, this index is calculated by first computing the average sales price of new units each

14
   We use residential land prices because it is not yet feasible to create an analogous index for commercial
properties. Theory suggests these two series should be highly correlated, since land is substitutable between these
two uses on the margin. As a robustness check, we calculated the correlation coefficient between the average
transaction prices of newly-built residential buildings and commercial properties as reported by the National Bureau
of Statistics of China in our 35 city sample. It was a strongly positive 0.64. Chaney, et. al. (2012) report similar
findings in their robustness checks using U.S. data.
15
   Average annual appreciation in our hedonic index is about five percentage points higher than in the unadjusted
price series, which suggests that parcel quality has been falling over time on average. The declining quality of
location with more sites being located in outlying areas as China has rapidly urbanized is an important factor, but
this does vary by time and market. See Deng, Gyourko and Wu (2012) for more on this.

                                                                                                                 14
month in each distinct housing complex. The series reported by the government then is the

transactions-volume weighted average of each complex’s average price changes over time. As

Deng, Gyourko and Wu (2012) show, this series has very little variation over time in most

markets, including the big coastal region cities that are thought to have had the biggest booms.

That makes this data source highly suspect on its face, and Wu, Deng and Liu (2011) explain

why it produces downwardly biased estimates of price growth, with much lower price volatility

than exists in reality.

        Beyond having a better empirical measure of price change in the property market that can

control for quality drift in parcel sites, it also makes good sense to measure price changes of land

in the first place. As long as structure is in anything approaching elastic supply, it is land value

which is the residual claimant on overall property value and which will change in response to

shocks to fundamentals. Land prices are not directly measured in most other countries because

of data limitations—namely, land parcel sales independent of the building (or property

improvements) situated on it are rarely observed.16 For purely historical reasons associated with

the Chinese Communist Party’s victory in its civil war, local governments literally own all the

surrounding urban land and sell it (via a long-term leasehold estate) to private developers before

structures are built. Hence, we routinely observe vacant land parcel sales in China, although data

quality prior to 2003 is highly suspect for reasons discussed above.



II.B. Firm Data

        We next collected data on publicly-traded firms listed on the Shanghai or Shenzhen stock

exchanges. There are 1,291 firms listed during or before 2003 on these two exchanges. We get


16
  This is beginning to change in the U.S. as land transactions data bases become available to academics. See
Nichols, Oliner and Mulhall (2013), Sirmans and Slade (2012) and Haughwout, Orr and Bedoll (2008) for examples.

                                                                                                            15
to our final sample size of 444 firms as follows. First, we exclude firms delisted during or before

2011. We also drop those with measured negative equity and those involved in a major takeover

operation during the sample period, as we suspect either data error or some other aspect of firm

strategy is likely to complicate any potential relationship between real estate collateral value and

investment and other spending behavior. Next, firms operating in the industries of “finance”,

“real estate”, and “construction” are dropped because it seems likely that the relationship

between firm investment behavior and real estate price fluctuations may be determined by a

mechanism other than the collateral channel effect in these business sectors. Firms in the

industries of “agriculture”, “mining”, “production and supply of electricity, gas and water” and

“transportation and storage” also are excluded because they tend to own properties outside of

urban areas, and we cannot impute property value price changes outside of the 35 major markets

listed above. Thus, our final sample is restricted to firms in the industries of “manufacturing”,

“information technology”, “wholesale and retail”, “social service”, and “media and culture”.17

We also restrict our focus to firms with headquarters in 35 major cities for which we have a

reliable land price series that is used to impute the value of real estate collateral over time. This

leaves us with a balanced panel of 444 firms with 3,996 firm-year observations during 2003-

2011.

        Determining the market value of these firms’ real estate asset holdings obviously is a

critical task for our estimation. The nature of Chinese accounting and reporting practices is such

that three major categories of assets on the balance sheet are involved in constructing our

measure. One is “Buildings” (a sub-entry of “Fixed Assets”, the equivalent of “Property, Plant

and Equipment” in China’s accounting codes); a second is “Land Ownership” (a sub-entry of


17
   According to the official industry codes issued by the China Security Regulatory Commission, there are also a few
firms defined as in “Multiple Industries”. These companies are grouped based on their largest sales sector.

                                                                                                                 16
“Intangible Assets”); and the third is “Investment Properties”. Table 4 provides more detail on

related accounting codes, including a minor adjustment in 2007. Unfortunately, none of the

available listed firm electronic databases in China presently provides full information on all three

categories of property assets. Consequently, we manually collected this information from the

original version of the firms’ annual financial reports.

         While we believe this is the first systematic collection of non-real estate firms’ property

holdings, this is only the starting point for our analysis. As with the Compustat data on U.S.

corporations, Chinese company financial reports include values based on historic cost, not

current market values. We follow the procedures adopted by Chaney, et. al. (2012) to translate

these book values into market values. From the financial reports, we know both the original

book value and the current book value after depreciation. Then, following certain rules on

depreciation, the average age of properties can be computed.18 Finally, the book value is updated

to the market value using the city-level residential land price index described above after 2003, a

newly-built house price index between 2000 and 200219, and the city-level CPI index before

2000. Because we do not know the exact address of each property in a firm’s portfolio, we

follow Chaney, et. al. (2012) and Cvijanovic (2011) in presuming that a firm’s properties are

concentrated in the city of its headquarters.20


18
   We use the following strategy to guide us in these calculations. If a firm explicitly describes its depreciation
method in the appendix of its financial reports, we adopt that specific rule for that firm. Otherwise, we follow
conventional rules on depreciation for China, which reflect an average of the different rules published by the listed
firms in our sample: for the items of “Building” and “Investment Properties”, it is assumed that the properties are
straight-line depreciated with 25 years of depreciable life and 5% remains; for “Land Ownership”, the corresponding
assumption is straight-line depreciation method, 40 years of depreciable life, and 0 remains. Western readers may
be surprised by the depreciation of land, but it does make sense because this technically is a leasehold estate position.
19
   This house price index is provided by Institute of Real Estate Studies at Tsinghua University. It is a hedonic
series that is not subject to the biases discussed earlier regarding the official government series.
20
   Both Chaney, et. al. (2012) and Cvijanovic (2011) investigate the robustness of this assumption using added
information from firm 10-K filings. Unfortunately, similar documents and data are not available in China. We
addressed the robustness of this assumption as follows. First, we pared down the sample to firms headquartered in
the 32 cities outside of the three national financial centers of Beijing, Shanghai and Shenzhen on the presumption
that firms located in the other 32 cities are less likely to be geographically dispersed in their business and, hence, in

                                                                                                                     17
         We next develop an estimate of annual change in the value of firm real estate asset

holdings. Our preferred measure is one that reflects changes in the market value over time of

real estate assets owned by the firm in the reference year of 2002 at the very beginning of our

sample period. Chaney, et. al. (2012) and Cvijanovic (2011) both do something similar to guard

against bias arising from the potentially endogenous decisions of firms to alter real estate

holdings in response to (or in conjunction with) market price changes. Thus, our collateral value

measure is defined as:


                      _     1,             ,                 1              ,            ,   /     ,



where REVi,2002 is the market value of real estate assets owned by firm i at the end of 2002

computed based on the procedures described above, LPGc,j is the annual growth rate in the local

land price index for firm i’s headquarters city c in year j, and ASSETi,t-1 is the total assets of firm

i at the beginning of year t (i.e., at the end of the previous year).

         As part of our robustness checks described more fully below, we also used a second

proxy, which measures the market value change in real estate assets held by the firm at the

beginning of each year:

                                    _     2,             ,              ,       /    ,


where REVi,t-1 is the market value of real estate assets owned by firm i at the beginning of year t

(i.e., at the end of the previous year). We experiment with both measures because it is not

obvious a priori what the optimal balance is between potential endogeneity bias and

measurement error.




their real estate asset holdings. All our key results reported below still hold in this “geographically concentrated”
group.

                                                                                                                  18
           In addition to our measures of changes in underlying real estate collateral, we also use a

number of variables describing other firm characteristics. These are from Wind Info, which is a

supplier of ‘Compustat-type’ data on Chinese companies.21 These include the ratio of net

investment on fixed assets (property, plant and equipment) to firm asset value (RATIO_INV),

where the numerator is defined as expenditures on fixed assets less cash inflows from disposing

of existing fixed assets over the year and the denominator reflects total assets at the beginning of

the relevant year (ASSET), RATIO_LOAN which is defined as the net change in loan balances

scaled by firm assets, RATIO_EBITDA, which reflects earnings before interest tax, depreciation

and amortization (again scaled by firm assets), RATIO_CASH which reflects the net change in

cash holdings divided by assets, RATIO_SALARY which is defined as total salary payments

divided by firm size, RATIO_DIVIDEND, which is total dividend payments scaled by firm assets,

RATIO_FAINV which is the ratio of net investment on financial assets such as stocks and bonds

to firm asset value, and EMP, which is the number of employees per million yuan of firm assets.

Other variables include the market-to-book ratio (MBR) and leverage level at the beginning of

the year (LEVERAGE, defined as total debt on the balance sheet divided by asset value), and the

change in share of long-term loans (i.e., loans with a term exceeding one year) in total loan

balance during the year (LONGLOAN).

           We also collected information on the total amount of government subsidies received by a

firm during each year. This also comes from Wind Info which includes this as a sub-entry of

“non-operating income” in each firm’s income statement. This includes both explicit monetary

subsidies and implicit subsidies from discounted tax rates. As with the other variables, this also

is normalized by the total assets of the firm (RATIO_SUBSIDY). It serves as a proxy of

government support in some of the robustness checks discussed below.
21
     See their website at www.wind.com.cn for more details.

                                                                                                    19
            Table 5 reports the summary statistics on the variables, with each having been winsorized

at the 5th percentile to eliminate extreme outliers in the data series.22 One noteworthy feature is

the large magnitude of the annual market value change of the listed firms’ real estate assets. On

average, it is equivalent to about 6% of a firm’s total assets if we only take properties owned in

the reference year into account, and to about 7.5% if all real estate assets are included.23

            Table 6 then reports the number of firms in our sample broken down by whether or not

they are state-owned enterprises (SOEs). This firm characteristic also comes from the Wind Info

data source.24 SOEs account for about three quarters of these 444 firms, although that proportion

declines over time due. Table 7 then compares the values of these variables across the two types

of firms. SOEs and non-SOEs differ in several aspects. SOEs tend to be much larger than non-

SOEs. They also pay out more in salaries to their employees, but they are less profitable, pay

fewer dividends, and have lower market-to-book ratios. However, both these groups experience

almost the same degree of change in the market values of their real estate assets during the

sample period. And, the difference in their fixed assets investment or borrowing characteristics

also is statistically insignificant.



     III.       Empirical Implementation and Results

            Collateral channel effects typically are estimated with reduced form investment




22
   We also experimented with winsorizing the top and bottom 1% of values, as well as not dropping any outliers at
all. The results were not materially affected, so we can be sure our conclusions are not driven by the presence of a
few outliers.
23
   The fact that the average value of RATIO_REV2 is larger than RATIO_REV1 implies that the listed firms generally
are expanding their real estate holdings over our sample period.
24
   More detailed information is available, as we can tell whether a SOE is directly controlled by the central
government or by some type of sub-national government. See Deng, et. al. (2011) for more details on the distinction
between these two groups. Because all our key conclusions are robust to this breakdown, we only report results for
all SOEs versus non-SOEs.

                                                                                                                 20
specifications as given by equation (1) just below. The underlying model and assumptions from

which they derive are derived and well described in the on-line theory appendix to Chaney, et. al.

(2012).25 That model leads those authors (and others, including us, working in this literature) to

estimate investment equations of the following type:

     (1) RATIO_INVi,c,t = α + β*RATIO_REVi,t + γ*LPc,t + δt + ηi + φ*OtherControlsi,t + ϵi,t ,

where i indexes the firms, c denotes the city of their headquarters, and t reflects the year of the

observation. RATIO_INV and RATIO_REV are as defined above, LP is the land price index in

the city where the firm is located, δ and η capture year and firm fixed effects, respectively, and

OtherControls includes standard firm measures of leverage (total debt/asset value), firm value

(market-to-book value) and cash flow (EBITDA more specifically) used in these types of

regressions. The investment and collateral value measures are scaled to control for firm size

differences.26 Time and firm fixed effects are included so that identification effectively comes

from variation over time within firm. One of the two real estate variables is the log of the land

price index (LP) in the city where the firm is headquartered. This variable is intended to control

for broader real estate market changes that could influence investment behavior independent of

the value of an individual firm’s collateral.

        The coefficient of interest in this regression is β which captures how changes in the value

of a firm’s real estate collateral (RATIO_REV) affect investment (RATIO_INV). Theory does not

sign this coefficient. Controlling for firm value (which is done via the market-to-book variable

25
   It is entitled “A Simple Model of Real Estate Prices and Investment” and is available at
www.princeton.edu/dsraer/theoryRE.pdf for this material.
26
   Note that we use asset value in the denominator rather than the more typical measure in the literature of overall
property, plant and equipment (which are called “fixed assets” in China). This is due to the nature of the available
Chinese balance sheet data. As depicted earlier in Table 4, part of a firm’s real estate holdings are not included in
the item “Fixed Assets” on its balance sheet. In particular, the 2007 adjustment of accounting codes separated the
leased-out properties from “Fixed Assets”, and put them as part of a new, independent item called “Investment
Properties” on the balance sheet. This makes the fixed assets series inconsistent over our sample period. Hence, we
scale by total assets. The 2007 adjustment did not apply to the cash flows, so it does not affect our measure of
RATIO_INV.

                                                                                                                 21
discussed above), investment and collateral value are negatively correlated for unconstrained

firms and positively correlated for constrained firms.27 Overall, the estimate of β using a panel

of firms reflects the combination of how many of them are financially constrained, how binding

those constraints are, and how easy it is to pledge the underlying collateral to increase debt

capacity.

           While it is relatively straightforward to generate a specification such as equation (1) from

a model of investment with financial constraints, it is more challenging to obtain unbiased

estimates of β. The typical worry is that OLS yields upwardly biased results on the collateral

channel effect. The productivity of a firm is inherently unobservable, and if it is correlated with

initial collateral value, the estimate of β will be biased. Reverse causality is perhaps the most

obvious problem if property prices and productivity are correlated. Consider the case of a firm

that is large enough in its market for its own investment program to affect factor prices,

including local land values. Similar effects could occur in markets in which multiple firms from

the same industry co-locate. In that case, common shifts in investment patterns not actually

driven by collateral value could be captured in the estimate of β from equation (1) if the firms’

investment behavior bids up local land values. Upwardly biased estimates of β also would result

if large land-holding firms are especially sensitive to local demand shocks (for whatever reason)

and our real estate variables proxy for local demand to any significant extent (which seems

likely).


27
   The reasons, which are discussed more fully in the proof of Proposition 1.2 in the on-line theory appendix to
Chaney, et. al. (2012) referenced above, are as follows. If two unconstrained firms have identical market values, but
the first has higher collateral value, then it must also have lower productivity and investment than the second firm
because the greater collateral value raises liquidation value. Thus, productivity and investment are lower in the first
firm to compensate. Next, consider a completely constrained firm. Its investment is independent of its productivity
because it is determined by a binding budget constraint set by collateral value (by assumption). However, this
constrained firm’s productivity must be lower to hold firm value constant, even though this does not affect its
investment program. Hence, there still is a positive correlation between such value and investment for this type of
firm, even when firm value is controlled for in the regression.

                                                                                                                    22
         The recent literature on collateral channel effects on U.S. corporate investment exploits

differences in local market supply elasticity to deal with this bias (Chaney, et. al. (2012),

Cvijanovic (2011)). The basic strategy is to instrument for real estate values using the

interaction of a demand shifter (e.g., mortgage rates) with the local supply elasticity, along with

city and time fixed effects. The underlying logic is as follows. Demand shifters should show up

in higher prices the more inelastic is local supply. If supply were perfectly elastic, prices should

not change at all. The measure of supply elasticity used (typically from Saiz (2010)) is based on

fixed geographic factors such as the amount of water and the slopes of land plots in the market

area, so it provides plausibly exogenous variation in real estate values due to changes in demand.

As noted in the Introduction, that type of instrumental variables estimator yields economically

large collateral channel effects on investment among U.S. corporations.

         We cannot implement that strategy here due to the absence of an appropriate

instrument.28 Hence, we estimate a version of (1) that does not instrument for real estate value,

keeping in mind that the reported estimate of β is likely to be biased upward. That said, if we do

not find a statistically and economically large collateral channel effect, we can be reasonably

sure that it does not exist, as the biases from such a specification work in the direction of finding

one.

         Table 8 reports our baseline findings. The precise specification estimated is very similar

to equation (1), except that it includes interaction terms of the initial firm controls with local land




28
   Wang, Chan and Xu (2012) do provide a recent estimate of housing supply elasticity for a select group of major
Chinese cities. However, our experimentation with their data showed that it cannot explain much of the variance in
our land price index growth (or that of the official government house price metrics). Not surprisingly, trying to use
it to help instrument for collateral value growth as in Chaney, et. al. (2012) and Cvijanovic (2011) does not generate
results significantly different from those reported here using OLS. Given that it does not appear to be a strong
instrument, we prefer to report the simpler OLS results.

                                                                                                                   23
prices.29 The first column reports estimates using the full sample of firms, regardless of type.

The estimate of β on our measure of the real estate collateral variable, RATIO_REV1, is a very

small and statistically insignificant 0.0045. Thus, there is no evidence of a collateral channel

effect in the Chinese data, as firm investment behavior is uncorrelated with changes in the value

of the real estate they own.

         This average could be masking important heterogeneity across types of firms, as state-

owned enterprises, which constitute the bulk of our firm sample well could be unconstrained. If

so, they would not be expected to exhibit any collateral channel effect on their investment

behavior. Hence, columns 2 and 3 of Table 8 report estimates of the same specification on

subsamples of SOEs and non-SOEs. The results are not meaningfully different, and we cannot

reliably discriminate between the coefficients across the two types of firms.

         This conclusion about the absence of a collateral channel effect is robust to many

alternative specifications investigated. For example, it could be that our desire to minimize

upward bias due to endogeneity by measuring real estate exposure with the quantity of firm

holdings at the end of 2002 ends up generating attenuation bias in our estimate of β because of

measurement error. That this is not the case is evident from the fact that we obtain very similar

results if we use RATIO_REV2 instead of RATIO_REV1 as our measure of real estate collateral,

as illustrated in the top panel of Table 9.

         We also investigated whether there were differences in the relationship between firm

investment behavior and real estate collateral value depending upon whether the property market


29
   This helps control for another source of potential upward bias. As discussed in Chaney, et. al. (2012), upward
bias in β might also result from potential endogeneity arising from the decision to own real estate in the first place.
If firms that are more likely to own real estate also are especially sensitive to local demand shocks, equation (1) will
overestimate the collateral channel effect. Our inclusion of the firm traits and their interaction with local land prices
helps control for any fixed firm-level correlation between investment and real estate values. We have no good
instrument to deal with variation that may not be fixed, but this is not costly for us, as we do not find a meaningful
collateral channel effect in any event.

                                                                                                                      24
was improving or declining. The second panel of Table 9 reports results from adding an

interaction term of RATIO_REV1 with a dummy variable that takes a value of one if the relevant

underlying land market was declining in value (i.e., DECREASE=1 if so, and =0 otherwise).

There is no evidence of any important asymmetry in impacts on investment behavior, as the

interaction term is never statistically significant at anything close to conventional confidence

levels. While not reported here for space reasons, including this added term does not affect the

coefficients on the other right-hand side regressors in any material way.

         Another robustness check that was performed arose out of a concern that unobserved

firm-level default risk could be biasing down our estimate of β. This could occur if the firms

with the largest real estate holdings were also perceived by lenders as being very risky so that

they could not borrow to finance additional investment even in the face of rising property values.

To investigate this, we began by estimating a corporate default risk instrument at the company

level. We then included the inverse Mill’s ratio from that corporate default model as a proxy to

control for unobserved heterogeneity in default risk in our investment equation. The appendix

goes into the details behind the creation of this variable. The bottom panel of Table 9 reports

estimates of our collateral channel effect when a corporate default risk factor is added to our

baseline model. Note that there is virtually no change in the estimated impact for non-SOEs.

That for SOEs does increase a bit, but it still remains immaterial in economic and statistical

terms. Including added controls for potentially asymmetric collateral effects (as in the middle

panel) does not alter the results. In sum, the absence of a collateral channel effect in China does

not appear to be due to some type of specification bias arising from an omitted firm trait such as

default risk.30


30
  While our focus is on the estimate of β as a measure of the collateral channel effect, the estimated coefficient for
corporate default risk is interesting in its own right. That for SOEs is positive and statistically significant (point

                                                                                                                     25
         We also investigated whether the small and insignificant estimates of β might be due to a

lack of investment opportunities for some firms. The answer is no. First, there is no evidence

that amassing more real estate is negatively correlated with growth in EBITDA or asset

accumulation in general. We also reestimated our baseline model on subsets of firms broken

down by whether they were headquartered in high, average or low growth cities. These

classifications were based on local market GDP growth rates computed by the Chinese

government. The results for each group were statistically and economically indistinguishable

from those for the combined sample reported in Table 8. It turns out that the average local GDP

growth rate in the group of lowest growth markets is quite high (at about 11.7% annually), so

there are plenty of investment opportunities in those places, too. We also estimated the baseline

model on subsets of firms based on their own asset growth rates. The point estimates for β were

larger for both SOEs and non-SOEs among the highest third in terms of asset growth, but they

were never statistically significantly different from zero themselves or from the point estimates

for the lowest third of firms in terms of annual asset growth.

         Another possible explanation for the absence of any estimated collateral channel effect

could be that lenders recognize the strong mean reversion in Chinese land prices plotted in

Figure 4 and only respond to longer-run, not annual, changes. Deng, Gyourko and Wu (2012)

report that the mean reversion the annual land price growth data is on the order of 35%.




estimate of 0.0426, with a standard error of 0.0131), but that for non-SOEs is not (point estimate of 0.0286, with as a
standard error of 0.0202). We also estimated the analogous regression using borrowing as the dependent variable
and found that riskier SOEs also borrowed more (but not riskier non-SOEs). Thus, this type of firm was allowed to
borrow and invest more. It is possible that these firms are viewed as ‘too big to fail’, but that is the subject for
another paper. More relevant for the present paper work is that there is no such effect for non-SOEs. Finally,
including this default risk proxy did not materially change the coefficients on the other regressors.

                                                                                                                    26
However, our estimates using 2- and 3-year moving averages for both the land price and

investment variables never yield a statistically significant positive relationship either.31

         The robustness of our conclusion that there is no meaningful collateral channel effect in

China is heightened by the fact that the standard errors about our estimates of β are small enough

so that even the implied economic impact from a coefficient two standard deviations above the

reported point estimate still is small.32 Returning to our baseline results in Table 8, if we

consider the estimates for non-SOEs, the group of firms for which a sizeable collateral channel

effect is most plausible, a coefficient of 0.0243, which is two standard deviations above the -

0.0003 value reported in column 3 of Table 8, implies only six percent of a standard deviation

increase in investment per dollar of assets among those firms. Given that virtually any

endogeneity-driven bias arising from our simple OLS specification is to raise β above its true

value33, this implies a fairly tight estimate around zero for β and strongly suggests that there is no

collateral channel effect operating among listed, non-real estate firms in China.

         That there is no collateral channel effect operating for SOEs is readily explainable in

terms of their not being financially constrained. Indeed, our findings support the claims by many


31
   We do find a significantly negative relationship between collateral value and investment for SOEs, but as
discussed above, that is consistent with theory when firm value is held constant in the regression. All these results
are available upon request.
32
   This argument obviously presumes that the standard errors are not biased downward. Classical measurement error
in the dependent investment variable would lead to standard errors being underestimated. Ours is a created variable,
so we cannot know for sure whether this is happening. However, the techniques used to construct it are virtually
identical to those employed by researchers using U.S. data, which typically find large collateral channel effects.
Hence, we do not believe this to be an important enough statistical problem that could change our key conclusion.
33
   Thus far, we have abstracted from the possibility that measurement error in our land price index variable could
result in countervailing attenuation bias. The direction of the bias in that case is uncertain because it depends upon
how any such measurement error associated with the land price index variable is correlated with other regressors.
We suspect any measurement error is orthogonal to the firm characteristics on the right-hand side of (1), but we
cannot know for sure. In addition, we believe the signal-to-noise ratio of this variable is high. Deng, Gyourko and
Wu (2012), which describes the creation of the land price index variable in greater detail, shows there is a very
strong common trend across properties within any given market. This suggests that the measurement error
associated with any individual property value (which is the actual collateral) is small compared to the ‘signal’ of the
market-level land price index itself. Hence, the attenuation bias should be less of a concern here given the likely
strong signal-to-noise ratio. We did experiment with regressions that put more weight on city-year index
observations with more underlying land transactions, but always got very similar results.

                                                                                                                    27
that SOEs are specially favored within the Chinese economy (e.g., see Lin and Tan (1999), Allen,

Qian and Qian (2005), and Poncet, Steingress and Vandenbussche (2010)), and have no need to

rely on increasing collateral value to secure financing. However, that cannot be the story for

non-SOEs, who are much more likely to be financially constrained. To explain the absence of

any meaningful collateral channel effect for this group, we must appeal to features of the Chinese

banking system and capital markets. The aggregate volume of credit is tightly controlled in

China, with the government often imposing quotas on lenders in different cities (e.g., see He and

Wang (2012) and Allen, et. al. (2012) for recent discussions on this). Even if underlying

collateral value owned by the firm increases, a binding quota implies that no further lending or

borrowing can or will take place, as illustrated above in Figure 1.

         Other regulatory norms also could help explain why we do not observe a collateral

channel effect among non-SOEs, even if loan quotas are not binding. Common practice in the

Chinese lending markets does not allow firms that experience positive appreciation on existing

assets pledged as collateral against current loans to use that enhanced value to obtain new loans

or better terms on the existing loans. This fixity in loan terms cuts off any possibility for a

collateral channel effect.34 Added properties could be used as collateral for additional debt, of

course, but that is very different from being able to exploit increased value on existing assets.

         The prospect of a binding loan quota constraint suggests that the best case for observing a

collateral channel effect among non-SOEs would be in the recent 2009-2010 stimulus period,

when those quotas were raised. This would be the equivalent of raising the loan quota from L1 to

L2 in Figure 1. Table 10 reports regression results analogous to those in Table 8, except that they


34
  In most cases, non-SOEs also cannot obtain better loan terms simply by prepaying their existing loans. There is
no guarantee that private firms can get new loans after prepaying unless loan quota amounts have been relaxed.
This is one reason the prepayment of corporate loans is rare in China, although there are no accurate statistics we
could find on this issue (which is another indication of how rare this practice is).

                                                                                                                  28
include the interaction of our firm-level real estate collateral variable with a dummy for the

stimulus period. Even in the stimulus period, Table 10 shows no evidence that non-SOEs were

engaged in investment booms that are correlated with higher owned real estate values, and we

know from Figure 3 that values were increasing markedly in most markets during this period.35

         The absence of any meaningful economic or statistical relationship between real estate

collateral value and firm investment naturally raises the question of whether firms are even

borrowing more at all when real estate values are higher. Table 11 reports results using the

annual change in total debt per dollar of asset value as the dependent variable for the full sample

of firms and then the breakdowns for SOEs and non-SOEs. Here, we find that real estate

collateral values are positively correlated with firm borrowing for non-SOEs, but the impact is

small in both economic and statistical terms.

         Table 12 then reports results on the impact on borrowing from a specification including

an interaction of the collateral value control with the stimulus period. Interestingly, the results in

column 3 show a statistically significantly higher amount of borrowing by non-SOEs (but not

SOEs, as expected) during the stimulus period that is associated with their appreciated real estate

assets. The impact of higher collateral value during the stimulus period (which equals 0.0538 as

the sum of -0.0243+0.0781) suggests that a $1 increase in real estate collateral value will raise

non-SOEs’ loan balances by just over five cents, controlling for other factors. How large this is

in economic terms can be seen via the following calculation. The standard deviations of

RATIO_REV1 and RATIO_LOAN for non-SOEs during the stimulus period are 0.144 and 0.079,

respectively, which implies that a one standard deviation increase in collateral values is

35
  Another possibility is that non-SOEs operate in industries that the central or local governments want to
discourage. In that case, it could be that they cannot expand for other regulatory reasons independent of the
collateral channel effect. To investigate this, we collected data on the level of subsidy received by the firm, as
described for the RATIO_SUBSIDY variable in the previous section. We found no evidence that non-SOE
investment behavior varied by the degree of subsidy.

                                                                                                                     29
associated with about 10% of a standard deviation increase in loan balance (i.e.,

0.144×0.0538/0.079≈0.0981).

       If non-SOEs were borrowing a bit more, but not investing more in property, plant and

equipment, what were they doing with the funds? Table 13 provides some answers. Six

potential spending outcomes (other than fixed asset investments) are investigated. These include

hiring more employees (EMP), increasing salary payments (RATIO_SALARY), expanding equity

payouts (RATIO_DIVIDEND), investing in financial assets such as stocks or bonds

(RATIO_FAINV), replacing short-term debt with long-term debt (LONGLOAN), or doing nothing

but simply holding more cash (RATIO_CASH). The results show statistically significant

correlations of increasing real estate collateral value during the stimulus period only with firm

employment levels, with a marginally significant correlation with respect to adjusting debt

structure to take on more longer-term loans. Cash holdings are also higher, but the point

estimate of 0.0505 (column 1) only has a t-statistic of 1.5.

       While statistically significant, the impact on employment is modest in economic terms.

A one standard deviation of increase in collateral value only results in about three percent of a

standard deviation increase in employment (0.144×0.2275/0.987≈0.0332) for non-SOEs during

the stimulus period. The case for adjusting debt structure is similar, as a one standard deviation

of increase in collateral value is associated with about seven percent of a standard deviation

increase in increase of long-term debt share (0.144×0.0822/0.131≈0.0726). While not

statistically significant, the point estimates for cash reserves imply that a one standard deviation

increase in real estate collateral value is associated with one-seventh of a standard deviation

increase in cash holdings.




                                                                                                    30
        We cannot tell why non-SOEs did not ‘splurge’ more with their added debt, but it could

be they understood the change was not sustainable. With the stimulus package, the Chinese

government only temporarily relaxed the loan quota, but did not unfold any fundamental reform

in the financial system which could be expected to systematically ease non-SOEs’ access to bank

loans over the long term. If the entrepreneurs running the non-SOEs expected the loan quota to

decrease back to old levels after the stimulus (i.e., from L2 to L1 in terms of our Figure 1), it

would be unwise of them to spend the added funds on ‘irreversible’ uses such as fixed assets or

equity payouts.36 Instead, they appear to have chosen to expand their business by hiring a few

more employees and taken out a few more longer-term loans (and possibly increased cash

reserves).

        While we have established that there is no amplification of investment among listed

companies, whether purely private or primarily state-owned, that does not necessarily mean that

no collateral channel effect exists throughout the Chinese economy. There are two other sectors

to consider. One is the set of non-listed firms that are not traded on any stock exchange.

According to the latest Economic Census in 2008, the reported total assets of all manufacturing

firms were 35.87 trillion yuan RMB, while the listed manufacturing firms in our sample account

for only 1.78 trillion, or 4.95% of the total (or about 6.57% if we exclude the FDI component).

Thus, there are many such firms, but the information on them is completely unaudited, so that

data quality is higher uncertain. Moreover, information on their real estate holdings is not

available. Hence, the empirical analysis performed above cannot be replicated. That said, we



36
  This may be investing too much foresight and discipline in the non-SOE managements, but it is the case that the
debt markets soon reverted back to their formerly difficult conditions for most purely private enterprises. They
became so constrained that the Chinese government has begun to seriously consider undertaking a major reform in
China’s financial system in early 2012 to provide more secure financing to these firms. See reports from the Wall
Street Journal (“China Tests Financial Relaxation in Wenzhou”, March 28, 2012; “Chinese Premier Blasts Banks”,
April 3, 2012) for examples of this.

                                                                                                               31
know of no reason why the results obtained for the listed companies would not apply to this

group of firms. With respect to the SOEs, there is no reason to believe they are not financially

unconstrained, just like their publicly-listed brethren. Hence, we would not expect to find a

collateral channel effect among this group of firms either. The same holds for the non-SOEs that

are not publicly traded. They do access the commercial loan market according to the survey

results in Ayyagari, Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (2010). And, there is no reason to suspect

that the loan quotas and financial market norms that prevent easy prepayment and refinancing of

existing debt do not apply with at least equal (and perhaps more) force for them. Thus, there is

no reason to believe that there would be a larger collateral channel effect for non-SOEs that are

not publicly traded compared to those that are.

         Perhaps the most likely exception to our finding of no collateral channel effect in China

is among local government-sponsored enterprises (local SOEs) charged with developing urban

infrastructure. Local governments needing (say) a road or a subway constructed usually

establish a local SOE to build the infrastructure. These entities typically are capitalized with

land grants from the local government. The land, which essentially serves as the local SOE’s

equity capital, can be used to help raise debt from banks to complete the financing of the

infrastructure provision.37 These entities are not publicly traded on stock exchanges, so detailed

firm-level data of the type used in the empirical analysis above are not available. However, we

can aggregate data on infrastructure provision at the city level. This includes investment by local

SOEs plus whatever the city itself directly provides. We proxied city collateral value first by




37
  A recent example of this type of entity is illustrated in the April 23, 2012, Wall Street Journal article entitled
“Behind a Chinese City’s Growth, Heavy Debt”. It describes the city of Chongqing’s (which is one of our 35
markets) use of this structure.

                                                                                                                       32
summing the total amount of land supplied in each city from 2001-2010, and then calculating its

market price at the beginning of 2003 (scaled by GDP) using our land price data.38

           We then ran a number of simple regressions of annual infrastructure investment (scaled

by city GDP) on the collateral value variable plus city and year fixed effects. Higher city-level

collateral values generally were positively correlated with aggregate city infrastructure

investment, but the coefficients often were not significantly different from zero. We did

typically find a significantly positive correlation with transportation infrastructure investment,

when we experimented with disaggregated data.39 One admittedly naïve specification that

regressed the log change in transportation infrastructure investment per dollar of city GDP on the

log change in our land value collateral variable implied that a one standard deviation higher

amount of collateral was associated with one-fifth of a standard deviation increase in

transportation infrastructure (controlling for city and year fixed effects). Naturally, this result

should be interpreted with caution given the obvious potential endogeneity concerns. That said,

we are not surprised to find this relationship in a special type of vehicle used by local

governments in China in which land grants serve as equity. Even so, this impact occurs in a

sector responsible for a relatively small share of overall investment in the country. In 2011, for

example, local governments spent 901.6 billion yuan RMB on urban transportation infrastructure

investment, accounting for about 3% of the total investment volume in that year.



     IV.       Conclusions

           Research in macroeconomics and financial economics reports substantial collateral


38
   We also experimented with another measure of total potential developable land in the urban area calculated by
Wang, Chan and Xu (2012).
39
   We can break overall infrastructure into transportation (e.g., roads, subways), environmental (e.g., parks,
sewerage), and other.

                                                                                                                   33
channel effects on firm investment that amplified the business cycles of the United States and

Japan. We provide the first analysis of whether something similar can be expected for China,

which also has experienced an extraordinary property market boom that appears to have crested

recently. Working with unique data on land values in 35 major Chinese markets and a panel of

firms outside the real estate industry, we estimate investment equations that yield no evidence of

a collateral channel effect.

       This is perhaps not surprising for state-owned enterprises which probably are not

financially constrained in the sense required by the underlying theory for a collateral channel

effect to operate. However, we also find no such effect for non-SOEs, so our average results are

not masking important heterogeneity across different types of firms. Norms and regulation in the

Chinese capital markets and banking sectors can explain why the collateral channel effect does

not operate among these firms in China. Various robustness analyses that range from

investigating whether there is an asymmetry in the effect based on whether property market

prices are increasing or decreasing to whether there is specification error from omitted firm-level

default risk confirm this conclusion.

       While this indicates that a real estate bust in China is unlikely to cause a material decline

in investment by non-real estate firms because of a decline in underlying property collateral

values, this does not imply that a bust will not materially harm the economy. It could, and we

strongly suspect it will. The direct impact of a major decline in property values on hiring in the

construction industry and on demand for raw and processed materials is likely to be quite large,

even without amplification from the collateral channel. More indirect impacts via a wealth effect

on household consumption also could be important (as in Gan 2010). However, we leave

investigation of those potential mechanisms to future work.



                                                                                                  34
                                     Selected References


Allen, Franklin, Jun Qian, Chenying Zhang and Mengxin Zhao. “China’s Financial System:
       Opportunities and Challenges”, NBER Working Paper w17828, 2012.

Allen, Franklin, Jun Qian and Meijun Qian. “Law, Finance, and Economic Growth in China”,
       Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 77, no. 1 (2005): 57-116.

Altman, Edward. “Financial Ratios, Discriminant Analysis and the Prediction of Corporate
      Bankruptcy”, Journal of Finance, Vol. 23, no. 4 (1968): 589-609.

Ayyagari, Meghana, Asli Demirguc-Kunt and Vojislav Maksimovic. “Formal versus Informal
      Finance: Evidence from China”, Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 23, no. 8 (2010):
      3048-3097.

Barro, Robert. “The Loan Market, Collateral, and Rates of Interest”, Journal of Money, Credit
       and Banking, Vol. 8, no. 4 (1976): 439-456.

Bernanke, Benjamin. “Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in Propagation of the Great
      Depression”, American Economic Review, Vol. 79, no. 1 (1983): 257-76.

Bernanke, Benjamin and Mark Gertler. “Agency Costs, New Worth and Business
      Fluctuations”, American Economic Review, Vol. 73, no. 3 (1989): 14-34.

Bharath, Sreedhar and Tyler Shumway. “Forecasting Default with the Merton Distance to
       Default Model”, Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 21, no. 3 (2008): 1339-1369.

Cai, Hongbin, Vernon Henderson and Qinghua Zhang. “China’s Land Market Auctions:
       Evidence of Corruption”, NBER Working Paper w15067, 2009.

Chaney, Thomas, David Sraer and David Thesmar. “The Collateral Channel: How Real Estate
      Shocks Affect Corporate Investment”, American Economic Review, Vol 102, no. 6
      (2012), 2381-2409.

Cvijanovic, Dragana. “Real Estate Prices and Firm Capital Structure”, working paper, London
       School of Economics, February 3, 2011.

Deng, Yongheng. “Mortgage Termination: An Empirical Hazard Model with Stochastic Term
      Structure”, Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, Vol. 14, no. 3 (1997): 309-
      331.

Deng, Yongheng, Joseph Gyourko and Jing Wu. “Land and House Price Measurement in
      China”, in Property Markets and Financial Stability, A. Heath, F. Packer and C. Windsor
      eds., Reserve Bank of Australia, 2012.



                                                                                                35
Deng, Yongheng, Morck Randall, Jing Wu and Bernard Yeung. “Monetary and Fiscal Stimuli,
      Ownership structure, and China’s Housing Market”, NBER Working Paper w16871,
      2011.

Deng, Yongheng, John Quigley and Robert Van Order. “Mortgage Terminations, Heterogeneity
      and the Exercise of Mortgage Options”, Econometrica, Vol. 68, no. 2 (2000): 275–307.

Duan, Jin-Chuan, Jie Sun and Tao Wang. “Multiperiod Corporate Default Prediction – a
      Forward Intensity Approach”, Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 170, no. 1 (2012): 191-209.

Duffie, Darrell, Leandro Saita and Ke Wang. “Multi-period Corporate Default Prediction with
       Stochastic Covariates”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 83, no. 3 (2007): 635-665.

Hillegeist, Stephen, Elizabeth Keating, Donald Cram and Kyle Lundstedt. “Assessing the
       Probability of Bankruptcy”, Review of Accounting Studies, Vol. 9, no. 1 (2004): 5-34.

Gan, Jie. “Collateral, Debt Capacity and Corporate Investment: Evidence from a Natural
       Experiment”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 85, no. 3 (2007a): 709-734.

_______. “The Real Effects of Asset Market Bubbles: Loan- and Firm-Level Evidence of a
      Lending Channel”, Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 20, no. 6 (2007b): 1941-1973.

_______. “Housing Wealth and Consumption Growth: Evidence from a Large Panel Dataset of
      Households”, Review of Financial Studies, Vo. 23, no. 6 (2010): 2229-2267.

Hart, Oliver and John Moore. “A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of Human
       Capital”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 109, no. 4 (1994): 841-879.

Haughwout, Andrew, James Orr and David Bedoll. “The Price of Land in the New York
     Metropolitan Area”, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, Vol. 14, No. 3 (2008):
     1-7.

He, Dong and Honglin Wang. “Dual-track Interest Rates and the Conduct of Monetary Policy in
      China”, China Economic Review, Vol. 23, No. 4 (2012): 928-947.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John Moore. “Credit Cycles”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 105,
       no. 2 (1997): 211-248.

Lin, Yifu and Guofu Tan. “Policy Burdens, Accountability, and the Soft Budget Constraint”,
       American Economic Review, Vol. 89, no. 2 (1999): 426-431.

Liu, Zheng, Pengfei Wang and Tao Zha. “Land-Price Dynamics and Macroeconomic
       Fluctuations”, NBER Working Paper w17045, 2011.

Merton, Robert. “On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of Interest Rates”,
      Journal of Finance, Vol. 29, no. 2 (1974): 449-470.

                                                                                             36
Nichols, Joseph, Stephen Oliner and Michael Mulhall. “Swings in Commercial and Residential
       Land Prices in the United States”, Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 73, no. 1 (2013):
       57-76.

Poncet, Sandra, Walter Steingress and Hylke Vandenbussche. “Financial Constraints in China:
       Firm-Level Evidence”, China Economic Review, Vol. 21, no. 3 (2010): 411-422.

Saiz, Albert. “On Local Housing Supply Elasticity”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 125,
       no. 3 (2010): 1253-1296.

Sirmans, C.F. and Barrett Slade. “National Transactions-Based Land Price Indices”, Journal of
      Real Estate Finance and Economics, Vol. 45, no. 4, (2012): 829-845.

Stiglitz, Joseph and Andres Weiss. “Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information”,
        American Economic Review, Vol. 71, no. 3 (1981): 393-410.

Wang, Songtao, Su Han Chan and Bohua Xu. “The Estimation and Determinants of the Price
      Elasticity of Housing Supply: Evidence from China”, Journal of Real Estate Research,
      Vol. 34, no. 3 (2012): 311-344.

Wu, Jing, Yongheng Deng and Hongyu Liu. “House Price Index Construction in the Nascent
       Housing Market: The Case of China”, Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics,
       forthcoming, (2011).

Wu, Jing, Joseph Gyourko and Yongheng Deng. “Evaluating Conditions in Major Chinese
       Housing Markets”, Regional Science and Urban Economics, Vol. 42, no. 3 (2012): 531-
       543.




                                                                                               37
Figure 1: Loan Quotas and Collateral Channel Effects


    Loan

                                                             Property Values


                                                       B
           L2




           L1
                                           A




                                                           Property value ($)




                                                                                38
                                                         Figure 2: Land Market Dataset Coverage




Note: the cities are labeled by the starting year of the land data in the dataset.




                                                                                                  39
Figure 3: Real Average Residential Land Prices in 35 Major Chinese Markets (2009 Yuan)
    yuan per sq.m. of floor area
                                                                                                Beijing
  10000                                                                                         Tianjin
                                                                                                Shijiazhuang
                                                                                                Taiyuan
   9000                                                                                         Huhehaote
                                                                                                Shenyang
                                                                                                Dalian
                                                                                                Changchun
   8000                                                                                         Haerbin
                                                                                                Shanghai
                                                                                                Nanjing
   7000                                                                                         Hangzhou
                                                                                                Ningbo
                                                                                                Hefei
   6000                                                                                         Fuzhou
                                                                                                Xiamen
                                                                                                Nanchang
   5000                                                                                         Jinan
                                                                                                Qingdao
                                                                                                Zhengzhou
   4000                                                                                         Wuhan
                                                                                                Changsha
                                                                                                Guangzhou
                                                                                                Shenzhen
   3000                                                                                         Nanning
                                                                                                Haikou
                                                                                                Chongqing
   2000                                                                                         Chengdu
                                                                                                Guiyang
                                                                                                Kunming
   1000                                                                                         Xian
                                                                                                Lanzhou
                                                                                                Xining
      0                                                                                         Yinchuan
             2003         2004     2005   2006     2007      2008      2009      2010    2011   Wulumuqi




                                                                                                               40
               Figure 4: Real Constant Quality Land Price Appreciation by Year, 35 Chinese Cities, 2003-2011


Percentage Change
                                                                                                               Beijing
                                                                                                               Tianjin
    150%
                                                                                                               Shijiazhuang
                                                                                                               Taiyuan
                                                                                                               Huhehaote
                                                                                                               Shenyang
                                                                                                               Dalian
                                                                                                               Changchun
    100%                                                                                                       Haerbin
                                                                                                               Shanghai
                                                                                                               Nanjing
                                                                                                               Hangzhou
                                                                                                               Ningbo
                                                                                                               Hefei
     50%                                                                                                       Fuzhou
                                                                                                               Xiamen
                                                                                                               Nanchang
                                                                                                               Jinan
                                                                                                               Qingdao
                                                                                                               Zhengzhou
      0%                                                                                                       Wuhan
                                                                                                               Changsha
                                                                                                               Guangzhou
                                                                                                               Shenzhen
                                                                                                               Nanning
                                                                                                               Haikou
                                                                                                               Chongqing
    -50%                                                                                                       Chengdu
                                                                                                               Guiyang
                                                                                                               Kunming
                                                                                                               Xian
                                                                                                               Lanzhou
                                                                                                               Xining
   -100%                                                                                                       Yinchuan
              2004       2005      2006       2007       2008       2009       2010       2011                 Wulumuqi




                                                                                                                              41
             Table 1 Sample Sizes in the Land Transaction Dataset

                              Number of                       Number of Land
                            Cities Covered                     Parcels Sold
  2003                             15                              378
  2004                             22                              681
  2005                             24                              773
  2006                             33                             1133
  2007                             34                             1413
  2008                             35                              963
  2009                             35                             1564
  2010                             35                             1759
  2011                             35                             1749
Aggregated                          -                            10413




                                                                               42
                       Table 2: Annual Real Land Price Appreciation, Summary Statistics, 35 Major Chinese Markets

                                        2003-2004      2004-2005     2005-2006    2006-2007   2007-2008   2008-2009   2009-2010   2010-2011
             Mean                        32.1%            12.2%         23.5%        46.4%       -5.3%       28.5%       31.4%       2.57%
       Standard Deviation                21.7%            23.1%         40.5%        42.1%       24.0%       30.7%       29.4%     30.22%
              Max                        64.1%            47.2%       128.8%       131.2%        38.6%       93.1%       83.6%    108.58%
              Min                         4.4%           -28.0%        -36.1%       -29.2%      -59.9%      -20.2%      -31.6%      -44.2%
        Number of Cities                   15              22            24           33          34          35          35          35
Number with Positive Appreciation          15              15            17           28          18          27          29          16
Number with Negative Appreciation           0               7             7            5          16           8           6          19


       Table 3: Average Annual Growth Rates and Standard Deviations: Land Prices, House Prices, Construction Costs and Wages

        A. Mean of Annual Real Growth Rate
                                              2004          2005         2006        2007        2008       2009       2010        2011
                  House Price                  4.14%         5.56%        6.72%      13.60%       8.18%      9.17%     23.31%       8.47%
                   Land Price                 32.07%        12.22%       23.51%      46.39%      -5.34%     28.46%     31.36%       2.57%
               Construction Cost               6.26%         0.12%        0.22%       1.26%       6.77%     -1.87%      1.76%        -
           Construction Industry Wage          8.24%        12.38%       14.19%      10.73%       8.56%     14.62%     10.26%        -
           Number of Cities Included           15            22           25          33          34         35         35          35
        B. Standard Deviation of Annual Real Growth Rate
                                              2004          2005         2006        2007        2008       2009       2010        2011
                  House Price                  4.91%         3.64%        6.13%      12.41%       8.31%      6.39%     11.60%       7.82%
                   Land Price                 21.68%        23.06%       40.52%      42.11%      23.98%     30.72%     29.44%      30.22%
               Construction Cost               2.23%         1.68%        1.39%       1.38%       2.49%      1.31%      1.29%        -
           Construction Industry Wage          5.78%         4.29%        4.61%       5.07%       4.33%      9.01%      4.89%        -
           Number of Cities Included           15            22           25          33          34         35         35          35




                                                                                                                                  43
                                Table 4: Real Estate Asset Information in the Financial Reports

                                                               (A) Before 2006
                                                                    Self-Occupied & Lease-Out Properties
                               The lands are listed in the item of “Land Ownerships” as a subentry of “Intangible Assets”.
             Construction
                               The construction materials, affiliated plants and equipment are listed in the item of “Construction in
              in Progress
Self-Built                      Progress”.
Properties                     The lands are listed in the item of “Land Ownerships” as a subentry of “Intangible Assets”.
              Completed
                               The structures are listed in the item of “Buildings” as a subentry of “Fixed Assets”. The plants and equipment
              Properties
                                are excluded.
                               Both lands and structures are listed in the item of “Buildings” as a subentry of “Fixed Assets”. The plants and
   Purchased Properties
                                equipment are excluded.

                                                               (B) Since 2007
                                           Self-Occupied Properties                                        Lease-Out Properties
             Construction      The lands are listed in the item of “Land Ownerships” as a subentry of “Intangible Assets”.
              in Progress      The construction materials, affiliated plants and equipment are listed in the item of “Construction in Progress”.
Self-Built                     The lands are listed in the item of “Land
Properties                      Ownerships” as a subentry of “Intangible Assets”.
              Completed
                               The structures are listed in the item of “Buildings”
              Properties                                                                Both lands and buildings are listed in the item of
                                as a subentry of “Fixed Assets”. The plants and
                                                                                           “Investment Properties”. The plants and equipment
                                equipment are excluded.
                                                                                           are excluded.
                               Both lands and structures are listed in the item of
   Purchased Properties         “Buildings” as a subentry of “Fixed Assets”. The
                                plants and equipment are excluded.




                                                                                                                                              44
                       Table 5: Definition and Summary Statistics of Variables

        Variable                               Definition                           Average   Std. Dev
ASSET              Total asset at the beginning of the year; in billion yuan RMB.     4.882    17.598
                   Market value change of real estate assets held in 2002 (see
RATIO_REV1                                                                            0.060     0.151
                   the text for more details); normalized by ASSET.
                   Market value change of real estate assets held at the
RATIO_REV2         beginning of the year (see the text for more details);             0.075     0.170
                   normalized by ASSET.
                   Net change in investment on fixed assets; normalized by
RATIO_INV                                                                             0.056     0.056
                   ASSET.
RATIO_LOAN         Net change in loan balance; normalized by ASSET.                   0.019     0.074
                   Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and
RATIO_EBITDA                                                                          0.089     0.059
                   amortization; normalized by ASSET.
RATIO_CASH         Net change in cash holdings; normalized by ASSET.                  0.020     0.073
RATIO_SALARY       Total salary payments; normalized by ASSET.                        0.065     0.034
RATIO_DIVIDEND     Total dividend payments; normalized by ASSET.                      0.018     0.028
                   Net change in investment on financial assets; normalized by
RATIO_FAINV                                                                           0.006     0.031
                   ASSET.
EMP                Number of employee per million of ASSET.                           1.381     1.012
                   Total amount of government subsidies received; normalized
RATIO_SUBSIDY                                                                         0.003     0.005
                   by ASSET.
MBR                Market-to-book ratio at the beginning of the year.                 1.627     1.043
LEVERAGE           Leverage level at the beginning of the year.                       0.501     0.159
LOANLOAN           Net change in share of long-term loan in total loan balance.       0.005     0.128
                   The ratio of the probability density function to the
RISK               cumulative distribution function of corporate default model        3.069     0.105
                   at the beginning of the year (see the text for more details).




                                                                                                         45
       Table 6: Distribution of Sample by Ownership Structure

Year                       Number of SOEs                       Number of Non-SOEs
2003                           353                                           91
2004                           347                                           97
2005                           343                                          101
2006                           329                                          115
2007                           323                                          121
2008                           325                                          119
2009                           320                                          114
2010                           318                                          126
2011                           318                                          126




                                                                                     46
               Table 7: Summary Statistics of Variables by Ownership Structure Groups

                                              SOEs                    Non-SOEs
                                                                                         t stat.
                                 Average             Std. Dev   Average      Std. Dev
    ASSET                        5.477               20.089     3.147         5.650     3.655***
    RATIO_REV1                   0.060                0.153     0.060         0.144     0.018
    RATIO_REV2                   0.076                0.173     0.075         0.163     0.062
    RATIO_INV                    0.057                0.055     0.055         0.057     1.052
    RATIO_LOAN                   0.019                0.073     0.022         0.079     1.109
    RATIO_EBITDA                 0.086                0.057     0.096         0.065     4.442***
    RATIO_CASH                   0.019                0.071     0.023         0.078     1.704*
    RATIO_SALARY                 0.066                0.033     0.061         0.035     4.807***
    RATIO_DIVIDEND               0.017                0.026     0.023         0.034     5.464***
    RATIO_FAINV                  0.005                0.029     0.008         0.035     3.295**
    EMP                          1.377                1.020     1.390         0.987     0.331
    RATIO_SUBSIDY                0.003                0.005     0.004         0.006     3.191***
    MBR                          1.552                0.972     1.847         1.201     7.817***
    LEVERAGE                     0.502                0.158     0.499         0.163     0.455
    LOANLOAN                     0.004                0.127     0.008         0.131     0.855
    RISK                         3.075                0.102     3.053         0.113     5.119***
Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                                                   47
                                  Table 8: Do Chinese Firms Invest More When Collateral Value Increases?

                                                                                                  Dependent Variable: RATIO_INV

                                                         Full Sample                 SOE's                    Non-SOE's
RATIO_REV1i,t                                                0.0045                   0.0062                    -0.0003
                                                           (0.0061)                  (0.0072)                   (0.0123)
Log(LPit)                                                  -0.0148                   -0.0154                     0.0217
                                                           (0.0110)                  (0.0122)                   (0.0245)
MBRi,t                                                       0.0032***                0.0030**                   0.0050**
                                                           (0.0011)                  (0.0013)                   (0.0023)
RATIO_EBITDAi,t                                              0.1743***                0.1761***                  0.1776***
                                                           (0.0186)                  (0.0237)                   (0.0375)
LEVERAGEi,t                                                -0.0624***                -0.0662***                 -0.0629***
                                                           (0.0108)                  (0.0123)                   (0.0192)
Initial Controls * Log(LPi,t)                                Yes                      Yes                        Yes
Year Fixed Effects                                           Yes                      Yes                        Yes
Firm Fixed Effects                                           Yes                      Yes                        Yes
Number of Observations                                      3974                      2962                       1012
R2                                                           0.473                    0.488                      0.499

Note: (1) the observations are clustered by city-year.
      (2) standard errors in parentheses.
      (3) * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                                                                             48
                                      Table 9: Collateral Channel Effects under Alternative Specifications

                                                                                                                     Dependent Variable: RATIO_INV

                                                 A. Real Estate Collateral Value Measured Continuously
                                                       (RATIO_REV2 instead of RATIO_REV1)
                                                              Full Sample                     SOE’s                              Non-SOE’s
                                                               -0.0026                      -0.0035                              -0.0010
                 RATIO_REV2i,t
                                                               (0.0064)                     (0.0078)                             (0.0109)

                                                        B. Asymmetry in Collateral Channel Effects
                                                              Full Sample                      SOE’s                             Non-SOE’s
                                                                0.0083                        0.0110                              0.0019
                 RATIO_REV1i,t
                                                               (0.0079)                      (0.0102)                            (0.0170)
     RATIO_REV1i,t *DECREASEi,t
                                                                   -0.0148                                -0.0184                -0.0095
(DECREASE=1 if land values are declining;
                                                                   (0.0211)                               (0.0260)               (0.0486)
           =0, otherwise)

                                       C. Real Estate Collateral Effects Controlling for Corporate Default Risk
                                                            Full Sample                        SOE’s                             Non-SOE’s
                                                              0.0093                          0.0111                              0.0002
                 RATIO_REV1i,t
                                                             (0.0083)                        (0.0095)                            (0.0210)
Note: (1) all models are estimated with additional control variables (see Table 8 for the full specification).
      (2) the observations are clustered by city-year.
      (3) standard errors in parentheses.
      (4) * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                                                                                               49
                         Table 10: Is There Evidence of a Collateral Channel Effect During the Stimulus Period?

                                                                                                  Dependent Variable: RATIO_INV

                                                         Full Sample                 SOE's                        Non-SOE's
RATIO_REV1i,t                                                0.0068                   0.0083                        -0.0056
                                                           (0.0089)                  (0.0102)                       (0.0176)
RATIO_REV1i,t * 2009/10                                    -0.0043                   -0.0042                         0.0095
                                                           (0.0110)                  (0.0141)                       (0.0226)
Log(LPit)                                                  -0.0150                   -0.0156                         0.0219
                                                           (0.0110)                  (0.0121)                       (0.0245)
MBRi,t                                                       0.0032***                0.0030**                       0.0050**
                                                           (0.0011)                  (0.0013)                       (0.0023)
RATIO_EBITDAi,t                                              0.1743***                0.1762***                      0.1778***
                                                           (0.0186)                  (0.0237)                       (0.0376)
LEVERAGEi,t                                                -0.0625***                -0.0662***                     -0.0629***
                                                           (0.0108)                  (0.0123)                       (0.0192)
Initial Controls * Log(LPi,t)                                Yes                      Yes                            Yes
Year Fixed Effects                                           Yes                      Yes                            Yes
Firm Fixed Effects                                           Yes                      Yes                            Yes
Number of Observations                                      3974                      2962                           1012
R2                                                           0.473                    0.488                          0.499

Note: (1) the observations are clustered by city-year.
      (2) standard errors in parentheses.
      (3) * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                                                                                 50
                                      Table 11: Do Chinese Firms Borrow More When Land Values Rise?

                                                                                                 Dependent Variable: RATIO_LOAN

                                                         Full Sample                SOE's                     Non-SOE's
RATIO_REV1i,t                                              -0.0000                  -0.0052                      0.0189
                                                           (0.0104)                 (0.0116)                    (0.0203)
Log(LPit)                                                    0.0110                  0.0141                      0.0456
                                                           (0.0162)                 (0.0172)                    (0.0460)
MBRi,t                                                       0.0002                 -0.0011                      0.0069*
                                                           (0.0020)                 (0.0025)                    (0.0037)
RATIO_EBITDAi,t                                              0.0329                  0.0306                      0.0184
                                                           (0.0299)                 (0.0376)                    (0.0571)
LEVERAGEi,t                                                -0.1467***               -0.1497***                  -0.1737***
                                                           (0.0175)                 (0.0196)                    (0.0356)
Initial Controls * Log(LPi,t)                                Yes                     Yes                         Yes
Year Fixed Effects                                           Yes                     Yes                         Yes
Firm Fixed Effects                                           Yes                     Yes                         Yes
Number of Observations                                      3974                     2962                        1012
R2                                                           0.232                   0.248                       0.285

Note: (1) the observations are clustered by city-year.
      (2) standard errors in parentheses.
      (3) * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                                                                             51
                                   Table 12: Did Chinese Firms Borrow More During the Stimulus Period?

                                                                                                  Dependent Variable: RATIO_LOAN

                                                         Full Sample                 SOE's                     Non-SOE's
RATIO_REV1i,t                                              -0.0105                   -0.0093                     -0.0243
                                                           (0.0130)                  (0.0165)                    (0.0297)
RATIO_REV1i,t * 2009/10                                      0.0197                   0.0079                      0.0781**
                                                           (0.0199)                  (0.0209)                    (0.0371)
Log(LPit)                                                    0.0118                   0.0147                      0.0465
                                                           (0.0162)                  (0.0173)                    (0.0451)
MBRi,t                                                       0.0000                  -0.0011                      0.0066*
                                                           (0.0020)                  (0.0025)                    (0.0036)
RATIO_EBITDAi,t                                              0.0329                   0.0304                      0.0201
                                                           (0.0299)                  (0.0376)                    (0.0570)
LEVERAGEi,t                                                -0.1466***                -0.1496***                  -0.1742***
                                                           (0.0176)                  (0.0196)                    (0.0356)
Initial Controls * Log(LPi,t)                                Yes                      Yes                         Yes
Year Fixed Effects                                           Yes                      Yes                         Yes
Firm Fixed Effects                                           Yes                      Yes                         Yes
Number of Observations                                      3974                      2962                        1012
R2                                                           0.232                    0.248                       0.288

Note: (1) the observations are clustered by city-year.
      (2) standard errors in parentheses.
      (3) * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                                                                              52
                                    Table 13: How did Non-SOEs Spend the Money During the Stimulus Period?

                                    RATIO_CASH                EMP         RATIO_SALARY    RATIO_FAINV     RATIO_DIVIDEND   LONGLOAN
RATIO_REV1i,t                          0.0248                -0.2525          0.0108*         0.0141          0.0066         -0.0368
                                      (0.0253)               (0.1785)        (0.0057)        (0.0134)        (0.0091)        (0.0504)
RATIO_REV1i,t * 2009/10                0.0505                 0.4800**        0.0004         -0.0177         -0.0106          0.1190*
                                      (0.0347)               (0.2241)        (0.0078)        (0.0189)        (0.0120)        (0.0647)
Log(LPit)                              0.0010                -0.2323         -0.0067         -0.0232         -0.0128          0.0540
                                      (0.0461)               (0.2912)        (0.0100)        (0.0201)        (0.0168)        (0.0701)
MBRi,t                                 0.0051                 0.0053          0.0013*         0.0030         -0.0008          0.0053
                                      (0.0047)               (0.0246)        (0.0007)        (0.0019)        (0.0014)        (0.0075)
RATIO_EBITDAi,t                        0.4168***              1.5708***       0.0780***      -0.0103          0.2028***       0.1022
                                      (0.0625)               (0.4122)        (0.0139)        (0.0265)        (0.0259)        (0.0984)
LEVERAGEi,t                           -0.0132                -0.0660         -0.0017         -0.0523***      -0.0152          0.0832
                                      (0.0358)               (0.2046)        (0.0063)        (0.0141)        (0.0103)        (0.0670)
Initial Controls * Log(LPi,t)           Yes                    Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes
Year Fixed Effects                      Yes                    Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes
Firm Fixed Effects                      Yes                    Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes
Number of Observations                 1012                   1011            1012            1012             1012           1012
R2                                     0.239                  0.795           0.847           0.224           0.503           0.117

    Note: (1) the observations are clustered by city-year.
          (2) standard errors in parentheses.
          (3) * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                                                                                 53
                      Appendix 1: Estimation of Firm-Level Default Risk

       We adopt a popular proportional hazard modeling framework (Deng (1997), Deng,

Quigley and Van Order (2000)) to estimate the firm-level default risk. The empirical estimation

is based on a large sample of 2,061 publicly-traded firms in China. We used data from 1995-

2010 on these firms, which were traded on the Shenzhen or Shanghai stock exchanges. Our

corporate default model specification follows the existing literature on firm bankruptcy analysis

(see, for example, Duffie, Saita and Wang, 2007). Key variables of the default risk model

include firm-specific attributes, such as distance to default (DTD), which is defined as the

logarithm of total assets over total liabilities, weighted by the idiosyncratic risk of firm’s stock

return. Hillegeist et. al. (2004), Bharath and Shumway (2008), and Duan, Sun and Wang (2012)

each report that distance-to-default is a highly significant measure that helps capture

heterogeneous firm level credit risk. Another variable used is Net Income/Total Asset (NI/TA),

which measures firm profitability. Bharath and Shumway (2008) and Duan, Sun and Wang

(2012) find it provides significant predictive power for bankruptcy, controlling for the distance to

default measure. A third variable is Earnings before Interest and Taxes/ Total Asset (EBIT/TA),

which Altman (1968) include in his classic work. We also control for firm size (SIZE) based on

the hypothesis that large firms are more likely to have more diversified business lines and

financial flexibility than smaller firms. Other variables included in our model control for the

type of firm, specifically whether the entity is a state-owned enterprise. This variable is called

OWNERSHIP in our model. We also include various market level attributes such as real GDP

growth (GDP), stock index return (STOCK), and the inflation rate (INFLATION).

       Our results, which are presented below in Appendix Table A1, generally are consistent

with findings in the existing literature (Hillegeist et. al. (2004), Bharath and Shumway (2008),



                                                                                                       54
and Duan, Sun and Wang (2012)). The estimated inverse Mill’s ratio obtained from this firm

bankruptcy default model is then added to our baseline investment regression, with results on the

collateral channel effect reported at the bottom of Table 9. Note that this estimate is based on a

slightly smaller sample of 376 firms (versus 444 firms in the baseline regression) because of

missing credit risk data for some firms.


             Appendix Table A1. Firm Level Bankruptcy Default Estimation

                                                     Whether the Corporate Defaults
             DTD                                                -0.2559***
                                                                (0.0873)
             NET INCOME                                         -0.4262***
                                                                (0.1536)
             EBIT/TA                                            -0.3682*
                                                                (0.1967)
             SIZE                                               -0.1385**
                                                                (0.0697)
             OWNERSHIP                                          -0.0976
                                                                (0.0718)
             GDP                                                -0.7328***
                                                                (0.2529)
             STOCK                                               0.0521
                                                                (0.0727)
             INFLATION                                          -0.3100***
                                                                (0.1017)
             Industry Fixed Effects                               Yes
             Number of Observations                              2,061

Note: standard errors in parentheses.




                                                                                                 55
