NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GROWTH FORECAST ERRORS AND FISCAL MULTIPLIERS
Olivier J. Blanchard
Daniel Leigh
Working Paper 18779
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18779

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013

We are grateful to Laurence Ball, John Bluedorn, Marcos Chamon, Petya Koeva Brooks, Oli Coibion,
Jörg Decressin, Kevin Fletcher, Philip Lane, David Romer, Sven Jari Stehn, and numerous IMF seminar
participants for helpful comments, to Eric Bang, Shan Chen, Angela Espiritu, Chanpheng Fizzarotti,
and Daniel Rivera for excellent research assistance, and to Linda Kean and Cristina Quintos for superb
editorial support. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent those of the IMF, IMF policy, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Olivier J. Blanchard and Daniel Leigh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Growth Forecast Errors and Fiscal Multipliers
Olivier J. Blanchard and Daniel Leigh
NBER Working Paper No. 18779
February 2013
JEL No. E32,E62,H20,H5,H68
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the relation between growth forecast errors and planned fiscal consolidation
during the crisis. We find that, in advanced economies, stronger planned fiscal consolidation has been
associated with lower growth than expected, with the relation being particularly strong, both statistically
and economically, early in the crisis. A natural interpretation is that fiscal multipliers were substantially
higher than implicitly assumed by forecasters. The weaker relation in more recent years may reflect
in part learning by forecasters and in part smaller multipliers than in the early years of the crisis.

Olivier J. Blanchard
International Monetary Fund
Economic Counsellor and Director
Research Department
700 19th Street, NW
Rm. 10-700
Washington DC, 20431
and NBER
blanchar@mit.edu
Daniel Leigh
International Monetary Fund
Research Department
700 19th Street, NW
Rm. 10-700N
Washington, DC 20431
dleigh@imf.org

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18779

1
With many economies in fiscal consolidation mode, there has been an intense debate
about the size of fiscal multipliers. At the same time, activity has disappointed in a number of
economies undertaking fiscal consolidation. A natural question therefore is whether
forecasters have underestimated fiscal multipliers, that is, the short-term effects of
government spending cuts or tax hikes on economic activity.
In a box published in the October 2012 World Economic Outlook (WEO; IMF,
2012b), we focused on this issue by regressing the forecast error for real GDP growth on
forecasts of fiscal consolidation. Under rational expectations, and assuming that forecasters
used the correct model for forecasting, the coefficient on the fiscal consolidation forecast
should be zero. If, on the other hand, forecasters underestimated fiscal multipliers, there
should be a negative relation between fiscal consolidation forecasts and subsequent growth
forecast errors. In other words, in the latter case, growth disappointments should be larger in
economies that planned greater fiscal cutbacks. This is what we found.
In the box published in October, we focused primarily on forecasts made for
European economies in early 2010. The reason for this choice was twofold. A number of
large multiyear fiscal consolidation plans were announced then, particularly in Europe. And
there was intense controversy about their likely effects. Some policymakers claimed that
confidence effects associated with fiscal consolidation could overwhelm direct
contractionary effects, leading to small or even negative multipliers. For example, in an
interview with Libération, the then President of the European Central Bank, Jean-Claude
Trichet, said “It is an error to think that fiscal austerity is a threat to growth and job creation”
(Trichet, 2010). Others argued that multipliers would be larger than in normal times for three
main reasons.
First, because of the binding zero lower bound on nominal interest rates, central
banks could not cut interest rates to offset the negative short-term effects of a fiscal
consolidation on economic activity. Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011) have shown,
using a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model, that under such conditions,
fiscal multipliers can exceed 3.2 Since episodes characterized by a binding zero lower bound
(also referred to as “liquidity trap” episodes) have been rare, only a few empirical studies
investigate fiscal multipliers under such conditions. Based on data for 27 economies during
the 1930s—a period during which interest rates were at or near the zero lower bound—
Almunia and others (2010) have concluded that fiscal multipliers were about 1.6.3
Second, lower output and lower income, together with a poorly functioning financial
system, imply that consumption may have depended more on current than on future income,
2

Other papers that use a theoretical model to analyze the effects of fiscal policy also conclude that fiscal
multipliers rise significantly at the zero lower bound. Hall (2009) finds that, in an economy with an output
multiplier below 1 in normal times, the multiplier can rise to 1.7 when the zero lower bound binds. See also
Coenen and others (2010), IMF (2010a), and Woodford (2011). It is worth acknowledging, however, that even
at the zero lower bound, central banks have used quantitative and qualitative easing measures, which can lower
interest rates at longer maturities.
3

See also Eichengreen and O’Rourke (2012).

2
and that investment may have depended more on current than on future profits, with both
effects leading to larger multipliers (Eggertsson and Krugman, 2012).4
Third, and consistent with some of the above mechanisms, a number of empirical
studies have found that fiscal multipliers are likely to be larger when there is a great deal of
slack in the economy. Based on U.S. data, Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012b) have found
that fiscal multipliers associated with government spending can fluctuate from being near
zero in normal times to about 2.5 during recessions.5 If fiscal multipliers were larger than
normal and growth projections implicitly assumed multipliers more consistent with normal
times, then growth forecast errors should be systematically correlated with fiscal
consolidation forecasts.
Our October 2012 box generated many comments, criticisms, and suggestions. In this
paper, we restate our methodology, revisit our results, examine their robustness, and consider
a number of extensions.
Section II presents our estimation approach and reports our baseline results. Our
forecast data come from the spring 2010 IMF World Economic Outlook (IMF, 2010c), which
includes forecasts of growth and fiscal consolidation—measured by the change in the
structural fiscal balance—for 26 European economies. We find that a 1 percentage point of
GDP rise in the fiscal consolidation forecast for 2010-11 was associated with a real GDP loss
during 2010-11 of about 1 percent, relative to forecast. Figure 1 illustrates this result using a
scatter plot. A natural interpretation of this finding is that multipliers implicit in the forecasts
were, on average, too low by about 1.
In Section III, we investigate the robustness of the baseline result along three
dimensions.
First, we consider the sensitivity of the baseline results to outliers and to the choice of
economies in the sample. Robustness checks indicate an unexpected output loss, relative to
forecast, that is for the most part near 1 percent and typically above 0.7 percent, for each 1
percent of GDP fiscal consolidation. We obtain similar results when we extend the analysis
to forecasts for all advanced economies. However, and not surprisingly given their different
economic circumstances, we find no evidence of multipliers being over- or under-estimated
for emerging market economies during that period.
Second, we reestimate our baseline specification while adding control variables,
ranging from initial fiscal and current account balances to initial bank credit risk and
household debt levels. These could plausibly have both affected the growth forecast error and
been correlated with fiscal consolidation forecasts. Not controlling for such factors could
4

Eggertsson and Krugman (2012) show, using a New Keynesian-style model, that when some households with
an overhang of debt are forced into rapid deleveraging, their spending depends on current income rather than on
expected future income, and that under these conditions, fiscal multipliers rise well above 1.
5

Studies based on data for other advanced economies that confirm the result of larger multipliers during
economic downturns include Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012b); Baum, Poplawski-Ribeiro, and Weber
(2012); Batini, Callegari, and Melina (2012); and IMF (2012b).

3
influence the estimated relation between fiscal consolidation forecasts and growth forecast
errors. We find, however, that our results are robust to the introduction of such controls.
Third, we look at the results for other time intervals since the start of the crisis, as
well as the results for “normal times” (1997–2008). Looking within the crisis, we find
evidence of more underestimation of fiscal multipliers earlier in the crisis (for the time
intervals 2009–10 and 2010–11) than later in the crisis (2011–12 and 2012–13). Results for
the earlier samples yield coefficients typically between 0.7 and 1.0. Results for the later
samples yield coefficients typically between 0.3 and 0.5 and are less statistically significant.
Interestingly, and again perhaps not surprisingly, we find no evidence of systematic forecast
errors related to planned changes in fiscal policy during the precrisis decade (1997–2008).
Having discussed robustness, Section IV turns to three extensions of our baseline
results.
First, we check whether the baseline results differ depending on whether the fiscal
consolidation reflects changes in government spending or changes in revenue. The results
suggest that fiscal multipliers were, on average, underestimated for both sides of the fiscal
balance, with a slightly larger degree of underestimation associated with changes in
government spending.
Second, we examine forecast errors for the unemployment rate and for the
components of GDP. We find that forecasters significantly underestimated the increase in
unemployment and the decline in private consumption and investment associated with fiscal
consolidation.
Finally, we compare the baseline results obtained using IMF forecast errors with
those obtained using the forecast errors of other forecasters, including the European
Commission (EC), the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD),
and the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU). Here, we find that the results hold for all the
forecasters considered, with coefficients ranging from –1.1 to –0.4. The results are strongest,
in terms of both economic and statistical significance, for forecasts published by the IMF
and, to a slightly lesser extent, by the EC.
We conclude in Section V with a discussion of what our results do and do not imply
for actual multipliers. We conclude that multipliers were substantially above 1 in the early
years of the crisis. The lower coefficients in recent years may reflect in part learning by
forecasters and in part smaller actual multipliers than in the early years of the crisis. We end
with a number of caveats.
First, forecasters do not typically use explicit multipliers, but instead use models in
which the actual multipliers depend on the type of fiscal adjustment and on other economic
conditions. Thus, we can only guess what the assumed multipliers, and by implication the
actual multipliers, have been during the crisis.
Second, our results only give average multipliers for groups of countries, and
individual countries may well have larger or smaller multipliers than the average.
Third, our findings that short-term fiscal multipliers have been larger than expected
do not have mechanical implications for the conduct of fiscal policy. Some commentators
interpreted our earlier box as implying that fiscal consolidation should be avoided altogether.

4
This does not follow from our analysis. The short-term effects of fiscal policy on economic
activity are only one of the many factors that need to be considered in determining the
appropriate pace of fiscal consolidation for any single economy.

I. FORECAST ERRORS AND FISCAL CONSOLIDATION FORECASTS
In this section, we explain our estimation approach, describe the dataset, and report
our baseline results.

A. Specification and Data
To investigate whether growth forecast errors have been systematically related to
fiscal consolidation forecasts, our approach is simple: we regress the forecast error for real
GDP growth in years t and t+1 on forecasts of fiscal consolidation for t and t+1 made early in
year t. We focus on two-year intervals to allow for lagged effects of fiscal policy. Under
rational expectations, and assuming that the correct model has been used for forecasting, the
coefficient on the forecast of fiscal consolidation should be zero. The equation estimated is
therefore:
(1)

Forecast Error of ΔYi,t:t+1 = α + β Forecast of ΔFi,t:t+1|t + ε i,t:t+1,

where ΔYi,t:t+1 denotes cumulative (year-over-year) growth of real GDP (Y) in economy i—
that is, (Yi,t+1/Yi,t–1 – 1)—and the associated forecast error is ΔY i,t:t+1 – f{ΔY i,t:t+1 | Ωt }, where
f denotes the forecast conditional on Ωt, the information set available early in year t. ΔF i,t:t+1
denotes the change in the general government structural fiscal balance in percent of potential
GDP, a widely used measure of the discretionary change in fiscal policy for which we have
forecasts.6 Positive values of ΔF i,t:t+1 indicate fiscal consolidation, while negative values
indicate discretionary fiscal stimulus. The associated forecast is “Forecast of ΔFi,t:t+1|t”
defined as f { Ft+1,,i – Ft–1,i | Ωt }. Under the null hypothesis that fiscal multipliers used for

6

As the WEO data appendix explains,
“The structural budget balance refers to the general government cyclically adjusted balance adjusted
for nonstructural elements beyond the economic cycle. These include temporary financial sector and
asset price movements as well as one-off, or temporary, revenue or expenditure items. The cyclically
adjusted balance is the fiscal balance adjusted for the effects of the economic cycle; see, for example,
A. Fedelino. A. Ivanova and M. Horton ‘Computing Cyclically Adjusted Balances and Automatic
Stabilizers’ IMF Technical Guidance Note No. 5.”

We express the structural balance as a ratio to potential GDP, but results based on the structural balance
expressed as a ratio to nominal GDP are very similar, as we report below.

5
forecasting were accurate, the coefficient, β, should be zero.7 Our data come from the IMF’s
WEO database. We have posted the underlying data and estimation codes required to
replicate all the results reported in this paper on the IMF’s website.8
As explained above, we focus in our baseline on forecasts made for European
economies in early 2010. Growth forecast errors thus measure the difference between actual
cumulative real GDP (year-over-year) growth during 2010–11, based on the latest data,
minus the forecast prepared for the April 2010 WEO (IMF, 2010c).9 The forecast of fiscal
consolidation is the forecast of the change in the structural fiscal balance as a percent of
potential GDP during 2010–11, as prepared for the April 2010 WEO. We use all available
data for the European Union’s (EU’s) 27 member states, as well as for the remaining three
European economies classified as “advanced” in the WEO database: Iceland, Norway, and
Switzerland. WEO forecasts of the structural fiscal balance made in April 2010 are
unavailable for Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Luxembourg. Thus, based on data availability,
our baseline sample consists of 26 economies (27 + 3 – 4).10 As we report below, filling the
four missing observations with forecasts from the spring 2010 EC European Economic
Forecast (EC, 2010) makes little difference to the results.

B. Results
Table 1 reports our baseline estimation results. We find a significant negative relation
between fiscal consolidation forecasts made in 2010 and subsequent growth forecast errors.
In the baseline specification, the estimate of β, the coefficient on the forecast of fiscal
consolidation, is –1.095 (t-statistic = –4.294), implying that, for every additional percentage
point of GDP of fiscal consolidation, GDP was about 1 percent lower than forecast.11 Figure
1 illustrates this result using a scatter plot. The coefficient is statistically significant at the 1
7

Estimates of equation (1) thus provide a simple test of forecast efficiency. Under the null of forecast
efficiency, information known when the forecasts were made should be uncorrelated with subsequent forecast
errors. A finding that the coefficient β is negative would indicate that forecasters tended to be optimistic
regarding the level of growth associated with fiscal consolidation.
8

The data can be found at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18779. We have posted the underlying dataset
in Excel and STATA, along with the STATA codes that produce all the empirical results, and a “Readme” file
with replication instructions. One series used in Table 6 of the appendix, namely the IMF vulnerability rating, is
confidential information and could not be included in the data file.
9

Throughout this paper, forecast errors are computed relative the latest (October 2012 WEO) database.

10

The 26 economies are Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Germany, Denmark, Finland,
France, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Iceland, Italy, Malta, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom.

11

In an earlier version of this paper, which considered results for a sample of EU and major advanced
economies, the results were similar: the slope coefficient estimate was –1.164, and the R-squared was 0.506.
Throughout the paper, we report statistical inference based on heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors.

6
percent level, and the R2 is 0.496. The estimate of the constant term, 0.775 (t-statistic =
2.023) has no strong economic interpretation.12

II. ROBUSTNESS
The results reported above suggest that economies with larger planned fiscal
consolidations tended to have larger subsequent growth disappointments. In this section, we
examine the robustness of this result along three main dimensions. First, we repeat the
analysis for different groups of economies and examine the role of potentially influential
outlier observations. Second, we reestimate the baseline equation (1) while adding control
variables that could plausibly have both affected the growth forecast error and been
correlated with fiscal consolidation forecasts. Not controlling for such factors could influence
the estimated relation between fiscal consolidation forecasts and growth forecast errors.
Finally, we consider how the results change for forecasts made in more normal times (1997–
2008) and for other time intervals since the start of the crisis (2009–12).

A. Choice of Economies and Role of Outliers
First, we investigate the sensitivity of the baseline results to changes in the economies
included in the sample. We start by seeing how the results change when we replace the
missing WEO forecasts for four EU member states—Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and
Luxembourg—with EC forecasts. As Table 1 reports, this makes little difference to the
results. Next, we consider how the results change when we remove observations associated
with the largest fiscal policy changes. While such policy changes are worth considering, it is
natural to ask how important they are for the results. As Table 1 reports, when we remove the
two largest policy changes (those for Germany and Greece), the estimate of β declines to –
0.776 (t-statistic = –2.249) but remains statistically significant at the 5 percent level. Thus,
concerns raised by some in reaction to an earlier version of this paper, that excluding the
largest policy changes from the sample might render the results insignificant, seem
exaggerated.13
We also investigate whether forecasts made for economies with IMF programs are
driving the baseline results. As Table 1 reports, excluding from the sample the five
economies that had IMF programs in 2010 or 2011—Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Portugal, and
12

The constant term, 0.775, equals the sample mean of the growth forecast error, 0.193 percentage point, minus
the slope coefficient (β), –1.095, times the sample mean of fiscal consolidation, 0.532 percentage point. Thus,
0.775 = 0.193 – (–1.095 × 0.532). If we express the structural fiscal balance in percent of headline (rather than
potential) GDP and rerun the baseline regression in that form, we obtain a very similar estimate of β (–1.077,
with a t-statistic of –3.900).

13

Financial Times, October 12, 2012.

7
Romania—yields an estimate of β of –0.812 (t-statistic = –2.890), which is statistically
significant at the 1 percent level and is not statistically distinguishable from our baseline
estimate of –1.095. Similarly, excluding the four economies classified as “emerging” in the
WEO database from the sample (Bulgaria, Hungary, Poland, and Romania) has little effect
on the point estimate of β, which is –0.992 (t-statistic = –3.568) in this case.14
Second, we investigate more formally the sensitivity of the results to outliers by
applying three accepted estimation strategies designed to resist the influence of potential
outliers. In particular, we reestimate the baseline specification using robust regression, which
down-weights observations with larger absolute residuals using iterative weighted least
squares (Andersen, 2008).15 Since robust regression is more resistant to outliers than is
ordinary least squares (OLS), this provides a check of whether outliers are unduly
influencing the baseline OLS results. As Table 1 reports, the robust regression estimate of β
is –1.279 (t-statistic = –6.989), which is similar to the baseline OLS estimate and statistically
significant at the 1 percent level. Next, we apply a quantile regression approach, which
minimizes the sum of the absolute residuals about the median, rather than the sum of the
squares of the residuals about the mean as in OLS, making the estimates less affected by
outliers.16 The quantile regression estimate of β is –1.088 (t-statistic = –4.533) and is
statistically significant at the 1 percent level. Finally, we also investigate the role of outliers
using Cook’s distance method, by discarding observations with Cook’s distance greater than
4/N, where N is the sample size, and obtain a β estimate of –0.921 (t-statistic = –4.244) that
is, again, statistically significant at the 1 percent level. Overall, these three methods that resist
the pull of outliers confirm the baseline OLS result of a negative relation between fiscal
consolidation forecasts and growth forecast errors.
Third, we consider how the results change when we broaden the sample to include the
entire group of economies classified as “advanced” in the WEO database. This wider group
adds 10 economies to our baseline sample.17 For most of these additional economies,
14

As a further robustness check, we examine whether the coefficient β was significantly different for European
economies in the euro area or with a peg to the euro. We reestimate equation (1) while allowing coefficients β
and α to be different for the nine economies in the sample that are not euro area members and do not have peg
to the euro (Czech Republic, Hungary, Iceland, Norway, Poland, Romania, Sweden, Switzerland, and the
United Kingdom), using dummy variables. We fail to reject the null that the coefficient β was the same for both
groups. The estimate of β for the euro area or euro peg economies is –0. 982 (t-statistic = –3.198), and the pvalue for the null hypothesis that β was the same for the remaining economies is 0.335.

15

The robust regression procedure is implemented in STATA via the rreg command. As Hamilton (2012)
explains, the procedure starts by estimating the equation via OLS. Next, it drops observation with Cook's
distance greater than 1. Finally, an iterative process occurs, during which weights are calculated based on
absolute residuals until the maximum change between the weights between successive iterations is below
tolerance. Overall, the procedure down-weights influential outliers.
16

17

The quantile regression approach is implemented via the qreg command in STATA.

The 10 additional economies are Australia, Canada, Korea, Hong Kong SAR, Israel, Japan, New Zealand,
Singapore, Taiwan Province of China, and the United States.

8
including Australia, Hong Kong SAR, Israel, Korea, New Zealand, Singapore, and Taiwan
Province of China, the conditions for larger-than-normal multipliers discussed above, such as
the liquidity trap, are less relevant, which leads us to expect a smaller absolute value of β for
this sample. As Table 1 reports, the estimate of β declines to –0.538 (t-statistic = –1.322) for
this group of economies and is no longer statistically significant. By contrast, when we
narrow this broad sample to include only economies that were, arguably, in a liquidity trap
during this period, the estimate of β rises in absolute value to –0.986 (t-statistic = –3.652).18
The reduced statistical significance of the OLS estimates for this broader sample is,
however, primarily driven by influential outliers, as Table 1 reports. The robust regression,
which down-weights influential outliers, yields an estimate of β of –0.955 (t-statistic = –
4.751), which is close to the baseline sample estimate and is statistically significant at the 1
percent level. The stark difference between these robust regression results and the OLS
results highlights the fact that the OLS results are heavily influenced by outliers in this
broader sample. The procedure gives the two smallest weights to New Zealand and
Singapore due to their large absolute residuals.19 Similarly, the quantile regression yields an
estimate of β of –0.999 (t-statistic = –7.866), and the estimate based on excluding
observations with Cook’s distance greater than N/4 yields an estimate of –0.746 (t-statistic =
–2.674). Overall, once we adjust for the influence of outliers, the results for the broader
group of all advanced economies are consistent with those obtained for the baseline
European sample.
Finally, we repeat the analysis for the group of 14 (non-European) emerging market
economies for which WEO forecasts of the structural fiscal balance made in early 2010 are
available.20 As Table 1 reports, our results provide no evidence that forecasters
underestimated fiscal multipliers for this group of economies. The estimate of β is 0.007 (tstatistic = 0.016). Moreover, in this case, the lack of statistical significance is not merely
driven by influential outliers—reestimating the relation for emerging market economies
using the robust regression, the quantile regression, and excluding Cook’s distance outliers
leads to the same conclusion. These results, admittedly based on a very small sample, are

18

For the purposes of this exercise, we define the set of economies in a liquidity trap as those for which the
central bank’s main nominal policy interest rate reached 1 percent or less during 2010–11. This excludes the
following economies from the sample: Australia, Hong Kong SAR, Hungary, Iceland, Israel, Korea, New
Zealand, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, Sweden, and Taiwan Province of China.

19

The residual for Singapore is 10.475 percentage points, while that of New Zealand is –6.832 percentage
points. The large negative residual for New Zealand reflects the 2010 earthquake, which had major implications
for growth and occurred after the publication of the WEO forecast (which, in turn, already assumed some fiscal
stimulus planned prior to the earthquake). The reason for Singapore’s large positive residual is less clear,
although it was associated with a growth spike of 45.9 percent (quarter-over-quarter, annualized) in 2010:Q1
(IMF, 2010b, p. 41).

20

These emerging market economies are Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico,
Russia, South Africa, Swaziland, Thailand, Turkey, and Ukraine.

9
consistent with the notion that the conditions leading to larger-than-normal fiscal multipliers
discussed above are currently less relevant for these economies.21

B. Controlling for Other Variables
Having established that the baseline results are not unduly influenced by outliers, we
check if the results are robust to controlling for additional variables that could plausibly have
triggered both planned fiscal consolidation and lower-than-expected growth. The omission of
such variables could bias the analysis toward finding that fiscal multipliers were larger than
assumed.
In the context of forecast evaluation, controlling for other variables that were in the
information set of forecasters is warranted. The question is: based on the information they
had available at the time forecasts were made, did forecasters underestimate the effect of
fiscal consolidation on growth, or did they instead underestimate the effect of other variables
on growth? It is worth emphasizing that, to answer this question, controlling for ex-post
developments—those unknown at the time forecast were made—is not valid. For example, an
ex-post rise in sovereign borrowing costs could be the result of lower-than-expected growth
as well as the cause of lower growth (Cottarelli and Jaramillo, 2012; Romer, 2012). In this
case, lower-than-expected growth caused by fiscal consolidation could trigger a rise in
sovereign borrowing costs, and these higher borrowing costs could, in turn, further reduce
growth. Even if controlling for such variables significantly changed the estimate of β, the
coefficient would no longer have an economic interpretation.22
Relatedly, controlling for the forecast error of the change in fiscal policy does not, in
our application, provide a way of estimating the causal effect of fiscal policy on growth.
Over the two-year intervals that we consider, changes in fiscal policy are unlikely to be
orthogonal to economic developments. Thus, the forecast error of fiscal consolidation over
our two-year intervals cannot be interpreted as an identified fiscal shock and cannot yield
estimates of actual fiscal multipliers. A large literature seeks to identify such exogenous
shifts in government spending and revenues. Doing so has proven difficult and lies beyond
the scope of our analysis.
We start by considering the role of sovereign debt problems. Are the baseline results
picking up greater-than-expected effects of sovereign debt problems rather than the effects of
fiscal consolidation? As Table 2 reports, the results are robust to controlling for the initial
(end-2009) government-debt-to-GDP ratio, for the initial fiscal-balance-to-GDP ratio, and for
the initial structural fiscal-balance-to-GDP ratio. To ensure that these variables were indeed
21

We revisit the case of emerging market economies based on a larger sample spanning more years in section
IIIC, again finding little evidence of fiscal multipliers being underestimated for this group.

22

Some comments on an earlier version of this analysis discussed the role of such ex-post developments. For
completeness, we report results while controlling for ex-post developments in Appendix Table 1, finding that
they do not materially influence the estimate of β.

10
in the forecasters’ information set, the source of the data is the same (from the April 2010
WEO—IMF, 2010c) as for the fiscal consolidation forecasts. However, since these
(backward-looking) measures of the fiscal accounts do not necessarily fully capture
perceived future sovereign debt problems, we also control for perceived sovereign default
risk, as measured by the sovereign credit default swap (CDS) spread in the first quarter of
2010.23 The estimate of β is, again, largely unchanged.
Next, we check if the baseline result is picking up greater-than-expected effects of
financial sector stress rather than the unexpected effects of fiscal consolidation. As Table 2
reports, the relation holds when we control for the initial bank CDS spread.24 We obtain
similar results when controlling for the occurrence of banking crises, based on a zero-one
event dummy variable indicating a systemic banking crisis, as identified by Laeven and
Valencia (2012). Finally, it is worth recalling that, as reported in Table 1, the baseline result
is robust to excluding economies with severe financial stress—namely, those with IMF
programs.
The baseline finding also holds up to controlling for the fiscal consolidation of
trading partners. To the extent that fiscal consolidations were synchronized, fiscal
consolidation by others may be driving the results. In particular, forecasters may have
understated the cross-country spillover effects of fiscal policy, which, as recent research
indicates, can be large (Auerbach and Gorodnichenko, 2012c). However, when we control
for trade-weighted fiscal consolidation of other countries (scaled by the share of exports in
GDP), the results are virtually unchanged.25
To investigate the role of precrisis external imbalances that may have triggered both
fiscal consolidation and larger-than-expected headwinds to growth, we control for the
precrisis (2007) current-account-deficit-to-GDP ratio, again taken from the April 2010 WEO
database (IMF, 2010c), and find similar results. We obtain similar results when controlling
23

Data for the sovereign CDS spreads come from Bloomberg LP. We use the average five-year CDS spread in
2010:Q1, which is arguably a good proxy for the information about CDS spreads available to forecasters during
the preparation of the April 2010 WEO forecasts. The results are similar if we use the level of the sovereign
CDS spread in 2009:Q4.

24

Data for the bank CDS spreads come from Bloomberg LP. We use the average five-year bank CDS spread in
2010:Q1. For each economy, the bank CDS spread is the bank-asset-weighted average. For our baseline
European sample, bank CDS spreads are available for 15 economies—Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France,
Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United
Kingdom. For the remaining 11 economies, we fill the missing observations using the predicted values of the
bank CDS spread from a regression of bank CDS spreads on sovereign CDS spreads during 2009–10—a strong
relation with a slope coefficient of 1.093 (t-statistic = 11.52).
25

The estimate of the coefficient on partner-country fiscal consolidation, –0.548, while not statistically
significant, is fairly large. It implies that a joint 1 percent of GDP fiscal consolidation by the domestic economy
and by its partners (weighted by the share of exports in GDP) would lead to a domestic output loss of 1.652
percent, relative to forecast (–0.548 plus the estimate of β in this specification, –1.105). However, since the
estimate of the coefficient on partner-country fiscal consolidation is highly imprecise (the standard error is
1.343), this result needs to be interpreted cautiously.

11
for the stock of precrisis (2007) net foreign liabilities in percent of GDP, based on the
updated and extended version of dataset constructed by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007).
Finally, we investigate the possible role of household debt overhang, which can have
negative effects on economic activity (Mian, Rao, and Sufi, 2011; IMF, 2012c, and others).
In particular, we reestimate the baseline equation while controlling for the precrisis (2007)
level of the household debt-to-disposable-income ratio. As Table 2 reports, controlling for
this variable does not materially influence the estimate of β.26
Actual versus Planned Fiscal Consolidation
We address next the possibility that, although the assumed multipliers were correct,
countries with more ambitious consolidation programs may have implemented more fiscal
consolidation than originally planned. The concern, here, is that the baseline result reflects
the fact that actual fiscal consolidation was much larger than planned rather than actual
multipliers being larger than expected. It is worth emphasizing that this issue would only lead
to a biased estimate of β to the extent that the unexpected fiscal consolidation (the fiscal
consolidation forecast error) was correlated with the initial fiscal consolidation forecast.
We investigate this possibility using a two-stage-least-squares approach: the first
stage involves a regression of actual fiscal consolidation on the forecast of fiscal
consolidation; and the second stage is a regression of the growth forecast error on the
instrumented values of actual fiscal consolidation obtained in the first stage. As Table 3
reports, the first stage is strong, and the slope coefficient is 1.057 (t-statistic = 5.714). This
coefficient close to 1 indicates that, on average, actual consolidation was neither smaller nor
larger than expected.27 The second stage indicates that a 1 percent of GDP fiscal
consolidation is associated with a –1.036 percentage point output forecast error (t-statistic = –
4.518), which is, again, close to the baseline.
Overall, these robustness checks suggest that the results for the baseline sample are
robust to the inclusion of additional variables that could potentially bias the results toward
finding that actual multipliers were larger than assumed multipliers. In particular, controlling
for variables that measure other weaknesses of the economy that might be associated with
26

Based on U.S. data, Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2011) show that a higher level of the household debt-to-income
ratio in 2007 is associated with sharper declines in U.S. economic activity during the crisis. Our measure of
household debt is the household sector’s total financial liabilities in percent of household disposable income,
which we take from the dataset compiled for the April 2012 WEO chapter on household debt (IMF, 2012c). The
baseline results also hold up to additional robustness checks, including controlling for the initial forecast for
2010–11 real growth, both in terms of GDP and in terms of terms of potential GDP.

27

The constant term is 0.907 (t-statistic = 2.834), as reported in Table 3, which indicates that economies did, on
average, tend to consolidate more than initially planned. However, the key result for our application is that the
forecast error of fiscal consolidation is not correlated with the initial fiscal consolidation forecast, as the slope
coefficient of 1.057 indicates. Equivalently, regressing the forecast error of fiscal consolidation on the initial
forecast yields a near-zero coefficient (0.057 with a t-statistic of 0.190).

12
fiscal consolidation do not materially affect the coefficient on the forecast of fiscal
consolidation.28

C. Different Forecast Vintages
So far, our analysis has focused on forecasts made in early 2010, when a number of
large fiscal consolidation plans were announced. But it is worth examining whether the
relation also holds for forecasts made in other years. We start by examining forecasts made in
all years since the start of the crisis (2009–12), both jointly and individually. This exercise
has the advantage of raising the sample size to 105 observations, up from the 26 observations
in our baseline sample. Then, we consider forecasts made in more normal times—the
precrisis decade (1997–2008). For this precrisis sample, our expectation is that in these more
normal times, the coefficient β should be close to zero.
First, we discuss the results obtained when considering the set of two-year intervals
since the start of the crisis (2009–12) together in a panel. The equation estimated is similar to
equation (1), except that it now includes a vector of time-fixed effects, λt:
(2)

Forecast Error of ΔYi,t:t+1 = α + λt + β Forecast of ΔFi,t:t+1|t + ε i,t:t+1,

where t = 2009, 2010, 2011, and 2012. Based on the available data, the size of our European
sample size is now 105 observations. Note, however, that for forecasts made in early 2011
and early 2012, the dependent variable is a forecast revision rather than a forecast error, since
actual data for 2012 (included in the October 2012 WEO (IMF, 2012b), our reference) are
not yet complete, and data for 2013 are not yet available. Results for these more recent
forecasts should therefore be seen as preliminary. Given our use of two-year overlapping
intervals, we correct the standard errors for serial correlation of type MA(1) using the
Newey-West procedure.29
Table 4 reports the estimation results. For the panel of forecasts made during 2009–
12, the estimate of β is –0.667 (t-statistic = –4.143), which is smaller than the baseline value
obtained for forecasts made in early 2010, but is still strongly statistically significant. Figure
2 illustrates this 2009–12 panel result using a scatter plot.30
28

Not surprisingly, repeating this analysis for the broader group of all advanced economies produces results
similar to those reported in Table 1, as reported in Appendix Table 2. In particular, based on OLS, which is
strongly influenced by outliers in this sample, as discussed above, the estimate of β is negative but statistically
insignificant for each case of adding an additional control variable. But using the robust regression approach,
the estimate of β is statistically significant in each case, and ranges from –0.729 to –0.973.

29

The Newey West standard errors are larger than OLS standard errors in our application. They are obtained in
STATA by choosing the option force of the newey command.

30

As reported in Appendix Table 3, when controlling for the other variables discussed above, both sequentially
(one at a time) and in a regression with all the controls included simultaneously, the estimate of β for the full
2009–12 panel is similar to that reported in Table 4.

13
Considering years individually, we find that the estimate of β is statistically
significant for forecasts made in early 2009, 2010, and 2012, but not for forecasts made in
early 2011. For the 2011 forecasts, the estimate of β is –0.467 (t-statistic = –1.038). Thus, the
concern, raised by some in reaction to the earlier version of this analysis, that the relation
weakens for forecasts made in 2011 is warranted.31 For 2012, however, the estimate of β is –
0.357 (t-statistic = 2.429), which is statistically significant at the 5 percent level. This decline
in the coefficient in 2011–12 to around –0.4 could reflect smaller multipliers or partial
learning by forecasters regarding the effects of fiscal policy on economic activity. However,
as explained above, results based on these more recent forecasts should be seen as
preliminary. Once data for 2012–13 are complete, the estimation results for forecasts made in
2011–12 could be revisited.32
Table 4 also reports estimation results based on the 2009–12 panel for our two
alternative samples: the sample of all advanced economies and the sample of emerging
market economies. For the broader sample of all advanced economies, the estimate of β is
–0.410 (t-statistic = –2.060), which is statistically significant at the 5 percent level. Figure 3
illustrates this 2009–12 result for advanced economies using a scatter plot, and suggests that
the lower significance of this coefficient is again partly due to noise introduced by outliers.
Also, as before, for the subset of advanced economies in a liquidity trap, the results are
stronger: the 2009–12 panel estimate of β is –0.648 (t-statistic = –3.042) and is significant at
the 1 percent level. For emerging market economies, we again find no significant relation:
the estimate of β is –0.108 (t-statistic = –0.394).
How special is the crisis period? To address this question, Table 4 also reports the
results of estimating equation (3) for the set of two-year intervals during the precrisis decade
(1997–2008). We find no evidence of fiscal multipliers being underestimated, on average,
during these more normal times. The estimate of β is near zero, –0.077 (t-statistic = –0.470),
for this period.33

31

Financial Times, October 12, 2012.

32

As reported in Appendix Tables 4 and 5, the coefficients for the individual forecasts (for 2009–10, 2010–11,
2011–12, and 2012–13) are similar to, though typically less statistically significant, than those reported in Table
4 when estimated in a panel with different β coefficients for each forecast, but now adding the additional
controls discussed above both individually and simultaneously. Appendix Table 6 reports how the results hold
up to controlling for a summary statistic for economic and financial vulnerabilities based on the IMF’s Early
Warning Exercise vulnerability ratings, finding results similar to those reported in Table 4. In particular, the
coefficients on the fiscal consolidation forecasts made during the 2009–12 period are all negative, and they are
larger in absolute value and more statistically significant for the forecasts made in 2009–10 than in 2011–12.
33

The R-squared for the panel regression covering the precrisis decade (0.64) reflects the inclusion of time fixed
effects. A number of the time dummy variables have statistically significant coefficients due to the occurrence
of common shocks. Without the time fixed effects, the R-squared for precrisis panel regression is near zero
(0.01).

14
III. EXTENSIONS
Having discussed the robustness of our baseline results on a number of dimensions,
we turn to three extensions. First, we check whether the baseline results differ depending on
whether fiscal consolidation reflects changes in government spending or changes in revenue.
Second, we consider the relation between planned fiscal consolidation and the forecast errors
for the components of aggregate spending and for the unemployment rate. Third, we
investigate whether the baseline results also hold when we rely on the forecast errors of other
forecasters, including the EC, the OECD, and the EIU.

A. Government Spending and Revenue
To investigate whether the baseline results are driven primarily by spending cuts or
by revenue increases, we split our measure of fiscal consolidation—the change in the
structural fiscal balance—into the change in government spending and revenue. In particular,
we estimate a modified version of our baseline equation, separating between the change in
spending and the change in revenue:34
(3)

Forecast Error of ΔYi,t:t+1 = α + δ Forecast of ΔTi,t:t+1|t + γ Forecast of ΔSi,t:t+1|t + ε i,t:t+1

where ΔSi,t:t+1|t denotes the forecast of the change in structural spending in 2010–11 and
ΔTi,t:t+1|t denotes the forecast of the change in structural revenue in 2010–11, both in percent
of potential GDP. As before, the forecasts are taken from the April 2010 WEO (IMF, 2010c).
IMF forecasts give forecasts of headline, not structural, spending. We construct forecasts for
the change in structural spending based on the conventional assumption of a zero elasticity of
government expenditure relative to the output gap (IMF, 2009a). Thus, we approximate the
forecast for the change in the structural spending ratio to potential GDP by the forecast of the
change in the headline spending ratio to potential GDP. The forecast for the change in
structural revenue ratio to potential GDP is the sum of the forecast of the change in the
structural fiscal balance and the forecast for the change in structural government spending:
ΔTi,t:t+1|t = ΔFi,t:t+1|t + ΔSi,t:t+1|t.
As Table 5 reports, the baseline results hold for both government spending and
revenue. The point estimate of the coefficient on the forecast of government spending (1.244,
t-statistic = 4.989) is slightly larger in absolute value than the coefficient on the revenue
forecast (–0.865, t-statistic = –3.822), but the difference is just short of being statistically
insignificant (p-value of 0.102).35 We estimate equation (3) using overall government
34

Since fiscal consolidation often involves a combination of spending cuts and tax hikes—they are correlated—
including either alone would not be appropriate.

35

The regression coefficient for spending is positive, indicating that spending cuts (negative changes in
spending) were associated with negative GDP forecast errors.

15
spending or primary government spending (excluding interest payments), obtaining similar
results. Overall, we conclude that fiscal multipliers were, on average, underestimated for both
sides of the fiscal balance, with a slightly larger degree of underestimation associated with
changes in government spending.

B. Components of Aggregate Spending and Unemployment
To get a sense of the sources of the growth forecast errors, we reestimate the baseline
specification for the components of real GDP. For example, to investigate the relation
between planned fiscal consolidation and forecast errors for private consumption growth, we
estimate the following modification of our baseline equation:
(4)

Forecast Error of ΔCi,t:t+1 = α + β Forecast of ΔFi,t:t+1|t + ε i,t:t+1,

where Forecast Error of ΔCi,t:t+1 is the forecast error for real private consumption growth,
instead of real GDP growth as in the baseline.
As Table 6 reports, when we decompose the effect on GDP in this way, we find that
planned fiscal consolidation is associated with significantly lower-than-expected
consumption and investment growth. The coefficient for investment growth (–2.681) is about
three times larger than that for private consumption growth (–0.816), which is consistent with
research showing that investment varies relatively strongly in response to overall economic
conditions. For example, based on U.S. data, Romer and Romer (2010) find that, in response
to a tax increase, GDP, investment and consumption all decline, but investment growth falls
by about four times more than consumption growth does. Conventional models predict that
fiscal consolidation is normally associated with lower interest rates, supporting investment.
The fact that investment growth falls by more than expected in response to fiscal
consolidation could reflect the lack of the conventional interest rate effect during this period.
In contrast, the results for export and import growth are not statistically significant.
Since lower-than-expected output growth could be expected to reduce inflation
pressure, we also look at the forecast error for the GDP deflator, finding evidence of a
negative, but statistically insignificant, relation. When we repeat the exercise for the
unemployment rate, we find a coefficient of 0.608, which is statistically and economically
significant. Overall, we find that, for the baseline sample, forecasters significantly
underestimated the increase in unemployment and the decline in domestic demand associated
with fiscal consolidation.

C. Alternative Forecasts
Finally, we compare the baseline results obtained for IMF forecast errors with those
obtained for the forecast errors of other forecasters, including the EC, the OECD, and the
EIU. Data for EC forecasts of both the structural fiscal balance and real GDP are from the

16
spring 2010 European Economic Forecast (EC, 2010). Data for OECD forecasts of the
structural fiscal balance and real GDP are from the May 2010 Economic Outlook (OECD,
2010). Data for EIU forecasts of real GDP are from the April 2010 Country Forecast (EIU,
2010). Since the EIU does not publish forecasts of the structural fiscal balance, we take
forecasts of fiscal consolidation from the April 2010 WEO (IMF, 2010c) for the EIU
regressions. We estimate the regressions for our baseline sample, both for all the forecasts
available from each forecast source and for a (smaller) subsample for which the economies
included are the same in each regression. As Table 7 reports, we find that the baseline result
of a negative relation between growth forecast errors and planned fiscal consolidation holds
for all the forecasters considered, but that it is strongest in terms of both economic and
statistical significance for IMF forecasts, and, to a slightly smaller extent, for EC forecasts.

IV. CONCLUSIONS
What do our results imply about actual multipliers? Our results suggest that actual
fiscal multipliers have been larger than forecasters assumed. But what did forecasters
assume? Answering this question is not easy, since forecasters use models in which fiscal
multipliers are implicit and depend on the composition of the fiscal adjustment and other
economic conditions.36
We believe, however, that a reasonable case can be made that the multipliers used at
the start of the crisis averaged about 0.5. A number of studies based on precrisis data for
advanced economies indicate actual multipliers of roughly 0.5, and it is plausible that
forecasters, on average, made assumptions consistent with this evidence. The October
2008 WEO chapter on fiscal policy presents multiplier estimates for 21 advanced economies
during 1970–2007 averaging 0.5 within three years (IMF, 2008, p. 177). Similarly, the
October 2010 WEO (IMF, 2010d) chapter on fiscal consolidation presents multiplier
estimates for 15 advanced economies during 1979–2009 averaging 0.5 percent within two
years.37 This evidence, and our finding of no gap, on average, between assumed and actual
fiscal multipliers before the crisis, would imply that multipliers assumed prior to the crisis
were around 0.5. Relatedly, the March 2009 IMF staff note prepared for the G-20 Ministerial
Meeting reports IMF staff assumptions regarding fiscal multipliers based on estimates from
various studies. In particular, it contains an assessment of the impact of the 2008–10 fiscal

36

Note that inferring assumed multipliers from regressions of growth forecasts on forecasts of the fiscal policy
stance is not possible. For example, economies with a worse economic outlook may have planned more fiscal
stimulus, and a regression of growth forecasts on forecasts of the fiscal policy stance may thus, incorrectly,
suggest that assumed multipliers were near zero or even negative.

37

A survey of the literature provided by Spilimbergo, Symansky, and Schindler (2009) indicated a wide range
of multiplier estimates, which includes 0.5 but which points, for the most part, to somewhat higher multipliers.

17
expansion on growth based on assumed multipliers of 0.3–0.5 for revenue and 0.3–1.8 for
government spending (IMF, 2009b, p. 32).38
If we put this together, and use the range of coefficients reported in our tables, this
suggests that actual multipliers were substantially above 1 early in the crisis. The smaller
coefficient we find for forecasts made in 2011 and 2012 could reflect smaller actual
multipliers or partial learning by forecasters regarding the effects of fiscal policy. A decline
in actual multipliers, despite the still-constraining zero lower bound, could reflect an easing
of credit constraints faced by firms and households, and less economic slack in a number of
economies relative to 2009–10.
However, our results need to be interpreted with care. As suggested by both
theoretical considerations and the evidence in this and other empirical papers, there is no
single multiplier for all times and all countries. Multipliers can be higher or lower across time
and across economies. In some cases, confidence effects may partly offset direct effects. As
economies recover, and economies exit the liquidity trap, multipliers are likely to return to
their precrisis levels. Nevertheless, it seems safe for the time being, when thinking about
fiscal consolidation, to assume higher multipliers than before the crisis.
Finally, it is worth emphasizing that deciding on the appropriate stance of fiscal
policy requires much more than an assessment regarding the size of short-term fiscal
multipliers. Thus, our results should not be construed as arguing for any specific fiscal policy
stance in any specific country. In particular, the results do not imply that fiscal consolidation
is undesirable. Virtually all advanced economies face the challenge of fiscal adjustment in
response to elevated government debt levels and future pressures on public finances from
demographic change. The short-term effects of fiscal policy on economic activity are only
one of the many factors that need to be considered in determining the appropriate pace of
fiscal consolidation for any single country.

38

The December 2010 OECD Economic Outlook includes a table on the likely effects of fiscal consolidation on
GDP, suggesting multipliers closer to 1 for a package equally composed of spending cuts and direct tax
increases. Such higher multipliers, if they were used in forecasting, may help to explain our finding of a smaller
coefficient on fiscal consolidation forecasts for OECD growth forecast errors.

18
APPENDIX
This appendix reports how the baseline results are affected by the inclusion of ex-post
variables in the specification (Appendix Table 1); how the results for the broader sample of
all advanced economies change when controlling for other variables (Appendix Table 2);
how the panel results for different year intervals in 2009-12 are influenced by the inclusion
of additional controls, both individually and simultaneously (Appendix Tables 3, 4, and 5);
and how the results hold up to controlling for a summary statistic for economic and financial
vulnerabilities based on the IMF’s Early Warning Exercise (EWE) ratings (Appendix
Table 6).
Appendix Table 1 reports the results of controlling for variables that were not known
at the time forecasts were made. We do so because some commentators have run such
regressions, and we want to report the results using our sample. As discussed above,
however, we do not think these regressions can shed light on the question of whether
forecasters underestimated fiscal multipliers or on the role of some other factor. Even if
controlling for such variables significantly changed the estimate of β, the coefficient would
no longer have an economic interpretation.
We start by considering the increase in sovereign and financial market stress during
2010–11, measured by the change in CDS spreads from 2010:Q1 to 2011:Q4. As Appendix
Table 2 reports, controlling for the change in sovereign CDS spreads during 2010–11 yields a
β estimate of –0.839 (t-statistic = –2.797), which is not statistically distinguishable from our
baseline estimate of –1.095. Controlling for the change in bank CDS spreads over the same
time period yields a β estimate of –1.002 (t-statistic = –4.158).39 Next, we control for the
revision to the initial (end-2009) government debt-to-GDP ratio. If subsequent upward
revisions to the initial stock of debt caused a rise in borrowing costs and lower growth, the
revision to the initial debt stock could be correlated with growth forecast errors. However, we
find that controlling for this revision—as measured by the latest estimates of the end-2009
government debt-to-GDP ratio minus the spring 2010 estimate—yields a β estimate of –
1.090 (t-statistic = –4.395), which is again similar to the baseline.
Finally, controlling for unexpected fiscal consolidation (the fiscal consolidation
forecast error) does not significantly affect the results. The estimate of β is –1.077 (t-statistic
= –5.033) in this case, which indicates that the omission of this variable from the baseline
specification was not a significant source of bias.40 The coefficient on the forecast error of
39

As before, we fill the 11 missing observations for the change in bank CDS spreads using the predicted values
from a regression of the change in bank CDS spreads on the change in sovereign CDS spreads during 2010–
11—a strong relation with a slope coefficient of 0.931 (t-statistic = 22.370).

40

In response to comments on an earlier version of this paper (EC, 2012), we also reestimate equation (1) while
allowing the coefficients β and α to be different for the group of economies that, in ex-post terms, undertook
fiscal stimulus in 2010 (ΔFi,2010 < 0) and fiscal consolidation in 2011 (ΔFi,2011 > 0), using dummy variables. We
fail to reject the null hypothesis that the coefficient β is the same for this group as for the rest (p-value = 0.772).
The estimate of β for this group is –1.058 (t-statistic = –2.990), and the estimate of β for the remaining
economies is –1.223 (t-statistic = –2.800).

19
fiscal consolidation is small and statistically insignificant (–0.309 with a t-statistic of –
1.626), but, as discussed above, this estimate suffers from two-way causality, and thus cannot
be given a structural interpretation. Over the two-year intervals we consider, changes in fiscal
policy are unlikely to be orthogonal to economic developments. Thus, the forecast error of
fiscal consolidation cannot be interpreted as an identified fiscal shock.
Appendix Table 2 reports the results of repeating the analysis reported in Table 2 for
the broader group of all advanced economies. The results are consistent with those reported
in Table 1. In particular, based on OLS, which is strongly influenced by outliers in this
sample, the estimate of β is negative but statistically insignificant for each case of adding an
additional control variable. But using the robust regression approach, which resists the pull of
outliers, the estimate of β is statistically significant in each case, and is typically above 0.9 in
absolute value.
Appendix Table 3 reports the results of estimating the panel data specification,
equation (2), while controlling for the additional variables reported in earlier (in Table 2). We
add the additional controls both one at a time, and simultaneously in a large-scale regression
with 12 control variables (columns 14 and 15). The coefficient β remains significant in each
case, and ranges from –0.447 to –0.712, compared to an estimate of –0.667 for the baseline
specification without controls. Overall, the panel data results also hold up to controlling for
these other variables.
Appendix Table 4 is the same as Appendix Table 3, except that the estimate of β is
allowed to vary across the forecast vintages (2009, 2010, 2011, and 2012). As before, given
our use of two-year overlapping intervals, we correct the standard errors for serial correlation
of type MA(1) using the Newey-West procedure. The coefficient for forecasts made in 2009
and 2010 is about –0.6 and –1, respectively, and remain statistically significant in all
specifications. The coefficient for forecasts made in 2011 and 2012 is negative, and typically
around –0.4 and –0.3, respectively. For the 2011 forecasts, the coefficient is statistically
insignificant, as before. For the forecasts made in 2012, the coefficient is significant in some
specifications, and not in others.
Appendix Table 5 reports the results of a similar exercise, in which both the
coefficient on the fiscal consolidation forecast and on each additional control is allowed to
vary over time. Allowing the coefficient on the controls to vary over time yields estimates for
the coefficients on the fiscal consolidation forecasts that are similar to those reported in
earlier tables.
As one can always think of more controls, and eventually exhaust degrees of
freedom, Appendix Table 6 takes a different approach. It explores how the results change
when we control for a summary statistic for various economic and financial vulnerabilities
perceived at the time the forecasts were made. The summary statistic we use is the IMF’s
vulnerability rating prepared for each advanced economy as part of the Early Warning
Exercise (EWE). As explained in the methodological guide to these ratings (IMF, 2010c),
each economy’s vulnerability rating is based on underlying risk assessments made for
different economic sectors, such as the external, government, corporate, and household
sectors. As before, to ensure that the vulnerability ratings provide a measure of risks

20
forecasters may have perceived in real time, while making the forecasts, we use the spring
2009 EWE ratings for the 2009 forecasts, the spring 2010 EWE ratings for the 2010
forecasts, and so on. Since the EWE vulnerability ratings are confidential, we report the
regression results based on them in Appendix Table 6, but cannot include the actual
underlying ratings in the replication dataset discussed above. As the table reports, the
estimation results are similar to those reported above. In particular, the coefficients on the
fiscal consolidation forecasts made during the 2009–12 period are all negative, and they are
larger in absolute value and more statistically significant for the forecasts made in 2009–10
than in 2011–12.

21
REFERENCES
Almunia, Miguel, Agustin Benetrix, Barry Eichengreen, Kevin O’Rourke, and Gisela Rua,
2010, “From Great Depression to Great Credit Crisis: Similarities, Differences and
Lessons,” Economic Policy, Vol. 25.
Andersen, Robert, 2008, Modern Methods for Robust Regression (Thousand Oaks,
California: SAGE Publications).
Auerbach, Alan, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2012a, “Fiscal Multipliers in Recession and
Expansion,” in Fiscal Policy after the Financial Crisis, edited by Alberto Alesina and
Francesco Giavazzi (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
———, 2012b, “Measuring the Output Responses to Fiscal Policy,” American Economic
Journal – Economic Policy, Vol. 4, pp. 1–27.
———, 2012c, “Output Spillovers from Fiscal Policy,” NBER Working Paper No. 18578
(Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research).
Batini, Nicoletta, Giovanni Callegari, and Giovanni Melina, 2012, “Successful Austerity in
the United States, Europe and Japan,” IMF Working Paper No. 12/190 (Washington:
International Monetary Fund).
Baum, Anja, Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro, and Anke Weber, 2012, “Fiscal Multipliers and the
State of the Economy,” IMF Working Paper No. 12/286 (Washington: International
Monetary Fund).
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, 2011, “When Is the
Government Spending Multiplier Large?” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 119,
pp. 78–121.
Coenen, Günter, Christopher Erceg, Charles Freedman, Davide Furceri, Michael Kumhof,
René Lalonde, Douglas Laxton, Jesper Lindé, Annabelle Mourougane, Dirk Muir,
Susanna Mursula, John Roberts, Werner Roeger, Carlos de Resende, Stephen
Snudden, Mathias Trabandt, Jan in‘t Veld, 2012, “Effects of Fiscal Stimulus in
Structural Models,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Vol. 4, No. 1,
pp. 22–68.
Cottarelli, Carlo, and Laura Jaramillo, 2012, “Walking Hand in Hand: Fiscal Policy and
Growth in Advanced Economies,” IMF Working Paper No. 12/137 (Washington:
International Monetary Fund).

22
Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU), 2010, Country Forecast (London, April, various
countries).
Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Paul Krugman, 2012, “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity
Trap,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 1469–513.
Eichengreen, Barry, and Kevin H O’Rourke, 2012, “Gauging the Multiplier: Lessons from
History,” Vox EU (23 October).
European Commission (EC), 2010, European Economic Forecast—Spring 2010
(Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union).
———, 2012, European Economic Forecast—Autumn 2012. (Luxembourg: Publications
Office of the European Union).
Financial Times, 2012, “Robustness of IMF Data Scrutinized,” October 12.
Hall, Robert E., 2009, “By How Much Does GDP Rise If the Government Buys More
Output?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 183–249.
Hamilton, Lawrence C., 2012, Statistics with STATA: Version 12 (Belmont, California:
Duxbury Press).
International Monetary Fund, 2008, World Economic Outlook: Financial Stress,Downturns,
and Recoveries (Washington: International Monetary Fund, October).
International Monetary Fund, 2009a, “Computing Cyclically Adjusted Balances and
Automatic Stabilizers,” Technical Guidance Note (Washington: International
Monetary Fund, November).
International Monetary Fund, 2009b, “Global Economic Policies and Prospects,” Note by the
Staff of the International Monetary Fund (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
International Monetary Fund, 2010a, “The IMF-FSB Early Warning Exercise—Design and
Methodological Toolkit” (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
International Monetary Fund, 2010b, Singapore: 2010 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report
(Washington: International Monetary Fund).
International Monetary Fund, 2010c, World Economic Outlook: Rebalancing Growth
(Washington: International Monetary Fund, April).

23
International Monetary Fund, 2010d, World Economic Outlook: Recovery, Risk, and
Rebalancing (Washington: International Monetary Fund, October).
International Monetary Fund, 2012a, Fiscal Monitor: Balancing Fiscal Policy Risks
(Washington: International Monetary Fund, April).
International Monetary Fund, 2012b, World Economic Outlook: Coping with High Debt and
Sluggish Growth (Washington: International Monetary Fund, October).
International Monetary Fund, 2012c, World Economic Outlook: Growth Resuming, Dangers
Remain (Washington: International Monetary Fund, April).
Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 2007, “The External Wealth of Nations
Mark II: Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970–
2004,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 73, pp. 223–50.
Laeven, Luc, and FabiánValencia, 2012, “Systemic Banking Crises Database: An Update,”
IMF Working Paper No. 12/163 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi, 2011, “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption,
and the Economic Slump,” University of Chicago Booth School of Business Working
Paper (Chicago).
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), 2010, Economic
Outlook, Vol. 2010, No. 1 (Paris, May).
Romer, Christina, and David Romer, 2010, “The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes:
Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks,” American Economic Review,
June.
Romer, Christina, 2012, “Fiscal Policy in the Crisis: Lessons and Policy Implications,”
presented at the IMF Fiscal Forum, April 18, Washington.
Spilimbergo, Antonio, Steve Symansky, and Martin Schindler, 2009, “Fiscal Multipliers,”
IMF Staff Position Note No. 09/11 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
Trichet, Jean-Claude, 2010, Interview with Jean Quatremer, Libération, July 8, 2010.
http://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2010/html/sp100713.en.html
Woodford, Michael, 2011, “Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier,”
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Vol. 3, No. 1, pp. 1–35.

24
Table 1. Main Results
Equation: Forecast Error of ΔYi,t:t+1 = α + β Forecast of ΔFi,t:t+1|t + ε i,t:t+1

β

α

Obs

R

2

Europe
Baseline
Filling missing using EC forecasts
Excluding 2 largest policy changes
Excluding IMF programs
Excluding Emerging Europe
Outliers: Robust regression
Outliers: Quantile regression
Outliers: Cook's Distance

‐1.095***
‐1.074***
‐0.776**
‐0.812***
‐0.992***
‐1.279***
‐1.088***
‐0.921***

(0.255)
(0.294)
(0.345)
(0.281)
(0.278)
(0.183)
(0.240)
(0.217)

0.775*
1.034**
0.690
0.859**
0.832*
0.606*
0.510
0.738***

(0.383)
(0.454)
(0.405)
(0.381)
(0.416)
(0.317)
(0.410)
(0.247)

26
30
24
21
22
26
26
21

0.496
0.403
0.227
0.235
0.475
0.671
0.262
0.539

‐0.538
‐0.986***
‐0.955***
‐0.999***
‐0.746**

(0.407)
(0.270)
(0.201)
(0.127)
(0.279)

0.696
0.415
0.540
0.486**
0.792**

(0.450)
(0.282)
(0.342)
(0.216)
(0.328)

36
23
36
36
33

0.097
0.599
0.400
0.0991
0.211

0.007
0.168
0.313
‐0.143

(0.433)
(0.228)
(0.355)
(0.230)

1.791
0.291
0.310
1.364

(1.271)
(0.466)
(0.791)
(0.875)

14
14
14
12

0.000
0.043
0.0312
0.004

Advanced economies
All available
Economies in liquidity trap
Outliers: Robust regression
Outliers: Quantile regression
Outliers: Cook's Distance
Emerging economies
All available
Outliers: Robust regression
Outliers: Quantile regression
Outliers: Cook's Distance

Note: Table reports point estimates and heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. ***,
**, and * denote statistical significance at the 1,5, and 10 level, respectively. Robust regression downweights observations with larger absolute residuals using iterative weighted least squares (Andersen,
2008).

25
Table 2. Europe: Robustness to Additional Controls
Equation: Forecast Error of ΔYi,t:t+1 = α + β Forecast of ΔFi,t:t+1|t + γ Xi,t |t + ε i,t:t+1

Additional Control

β

γ

Baseline

‐1.095*** (0.255)

Initial debt ratio
Initial fiscal balance
Initial structural fiscal balance
Initial sovereign CDS
Initial bank CDS
Banking crisis
Initial growth forecast
Initial potential growth forecast
Trading partner fiscal consolidation
Precrisis current account balance
Precrisis net foreign liabilities
Precrisis household debt

‐1.146***
‐1.173***
‐0.921**
‐0.990***
‐1.007***
‐1.105***
‐1.099***
‐1.126***
‐1.105***
‐0.935***
‐1.056***
‐1.086***

(0.270)
(0.299)
(0.360)
(0.296)
(0.281)
(0.262)
(0.275)
(0.251)
(0.270)
(0.274)
(0.306)
(0.262)

0.010
‐0.045
0.115
‐0.259
‐0.208
0.162
‐0.008
‐0.242
‐0.548
0.060
‐0.002
‐0.001

Obs

(0.013)
(0.068)
(0.187)
(0.458)
(0.383)
(0.773)
(0.178)
(0.177)
(1.343)
(0.049)
(0.006)
(0.006)

R

2

26

0.496

26
26
26
26
26
26
26
26
26
26
26
25

0.504
0.500
0.506
0.504
0.502
0.497
0.496
0.524
0.499
0.531
0.498
0.489

Note: Table reports point estimates and heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. ***, **,
and * denotes statistical significance at the 1,5, and 10 level, respectively. Constant term included in
specification but estimate not reported. The additional controls appear in the specifications one at a time.

26
Table 3. Europe: Two-stage Least Squares
First stage: ΔFi,t:t+1 = γ + δ Forecast of ΔFi,t:t+1|t + η i,t:t+1
Second stage: Forecast Error of ΔYi,t:t+1 = α + β F̂ i,t:t+1 + ε i,t:t+1

First stage

δ

1.057***
(0.185)

β
Constant term

0.907***
(0.320)

Obs

26

R

Second stage

2

0.578

‐1.036***
(0.228)
1.715***
(0.548)
26
0.350

Note: Table reports point estimates and heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, and *
denotes statistical significance at the 1,5, and 10 level, respectively. ^ denotes instrumented values.

27
Table 4. 2009-12 Panel of Forecasts
Equation: Forecast Error of ΔYi,t:t+1 = α + λt + β Forecast of ΔFi,t:t+1|t + ε i,t:t+1

β

Obs

R

2

Europe
2009‐10 to 2012‐13

‐0.667*** (0.161)

105

0.413

Results for forecasts for:
2009‐10
2010‐11
2011‐12
2012‐13

‐0.699***
‐1.095***
‐0.467
‐0.358**

(0.185)
(0.255)
(0.450)
(0.147)

26
26
25
28

0.208
0.496
0.091
0.194

1997‐98 to 2008‐09

‐0.077

(0.164)

207

0.640

Advanced economies
2009‐10 to 2012‐13
All available
Economies in liquidity trap

‐0.410** (0.199)
‐0.648*** (0.213)

145
94

0.286
0.440

Emerging market economies
2009‐10 to 2012‐13

‐0.108

54

(0.274)

0.362

Note: Table reports point estimates and Newey-West standard errors in parentheses (correcting for
heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation up to one year). ***, **, and * denotes statistical significance at the 1,5,
and 10 level, respectively. Constant term and time-fixed effects included in all panel regressions, but estimates
not reported.

28
Table 5. Europe: Government Revenue and Spending
Equation estimated:
Forecast Error of ΔY i,t:t+1 = α + δ Forecast of ΔTi,t:t+1|t + γ Forecast of ΔSi,t:t+1|t + ε i,t:t+1

Forecast Error of ΔY

i ,t :t+ 1

(1)

(2)

δ: Forecast of ΔT i ,t :t+ 1|t

‐0.865*** ‐0.783***
(0.225)
(0.221)

γ: Forecast of ΔS i ,t :t+ 1|t

1.244***
(0.254)

γ: Forecast of ΔS (primary)i ,t :t+ 1|t
0.807**
(0.373)

1.179***
(0.243)
1.140***
(0.389)

Obs

26

26

2

0.554
0.102

0.557
0.095

α

R
p‐ value (δ + γ = 0)

Note: Table reports point estimates and heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, and *
denotes statistical significance at the 1,5, and 10 level, respectively. T denotes government revenue, and S
denotes government spending. p-value is for test of null that δ + γ = 0.

29
Table 6. Europe: Unemployment and GDP Components
Equation: Forecast Error of ΔYi,t:t+1 = α + β Forecast of ΔFi,t:t+1|t + ε i,t:t+1

Dependent Variable (Y )

GDP
Private consumption
Investment
Exports
Imports
GDP Deflator
Unemployment rate

β

‐1.095***
‐0.816***
‐2.681***
‐1.109
‐0.639
‐0.185
0.608***

Obs R

α

(0.255)
(0.138)
(0.910)
(0.925)
(1.006)
(0.253)
(0.193)

0.775*
‐0.620
‐2.580
8.866***
6.520***
0.286
‐0.179

(0.383)
(0.388)
(1.993)
(1.442)
(1.665)
(0.425)
(0.336)

26
26
26
26
26
26
26

2

0.496
0.330
0.174
0.070
0.025
0.016
0.270

Note: Table reports point estimates and heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, and *
denotes statistical significance at the 1,5, and 10 level, respectively.

30
Table 7. Europe: Alternative Forecasters
Equation: Forecast Error of ΔYi,t:t+1 = α + β Forecast of ΔFi,t:t+1|t + ε i,t:t+1

Source of Forecasts

IMF
European Commission
OECD
Economist Intelligence Unit

β

α

Obs

R

2

‐1.095***
‐0.837**
‐0.371***
‐0.696**

(0.255)
(0.358)
(0.125)
(0.318)

0.775*
0.728
0.199
1.116*

(0.383)
(0.461)
(0.449)
(0.565)

26
27
21
22

0.496
0.291
0.274
0.220

‐1.129***
‐0.900*
‐0.531***
‐0.773***

(0.304)
(0.449)
(0.121)
(0.245)

1.259**
0.430
0.509
1.930***

(0.506)
(0.526)
(0.482)
(0.467)

17
17
17
17

0.539
0.391
0.419
0.407

Equalized sample
IMF
European Commission
OECD
Economist Intelligence Unit

Note: Table reports point estimates and heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, and *
denotes statistical significance at the 1,5, and 10 level, respectively.

31
Appendix Table 1. Europe: Controlling for Ex-post Developments
Equation: Forecast Error of ΔYi,t:t+1 = α + β Forecast of ΔFi,t:t+1|t + γ Xi,t+1 + ε i,t:t+1

Additional Control

β

γ

Baseline

‐1.095*** (0.255)

Ex‐post change in sovereign CDS
Ex‐post change in bank CDS
Revision to initial debt ratio
Unexpected fiscal consolidation

‐0.839**
‐1.002***
‐1.090***
‐1.077***

(0.300)
(0.241)
(0.248)
(0.214)

‐0.054**
‐0.100
‐0.026
‐0.309

Obs

(0.023)
(0.135)
(0.056)
(0.190)

R

2

26

0.496

26
26
26
26

0.548
0.509
0.499
0.528

Note: Table reports point estimates and heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, and *
denotes statistical significance at the 1,5, and 10 level, respectively. Constant term included in specification but
estimates not reported. The additional controls appear in the specifications one at a time.

32
Appendix Table 2. All Advanced Economies: Robustness to Additional Controls
Equation: Forecast Error of ΔYi,t:t+1 = α + β Forecast of ΔFi,t:t+1|t + γ Xi,t |t + ε i,t:t+1

OLS Regression
Additional Control

β

Robust Regression
Obs

R

2

β

Obs

R

2

Baseline

‐0.538 (0.407)

36 0.097

‐0.955*** (0.201)

36 0.400

Initial debt ratio
Initial fiscal balance
Initial structural fiscal balance
Initial sovereign CDS
Initial bank CDS
Banking crisis
Initial growth forecast
Initial potential growth forecast
Trading partner fiscal consolidation
Precrisis current account balance
Precrisis net foreign liabilities

‐0.577
‐0.277
0.013
‐0.534
‐0.543
‐0.495
‐0.396
‐0.515
‐0.451
‐0.249
‐0.260

36
36
36
33
33
36
36
36
36
36
36

‐0.967***
‐0.956***
‐0.729***
‐0.919***
‐0.921***
‐0.960***
‐0.920***
‐0.946***
‐0.961***
‐0.784***
‐0.817***

35
35
35
33
33
35
35
35
35
35
35

(0.403)
(0.509)
(0.476)
(0.395)
(0.387)
(0.421)
(0.400)
(0.400)
(0.442)
(0.313)
(0.361)

0.102
0.156
0.256
0.250
0.249
0.110
0.208
0.192
0.145
0.461
0.352

(0.234)
(0.272)
(0.261)
(0.254)
(0.241)
(0.231)
(0.239)
(0.238)
(0.255)
(0.255)
(0.290)

0.432
0.431
0.464
0.455
0.455
0.432
0.436
0.433
0.431
0.475
0.455

Note: Table reports point estimates and heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, and *
denotes statistical significance at the 1,5, and 10 level, respectively. Estimation results for coefficient on
additional control (γ) and constant term not reported. Robust regressions use same weights as baseline
regression (row 1). The additional controls appear in the specifications one at a time. Robust regression downweights observations with larger absolute residuals using iterative weighted least squares (Andersen, 2008).

33

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

0.430

104

0.426

104

0.413

105

0.413

105

0.427

105

0.433

105

0.461

105

0.428

105

0.427

101

0.550

100

0.478

99

‐0.030
(0.039)

105

0.003
(0.107)

0.413

‐0.032***
(0.006)

105

‐0.115
(0.103)

0.415

0.060
(0.518)

105

‐0.002
(0.122)

0.413

‐0.175
(0.141)

‐0.486*** ‐0.569*** ‐0.645*** ‐0.447** ‐0.566***
(0.161) (0.157) (0.158)
(0.177)
(0.156)
‐0.018
‐0.005
(0.014)
(0.011)
‐0.075*
‐0.058
(0.041)
(0.036)
0.034
‐0.040
(0.107)
(0.077)
‐0.025
0.102
(0.018)
(0.219)
0.115
0.046
(0.085)
(0.137)
‐0.144
0.206
(0.525)
(0.394)
0.254
0.200
(0.198)
(0.172)
‐0.563** ‐0.376*
(0.269)
(0.216)
‐0.659
‐1.019*
(0.710)
(0.525)
0.074***
0.092*
0.057
(0.027)
(0.048)
(0.040)
‐0.007*
‐0.000
‐0.003
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.004)
‐0.001
‐0.002
(0.005)
(0.004)
105

0.004
(0.004)

0.413

‐1.015*
(0.526)

‐0.667*** ‐0.669*** ‐0.712*** ‐0.664*** ‐0.640*** ‐0.600*** ‐0.667*** ‐0.668*** ‐0.665*** ‐0.708***
(0.161)
(0.144)
(0.165)
(0.158)
(0.164) (0.166) (0.164)
(0.155)
(0.166)
(0.159)
0.000
(0.011)

(1)

Appendix Table 3. Europe: 2009-12 Panel of Forecasts, Robustness to Additional Controls
Equation: Forecast Error of ΔYi,t:t+1 = α + λt + β Forecast of ΔFi,t:t+1|t + Σ γj Xj,i,t |t + ε i,t:t+1

β
γ: Initial debt ratio
γ: Initial fiscal balance
γ: Initial structural fiscal balance
γ: Initial sovereign CDS
γ: Initial bank CDS
γ: Banking crisis
γ: Initial growth forecast
γ: Initial potential growth forecast
γ: Trading partner fiscal consolidation
γ: Precrisis current account balance
γ: Precrisis net foreign liabilities
γ: Precrisis household debt

2

Obs
R

Note: Table reports point estimates and Newey-West standard errors in parentheses (correcting for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation up to one year). ***, **, and * denotes
statistical significance at the 1,5, and 10 level, respectively. Constant term and time-fixed effects included in all panel regressions, but estimates not reported. Xj denotes control variable j.
The additional controls appear in the specifications one at a time, and simultaneously in columns 14-15. Column 15 reports estimates obtained via robust regression with Newey-West
standard errors in parentheses. Robust regression down-weights observations with larger absolute residuals using iterative weighted least squares (Andersen, 2008).

34

(14)

(15)

(13)

‐0.581***
(0.182)
‐1.048***
(0.225)
‐0.042
(0.301)
‐0.275
(0.272)
‐0.001
(0.010)
‐0.046
(0.039)
‐0.037
(0.088)
0.015
(0.244)
0.052
(0.144)
0.324
(0.376)
0.205
(0.166)
‐0.345
(0.215)
‐0.881*
(0.507)
0.050
(0.039)
‐0.002
(0.004)
‐0.002
(0.004)

(12)

98

(11)

‐0.490**
(0.216)
‐0.811***
(0.220)
‐0.296
(0.460)
‐0.004
(0.280)
‐0.018
(0.015)
‐0.076
(0.049)
0.021
(0.112)
‐0.029*
(0.018)
0.043
(0.101)
‐0.044
(0.497)
0.222
(0.190)
‐0.524*
(0.268)
‐0.503
(0.691)
0.094*
(0.051)
0.001
(0.006)
‐0.001
(0.005)

0.538

(10)

100

(9)

0.004
(0.004)

0.475

(8)

101

(7)

0.407

(6)

105

(5)

0.412

(4)

105

(3)

0.451

(2)

105

(1)

0.412

0.077**
(0.029)
‐0.007*
(0.004)

‐0.555*** ‐0.626*** ‐0.729***
(0.171) (0.179) (0.185)
‐0.892*** ‐0.977*** ‐1.037***
(0.240) (0.253) (0.252)
‐0.310
‐0.374
‐0.445
(0.450) (0.448) (0.438)
‐0.096
‐0.232 ‐0.327**
(0.183) (0.171) (0.145)

105

‐0.696***
(0.171)
‐1.111***
(0.261)
‐0.566
(0.450)
‐0.422***
(0.144)

0.409

‐0.631***
(0.184)
‐1.117***
(0.246)
‐0.477
(0.476)
‐0.417***
(0.156)

105

‐0.701***
(0.185)
‐1.091***
(0.251)
‐0.461
(0.426)
‐0.352**
(0.143)

0.395

‐0.691***
(0.191)
‐1.103***
(0.249)
‐0.472
(0.450)
‐0.355**
(0.154)

105

‐0.610***
(0.185)
‐1.016***
(0.239)
‐0.355
(0.409)
‐0.094
(0.226)

0.395

‐0.679***
(0.183)
‐1.077***
(0.255)
‐0.437
(0.439)
‐0.191
(0.132)

104

‐0.709***
(0.185)
‐1.117***
(0.252)
‐0.489
(0.463)
‐0.372**
(0.180)

0.418

‐0.730***
(0.183)
‐1.148***
(0.248)
‐0.528
(0.470)
‐0.404**
(0.159)

104

‐0.699*** ‐0.698***
(0.185)
(0.186)
‐1.095*** ‐1.088***
(0.255)
(0.246)
‐0.467
‐0.464
(0.450)
(0.433)
‐0.358** ‐0.344**
(0.147)
(0.154)
‐0.001
(0.012)

0.421

‐0.031
(0.042)

105

‐0.015
(0.105)

0.395

‐0.045***
(0.007)

105

‐0.187
(0.132)

0.398

0.130
(0.503)

105

0.010
(0.118)

0.395

‐0.171
(0.143)

105

‐0.900*
(0.525)

0.401

Appendix Table 4. Europe: 2009-12 Panel of Forecasts, Time-Varying β, Robustness to Additional Controls
Equation: Forecast Error of ΔYi,t:t+1 = α + λt + Σ βt Forecast of ΔFi,t:t+1|t + Σ γj Xj,i,t |t + ε i,t:t+1

β: 2009‐10
β: 2010‐11
β: 2011‐12
β: 2012‐13
γ: Initial debt ratio
γ: Initial fiscal balance
γ: Initial structural fiscal balance
γ: Initial sovereign CDS
γ: Initial bank CDS
γ: Banking crisis
γ: Initial growth forecast
γ: Initial potential growth forecast
γ: Trading partner fiscal consolidation
γ: Precrisis current account balance
γ: Precrisis net foreign liabilities
γ: Precrisis household debt

2

Obs
R

Note: Table reports point estimates and Newey-West standard errors in parentheses (correcting for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation up to one year). ***, **, and * denotes
statistical significance at the 1,5, and 10 level, respectively. Constant term and time-fixed effects included in all panel regressions, but estimates not reported. Xj denotes control variable j.
The additional controls appear in the specifications one at a time, and simultaneously in columns 14-15. Column 15 reports estimates obtained via robust regression with Newey-West
standard errors in parentheses. Robust regression down-weights observations with larger absolute residuals using iterative weighted least squares (Andersen, 2008).

35
Appendix Table 5. Europe: 2009-12 Panel of Forecasts,
Robustness to Additional Controls, Time-Varying β and γ
Equation: Forecast Error of ΔYi,t:t+1 = α + λt + Σ βt Forecast of ΔFi,t:t+1|t + Σ γt Xi,t |t + ε i,t:t+1
Coefficient on fiscal consolidation forecast (β) for year interval:
Specification

2009‐10

Baseline
Initial debt ratio
Initial fiscal balance
Initial structural fiscal balance
Initial sovereign CDS
Initial bank CDS
Banking crisis
Initial growth forecast
Initial potential growth forecast
Trading partner fiscal consolidation
Precrisis current account balance
Precrisis net foreign liabilities
Precrisis household debt

‐0.699***
‐0.722***
‐0.793***
‐0.830***
‐0.622***
‐0.604***
‐0.685***
‐0.622***
‐0.384*
‐0.691***
‐0.417**
‐0.546***
‐0.739***

2010‐11

(0.185)
(0.167)
(0.175)
(0.149)
(0.218)
(0.201)
(0.220)
(0.202)
(0.224)
(0.175)
(0.173)
(0.189)
(0.210)

‐1.095***
‐1.146***
‐1.173***
‐0.921**
‐0.990***
‐1.007***
‐1.105***
‐1.099***
‐1.126***
‐1.105***
‐0.935***
‐1.056***
‐1.086***

2011‐12

(0.255)
(0.269)
(0.298)
(0.360)
(0.296)
(0.279)
(0.261)
(0.275)
(0.250)
(0.270)
(0.274)
(0.305)
(0.262)

‐0.467
‐0.430
‐0.548
‐0.277
‐0.113
‐0.387
‐0.484
‐0.235
‐0.451
‐0.531
‐0.306
‐0.333
‐0.429

2012‐13

(0.450)
(0.386)
(0.507)
(0.494)
(0.339)
(0.418)
(0.460)
(0.303)
(0.417)
(0.442)
(0.470)
(0.472)
(0.427)

‐0.358**
‐0.229
‐0.204
‐0.324
‐0.222*
‐0.052
‐0.363**
‐0.207
‐0.293**
‐0.384***
‐0.352**
‐0.345**
‐0.322**

Obs R

(0.147)
(0.142)
(0.150)
(0.198)
(0.131)
(0.207)
(0.149)
(0.125)
(0.135)
(0.139)
(0.152)
(0.136)
(0.144)

105
105
105
105
104
104
105
105
105
105
105
105
101

2

0.401
0.395
0.391
0.390
0.434
0.399
0.379
0.447
0.481
0.408
0.460
0.405
0.397

Coefficient on control variable (γ) for year interval:
Specification, continued

2009‐10

Baseline
Initial debt ratio
Initial fiscal balance
Initial structural fiscal balance
Initial sovereign CDS
Initial bank CDS
Banking crisis
Initial growth forecast
Initial potential growth forecast
Trading partner fiscal consolidation
Precrisis current account balance
Precrisis net foreign liabilities
Precrisis household debt

0.020
‐0.094
‐0.186
‐0.168
‐0.198
0.216
‐0.340*
‐0.791***
‐2.478**
0.149***
‐0.014
0.003

2010‐11

(0.030)
(0.093)
(0.137)
(0.210)
(0.197)
(1.268)
(0.188)
(0.278)
(1.220)
(0.051)
(0.009)
(0.010)

0.010
‐0.045
0.115
‐0.259
‐0.208
0.162
‐0.008
‐0.242
‐0.548
0.060
‐0.002
‐0.001

2011‐12

(0.013)
(0.068)
(0.187)
(0.458)
(0.385)
(0.773)
(0.178)
(0.177)
(1.342)
(0.049)
(0.006)
(0.006)

‐0.015
‐0.040
0.126
‐0.529
‐0.134
0.486
0.370
0.301
‐0.580
0.079
‐0.010
0.009

2012‐13

(0.024)
(0.061)
(0.182)
(0.338)
(0.322)
(0.906)
(0.236)
(0.312)
(1.251)
(0.048)
(0.009)
(0.006)

‐0.012
0.103*
0.034
‐0.038***
‐0.212*
‐0.292
0.247**
0.187
‐0.363
0.002
‐0.001
0.005

Obs R

(0.011)
(0.057)
(0.119)
(0.004)
(0.115)
(0.506)
(0.118)
(0.127)
(0.337)
(0.029)
(0.004)
(0.003)

105
105
105
105
104
104
105
105
105
105
105
105
101

2

0.401
0.395
0.391
0.390
0.434
0.399
0.379
0.447
0.481
0.408
0.460
0.405
0.397

Note: Table reports point estimates and Newey-West standard errors in parentheses (correcting for
heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation up to one year). ***, **, and * denotes statistical significance at the 1,5,
and 10 level, respectively. Constant term and time-fixed effects included in all regressions, but estimates not
reported. Baseline specification with no control variables reported in first row. Coefficients on fiscal
consolidation forecast (β) and additional controls (γ) allowed to vary over time.

36
Appendix Table 6. Europe: 2009-12 Panel of Forecasts,
Controlling for Vulnerability Rating
Equation: Forecast Error of ΔYi,t:t+1 = α + λt + Σ βt Forecast of ΔFi,t:t+1|t + Σ γt Vi,t |t + ε i,t:t+1

(1)

β

(2)

(3)

(4)

‐0.699***
(0.185)
‐1.095***
(0.255)
‐0.467
(0.450)
‐0.358**
(0.147)

‐1.483*
(0.822)
‐0.718**
(0.329)
‐0.833*
(0.495)
‐0.227
(0.223)
‐0.825
(1.725)
‐1.039
(0.707)
0.182
(0.835)
‐0.399
(0.492)

‐0.667*** ‐0.724***
(0.161)
(0.232)
‐0.149
(0.390)

γ
β: 2009‐10
β: 2010‐11
β: 2011‐12
β: 2012‐13
γ: Vulnerability rating | 2009
γ: Vulnerability rating | 2010
γ: Vulnerability rating | 2011
γ: Vulnerability rating | 2012

Obs

105

80

105

80

2

0.413

0.509

0.401

0.489

R

Note: Table reports point estimates and Newey-West standard errors in parentheses (correcting for
heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation up to one year). ***, **, and * denotes statistical significance at the 1,5,
and 10 level, respectively. Constant term and time-fixed effects included in all panel regressions, but estimates
not reported. Coefficients on fiscal consolidation forecast (β) and vulnerability rating (γ) constant in columns 12, and allowed to vary over time in columns 3-4. For methodology underlying vulnerability rating (V), see IMF
(2010c).

37
Figure 1. Europe: Growth Forecast Errors vs. Fiscal Consolidation Forecasts

5

SWE

g ro w t h fo re c a s t e rro r
-5
0

DEU
FINMLT POL
AUT
CHE
CYP
DNK

BEL

ITA
CZE
NLD
FRA
HUNESP ISL
BGR
NOR SVK
PRT
GBR
SVN

IRL

ROM

-1 0

GRC

-2

0
2
forecast of fiscal consolidation

4

6

Note: Figure plots forecast error for real GDP growth in 2010 and 2011 relative to forecasts made in the spring
of 2010 on forecasts of fiscal consolidation for 2010 and 2011 made in spring of year 2010; and regression line.

38

-1 0

g ro w t h fo re c a s t e rro r
-5
0
5

10

Figure 2. Europe: 2009-12 Panel
Growth Forecast Errors vs. Fiscal Consolidation Forecasts

-4

-2

0
2
fiscal consolidation forecast
2009

2010

2011

4

6

2012

Note: Figure plots forecast error for real GDP growth in years t and t+1 relative to forecasts made in the spring
of year t on forecasts of fiscal consolidation for t and t+1 made in spring of year t, for years t = 2009, 2010,
2011, and 2012; and simple regression line for panel of observations without time effects.

39

g ro w t h fo re c a s t e rro r
0
10
20

30

Figure 3. All Advanced Economies: 2009-12 Panel
Growth Forecast Errors vs. Fiscal Consolidation Forecasts

SGP

-1 0

TWN

-4

-2

0
2
fiscal consolidation forecast
2009

2010

2011

4

6

2012

Note: Figure plots forecast error for real GDP growth in years t and t+1 relative to forecasts made in the spring
of year t on forecasts of fiscal consolidation for t and t+1 made in spring of year t, for years t = 2009, 2010,
2011, and 2012; and simple regression line for panel of observations without time effects.

