                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

         LONG-TERM NEIGHBORHOOD EFFECTS ON LOW-INCOME FAMILIES:
                  EVIDENCE FROM MOVING TO OPPORTUNITY

                                             Jens Ludwig
                                           Greg J. Duncan
                                          Lisa A. Gennetian
                                          Lawrence F. Katz
                                          Ronald C. Kessler
                                           Jeffrey R. Kling
                                          Lisa Sanbonmatsu

                                         Working Paper 18772
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18772

                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2013

An abridged version of this paper is forthcoming in the May 2013 American Economic Review: Papers
and Proceedings. Support for this research was provided by a contract from the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD; C-CHI-00808) and grants from the National Science Foundation
(SES-0527615), National Institute for Child Health and Human Development (R01-HD040404, R01-HD040444),
Centers for Disease Control (R49-CE000906), National Institute of Mental Health (R01-MH077026),
National Institute for Aging (P30-AG012810, R01-AG031259, and P01-AG005842-22S1), the National
Opinion Research Center’s Population Research Center (through R24-HD051152-04 from the National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development), University of Chicago’s Center for Health Administration
Studies, U.S. Department of Education/Institute of Education Sciences (R305U070006), Bill & Melinda
Gates Foundation, John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, Russell Sage Foundation, Smith
Richardson Foundation, Spencer Foundation, Annie E. Casey Foundation, and Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation. Outstanding assistance with the data preparation and analysis was provided by Joe Amick,
Ryan Gillette, Ray Yun Gou, Ijun Lai, Jordan Marvakov, Nicholas Potter, Matt Sciandra, Fanghua
Yang, Sabrina Yusuf, and Michael Zabek. The survey data collection effort was led by Nancy Gebler
of the University of Michigan’s Survey Research Center under subcontract to our research team. We
thank Janet Currie and many seminar participants for helpful comments. MTO data were provided
by HUD. The data used in this paper will be made available through the Inter-university Consortium
on Political and Social Research (ICPSR) at the University of Michigan. The views expressed in this
work are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as those of the Congressional Budget Office
or HUD. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18772.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Jens Ludwig, Greg J. Duncan, Lisa A. Gennetian, Lawrence F. Katz, Ronald C. Kessler,
Jeffrey R. Kling, and Lisa Sanbonmatsu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Long-Term Neighborhood Effects on Low-Income Families: Evidence from Moving to Opportunity
Jens Ludwig, Greg J. Duncan, Lisa A. Gennetian, Lawrence F. Katz, Ronald C. Kessler, Jeffrey
R. Kling, and Lisa Sanbonmatsu
NBER Working Paper No. 18772
February 2013, Revised April 2013
JEL No. H43,I18,I38,J38

                                            ABSTRACT

We examine long-term neighborhood effects on low-income families using data from the Moving
to Opportunity (MTO) randomized housing-mobility experiment, which offered some public-housing
families but not others the chance to move to less-disadvantaged neighborhoods. We show that 10-15
years after baseline MTO improves adult physical and mental health; has no detectable effect on economic
outcomes, youth schooling and youth physical health; and mixed results by gender on other youth
outcomes, with girls doing better on some measures and boys doing worse. Despite the somewhat
mixed pattern of impacts on traditional behavioral outcomes, MTO moves substantially improve adult
subjective well-being.

Jens Ludwig                                        Ronald C. Kessler
University of Chicago                              Harvard Medical School
1155 East 60th Street                              Department of Health Care Policy
Chicago, IL 60637                                  180 Longwood Avenue
and NBER                                           Boston, MA 02115
jludwig@uchicago.edu                               kessler@hcp.med.harvard.edu

Greg J. Duncan                                     Jeffrey R. Kling
University of California, Irvine                   Congressional Budget Office
School of Education                                3403 Ordway St NW
2056 Education Building, Mail Code 5500            Washington, DC 20016
Irvine, CA 92697                                   and NBER
gduncan@uci.edu                                    jeffrey_kling@nber.org

Lisa A. Gennetian                                  Lisa Sanbonmatsu
New York University                                NBER
Institute of Human Development and                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue, 3rd Floor
Social Change                                      Cambridge, MA 02138
246 Greene Street, Floor 6E                        lsanbonm@nber.org
New York, NY 10003
gennetl@nber.org

Lawrence F. Katz
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
lkatz@harvard.edu
       Research dating back to at least the 17th century has shown that people living in more

disadvantaged neighborhoods fare worse with respect to earnings, education, health, crime

involvement and other life outcomes (Jencks and Mayer 1990; Ellen and Turner 1997; Sampson,

Raudenbush, and Earls 1997; Kawachi and Berkman 2003; Sampson, Morenoff, and Gannon-

Rowley 2002; Sampson 2012). These patterns have led to concern that neighborhood

environments may exert independent causal effects on people’s long-term life chances. Living in

a disadvantaged social environment may depress life outcomes by, for example, shaping

exposure to peer norms or access to resources such as schools or job referrals. However some

theories yield the opposite prediction about the effects of moving into a more affluent area, since

more affluent areas could have greater discrimination and competition from advantaged peers

and fewer social services for the poor.

       Isolating the causal effects of neighborhood environments on behavior and well-being is

complicated by the fact that most people have at least some degree of choice over where they

live. Observational studies may confound neighborhood influences with those of hard-to-

measure individual- or family-level attributes that affect both residential sorting and the

behavioral outcomes of interest.

       Evidence on “neighborhood effects” is of growing relevance because neighborhood

residential segregation by income has been increasing in the United States since 1970 even

beyond the amount expected from rising income inequality alone (Reardon and Bischoff 2011).

Nearly 9 million Americans live in “extreme-poverty” neighborhoods in which at least 40

percent of residents are poor (Kneebone, Nadeau, and Berube 2011). Knowledge of

neighborhood effects (and the mechanisms behind such effects) is essential for evaluating




                                                  1
policies that affect how people are sorted across neighborhoods and for assessing the efficiency

of private housing market outcomes.

       This paper examines the long-term effects on low-income parents and children of moving

from very disadvantaged to less distressed neighborhoods, using data from a unique, large-scale

randomized social experiment – the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development’s

(HUD’s) Moving to Opportunity (MTO) demonstration. Via random lottery, MTO offered

housing vouchers to families with children living in high-poverty public housing projects that

facilitate moves to less-distressed areas. MTO randomization generates large, persistent

differences in neighborhood conditions for otherwise comparable groups and enables us to

attribute group differences in post-baseline outcomes to the offer to move through MTO.

       We find that 10-15 years after randomization, MTO-assisted moves improve several key

adult mental and physical health outcomes, but have no consistent detectable impacts on adult

economic self-sufficiency or children’s educational achievement outcomes, even for children

who were too young to have enrolled in school at baseline. We also find signs of the same

gender difference in the effects of MTO moves on youth risky behaviors and health found in the

interim (4-7 year) follow-up, with girls doing better in some ways while boys do worse (Kling,

Liebman, and Katz 2007). Despite the mixed MTO impacts on the standard outcomes that have

dominated the neighborhood-effects literature, MTO moves generate a large gain in subjective

well-being (SWB) for adults (Ludwig et al. 2012).




                                                2
     I.   The Moving to Opportunity Experiment1

          From 1994 to 1998 MTO enrolled 4,604 low-income public housing families living in

high-poverty neighborhoods within five U.S. cities: Baltimore, Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles,

and New York. Families were randomized into three groups: i) the Experimental group, which

received housing vouchers that subsidize private-market rents and could only be used in census

tracts with 1990 poverty rates below 10 percent, and additional housing-mobility counseling; ii)

the Section 8 group, which received regular housing vouchers without any MTO relocation

constraint; and iii) a control group, which received no assistance through MTO. Some 48% of

households assigned to the Experimental group and 63% of those assigned to the Section 8 group

moved through MTO (the MTO “compliance rate”).

          Data from baseline surveys show that these families were quite economically

disadvantaged when they applied for MTO (see Appendix Table 1). Most household heads were

African-American or Hispanic females; fewer than 40% had completed high school. Around

three-quarters of applicants reported getting away from gangs and drugs as the most important

reason for enrolling in MTO. As one would expect from a properly-conducted random

assignment, the distribution of baseline characteristics is balanced between the treatment and

control groups.



    II.   Measures and Methods

          To measure long-term outcomes, our research team subcontracted with the Institute for

Social Research at the University of Michigan to collect in-person data with 3,273 MTO adults

and 5,105 youth who were ages 10-20 at the end of 2007. Data were collected between 2008 and


1
  Additional details about the Moving to Opportunity experiment and long-term follow-up data collection are
reported in Sanbonmatsu et al. (2011).




                                                        3
2010, or 10-15 years after baseline. The effective response rates equaled 90% for MTO adults

and 89% for youth, and were generally similar across randomized MTO groups. Adults in the

Section 8 group were interviewed slightly later than other adults because funding for this activity

was secured later during the project; we discuss implications of this delay below.

       To measure neighborhood conditions we collected self-report address information and

passive tracking data, which we linked to census tract-level data from the 1990 and 2000

censuses and the 2005-09 American Community Surveys. We focus on duration-weighted

average tract characteristics over the 10-15 year study period, since people’s life outcomes may

depend on cumulative exposure to neighborhood environments. Our surveys also asked MTO

adults and youth to self-report about their neighborhood conditions.

       Our primary focus is on indices of adult outcomes in the domains of economic outcomes,

physical health, and mental health, and youth outcomes in the domains of education, physical

health, mental health, and risky behavior. The outcome indices are constructed from a set of

individual outcomes from our surveys that are rescaled so that higher values represent “better”

outcomes and then converted to Z-scores using the control group distribution. Aggregating

outcomes improves statistical power to detect impacts and reduces the risk of “false positives” by

reducing the number of statistical tests carried out. To further reduce the risk of false positives

due to data mining, the outcome indices we examine were pre-specified for the interim MTO

follow-up done in 2002 (Kling, Liebman, and Katz 2007).

       We present intention-to-treat (ITT) estimates that capture the effect of being offered the

chance to use an MTO voucher to move into a different neighborhood. These estimates are

calculated as the difference in average outcomes for families assigned to treatment versus the

control condition, by regressing an outcome index against indicators for treatment-group




                                                  4
assignment and (pre-random assignment) baseline covariates that include indicators for MTO

demonstration site and participant socio-demographic characteristics to improve precision (see

Appendix Table 1). The estimates are weighted to account for changes over time in the

probability of treatment assignment due to higher-than-expected compliance rates.

       We also present estimates of the effects of treatment on the treated (TOT), which use

random assignment indicators as instruments for moving through MTO in the Experimental or

Section 8 groups and assume the treatment assignment only affects families who move using a

MTO voucher (Bloom 1984; Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin 1996). The TOT estimates are about

twice as large as the estimated ITT effects for the Experimental group and about 1.6 times as

large as the ITT effect for the Section 8 group.



III.   Results

       One year after baseline, the average control group adult was living in a neighborhood

with an average tract poverty rate of 50 percent (Appendix Table 2). Moving with an

Experimental voucher reduced average tract poverty rates one year after baseline by 35

percentage points (2.85 standard deviations in the 2000 census tract poverty distribution), while

moving through MTO with a regular Section 8 voucher reduced tract poverty rates by 21

percentage points (1.73 standard deviations). These differences across MTO groups in

neighborhood conditions narrowed over time, mostly because the average neighborhood poverty

rates for the control group declined.

       Despite the partial convergence of neighborhood conditions across MTO groups over the

study period, MTO-induced differences in duration-weighted average tract poverty rates over the

course of the 10-15 year follow-up period were quite sizable. Figure 1 shows that a large share of




                                                   5
adults who moved with an Experimental-group voucher (the Experimental Group Compliers)

had an average tract poverty rate below 20%, which was true for few control group families. The

effects of moving with a regular Section 8 voucher on average tract poverty rates were somewhat

less pronounced. (Appendix Table 2 presents MTO impacts on a broader set of neighborhood

characteristics.)

        Contrary to the widespread view that living in a disadvantaged inner-city neighborhood

depresses labor market outcomes, Table 1 shows that being offered a voucher through MTO did

not improve economic self-sufficiency, at least for this study sample. Although the ITT estimate

for the Section 8 group was negative and marginally significant (p<.10), we believe this was

most likely an artifact of our interviewing the Section 8 group adults a bit later than control

adults, when labor market conditions were less favorable (see Sanbonmatsu et al. 2011).

        The results in Table 1 also hint at some potentially positive impacts of MTO on adult

mental and physical health outcomes, with ITT effects on these broad health outcome indices

that were in the direction of better health but not quite statistically significant. However some

specific individual health outcomes showed large and statistically significant improvements in

response to MTO-assisted moves. For example, moving with an Experimental-group voucher

(the TOT effect) reduced the prevalence of having a body mass index of 40 or more (BMI,

defined as weight in kilograms divided by the square of height in meters) by 7 percentage points.

This was a decline of nearly 40% of the control group mean of 18 percent (Ludwig et al. 2011).

For a five-foot-four woman, a BMI of 40 would correspond to a weight of about 235 pounds. We

also found the Experimental-voucher TOT effect reduced the prevalence of diabetes, measured

from blood samples and defined as having a level of glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) 6.5%,

by 10 percentage points, or one-half of the control group’s rate.




                                                  6
       We found no evidence that MTO had beneficial impacts on youth educational outcomes.

Effects on math and reading test scores were very close to zero both for youth who were pre-

school age at baseline and for youth who were ages 6 and up at baseline. MTO did tend to have

some beneficial effects on female but not male youth in other outcome domains (Table 2).

Assignment to the Experimental and Section 8 groups improved physical health for girls, while

the Experimental-group effect on mental health outcomes is also positive and statistically

significant for girls. The estimated effects on health outcomes for boys ranged from zero to

negative (worse health). We can reject the null hypothesis that the physical and mental health

impacts of the Experimental treatment were the same by gender (Appendix Table 3).



IV.    Extensions

       The MTO findings about the effects of changes in neighborhood environments on key

outcomes like economic self-sufficiency and children’s schooling outcomes run counter to much

of what previous theories and observational research have suggested. One common explanation

for this discrepancy is that MTO generates too small of a “treatment dose” on neighborhood

environments to provide a meaningful test of “neighborhood effects” theories. This section

discusses that issue and also provides some additional results showing MTO’s effects on various

behavioral outcomes.




                                                7
       A. Impacts on neighborhood environments

       In this section we provide more details on the nature and magnitude of MTO’s effects on

the neighborhood conditions in which families were living during our study period.

       A1. MTO effects on neighborhood poverty

       Appendix Table 2 shows that one year after random assignment, the average control

group family was living in a neighborhood that had a poverty rate of 50 percent or 2.92 standard

deviations (SD) above the national average in the 2000 census nationwide tract-poverty

distribution. The ITT effect on neighborhood poverty was 17 percentage points for the

Experimental group and 13 percentage points for the Section 8 group at one year after random

assignment. Actually moving with an Experimental-group voucher reduced average tract poverty

rates by 35 percentage points, or 2.85 SD – moving families almost down to the national average

poverty rate. The effect of moving with a regular Section 8 voucher that did not have the

mobility restriction was smaller but still sizable – equal to 21 percentage points or 1.73 SD in the

national distribution.

       Over time the MTO effect on neighborhood conditions declined, due partly to secondary

moves by MTO families after their initial MTO-assisted voucher moves but mostly to declines

over time in the average tract poverty rate of families in the control group. For example, the

Experimental-voucher TOT effect on tract poverty rates was 35 percentage points measured 1

year after baseline and about 8 percentage points measured 10-15 years after baseline, a decline

of 27 percentage points. Much of this attenuation of the MTO effect on neighborhood poverty

rates came from the fact that the average tract poverty rate for control families declined from 50

percent one year after baseline down to 31 percent 10-15 years after baseline, a drop of 19

percentage points. Most of the decline in neighborhood poverty rates among families in the




                                                 8
control group was due to mobility rather than to gentrification of the neighborhoods in which

control families were living. This conclusion came from results (not shown) that re-estimated

MTO impacts on neighborhood conditions at different points in time since randomization but

holding the poverty rates of all tracts constant at their levels in the 2000 census.

        Whatever the cause, it is clear that the neighborhood conditions of the MTO treatment

and control groups partially converged over time. Because behavioral change may require

accumulated exposure to neighborhood environments, however, we also examined the average

neighborhood conditions that families experienced over the entire post-randomization period.

Appendix Table 2 shows that over the course of the study period the average control group

family lived in a census tract with a poverty rate of 40 percent. Moving with an Experimental

voucher reduces average tract poverty rates for families by 18 percentage points. This decline is

quite large, amounting to nearly one-half the control mean and 1.48 standard deviations in the

2000 national tract poverty distribution, and much larger than poverty reductions that might be

accomplished with almost any place-based neighborhood policy.

        Another way to consider the size of the MTO “treatment dose” on neighborhood

conditions is to ask how much larger such a dose could possibly be from a large-scale mobility

program. The answer is not much. A common measure of residential segregation is the

“dissimilarity index,” defined as the share of people who would need to be moved across census

tracts within a given area in order to have the share of poor people in each tract equal the share of

the larger area that is poor. The five MTO demonstration cities have poverty rates right now

around 20 percent.2 The average tract poverty rate of MTO Experimental group movers (about

21 percent) roughly corresponds to the dissimilarity-index benchmark of perfect poverty
2
  Data from the Census Bureau’s American Community Survey for 2006 through 2010 show the poverty rates for
the five MTO cities are: Baltimore (21.3 percent); Boston (21.2); Chicago (20.9); Los Angeles (19.5); and New
York (19.1). See www.census.gov.




                                                       9
integration in these MTO cities. The national poverty rate in the U.S. as a whole right now is 15

percent, so even if a residential mobility program were to move inner-city families at random

across neighborhoods all over the country, there is scope for achieving more economic

integration than was achieved in the MTO Experimental group when the overall poverty rate is

15 or 20 percent.

       A2. MTO effects on other neighborhood conditions

       Although MTO focused explicitly on reducing economic rather than racial segregation

for participating families, one might have expected important changes in neighborhood racial

segregation as a byproduct of the MTO moves, given that residents of high-poverty

neighborhoods are very disproportionately likely to be Hispanic or African-American

(Jargowsky 1997; Jargowsky 2003). Appendix Table 2 makes clear, however, that MTO’s

impacts on racial segregation for participants were fairly modest and much smaller than impacts

on economic segregation. The average control group family spent the study period living in a

census tract that was 88 percent minority. The tract share minority for those who moved with an

Experimental voucher was lower by a statistically significant amount, but the TOT effect of

about 12 percentage points means that, over the study period, even the Experimental-group

movers were living in census tracts in which fully three-quarters of all residents were members

of racial and ethnic minority groups.

       Despite the lack of MTO impact on neighborhood racial composition, MTO moves led to

sizable changes in neighborhood social processes that a growing body of sociological research

suggests might be particularly important in affecting people’s life outcomes (see for example

Sampson, Morenoff, and Gannon-Rowley 2002; Sampson 2012). For example Appendix Table 2

shows that in survey self-reports 10 to 15 years after baseline – after the partial convergence in




                                                 10
neighborhood poverty rates between treatment and control groups had occurred – the

Experimental-voucher TOT effect on the chance of having at least one college-educated friend

was nearly 15 percentage points, or about a third of the control mean of 53 percent. The

Experimental-voucher TOT effect on the likelihood that neighbors would do something if local

youth were spraying graffiti (intended to measure what Sampson, Raudenbush, and Earls (1997),

call “collective efficacy” – the willingness of neighbors to work together to enforce shared social

norms) was over 16 percentage points, more than a quarter of the control mean of 59 percent.

         MTO also changed safety – the neighborhood condition that was the main reason most

MTO families originally signed up for the program. Moving with an Experimental voucher

reduced the local violent-crime rate (as measured by police data) by 833 violent crimes per

100,000 residents, over one-third of the control mean of 2,317.3 Self-reported data about

neighborhood safety showed similarly large effects. The Experimental-voucher TOT effect on

the likelihood that adults reported feeling unsafe in their neighborhood during the day equaled 8

percentage points, over one-third of the control group’s rate of 20 percent. The likelihood of

having seen drugs used or sold in the neighborhood over the past month was 13 percentage

points lower in the Experimental group than the control group value of 31 percent.

         Because moving itself is part of the MTO treatment and could have independent effects

on people’s life outcomes, it is important to keep in mind that the control group averaged about

2.2 moves over the course of the 10-15 year follow-up study period. Treatment assignment

increased the average number of moves over 10 to 15 years by about half a move.




3
  The results reported here for local-area crime rates are slightly different from those reported in Ludwig (2012) due
to corrections and updates to the available administrative crime records used for analysis.




                                                          11
       B. Additional Impacts on Behavioral Outcomes

       The results presented in Table 1 above provide a broad summary of the effects of MTO-

assisted moves on the behavioral outcomes of adults, while the results in Table 2 summarize the

effects on youth. In this section we provide more details about impacts on the individual

outcomes that underlie these broad outcome indices.

       B1. MTO impacts on adult outcomes

       Given the widely held view that living in a disadvantaged neighborhood depresses

earnings and employment, due to peer norms or lack of access to informal job referrals or some

other reason, one of the most surprising findings shown in Table 1 is that moving to a less-

distressed area with a regular Section 8 voucher seems to have reduced economic self-

sufficiency. As noted above, we believe that this is most likely a spurious result – a consequence

of having secured funding to survey the Section 8 adults later in the research project and

therefore interviewing them later in calendar time, when labor market conditions were weaker as

a result of the economic recession, than when we interviewed the control group.

       The top of Appendix Table 4 shows that MTO impacts on survey reports of adult

economic outcomes are not statistically significant for the Experimental group, but for the

Section 8 group tend to be in the direction of worse economic outcomes. However the bottom

panel of Appendix Table 4 shows MTO impacts on adult employment rates and earnings as

measured by quarterly administrative records obtained from state unemployment insurance (UI)

systems, which we can use to measure outcomes at a common point in time across groups. We

found no signs of a negative effect on economic outcomes in the Section 8 group with

administrative data. We can also see this in Appendix Figure 2, which shows quarter-by-quarter

employment rates for all three randomized MTO groups. Experimental group employment rates




                                                12
increased dramatically in the early years of the program, which coincided with welfare reform

and very low unemployment, but the control group employment rates tracked these employment

rate changes very closely during these as well as later years of the study period.

       Although Table 1 shows that the overall MTO impacts on our broad physical and mental

health outcome indices were not quite statistically significant, MTO did significantly improve

several important individual indicators of health as described in Appendix Table 5. For example,

the top panel shows that moving with an MTO Experimental group voucher reduced an indicator

of short-term psychological distress (the K6 index) by one-fifth of a standard deviation, with

impacts of moving with a regular Section 8 voucher roughly half as large.

       MTO had no detectable effects on overall self-reported health status, but we found

sizable impacts on a variety of specific health conditions. Moving with an Experimental voucher

reduced the chances that MTO adults had difficulty lifting groceries by about 10 percentage

points or one-fifth the control mean. Appendix Table 5 also shows MTO impacts on diabetes and

measures of obesity and extreme obesity– based on different cut-points in the BMI distribution –

taken from Ludwig et al. (2011). Although the interim MTO study found that MTO reduced

obesity prevalence, defined as BMI 30, we found no impact on this outcome in the long-term

data – perhaps because nearly three in five MTO adults are obese in those data. We did find

sizable impacts at higher BMI cut points. Moving with either an Experimental or regular Section

8 voucher reduced the likelihood of having BMI 35 by about 9 or 10 percentage points, over a

quarter of the control mean of 35 percent. The Experimental-voucher TOT effect on extreme

obesity (BMI 40) was 7 percentage points, 40 percent of the control mean of 18 percent. We

used blood samples to measure diabetes, since nearly a third of all diabetes cases are

undiagnosed (Cowie et al. 2006) and the likelihood of diagnosis could vary across areas. The




                                                 13
Experimental-voucher TOT effect on diabetes was a reduction of 10 percentage points, about

half the control-group mean of 20 percent.

       Because economic outcomes and particularly health outcomes are expected to vary by

age, it is possible that MTO’s effects on adult outcomes could also have varied by age. Appendix

Table 6 presents results for economic outcomes and individual health outcomes separately for

adults who were under 33 years of age versus 33 years and older at the time of random

assignment. We found little consistent evidence that there were detectable differences in long-

run MTO impacts on adults by age.

       Although MTO has overall a mixed pattern of impacts on the sort of traditional measure

of objective outcomes that dominate the neighborhood-effects literature, Appendix Table 7

(reproduced from the supplemental appendix to Ludwig et al. (2012)) shows that MTO moves

nonetheless generated very sizable gains in adult self-reports of subjective well-being (SWB).

The long-term MTO data included the standard SWB measure that has been used as part of the

General Social Survey (“Taken all together, how would you say things are these days – would

you say that you are very happy, pretty happy, or not too happy?”) The proper interpretation of

SWB measures remains the topic of some debate. Previous studies have shown different

measures of self-reported SWB to be correlated in expected ways with objective indicators of

well-being such as life events, biological indicators, and reports by other people about the

person’s happiness (see for example Kahneman and Krueger (2006) and Oswald and Wu

(2010)). The TOT effects on SWB equaled 0.16SD for the Experimental group and 0.19SD for

the Section 8 group.

       Appendix Figure 3 (taken from Ludwig et al. (2012)) suggests that adult SWB was more

strongly affected by neighborhood economic segregation than by racial segregation. The analysis




                                                 14
estimates the relationship between SWB and duration-weighted neighborhood characteristics

measures by using interactions of MTO treatment assignment and city indicators as instrumental

variables to deal with the endogeneity of neighborhood location. Panel A shows that there was a

negative relationship between SWB and average tract poverty rates when that is the only

neighborhood measure included as an explanatory variable in the model. Panel B shows the same

was true for the relationship between SWB and tract minority share. When tract poverty and tract

minority share are included in the model at the same time, SWB had an even more pronounced

negative relationship with tract poverty (Panel C) but SWB had a positive relationship with tract

minority share (Panel D). A qualitatively similar pattern held for our broad indices for outcomes

in the physical and mental health domains as well (see Appendix Tables 8 and 9 for details).

         This pattern is important because while racial segregation has been declining in the U.S.

since 1970, to levels not seen since 1970 (Glaeser and Vigdor 2012), income segregation has

been increasing since 1970 (Watson 2009; Reardon and Bischoff 2011). Our results suggest the

adverse effect of disadvantaged neighborhood environments on the well-being of poor families

has been getting worse over time, and that trends over time in growing inequality in family

income may understate the growth over time in the inequality of overall well-being.

         B2. MTO impacts on youth outcomes

         Appendix Table 10 shows that the long-term data are qualitatively consistent with the

interim MTO study in showing a gender difference in MTO impacts on youth – with female

youth having had positive impacts on some outcomes, while males had negative impacts –

although the youth impacts were generally more muted in the long-term than interim data.4 For


4
  These youth estimates for MTO ITT and TOT effects come from a set of regressions that have a similar
specification to those for the MTO adult sample, but now cluster standard errors at the baseline-household level to
account for the non-independence of observations for children drawn from the same family, and control for a
slightly different set of baseline covariates (see Appendix Table 1B).




                                                         15
female youth MTO moves with either an Experimental or regular Section 8 voucher reduced the

share overweight (which for youth is defined as BMI 95th percentile), with an ITT effect equal

to about five percentage points or a fifth of the control mean.5 The Experimental-voucher moves

also improved mental health, as indicated by declines in the K6 measure of short-term

psychological distress. For male youth most of the impacts were either not statistically

significant or tended to indicate worse outcomes as a result of MTO moves, for example with

respect to injury prevalence, smoking, or likelihood of being educationally on track. We found

no signs of the large declines in youth violence rates found among both male and female youth in

the interim MTO data (Kling, Ludwig, and Katz 2005).

         We note that the set of youth we surveyed for the long-term MTO study, ages 10-20 at

the end of 2007, overlaps very little with youth analyzed in the interim MTO study, who were

10-20 at the end of 2001. Our long-term results thus help confirm the previous (surprising)

results for the gender difference in MTO impacts among a different group of MTO children.

         We found few statistically significant MTO impacts on educational outcomes in the long-

term data, either with respect to measures of school persistence or achievement test scores (Panel

C of Appendix Table 10).6 The standard errors around our estimates indicate that impacts on

achievement test scores larger than about 0.10 or 0.15 SD were very unlikely.


5
  Our main results define childhood obesity using the Centers for Disease Control definition – body mass index
above the 95th percentile for a given age-sex group as estimated from a set of national health studies collected in the
1960s through 1990s (www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/ad/ad314.pdf). This result (and hence the results for the overall
physical health index for female youth) is somewhat sensitive to using alternative definitions of childhood obesity;
for example the result is not quite statistically significant when we instead use the definition developed by the
International Obesity Task Force, which uses a different set of age-sex BMI cut points derived from international
data; for additional details see Sanbonmatsu et al. (2011).
6
  Our in-person interviews with MTO youth included a 45-minute achievement assessment in math and reading as
designed for the 5th and 8th grade follow-up waves of the U.S. Department of Education’s Early Childhood
Longitudinal Study- Kindergarten Cohort (ECLS-K). Youth ages 10-12 were administered the 5th grade test, while
youth ages 13-20 at the end of 2007 were administered the 8th grade test. To guard against the possibility that some
13-20 year olds would find the items on the 8th grade test too easy and answer every item correctly, in which case
the assessment would lose its ability to provide information about which youth in the study know more than others
(a “ceiling effect”), we supplemented the ECLS-K 8th grade test with a small set of math and reading items from the




                                                          16
         One of the main motivations for following up with youth in the long-term study was the

possibility that youth who were very young at baseline may have experienced particularly

pronounced gains from MTO moves. After all, children who were pre-school age at baseline did

not yet really have social networks or a sense of social identity before they moved. Moreover

they experienced massive changes in neighborhood poverty (up to 3SD in the national

distribution one year after randomization) during the life stage when children are thought to be

most developmentally malleable. Yet Appendix Table 11 shows that even for children who were

under age 6 at baseline we found no signs of any detectable changes in achievement test scores.

         The MTO effects that we do observe among youth – health impacts on female youth –

seem to be driven more by neighborhood economic disadvantage than neighborhood minority

composition. Appendix Tables 12 and 13 present the results of using interactions of indicators

for MTO treatment-group assignment and baseline demonstration site as instruments for

duration-weighted tract poverty or tract minority share, and show little evidence of a ‘dose-

response’ relationship between either measure and any outcomes when we look at all youth

together. The same is true when we look at male youth (Appendix Tables 16 and 17). However

Appendix Table 14 shows that the MTO effect on physical health of female youth is more

strongly related to tract poverty than tract minority share when each is included one at a time as

the endogenous explanatory variable in our instrumental variables model. When both are

included in the same IV model simultaneously, we can reject the null hypothesis that the

coefficients on tract poverty and tract minority share are the same (Appendix Table 15). The data

provide some suggestive indication that mental health for female youth might also be more

strongly related to tract poverty than tract minority share; when both are included in the same IV

U.S. Department of Education’s National Educational Longitudinal Survey-1988 (NELS). The results presented in
our table here report just on youth who were 13-20 at the end of 2007 who took the 8th grade test; results are similar
for the 10-12 year olds.




                                                          17
model at the same time the coefficient is much larger in absolute value for tract poverty,

although given the standard errors around our estimates we cannot reject the null hypothesis that

the coefficients on tract poverty and minority share are the same.



 V.    Discussion

       The MTO long-term results did not provide support for the view that high rates of school

failure and non-employment in central city neighborhoods are due to the direct adverse effects of

living in a poor neighborhood. The pattern of findings was consistent with the results from the 4-

7 year interim follow-up of MTO adults and youth (Kling, Liebman, and Katz 2007). Our long-

term data also showed no detectable impacts on academic achievement for children of pre-school

age at baseline even though MTO led to very large changes in their neighborhood conditions at a

life stage when they may be most developmentally malleable.

       One obvious question involves generalizability: Do neighborhood changes have no

impact on earnings or educational achievement outcomes here because the MTO study sample is

somehow unusual? MTO families were drawn from extremely distressed communities. The

baseline census tracts for MTO families were fully 3 standard deviations above the national

average in the 2000 census tract-poverty distribution. On the other hand much of the scientific

and policy concern about “neighborhood effects” is precisely with families living in the most

distressed areas. And previous observational studies report finding impacts on samples similar to

the MTO sample.

       Looking at broad indices of outcomes that were pre-specified for the interim MTO data,

we found suggestive (but not always statistically significant) signs that physical and mental

health outcomes improved for adult women and female youth. We found very large MTO




                                                18
impacts on specific health measures, particularly those related to extreme obesity and diabetes.

Although we acknowledge that measuring candidate mechanisms like diet, exercise and access to

health care is intrinsically challenging, and that our available data on these factors are quite

limited, it is noteworthy that MTO moves reduced extreme obesity and diabetes by fully 40-50%

for adults while generating almost no detectable changes in our measures of these candidate

mediators. One hypothesis for why MTO improved physical health is because of MTO’s

beneficial impacts on neighborhood safety, and subsequent gains in mental health – including

psychological distress. This safety-stress-health hypothesis is also consistent with our finding

that the majority of MTO households signed up to move to new neighborhoods through MTO

because of concerns about crime and violence.

       The long-term MTO data did not show any signs of the large drop in violent-crime arrests

that were found in the 4-7 year MTO follow-up among both male and female youth (Kling,

Ludwig, and Katz 2005). However the long-term data did echo the interim data to some extent in

showing female youth may benefit from MTO moves in other outcome domains like mental

health or risky behaviors, but male youth tended to do no better (or do worse) as a result of such

moves. The reason for these gender differences remains unclear; they do not seem to be due

merely to gender differences in the prevalence of these outcomes or behaviors.

       The magnitudes of these gender differences in MTO impacts were smaller in the long-

term than interim data, just as the difference across MTO groups in neighborhood conditions was

smaller at the time of the long-term surveys than interim surveys. These patterns suggest youth

outcomes may be more affected by contemporaneous neighborhood conditions than accumulated

exposure to neighborhood environments, or what Sampson (2012) calls “situational”

neighborhood effects as opposed to “developmental” neighborhood effects.




                                                  19
       The MTO data make clear that neighborhood environments have important impacts on

the overall quality of life and well-being of low-income families despite the mixed pattern of

impacts on traditional “objective” outcome measures, including null effects on earnings and

education. Ludwig et al. (2012) showed that a 1 standard deviation decline in census tract

poverty rates (about 13 percentage points) was associated with an increase in SWB that is about

the same size as the difference in SWB between households whose annual incomes differ by

$13,000 – a very large amount given that the average control group family’s annual income in

the long-term survey was just $20,000.




                                                20
REFERENCES

Angrist, Joshua D., Guido W. Imbens, and Donald B. Rubin. 1996. “Identification of Causal
    Effects Using Instrumental Variables.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 91
    (434): 444–455.

Bloom, Howard S. 1984. “Accounting for No-Shows in Experimental Evaluation Designs.”
    Evaluation Review 8 (2): 225–246.

Cowie, Catherine C., Keith F. Rust, Danita D. Byrd-Holt, Mark S. Eberhardt, Katherine M.
   Flegal, Michael M. Engelgau, Sharon H. Saydah, Desmond E. Williams, Linda S. Geiss,
   and Edward W. Gregg. 2006. “Prevalence of Diabetes and Impaired Fasting Glucose in
   Adults in the U.S. Population.” Diabetes Care 29 (6): 1263–1268.
   http://care.diabetesjournals.org/content/29/6/1263.abstract.

Ellen, Ingrid G., and Margery A. Turner. 1997. “Does Neighborhood Matter?” Housing Policy
     Debate 8 (4): 833–66.

Glaeser, Edward L., and Jacob L. Vigdor. 2012. The End of the Segregated Century: Racial
    Separation in America’s Neighborhoods, 1980-2010. New York. www.manhattan-
    institute.org/pdf/cr_66.pdf.

Jargowsky, Paul A. 1997. Poverty and Place: Ghettos, Barrios and the American City. New
     York: Russell Sage Foundation.

———. 2003. Stunning Progress, Hidden Problems: The Dramatic Decline of Concentrated
  Poverty in the 1990s. Washington, DC.

Jencks, Christopher, and Susan E. Mayer. 1990. “The Social Consequences of Growing up in a
    Poor Neighborhood.” In Inner-City Poverty in the United States, ed. Laurence Lynn and
    Michael McGeary, 111–186. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

Kahneman, Daniel, and Alan B. Krueger. 2006. “Developments in the Measurement of
    Subjective Well-Being.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20 (1): 3–24.

Kawachi, Ichiro, and Lisa F. Berkman, eds. 2003. Neighborhoods and Health. New York:
   Oxford University Press.

Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2007. “Experimental Analysis of
    Neighborhood Effects.” Econometrica 75 (1): 83–119.

Kling, Jeffrey R., Jens Ludwig, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2005. “Neighborhood Effects on Crime
    for Female and Male Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment.”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (1): 87–130.




                                              21
Kneebone, Elizabeth, Carey Nadeau, and Alan Berube. 2011. “The Re-Emergence of
    Concentrated Poverty: Metropolitan Trends in the 2000s”. Washington, DC: The Brookings
    Institution, Metropolitan Policy Program.
    www.brookings.edu/~/media/Files/rc/papers/2011/1103_poverty_kneebone_nadeau_berube
    /1103_poverty_kneebone_nadeau_berube.pdf.

Ludwig, Jens. 2012. “The Long-Term Results From the Moving to Opportunity Residential
    Mobility Demonstration.” Cityscape 14 (2): 1–28.

Ludwig, Jens, Greg J. Duncan, Lisa A. Gennetian, Lawrence F. Katz, Ronald C. Kessler, Jeffrey
    R. Kling, and Lisa Sanbonmatsu. 2012. “Neighborhood Effects on the Long-Term Well-
    Being of Low-Income Adults.” Science 337 (6101): 1505–1510.

Ludwig, Jens, Lisa Sanbonmatsu, Lisa Gennetian, Emma Adam, Greg J. Duncan, Lawrence F.
    Katz, Ronald C. Kessler, et al. 2011. “Neighborhoods, Obesity, and Diabetes-a Randomized
    Social Experiment.” The New England Journal of Medicine 365 (16): 1509–19.

Oswald, Andrew J., and Stephen Wu. 2010. “Objective Confirmation of Subjective Measures of
   Human Well-being: Evidence from the U.S.A.” Science 327 (5965): 576–579.

Reardon, Sean F., and Kendra Bischoff. 2011. “Income Inequality and Income Segregation.”
    American Journal of Sociology 116 (4): 1092–1153.

Sampson, Robert J. 2012. Great American City: Chicago and the Enduring Neighborhood Effect.
   Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Sampson, Robert J., Jeffrey D. Morenoff, and Thomas Gannon-Rowley. 2002. “Assessing
   ‘Neighborhood Effects’: Social Processes and New Directions in Research.” Annual Review
   of Sociology 28 (1): 443–478.

Sampson, Robert J., Stephen W. Raudenbush, and Felton Earls. 1997. “Neighborhoods and
   Violent Crime: a Multilevel Study of Collective Efficacy.” Science 277 (5328): 918–924.

Sanbonmatsu, Lisa, Jens Ludwig, Lawrence F. Katz, Lisa A. Gennetian, Greg J. Duncan, Ronald
    C. Kessler, Emma Adam, Thomas W. McDade, and Stacy Tessler Lindau. 2011. Moving to
    Opportunity for Fair Housing Demonstration Program: Final Impacts Evaluation.
    Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of Policy
    Development and Research.
    www.huduser.org/publications/pdf/MTOFHD_fullreport_v2.pdf.

Watson, Tara. 2009. “Inequality and the Measurement of Residential Segregation By Income in
    American Neighborhoods.” Review of Income and Wealth 55 (3): 820–844.




                                              22
Exhibit List
Main Exhibits
Figure 1. Densities of Average Poverty Rate by Treatment Group
Table 1. Intent-to-Treat Effects on MTO Adults
Table 2. Intent-to-Treat Effects on MTO Youth

Appendix Figures
1. Densities of Average Poverty Rate by Treatment Group
2. Employment Rates Over Time by Treatment Group
3. Instrumental Variable Estimation of the Relationship between Subjective Well-Being and Tract
   Poverty Rate and Tract Share Minority

Appendix Tables
1. Baseline Characteristics (1994-98) Controlled for in the Main Analysis
1B. Additional Baseline Characteristics Controlled for in the Youth Analysis
2. Effects on Expanded Set of Housing and Neighborhood Condition Measures
3. Intent-to-Treat Effects on Summary Measures of Outcomes
4. Effects on Adult Economic Self-Sufficiency
5. Effects on Adult Mental and Physical Health
6. Intent-to-Treat Effects on Adult Economic Self-Sufficiency and Health by Age at Baseline
7. Effects on Adult Subjective Well-Being
8. Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Relationship between Adult Outcomes and Duration-
    Weighted Tract Poverty Rate or Tract Share Minority
9. Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Relationship between Adult Outcomes and Duration-
    Weighted Tract Poverty Rate and Tract Share Minority in One Model
10. Intent-to-Treat Effects on Youth Outcomes
11. Intent-to-Treat Effects on Youth Achievement Assessment Scores, by Gender and Age at Baseline
12. Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Relationship between Youth Outcomes and Duration-
    Weighted Tract Poverty Rate or Tract Share Minority
13. Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Relationship between Youth Outcomes and Duration-
    Weighted Tract Poverty Rate and Tract Share Minority in One Model
14. Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Relationship between Female Youth Outcomes and
    Duration-Weighted Tract Poverty Rate or Tract Share Minority
15. Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Relationship between Female Youth Outcomes and
    Duration-Weighted Tract Poverty Rate and Tract Share Minority in One Model
16. Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Relationship between Male Youth Outcomes and Duration-
    Weighted Tract Poverty Rate or Tract Share Minority
17. Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Relationship between Male Youth Outcomes and Duration-
    Weighted Tract Poverty Rate and Tract Share Minority in One Model
             .05
   Density
             .025
             0




                    0            20                  40                   60                  80                 100
                                     Average Census Tract Poverty Rate
                                 from Random Assignment through May 2008
                                                 Experimental Group Compliers
                                                 Section 8 Group Compliers
                                                 Control Group


FIGURE 1. DENSITIES OF AVERAGE POVERTY RATE BY TREATMENT GROUP
Notes : Duration-weighted average of census tract poverty at all addresses from random assignment through May 2008
(just prior to the long-term survey period), based on linear interpolation of 1990 and 2000 decennial census and the 2005-
09 American Community Survey data. Density estimates used an Epanechnikov kernel with a half-width of 2.
Source and Sample : The sample is all adults who were interviewed as part of the long-term survey (with Experimental
and Section 8 group adults limited to those who used an MTO voucher to move). Sample sizes in the Experimental,
Section 8, and control groups are 711, 413, and 1,139.
                            TABLE 1      MTO IMPACTS ON ADULT OUTCOMES

                                                       Experimental vs. Control            Section 8 vs. Control
Panel A. Outcome indices (z-scores)
Index for all outcomes                                             0.037                             -0.010
                                                                 (0.040)                            (0.059)
Economic self-sufficiency                                         -0.029                             -0.112 *
                                                                 (0.040)                            (0.059)
Absence of physical health problems                                0.055                              0.062
                                                                 (0.042)                            (0.058)
Absence of mental health problems                                  0.069                              0.063
                                                                 (0.042)                            (0.062)
Panel B. Selected individual health outcomes
Psychological distress, K6 z-score                                -0.106 **                          -0.081
                                                                 (0.042)                            (0.060)
BMI    40                                                         -0.036 **                          -0.038 *
                                                                 (0.016)                            (0.023)
Blood test detected diabetes (HbA1c    6.5%)                      -0.050 ***                         -0.015
                                                                 (0.018)                            (0.026)
Notes : Estimates are the intent-to-treat effect sizes from an ordinary least squares regression of each outcome on
treatment indicators and the baseline covariates listed in Appendix Table 1. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses. Outcome indices and psychological distress are z-scores using the mean and standard deviation for the
control group. Index components are (positive outcomes (+) included as is, while signs for negative outcomes (−)
were reversed so that higher values indicate “better” outcomes): Economic: + adult employed and not on TANF +
employed + earnings − on TANF − government income. Mental health: − distress − depression − Generalized
Anxiety + calmness + sleep. Physical health: − self-reported health fair/poor − asthma attack past year – obesity −
hypertension − trouble carrying/climbing. The index for all outcomes includes the 15 measures from the three
indices. Psychological distress consists of 6 items (e.g. sadness) scaled on a score from 0 to 24 (highest distress).
Source and Sample : The sample is all adults who were interviewed as part of the long-term survey. Sample sizes in
the Experimental, Section 8, and Control groups are 1,456, 678, and 1,139.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.
                                        TABLE 2      MTO IMPACTS ON YOUTH OUTCOMES

                                                                       Experimental        Section 8         Experimental        Section 8
                                                                        vs. Control       vs. Control         vs. Control       vs. Control
Panel A. Outcome indices (z-scores)
                                                                               Female Youth                           Male Youth
Index for all outcomes                                                     0.079          0.077                 -0.016         -0.116 *
                                                                         (0.062)        (0.065)                (0.062)        (0.069)
Absence of physical health problems                                        0.109 *        0.124 *               -0.075         -0.058
                                                                         (0.061)        (0.065)                (0.068)        (0.078)
Absence of mental health problems                                          0.160 ***      0.039                  0.008         -0.062
                                                                         (0.058)        (0.065)                (0.064)        (0.071)
Absence of risky behavior                                                 -0.001          0.007                  0.027         -0.069
                                                                         (0.065)        (0.066)                (0.061)        (0.067)
Education                                                                 -0.043          0.027                 -0.006         -0.082
                                                                         (0.061)        (0.072)                (0.061)        (0.069)
Panel B. Selected education outcomes by age group (z-scores)
                                                                          Under Age 6 at Baseline             Ages 6 and Over at Baseline
Combined math and reading assessment                                      -0.014           0.019                -0.018           0.043
                                                                         (0.055)         (0.056)               (0.061)         (0.072)
Notes : Estimates are the intent-to-treat effect sizes from an ordinary least squares regression of each outcome on treatment indicators and
the baseline covariates listed in Appendix Tables 1 and 1B. Robust standard errors adjusted for household clustering are in parentheses. All
measures are z-scores using the mean and standard deviation for the control group. Index components are (positive outcomes (+) included
as is, while signs for negative outcomes (−) were reversed so that higher values indicate “better” outcomes): Physical health: − self-reported
health fair/poor − asthma attack past year − overweight – non-sports injury past year. Mental health: − distress − depression − Generalized
Anxiety. Risky behavior: − marijuana past 30 days − smoking past 30 days − alcohol past 30 days − ever pregnant or gotten someone
pregnant. Education: + graduated high school or still in school + in school or working + Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-Kindergarten
cohort study (ECLS-K) reading score + ECLS-K math score. The index for all outcomes includes the 15 measures from the four indices.
Source and Sample : The sample in both panels is youth who were interviewed as part of the long-term survey. Panel A is youth ages 15-20
as of December 2007, and Panel B is youth ages 13-20 (in analysis not shown, effects for youth ages 10-12 were similar to those for ages
13-20). Sample sizes in the Experimental, Section 8, and Control groups are 1,437, 1,031, and 1,153 for Panel A and 1,850, 1,318, and
1,476 for Panel B.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.
              .05




                                                                              .05
    Density




                                                                    Density
              .025




                                                                              .025
              0




                                                                              0
                     0         20      40      60      80     100                    0         20        40      60       80        100
                             Average Census Tract Poverty Rate                               Average Census Tract Poverty Rate
                         from Random Assignment through May 2008                         from Random Assignment through May 2008
                                Experimental Group Compliers                                        Section 8 Group Compliers
                                Experimental Group Non-Compliers                                    Section 8 Group Non-Compliers
                                Control Group                                                       Control Group




APPENDIX FIGURE 1. DENSITIES OF AVERAGE POVERTY RATE BY TREATMENT GROUP
Notes : Duration-weighted average of census tract poverty at all addresses from random assignment through May 2008
(just prior to the long-term survey fielding period), based on linear interpolation of 1990 and 2000 decennial census and
the 2005-09 American Community Survey data. Density estimates used an Epanechnikov kernel with a half-width of 2.
Source and Sample : The sample is all adults who were interviewed as part of the long-term survey. Sample sizes in the
Experimental, Section 8, and control groups are 1,456, 678, and 1,139.
                                              Percent Employed Over Time

                      60



                      50



                      40
   Percent Employed




                                                                                                              Experimental group mean
                      30                                                                                      Section 8 group mean

                                                                                                              Control group mean
                      20



                      10



                      0



                                               Calendar Quarter
APPENDIX FIGURE 2. EMPLOYMENT RATES OVER TIME BY TREATMENT GROUP
Notes : Employment is the fraction with positive earnings per quarter.
Source and Sample : Data are from administrative Unemployment Insurance (UI) records. The analysis uses individual-level data from UI records
from Maryland, Illinois, California, and Florida for individuals whose random assignment site was Baltimore, Chicago, or Los Angeles and
aggregate-level UI data from Massachusetts and New York, representing individuals whose random assignment site was Boston or New York City.
The sample is adults from all MTO households for whom consent to administrative data collection was available (N=4,194).
  A                                                             Subjective well-being versus
                                                                         share poor
                                                                                                                                  B                                                             Subjective well-being versus
                                                                                                                                                                                                      share minority

                                           0.24




                                                                                                                                                                           0.24
                                                               S LA                                                                                                                                                       S LA
                                           0.18




                                                                                                                                                                           0.18
  relative to site overall mean, z-score




                                                                                                                                  relative to site overall mean, z-score
                                           0.12




                                                                                                                                                                           0.12
          Subjective well-being




                                                                                                                                          Subjective well-being
                                                                  E Bal
                                           0.06




                                                                                                                                                                           0.06
                                                                              S Chi                                                                                                               E Bal                   S Chi
                                                      E NY                                                                                                                                                  E NY

                                                                  E Chi
                                                                                  S Bos                                                                                                                   E Chi             S Bos
                                           0.00




                                                                                                                                                                           0.00
                                                                E Bos                                                                                                                     E Bos
                                                                                                            C Bos                                                                                         S Bal                      C Bos
                                                                         S Bal                                                                                                                                      S NY
                                                                                         S NY
                                                                                                                    C NY                                                                                              C NY
                                                        E LA                                                                                                                               E LA
                                           -0.06




                                                                                                                                                                           -0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         C Bal
                                                                                                              C Bal

                                                                                                            C Chi                                                                                                    C Chi
                                                                                                                           C LA                                                                                                      C LA
                                           -0.12




                                                                                                                                                                           -0.12
                                                   -0.4    -0.2      0.0       0.2       0.4     0.6                                                                               -0.4    -0.2      0.0       0.2       0.4     0.6
                                                      Share poor relative to site overall mean, z-score                                                                             Share minority relative to site overall mean, z-score


  C                                                        Subjective well-being versus
                                                     share poor controlling for share minority
                                                                                                                                  D                                                        Subjective well-being versus
                                                                                                                                                                                     share minority controlling for share poor
                                           0.24




                                                                                                                                                                           0.24




                                                     S LA
                                           0.18




                                                                                                                                                                           0.18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S LA
  relative to site overall mean, z-score




                                                                                                                                  relative to site overall mean, z-score
                                           0.12




                                                                                                                                                                           0.12
          Subjective well-being




                                                                                                                                          Subjective well-being
                                           0.06




                                                                                                                                                                           0.06




                                                                      S Chi
                                                                                           E Bal                                                                                                                  S Chi
                                                     E NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                      E Bal
                                                        S Bos                                                                                                                                                              C Bos
                                                                                 E Chi                                                                                                                                      S Bos
                                                                                                                                                                                                      C NY
                                           0.00




                                                                                                                                                                           0.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                     E Chi                E NY
                                                                       C Bos                                                                                                                                                C Bal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  C LA
                                                                                                   E Bos                                                                                                           S NY
                                                                  S Bal
                                                                                 S NY                       C NY                                                                        E Bos
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S Bal
                                                                                   C Bal
                                           -0.06




                                                                                                                                                                           -0.06




                                                                                                                                                                                                          C Chi
                                                                                      E LA
                                                                                                           C LA

                                                                                                   C Chi                                                                                              E LA
                                           -0.12




                                                                                                                                                                           -0.12




                                                   -0.4    -0.2      0.0       0.2       0.4     0.6                                                                               -0.4    -0.2      0.0       0.2       0.4     0.6
                                                      Share poor relative to site overall mean, z-score                                                                             Share minority relative to site overall mean, z-score




APPENDIX FIGURE 3. INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLE ESTIMATION OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
    SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING AND TRACT POVERTY RATE AND TRACT SHARE MINORITY
APPENDIX FIGURE 3. (continued)
Notes: The figure shows the instrumental variable estimation of the relationship between subjective well-being and average
(duration-weighted) tract poverty rate (panel A), tract share minority (panel B), tract poverty controlling for share minority
(panel C), and tract share minority share controlling for tract poverty (panel D). The y-axis is a 3-point happiness scale (1=not
too happy, 2=pretty happy, 3=very happy) expressed in standard deviation units relative to the control group. Share poor is the
fraction of census tract residents living below the poverty threshold. Share minority is the fraction of census tract residents who
are members of racial or ethnic minority groups. Tract shares are linearly interpolated from the 1990 and 2000 decennial census
and 2005-09 American Community Survey and are weighted by the time respondents lived at each of their addresses from
random assignment through May 2008. Share poor and minority are z-scores, standardized by the control group mean and
standard deviation. The points represent the site (Bal = Baltimore, Bos = Boston, Chi = Chicago, LA = Los Angeles, NY = New
York City) and treatment group (E = Experimental group, S = Section 8 group, C = control group). The slope of the line is
equivalent to a 2SLS estimate of the relationship between subjective well-being and the mediator shown in each panel, using
interactions of indicators for MTO treatment group assignment and demonstration site as instruments for the mediator
(controlling for site indicator main effects). The estimated impact of 1sd decrease in poverty (Panel A) is a 0.129sd increase in
SWB (SE=0.054, P=0.017), and The estimated impact of 1sd decrease in poverty controlling for minority share (Panel C) is a
0.255sd increase in SWB (SE=0.095, P=0.008), and the estimated impact of 1sd decrease in minority share controlling for
poverty (Panel D) is a 0.289sd decrease in SWB (SE=0.176, P=0.101). The p-value from an F test of whether the coefficients
on poverty and minority share are the same (that is, whether the slope in panel C equals the slope in panel D) is 0.036.
Source and Sample: The sample is all adults who were interviewed as part of the long-term survey with non-missing subjective
well-being and duration-weighted census tract characteristics data (N=3,263).
                           APPENDIX TABLE 1
 BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS (1994-98) CONTROLLED FOR IN THE MAIN ANALYSIS
                                           Control   Experimental   Section 8
                                           N=1139      N=1456        N=678
Female                                      0.978       0.988 *       0.978

Age as of December 31, 2007
 35                                         0.143       0.145         0.132
36-40                                       0.229       0.212         0.236
41-45                                       0.234       0.236         0.223
46-50                                       0.175       0.184         0.203
> 50                                        0.249       0.251         0.240

Race and ethnicity
African-American (any ethnicity)            0.660       0.648         0.629
Other non-white (any ethnicity)             0.270       0.283         0.283
Hispanic ethnicity (any race)               0.304       0.314         0.340

Other demographic characteristics
Never married                               0.637       0.623         0.624
Parent before age 18                        0.246       0.249         0.277
Working                                     0.245       0.271         0.269
Enrolled in school                          0.167       0.161         0.174
High school diploma                         0.361       0.381         0.347
Certificate of General Educational
Development (GED)                           0.199       0.159 **      0.183
Receiving Aid to Families with Dependent
Children (AFDC)                             0.763       0.763         0.736

Household characteristics
Own car                                     0.170       0.190         0.190
Disabled household member                   0.148       0.145         0.168
No teens in household                       0.646       0.608 *       0.610
Household size
    Two                                     0.194       0.223         0.210
    Three                                   0.330       0.302         0.291
    Four or more                            0.221       0.233         0.238
APPENDIX TABLE 1 (continued)

                                               Control            Experimental              Section 8

Site
Baltimore                                       0.135                  0.134                  0.140
Boston                                          0.205                  0.201                  0.207
Chicago                                         0.205                  0.205                  0.209
Los Angeles                                     0.226                  0.233                  0.214
New York                                        0.229                  0.227                  0.231

Neighborhood characteristics
Household member was crime victim in
last six months                                 0.416                  0.434                  0.414
Streets unsafe at night                         0.512                  0.493                  0.517
Very dissatisfied with neighborhood             0.467                  0.478                  0.477
Lived in neighborhood 5+ years                  0.606                  0.599                  0.616

Moved more than 3 times in past 5 years         0.108                  0.093                  0.090
No family in neighborhood                       0.639                  0.640                  0.611
No friends in neighborhood                      0.409                  0.396                  0.400
Chatted with neighbors at least once per
week                                            0.549                  0.524                  0.486 **
Very likely to tell neighbor about child
getting into trouble                            0.555                  0.556                  0.521

Confident about finding a new apartment         0.456                  0.477                  0.499
Had Section 8 voucher before                    0.426                  0.400                  0.379 *
Primary or secondary reason for
wanting to move
To get away from gangs and drugs                0.779                  0.786                  0.749
Better schools for children                     0.481                  0.491                  0.553 ***
Notes : All values represent shares. Values are calculated using sample weights to account for changes in
random assignment ratios across randomization cohorts, for survey sample selection, and for two-phase
interviewing. Missing values were imputed based on randomization site and whether randomized through
1997 or in 1998. The baseline head of household reported on the neighborhood characteristics listed
here. Analysis control variables not listed include whether the adult was part of the first survey release
and whether education level is missing. An omnibus F-test fails to reject the null hypothesis that the set
of baseline characteristics presented above is the same for both the control group and the randomly
assigned housing voucher treatment groups (p-value for the Experimental vs. control comparison is
P=0.442; and p-value for the Section 8 vs. control comparison is P=0.229).
Source and Sample : Baseline survey. The sample is all adults interviewed as part of the long-term
survey (N=3,273).
*** Significant at the 1 percent level on an independent group t-test of the difference between the control
group and the Experimental group or the Section 8 group.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.
                           APPENDIX TABLE 1B
ADDITIONAL BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS CONTROLLED FOR IN THE YOUTH ANALYSIS
                                                      Control             Experimental              Section 8
                                                      N=1153                N=1437                   N=1031
Male                                                   0.513                   0.480                   0.495

Age as of December 31, 2007
15                                                     0.150                   0.166                   0.161
16                                                     0.183                   0.180                   0.169
17                                                     0.182                   0.189                   0.162
18                                                     0.160                   0.191 **                0.167
19                                                     0.172                   0.138 **                0.155
20                                                     0.154                   0.135                   0.185 *

Age 6 or over at baseline                              0.562                   0.534                   0.566

Older youth characteristics
Gifted student or did advanced coursework              0.145                   0.123                   0.129
Suspended or expelled from school in past two
years                                                  0.032                   0.031                   0.041
School called about behavior in past two years         0.196                   0.200                   0.218
Behavioral or emotional problems                       0.061                   0.051                   0.059
Learning problems                                      0.134                   0.101                   0.137

Younger youth characteristics
In hospital before first birthday                      0.201                   0.169                   0.179
Weighed less than 6 pounds at birth                    0.153                   0.116                   0.152
Adult read to youth more than once per day             0.236                   0.241                   0.184

All youth characteristics
Health problems that limited activity                  0.058                   0.060                   0.057
Health problems that required special medicine
or equipment                                           0.081                   0.081                   0.096
Notes : All values represent shares. Values are calculated using sample weights to account for changes in
random assignment ratios across randomization cohorts, for survey sample selection, and for two-phase
interviewing. Missing values were imputed based on randomization site and whether randomized through 1997
or in 1998. The baseline head of household reported on all youth characteristics listed here. At baseline, older
youth were ages 6 to 11 and younger youth were ages 0 to 5. The youth analysis includes all control variables
listed in Appendix Table 1 (except for the survey release flag) as well as those listed in this table and flags for
missing data for several characteristics listed above (gifted student, suspended/expelled, behavioral problems,
learning problems, hospitalization, low birth weight, read to by household member, activity-limiting health
problems).
Source and Sample : Baseline survey. The sample is all youth ages 15-20 as of December 2007 interviewed as
part of the long-term survey (N=3,621).
** Significant at the 5 percent level on an independent group t-test of the difference between the control group
and the Experimental group or the Section 8 group.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.
                   APPENDIX TABLE 2    EFFECTS ON EXPANDED SET OF HOUSING AND NEIGHBORHOOD CONDITION MEASURES

                                                              Experimental vs. Control                          Section 8 vs. Control
                                          CM           ITT            TOT          CCM       N       ITT              TOT          CCM      N
Tract share poor
At baseline
  Share poor                              0.531      -0.004           -0.009       0.539    2555    -0.003           -0.004       0.544    1797
                                                    (0.005)          (0.009)                       (0.006)          (0.010)
 Share poor, z-score on U.S. tracts       3.172      -0.036           -0.074       3.241    2555    -0.021           -0.034       3.280    1797
                                                    (0.037)          (0.076)                       (0.049)          (0.079)
 Share poor, z-score on MTO controls      0.000      -0.030           -0.062       0.057    2555    -0.018           -0.028       0.089    1797
                                                    (0.031)          (0.063)                       (0.041)          (0.065)
1 year post-random assignment
  Share poor                              0.499      -0.169 ***       -0.352 ***   0.507    2552    -0.134 ***       -0.213 ***   0.505    1793
                                                    (0.008)          (0.013)                       (0.009)          (0.013)
 Share poor, z-score on U.S. tracts       2.916      -1.372 ***       -2.853 ***   2.982    2552    -1.085 ***       -1.728 ***   2.965    1793
                                                    (0.062)          (0.102)                       (0.073)          (0.102)
 Share poor, z-score on MTO controls      0.000      -1.043 ***       -2.168 ***   0.050    2552    -0.825 ***       -1.313 ***   0.037    1793
                                                    (0.047)          (0.077)                       (0.056)          (0.077)
5 years post-random assignment
  Share poor                              0.399      -0.098 ***       -0.202 ***   0.390    2544    -0.065 ***       -0.104 ***   0.392    1785
                                                    (0.007)          (0.014)                       (0.010)          (0.016)
 Share poor, z-score on U.S. tracts       2.109      -0.793 ***       -1.634 ***   2.030    2544    -0.526 ***       -0.842 ***   2.052    1785
                                                    (0.060)          (0.110)                       (0.083)          (0.131)
 Share poor, z-score on MTO controls      0.000      -0.594 ***       -1.225 ***   -0.059   2544    -0.394 ***       -0.631 ***   -0.042   1785
                                                    (0.045)          (0.083)                       (0.062)          (0.098)
10-15 years post-random assignment
(May 2008)
  Share poor                              0.311      -0.037 ***       -0.076 ***   0.285    2549    -0.021 **        -0.034 **    0.276    1778
                                                    (0.007)          (0.014)                       (0.010)          (0.016)
 Share poor, z-score on U.S. tracts       1.396      -0.298 ***       -0.618 ***   1.183    2549    -0.171 **        -0.275 **    1.108    1778
                                                    (0.057)          (0.115)                       (0.080)          (0.127)
 Share poor, z-score on MTO controls      0.000      -0.220 ***       -0.456 ***   -0.157   2549    -0.126 **        -0.203 **    -0.212   1778
                                                    (0.042)          (0.085)                       (0.059)          (0.094)
APPENDIX TABLE 2 (continued)

                                                         Experimental vs. Control                       Section 8 vs. Control
                                          CM         ITT         TOT          CCM       N       ITT           TOT          CCM      N
Tract share poor (continued)
Duration-weighted
  Share poor                              0.396    -0.088 ***    -0.183 ***   0.383    2592    -0.062 ***    -0.099 ***   0.384    1817
                                                  (0.006)       (0.010)                       (0.007)       (0.011)
 Share poor, z-score on U.S. tracts       2.082    -0.716 ***    -1.482 ***   1.974    2592    -0.501 ***    -0.800 ***   1.985    1817
                                                  (0.046)       (0.080)                       (0.058)       (0.088)
 Share poor, z-score on MTO controls      0.000    -0.702 ***    -1.454 ***   -0.107   2592    -0.491 ***    -0.785 ***   -0.095   1817
                                                  (0.045)       (0.078)                       (0.057)       (0.086)
Duration-weighted poverty rate is…
 Less than 20%                            0.054     0.233 ***     0.483 ***   0.076    2592     0.104 ***     0.165 ***   0.066    1817
                                                  (0.015)       (0.026)                       (0.019)       (0.030)
 Less than 30%                            0.242     0.268 ***     0.555 ***   0.310    2592     0.148 ***     0.236 ***   0.317    1817
                                                  (0.019)       (0.035)                       (0.027)       (0.043)
 Less than 40%                            0.512     0.199 ***     0.412 ***   0.568    2592     0.207 ***     0.331 ***   0.532    1817
                                                  (0.020)       (0.038)                       (0.028)       (0.043)
Tract share minority
At baseline
  Share minority                          0.912     0.001         0.003       0.909    2555     0.007         0.011       0.895    1797
                                                  (0.007)       (0.014)                       (0.010)       (0.016)
 Share minority, z-score on U.S. tracts   1.898     0.005         0.010       1.889    2555     0.023         0.036       1.845    1797
                                                  (0.021)       (0.045)                       (0.032)       (0.051)
 Share minority, z-score on MTO           0.000     0.008         0.016       -0.015   2555     0.037         0.059       -0.088   1797
 controls                                         (0.035)       (0.073)                       (0.052)       (0.084)
1 year post-random assignment
  Share minority                          0.904    -0.111 ***    -0.230 ***   0.897    2552    -0.031 ***    -0.049 ***   0.881    1793
                                                  (0.009)       (0.017)                       (0.011)       (0.018)
 Share minority, z-score on U.S. tracts   1.875    -0.356 ***    -0.740 ***   1.852    2552    -0.098 ***    -0.156 ***   1.802    1793
                                                  (0.028)       (0.054)                       (0.036)       (0.057)
 Share minority, z-score on MTO           0.000    -0.574 ***    -1.194 ***   -0.036   2552    -0.158 ***    -0.252 ***   -0.118   1793
 controls                                         (0.045)       (0.086)                       (0.058)       (0.092)
APPENDIX TABLE 2 (continued)

                                                         Experimental vs. Control                          Section 8 vs. Control
                                          CM         ITT         TOT          CCM       N       ITT              TOT          CCM     N
Tract share minority (continued)
5 years post-random assignment
  Share minority                          0.886    -0.056 ***    -0.116 ***   0.868    2544    -0.014           -0.023      0.868    1785
                                                  (0.009)       (0.017)                       (0.012)          (0.019)
 Share minority, z-score on U.S. tracts   1.815    -0.181 ***    -0.374 ***   1.760    2544    -0.046           -0.074      1.759    1785
                                                  (0.028)       (0.055)                       (0.038)          (0.061)
 Share minority, z-score on MTO           0.000    -0.285 ***    -0.588 ***   -0.086   2544    -0.072           -0.116      -0.088   1785
 controls                                         (0.043)       (0.086)                       (0.060)          (0.096)
10-15 years post-random assignment
(May 2008)
  Share minority                          0.844    -0.036 ***    -0.075 ***   0.856    2549     0.004            0.007      0.812    1778
                                                  (0.010)       (0.021)                       (0.015)          (0.024)
 Share minority, z-score on U.S. tracts   1.681    -0.115 ***    -0.239 ***   1.719    2549     0.013            0.022      1.578    1778
                                                  (0.032)       (0.066)                       (0.048)          (0.077)
 Share minority, z-score on MTO           0.000    -0.157 ***    -0.325 ***   0.051    2549     0.018            0.029      -0.140   1778
 controls                                         (0.043)       (0.090)                       (0.065)          (0.104)
Duration-weighted
 Share minority                           0.880    -0.060 ***    -0.123 ***   0.873    2592    -0.010           -0.016      0.857    1817
                                                  (0.007)       (0.013)                       (0.010)          (0.015)
 Share minority, z-score on U.S. tracts   1.798    -0.191 ***    -0.396 ***   1.775    2592    -0.033           -0.052      1.723    1817
                                                  (0.022)       (0.043)                       (0.031)          (0.049)
 Share minority, z-score on MTO
 controls                                 0.000    -0.368 ***    -0.763 ***   -0.044   2592    -0.063           -0.100      -0.143   1817
                                                  (0.042)       (0.083)                       (0.059)          (0.094)
Other tract characteristics
10-15 years post-random assignment
(May 2008)
  Concentrated disadvantage index         1.128    -0.104 ***    -0.215 ***   1.077    2549    -0.053 **        -0.085 **   1.047    1778
                                                  (0.018)       (0.036)                       (0.025)          (0.039)
 Concentrated disadvantage index,
 z-score on MTO controls                  0.000    -0.245 ***    -0.508 ***   -0.119   2549    -0.125 **        -0.201 **   -0.190   1778
                                                  (0.042)       (0.085)                       (0.058)          (0.093)
 Share college graduates                  0.220     0.021 ***     0.043 ***   0.211    2549     0.003            0.005      0.241    1778
                                                  (0.006)       (0.012)                       (0.009)          (0.014)
APPENDIX TABLE 2 (continued)

                                                            Experimental vs. Control                        Section 8 vs. Control
                                           CM           ITT         TOT          CCM        N       ITT           TOT          CCM       N
Other tract characteristics (continued)
Duration-weighted
 Concentrated disadvantage index          1.389      -0.235 ***     -0.487 ***    1.345    2592    -0.171 ***    -0.273 ***    1.362    1817
                                                    (0.016)        (0.028)                        (0.020)       (0.030)
 Concentrated disadvantage index,
 z-score on MTO controls                  0.000      -0.637 ***     -1.319 ***    -0.122   2592    -0.462 ***    -0.738 ***    -0.073   1817
                                                    (0.042)        (0.075)                        (0.053)       (0.081)
 Share college graduates                  0.161       0.042 ***      0.087 ***    0.159    2592     0.014 **      0.022 **     0.172    1817
                                                    (0.004)        (0.008)                        (0.005)       (0.009)
Residential mobility
 Number of moves after random
 assignment                               2.165       0.555 ***      1.152 ***    2.276    2595     0.588 ***     0.940 ***    2.511    1817
                                                    (0.073)        (0.146)                        (0.103)       (0.158)
Local area violent crime rate (per
100,000 residents)
  At baseline                             4,082.4      -62.0         -128.7       4,314.9 2579        9.2           14.7       4,201.6 1810
                                                      (91.0)        (189.2)                       (124.4)        (198.8)
 1 year after random assignment           3,603.0   -1,035.7 ***   -2,258.9 ***   3,711.1 2506     -718.9 ***   -1,154.4 ***   3,687.9 1800
                                                      (84.3)        (178.5)                       (105.5)        (164.5)
 5 years after random assignment          2,480.4     -486.1 ***   -1,044.3 ***   2,443.9 2495     -301.6 ***     -485.9 ***   2,645.2 1776
                                                      (59.9)        (125.2)                        (76.2)        (123.0)
 10-15 years post-random assignment
 (May 2008)                               1,458.4     -95.4 ***     -203.8 ***    1,342.8 2436     -13.1          -21.1        1,461.2 1746
                                                     (35.4)         (75.1)                        (53.6)         (86.7)
 Duration-weighted                        2,317.2    -401.9 ***     -833.2 ***    2,317.9 2594    -277.3 ***     -443.1 ***    2,454.8 1817
                                                     (40.4)         (81.1)                        (54.9)         (87.4)
Local area property crime rate (per
100,000 residents)
  At baseline                             7,021.1     200.3           415.7       6,739.8 2577       37.3          59.6        7,342.0 1809
                                                    (243.2)         (504.6)                       (226.6)       (362.1)
 1 year after random assignment           6,376.8    -666.6 ***    -1,424.9 ***   5,984.8 2537     -618.7 ***    -993.6 ***    6,732.6 1803
                                                    (247.5)         (527.1)                       (203.7)       (325.5)
 5 years after random assignment          5,134.1    -276.9 **       -588.2 **    4,700.7 2514     -270.7        -434.2        5,491.3 1780
                                                    (124.2)         (262.2)                       (169.4)       (271.3)
APPENDIX TABLE 2 (continued)

                                                                          Experimental vs. Control                                         Section 8 vs. Control
                                                  CM                  ITT         TOT          CCM              N               ITT              TOT          CCM        N
Local area property crime rate (per
100,000 residents) (continued)
  10-15 years post-random assignment
  (May 2008)                                    3,747.5              62.0              131.8        3,354.6 2472                 38.2             61.6       3,991.7 1754
                                                                   (80.3)            (171.1)                                  (124.3)          (200.1)
  Duration-weighted                             4,821.2            -207.6 **          -430.3 **     4,544.4 2593               -239.1 **        -382.1 **    5,205.9 1817
                                                                   (89.0)            (183.4)                                  (106.4)          (170.4)
Safety, housing and neighborhood
problems, and social networks
  Feel unsafe during day                         0.196             -0.036 **          -0.076 **      0.200    2587             -0.047 **        -0.075 **     0.181    1812
                                                                  (0.016)            (0.034)                                  (0.023)          (0.036)
  Saw drugs used or sold in last 30 days         0.310             -0.062 ***         -0.128 ***     0.316    2583             -0.027           -0.042        0.249    1798
                                                                  (0.019)            (0.039)                                  (0.027)          (0.043)
  Number of housing problems (0-7)               2.051             -0.359 ***         -0.745 ***     2.186    2593             -0.395 ***       -0.626 ***    1.932    1812
                                                                  (0.080)            (0.166)                                  (0.115)          (0.181)
  Likely or very likely to report kids
  spraying graffiti (collective efficacy)        0.589              0.078 ***          0.162 ***     0.541    2581              0.018            0.028        0.611    1807
                                                                  (0.021)            (0.043)                                  (0.030)          (0.048)
  One or more friends with college
  degree                                         0.532              0.071 ***          0.146 ***     0.481    2543             -0.018           -0.028        0.583    1778
                                                                  (0.021)            (0.044)                                  (0.031)          (0.050)
Notes : CM, control mean; ITT, intent-to-treat, from ordinary least squares regression; TOT, treatment-on-treated, from two-stage least squares regression instrumenting
treatment compliance; CCM, control complier mean. The estimated equations all include treatment indicators and the baseline covariates listed in Appendix Table 1. Robust
standard errors are in parentheses. The concentrated disadvantage index is a weighted combination of census tract percent [i] poverty, [ii] on welfare, [iii] unemployed, [iv]
female-headed family households, and [v] under age 18, with loading factors developed using 2000 Census tracts in Chicago by Sampson, Sharkey, and Raudenbush
(2008), but does not include percent African-American. The local area crime rate data were refined after the publication of Ludwig (2012), but these results do not
substantively differ from those in the earlier publication. The safety measure reflects whether the respondent felt unsafe or very unsafe (vs. safe or very safe) in the
neighborhood during the day. Housing problems include peeling paint, broken plumbing, rats, roaches, broken locks, broken windows, and broken heating system.
Source and Sample : Self-reported measures come from the adult long-term survey. Census tract characteristics are interpolated data from the 1990 and 2000 decennial
censuses as well as the 2005-09 American Community Survey. The sample is all adults interviewed as part of the long-term survey (N=3,273).
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
                         APPENDIX TABLE 3          INTENT-TO-TREAT EFFECTS ON SUMMARY MEASURES OF OUTCOMES

                               All Adults                 All Youth                 Female Youth                  Male Youth                  M − F Youth
                            E−C         S−C            E−C         S−C              E−C        S−C              E−C       S−C               E−C          S−C
                              (i)         (ii)          (iii)       (iv)              (v)       (vi)             (vii)     (viii)             (ix)         (x)
Index for all outcomes       0.037     -0.010          0.034       -0.019          0.079        0.077           -0.016    -0.116 *         -0.096       -0.193 **
                           (0.040)    (0.059)        (0.046)      (0.050)        (0.062)      (0.065)          (0.062)   (0.069)          (0.084)      (0.089)
Economic                    -0.029     -0.112 *
  self-sufficiency         (0.040)    (0.059)
Absence of physical          0.055      0.062          0.025         0.025         0.109 *         0.124 *      -0.075       -0.058        -0.184 **     -0.182 *
  health problems          (0.042)    (0.058)        (0.047)       (0.052)       (0.061)         (0.065)       (0.068)      (0.078)       (0.088)       (0.100)
Absence of mental            0.069      0.063          0.089 **     -0.006         0.160 ***       0.039         0.008       -0.062        -0.151 *      -0.101
  health problems          (0.042)    (0.062)        (0.044)       (0.049)       (0.058)         (0.065)       (0.064)      (0.071)       (0.085)       (0.095)
Absence of risky                                       0.009        -0.035        -0.001           0.007         0.027       -0.069         0.028        -0.076
  behavior                                           (0.047)       (0.049)       (0.065)         (0.066)       (0.061)      (0.067)       (0.085)       (0.090)
Education                                             -0.024        -0.021        -0.043           0.027        -0.006       -0.082         0.037        -0.109
                                                     (0.045)       (0.053)       (0.061)         (0.072)       (0.061)      (0.069)       (0.082)       (0.094)
Notes : E
regression of each outcome on treatment indicators and the baseline covariates listed in Appendix Tables 1 and 1B. In columns (v)–(x), gender is interacted with
the treatment indicators and baseline covariates described above. M − F Youth is male − female difference. Robust standard errors (adjusted for household
clustering in the youth analysis) are in parentheses. Index components are as follows (positive outcomes (+) were included as is, while the signs for negative
outcomes (−) were reversed so that higher index values indicate "better" outcomes): Adult economic self-sufficiency: + adult employed and not on TANF +
employed + 2009 earnings − on TANF − 2009 government income. Adult mental health: − distress index − depression − Generalized Anxiety Disorder +
calmness + sleep. Adult physical health: − self-reported health fair/poor − asthma attack past year – obesity − hypertension − trouble carrying/climbing. Youth
physical health: − self-reported health fair/poor − asthma attack past year − overweight − nonsports injury past year. Youth mental health: − distress index −
depression − Generalized Anxiety Disorder. Youth risky behavior: − marijuana past 30 days − smoking past 30 days − alcohol past 30 days − ever pregnant or
gotten someone pregnant. Youth education: + graduated high school or still in school + in school or working + Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-
Kindergarten cohort study (ECLS-K) reading score + ECLS-K math score. For adults, the index for all outcomes includes the 15 measures in the self-
sufficiency, physical health, and mental health indices. For youth, the index for all outcomes includes the 15 measures in the physical health, mental health, risky
behavior, and education indices.
Source and Sample : The sample is all adults and youth aged 15-20 (as of December 2007) who were interviewed as part of the long-term survey. Sample sizes
in the E, S, and C groups are 1,456, 678, and 1,139 for adults and 1,437, 1,031, 1,153 for youth.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.
                                        APPENDIX TABLE 4          EFFECTS ON ADULT ECONOMIC SELF-SUFFICIENCY

                                                                      Experimental vs. Control                                       Section 8 vs. Control
                                               CM              ITT           TOT           CCM            N                ITT             TOT           CCM          N

A. Survey data
    Employed and not receiving TANF            0.499         -0.020           -0.041          0.560      2585            -0.066 **        -0.106 **       0.577      1809
                                                            (0.021)          (0.043)                                    (0.030)          (0.048)
    Employed                                   0.525         -0.007           -0.014          0.576      2586            -0.068 **        -0.108 **       0.606      1813
                                                            (0.021)          (0.043)                                    (0.030)          (0.048)
    Earnings                                 $12,289            293             613          $12,625     2493              -251            -399          $12,717     1736
                                                              (576)          (1208)                                       (883)          (1403)
    Receiving TANF                             0.158          0.011            0.022          0.147      2590             0.037 *          0.059 *        0.102      1806
                                                            (0.015)          (0.031)                                    (0.022)          (0.035)
    Government income                         $3,543            255              530         $2,902      2493               191              300         $3,169      1737
                                                              (217)            (451)                                      (318)            (500)
B. Administrative data
    Employed                                   0.465         -0.004           -0.009          0.495      2980             0.000            0.000          0.482      2526
                                                            (0.017)          (0.036)                                    (0.019)          (0.030)
    Earnings                                 $11,325           -348            -732          $12,441     2980               113              181         $11,542     2526
                                                              (524)          (1102)                                       (581)            (982)
Notes : CM, control mean; ITT, intent-to-treat, from ordinary least squares regression; TOT, treatment-on-treated, from two-stage least squares regression instrumenting
treatment compliance; CCM, control complier mean. The estimated equations all include treatment indicators and the baseline covariates listed in Appendix Table 1. Robust
standard errors are in parentheses. Rows shown in the table are the components of the economic self-sufficiency index described in the notes to Table 1. TANF denotes
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families. The administrative data effects were calculated using a slightly different estimation approach, pooling all three groups and
including indicators for both treatments (whereas the survey data effects were estimated via separate regressions for the two treatments). Differences between estimation
approaches are minimal.
Source and Sample : The survey data sample is all adults interviewed as part of the long-term survey (N=3,273). The administrative data sample is adults from all MTO
households for whom consent to administrative data collection was available (N=4,194).
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.
                                        APPENDIX TABLE 5 − EFFECTS ON ADULT MENTAL AND PHYSICAL HEALTH

                                                                                   Experimental vs. Control                                   Section 8 vs. Control
                                                                CM             ITT         TOT         CCM              N             ITT           TOT         CCM          N
A. Mental health
   Psychological distress, K6 z-score                          0.000         -0.106 **       -0.219 **       0.058     2595          -0.081         -0.130       -0.014    1817
                                                                            (0.042)         (0.087)                                 (0.060)        (0.096)
    Calm and peaceful                                          0.487          0.015           0.032          0.502     2594          -0.039         -0.063        0.552    1816
                                                                            (0.022)         (0.045)                                 (0.031)        (0.050)
B. Physical health
    Fair or poor self-rated health                             0.436         -0.004          -0.007          0.433     2591           0.017          0.028        0.369    1814
                                                                            (0.020)         (0.042)                                 (0.030)        (0.048)
    Slept 7-8 hours last night                                 0.291          0.014           0.029          0.285     2569           0.015          0.024        0.291    1800
                                                                            (0.020)         (0.042)                                 (0.029)        (0.047)
    Has trouble climbing stairs or carrying groceries          0.510         -0.050   **     -0.104   **     0.514     2592          -0.026         -0.041        0.476    1815
                                                                            (0.021)         (0.043)                                 (0.030)        (0.048)
    Asthma attack in past year                                 0.293         -0.017          -0.036          0.285     2593          -0.037         -0.058        0.303    1811
                                                                            (0.019)         (0.040)                                 (0.028)        (0.044)
    Hypertension                                               0.315          0.007           0.015          0.268     2462          -0.023         -0.036        0.304    1719
                                                                            (0.020)         (0.042)                                 (0.029)        (0.045)
    BMI    30                                                  0.584         -0.011          -0.023          0.589     2550          -0.010         -0.017        0.581    1788
                                                                            (0.021)         (0.045)                                 (0.031)        (0.050)
    BMI    35                                                  0.351         -0.044   **     -0.092   **     0.404     2550          -0.061 **      -0.098 **     0.389    1788
                                                                            (0.020)         (0.042)                                 (0.029)        (0.047)
    BMI    40                                                  0.175         -0.036   **     -0.074   **     0.213     2550          -0.038 *       -0.060 *      0.215    1788
                                                                            (0.016)         (0.032)                                 (0.023)        (0.037)
    Blood test detected diabetes (HbA1c     6.5%)              0.204         -0.050   ***    -0.103   ***    0.255     2130          -0.015         -0.023        0.229    1554
                                                                            (0.018)         (0.038)                                 (0.026)        (0.041)
Notes : CM, control mean; ITT, intent-to-treat, from ordinary least squares regression; TOT, treatment-on-treated, from two-stage least squares regression instrumenting
treatment compliance; CCM, control complier mean. The estimated equations all include treatment indicators and the baseline covariates listed in Appendix Table 1.
Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Panel A and the first five rows in panel B are the components of the mental and physical health indices in Table 1 (effects on the
depression and Generalized Anxiety Disorder components of the mental health index are withheld). The effects on body mass index (BMI) and diabetes represent key
findings from earlier work. Psychological distress consists of 6 items (sadness, nervousness, restless, hopelessness, feeling that everything is an effort, worthlessness) scaled
on a score from 0 (no distress) to 24 (highest distress) and then converted to a z-score using the mean and standard deviation for control group adults. Hypertension is high
blood pressure based on systolic 140 mm Hg or diastolic 90 mm Hg. BMI is weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared (BMI 30 indicates obesity, 35
indicates severe obesity, 40 indicates extreme obesity). Glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) level is from a blood sample, and a level 6.5% indicates diabetes.
Source and Sample : The sample is all adults interviewed as part of the long-term survey (N=3,273).
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.
        APPENDIX TABLE 6 − INTENT-TO-TREAT EFFECTS ON ADULT ECONOMIC SELF-SUFFICIENCY AND HEALTH BY AGE AT BASELINE

                                                            Under Age 33 at Baseline           Age 33 and Over at Baseline          Difference by Age
                                                       CM           E−C           S−C          CM        E−C           S−C         E−C          S−C
A. Economic self-sufficiency
 Employed and not on TANF                              0.564       -0.032         -0.066 *     0.421      -0.005        -0.068 *     0.027       -0.002
                                                                  (0.029)        (0.040)                 (0.029)       (0.040)     (0.041)      (0.052)
  Employed                                             0.599       -0.017         -0.070 *     0.439       0.005        -0.066 *     0.023        0.004
                                                                  (0.028)        (0.040)                 (0.029)       (0.040)     (0.040)      (0.052)
  Earnings in 2009                                    $14,232         815           -572      $10,037       -312            49       -1126          621
                                                                    (839)         (1198)                   (772)        (1117)      (1138)       (1501)
  On TANF                                              0.187        0.003          0.022       0.122       0.020         0.053 *     0.017        0.031
                                                                  (0.022)        (0.030)                 (0.021)       (0.028)     (0.030)      (0.038)
  Government income in 2009                           $3,066          274           -308      $4,112         232           763         -42         1071 *
                                                                    (293)          (385)                   (318)         (476)       (430)        (579)
B. Mental health
  Psychological distress, K6 z-score                  -0.031       -0.162 ***     -0.150 **    0.037      -0.040         0.000       0.122        0.149
                                                                  (0.054)        (0.075)                 (0.065)       (0.084)     (0.085)      (0.104)
  Calm and peaceful                                    0.480        0.019         -0.008       0.495       0.010        -0.075 *    -0.009       -0.067
                                                                  (0.029)        (0.040)                 (0.032)       (0.042)     (0.043)      (0.054)
C. Physical health
 Fair or poor self-rated health                        0.357       -0.015         -0.009       0.529       0.009         0.046       0.024        0.055
                                                                  (0.027)        (0.038)                 (0.030)       (0.041)     (0.041)      (0.051)
  Slept 7-8 hours per night                            0.277        0.013          0.015       0.309       0.016         0.016       0.003        0.001
                                                                  (0.027)        (0.037)                 (0.030)       (0.040)     (0.040)      (0.049)
  Has trouble climbing stairs or carrying groceries    0.415       -0.074 ***     -0.042       0.624      -0.023        -0.005       0.051        0.037
                                                                  (0.028)        (0.039)                 (0.030)       (0.040)     (0.041)      (0.051)
  Asthma attack in past year                           0.294       -0.056 **      -0.081 **    0.293       0.027         0.013       0.083 **     0.094 **
                                                                  (0.026)        (0.036)                 (0.029)       (0.038)     (0.039)      (0.047)
  Has hypertension                                     0.253       -0.002         -0.051       0.389       0.017         0.012       0.019        0.063
                                                                  (0.026)        (0.034)                 (0.032)       (0.042)     (0.041)      (0.050)
APPENDIX TABLE 6 (continued)
                                                                Under Age 33 at Baseline                    Age 33 and Over at Baseline                 Difference by Age
                                                           CM          E−C             S−C                  CM        E−C           S−C                E−C           S−C
C. Physical health (continued)
 BMI 30                                                   0.576          0.022           -0.020            0.594        -0.050            0.000         -0.072 *         0.021
                                                                       (0.029)          (0.041)                        (0.032)          (0.041)        (0.043)         (0.053)
  BMI    35                                               0.381         -0.063 **        -0.099 ***        0.315        -0.023           -0.021          0.040           0.079
                                                                       (0.028)          (0.038)                        (0.029)          (0.039)        (0.040)         (0.050)
  BMI    40                                               0.194         -0.039 *         -0.062 **         0.153        -0.033           -0.010          0.006           0.052
                                                                       (0.022)          (0.030)                        (0.022)          (0.031)        (0.031)         (0.039)
  Blood test detected diabetes (HbA1c     6.5%)           0.132         -0.047 **        -0.023            0.294        -0.053 *         -0.006         -0.006           0.017
                                                                       (0.021)          (0.030)                        (0.031)          (0.040)        (0.037)         (0.046)
Notes : E                                                                                 !
squares regression of each outcome on treatment indicators and the baseline covariates listed in Appendix Table 1. Impacts by age at baseline were estimated as an interaction
with treatment status. Difference by age is age 33 and over − under age 33. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Panels A and B and the first five rows in panel C are the
components of the economic self-sufficiency, physical health, and mental health indices in Table 1 (effects on the depression and Generalized Anxiety Disorder components
of the mental health index are withheld). The effects on body mass index (BMI) and diabetes represent key findings from earlier work. Psychological distress consists of 6
items (sadness, nervousness, restless, hopelessness, feeling that everything is an effort, worthlessness) scaled on a score from 0 (no distress) to 24 (highest distress) and then
converted to a z-score using the mean and standard deviation for control group adults. Hypertension is high blood pressure based on systolic 140 mm Hg or diastolic 90
mm Hg. BMI is weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared (BMI 30 indicates obesity, 35 indicates severe obesity, 40 indicates extreme obesity).
Glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) level is from a blood sample, and a level 6.5% indicates diabetes.
Source and Sample : The sample is all adults interviewed as part of the long-term survey (N=3,273).
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.
                                           APPENDIX TABLE 7 EFFECTS ON ADULT SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING

                                                                        Experimental vs. Control                                     Section 8 vs. Control
                                               CM              ITT             TOT           CCM          N                ITT             TOT           CCM          N
Very happy                                     0.228          0.010            0.022          0.242      2593             0.050 *          0.079 *        0.192      1811
   (vs. pretty happy or not very happy)                     (0.018)          (0.037)                                    (0.027)          (0.043)
Very happy or pretty happy                     0.725          0.045 **         0.094 **       0.712      2593             0.034            0.054          0.730      1811
   (vs. not very happy)                                     (0.018)          (0.038)                                    (0.027)          (0.042)
Happiness 3-point scale                        1.953          0.056 *          0.116 *        1.954      2593             0.084 *          0.133 *        1.922      1811
                                                            (0.029)          (0.061)                                    (0.043)          (0.069)
Happiness 3-point scale, z-score               0.000          0.079 *          0.163 *        0.001      2593             0.119 *          0.187 *        -0.045     1811
                                                            (0.042)          (0.086)                                    (0.061)          (0.097)
Notes : CM, control mean; ITT, intent-to-treat, from ordinary least squares regression; TOT, treatment-on-treated, from two-stage least squares regression instrumenting
treatment compliance; CCM, control complier mean. The estimated equations all include treatment indicators and the baseline covariates listed in Appendix Table 1. Robust
standard errors are in parentheses. Subjective well-being is from a 3-point happiness scale (1=not too happy, 2=pretty happy, 3=very happy), and the z-score was
standardized using the control group mean and standard deviation.
Source and Sample : The sample is all adults interviewed as part of the long-term survey (N=3,273).
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.
                                  APPENDIX TABLE 8
  INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES ESTIMATES OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ADULT OUTCOMES
          AND DURATION-WEIGHTED TRACT POVERTY RATE OR TRACT SHARE MINORITY
                                                                        First Stage
                                             Model                       Statistics
                                                                              Angrist-
Outcome and Single Mediator                  Fuller  Fuller   Fuller  Partial Pischke
Included in Model            2SLS   LIML     (c=1)    (c=2)   (c=4)   R-Sq. F-stat
Outcome=Economic self-sufficiency
index
Share poor (duration-weighted)           0.043        0.048        0.047         0.047        0.046       0.097    29.827
                                       (0.054)      (0.056)      (0.056)       (0.055)      (0.055)
Share minority (duration-weighted)       0.028        0.033        0.032         0.032        0.031       0.035    10.493
                                       (0.095)      (0.108)      (0.107)       (0.106)      (0.104)
Outcome=Physical health index
Share poor (duration-weighted)          -0.105 *     -0.110 *     -0.110 *      -0.109 *     -0.109 *     0.096    29.648
                                       (0.055)      (0.058)      (0.058)       (0.057)      (0.057)
Share minority (duration-weighted)      -0.086       -0.104       -0.103        -0.102       -0.100       0.035    10.509
                                       (0.096)      (0.120)      (0.118)       (0.117)      (0.115)
Outcome=Mental health index
Share poor (duration-weighted)          -0.104 *     -0.106 *     -0.105 *      -0.105 *     -0.105 *     0.096    29.648
                                       (0.057)      (0.058)      (0.058)       (0.058)      (0.058)
Share minority (duration-weighted)      -0.151       -0.161       -0.160        -0.159       -0.156       0.035    10.509
                                       (0.101)      (0.110)      (0.109)       (0.108)      (0.106)
Outcome=Subjective well-being
scale
Share poor (duration-weighted)          -0.141 *** -0.143 ** -0.143 **          -0.143 ** -0.142 *** 0.098         30.265
                                       (0.054)     (0.056)   (0.056)           (0.055)    (0.055)
Share minority (duration-weighted)      -0.069      -0.073    -0.073            -0.073     -0.072    0.035         10.697
                                       (0.098)     (0.115)   (0.114)           (0.113)    (0.111)

Notes : Coefficient estimates for the various instrumental variable regressions shown use site and treatment group
interactions as instruments. Each regression also controlled for the baseline covariates presented in Appendix Table 1 and
for field release and was weighted. Columns labels are as follows: 2SLS columns report results for two-stage least
squares, LIML is an unmodified limited information maximum likelihood (LIML) model, and columns labeled Fuller
present Fuller-modified LIML models with constants 1, 2 and 4, respectively. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
All measures were converted to z-scores using the control group mean and standard deviation. See the notes to Table 1 for
a description of the indices. Subjective well-being (SWB) scale refers to the 3-point happiness scale (1=not too happy,
2=pretty happy, 3=very happy). Share poor is the fraction of census tract residents living below the poverty threshold, and
share minority is the fraction of census tract residents who are members of racial or ethnic minority groups. Both share
poor and share minority are average measures weighted by the amount of time respondents lived at each of their addresses
between random assignment and May 31, 2008 (just prior to the start of the long-term survey fielding period).
Source and Sample : SWB and the index components were self-reported or measured on the MTO long-term survey.
Share poor and share minority come from interpolated data from the 1990 and 2000 decennial census as well as the 2005-
09 American Community Survey. The sample is all adults interviewed as part of the long-term survey (N=3,273).
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.
                                  APPENDIX TABLE 9
 INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES ESTIMATES OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ADULT OUTCOMES AND
     DURATION-WEIGHTED TRACT POVERTY RATE AND TRACT SHARE MINORITY IN ONE MODEL
                                        Model                      First Stage Statistics
                                                                         Angrist- Cragg-
Outcome and Both Mediators              Fuller   Fuller  Fuller  Partial Pischke Donald
Included in Model          2SLS LIML    (c=1)    (c=2)   (c=4)   R-Sq. F-stat F-stat
Outcome=Economic self-
sufficiency index
Share poor, controlling for share   0.073         0.088        0.086        0.085         0.082      0.052    14.126     6.132
minority (duration-weighted)      (0.087)       (0.103)      (0.101)      (0.100)       (0.097)
Share minority, controlling for    -0.068        -0.093       -0.091       -0.088        -0.084      0.019     4.484
share poor (duration-weighted) (0.155)          (0.196)      (0.192)      (0.188)       (0.181)
P-value of test that coefficients
are equal                           0.539        0.530         0.530        0.531        0.532
Outcome=Physical health index
Share poor, controlling for share -0.155 *       -0.183       -0.181       -0.179        -0.175      0.053    14.210     6.220
minority (duration-weighted)      (0.089)       (0.116)      (0.114)      (0.112)       (0.108)
Share minority, controlling for     0.118         0.170        0.166        0.162         0.155      0.019     4.546
share poor (duration-weighted) (0.159)          (0.230)      (0.224)      (0.219)       (0.210)
P-value of test that coefficients
are equal                           0.247        0.292         0.289        0.287        0.281
Outcome=Mental health index
Share poor, controlling for share -0.089         -0.090       -0.090       -0.090        -0.090      0.053    14.210     6.220
minority (duration-weighted)      (0.091)       (0.100)      (0.098)      (0.097)       (0.095)
Share minority, controlling for    -0.034        -0.036       -0.036       -0.036        -0.035      0.019     4.546
share poor (duration-weighted) (0.160)          (0.183)      (0.179)      (0.176)       (0.170)
P-value of test that coefficients
are equal                           0.817        0.842         0.838        0.835        0.829
Outcome=Subjective well-
being scale
Share poor, controlling for share -0.261 *** -0.279 *** -0.276 *** -0.273 *** -0.268 *** 0.052                14.246     6.077
minority (duration-weighted)      (0.093)    (0.102)    (0.100)    (0.099)    (0.096)
Share minority, controlling for     0.279 *    0.316 *    0.310 *    0.304 *    0.293 *  0.019                 4.552
share poor (duration-weighted) (0.169)       (0.191)    (0.187)    (0.184)    (0.177)
P-value of test that coefficients
are equal                           0.030      0.035      0.034      0.033      0.032
Notes : Coefficient estimates for the various instrumental variable regressions shown use site and treatment group interactions
as instruments. Each regression presents coefficients for the respective neighborhood measure controlling for the other
mediator listed. Each regression also controlled for the baseline covariates presented in Appendix Table 1 and for field release
and was weighted. Columns labels are as follows: 2SLS columns report results for two-stage least squares, LIML is an
unmodified limited information maximum likelihood (LIML) model, and columns labeled Fuller present Fuller-modified
LIML models with constants 1, 2 and 4, respectively. Robust standard errors shown in parentheses; * = p-value < 0.05, ~ = p-
value < 0.10. All measures were converted to z-scores using the control group mean and standard deviation. See the notes to
Table 1 for a description of the indices. Subjective well-being (SWB) scale refers to the 3-point happiness scale (1=not too
happy, 2=pretty happy, 3=very happy). Share poor is the fraction of census tract residents living below the poverty threshold,
and share minority is the fraction of census tract residents who are members of racial or ethnic minority groups. Both share
poor and share minority are average measures weighted by the amount of time respondents lived at each of their addresses
between random assignment and May 31, 2008 (just prior to the start of the long-term survey fielding period).
Source and Sample : SWB and the index components were self-reported or measured on the MTO long-term survey. Share
poor and share minority come from interpolated data from the 1990 and 2000 decennial census as well as the 2005-09
American Community Survey. The sample is all adults interviewed as part of the long-term survey (N=3,273).
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.
                                        APPENDIX TABLE 10     INTENT-TO-TREAT EFFECTS ON YOUTH OUTCOMES

                                                           Female Youth                       Male Youth                   M − F Difference
                                                   CM         E−C           S−C       CM        E−C          S−C          E−C          S−C
A. Mental health
 Psychological distress, K6 z-score                0.000     -0.143 **     -0.032     0.000      0.039       0.081         0.182 **     0.113
                                                            (0.062)       (0.070)              (0.063)     (0.070)       (0.085)      (0.094)
B. Physical health
  Fair or poor self-rated health                   0.149     -0.014        -0.017     0.110     -0.003      -0.008         0.011        0.009
                                                            (0.022)       (0.024)              (0.020)     (0.023)       (0.029)      (0.032)
  Asthma attack in past year                       0.217     -0.016        -0.025     0.159      0.022      -0.011         0.038        0.014
                                                            (0.025)       (0.026)              (0.024)     (0.027)       (0.034)      (0.037)
  Non-sports injury in past year                   0.128     -0.013        -0.019     0.107      0.024       0.050 **      0.037        0.069 **
                                                            (0.020)       (0.022)              (0.020)     (0.023)       (0.029)      (0.032)
  Overweight, BMI > 95th percentile                0.269     -0.059 **     -0.050 *   0.196      0.015       0.008         0.074 **     0.058
                                                            (0.028)       (0.030)              (0.025)     (0.028)       (0.036)      (0.039)
C. Education
 Educationally on track                            0.827     -0.004         0.012     0.801     -0.018      -0.061 **     -0.014       -0.073 **
                                                            (0.023)       (0.024)              (0.025)     (0.029)       (0.032)      (0.036)
  Currently idle (neither in school nor working)   0.194      0.030         0.025     0.235     -0.019       0.025        -0.049        0.000
                                                            (0.024)       (0.027)              (0.027)     (0.030)       (0.035)      (0.040)
  Reading assessment, z-score                      0.000     -0.019         0.080     0.000      0.016      -0.033         0.035       -0.113
                                                            (0.062)       (0.069)              (0.060)     (0.066)       (0.083)      (0.092)
  Math assessment, z-score                         0.000     -0.026         0.007     0.000     -0.057       0.014        -0.031        0.007
                                                            (0.065)       (0.075)              (0.061)     (0.067)       (0.084)      (0.097)
D. Risky behavior
 Used marijuana in past 30 days                    0.186     -0.021        -0.019     0.274      0.003       0.012         0.024        0.031
                                                            (0.025)       (0.028)              (0.030)     (0.033)       (0.038)      (0.043)
  Used alcohol in past 30 days                     0.427     -0.034         0.001     0.474     -0.044       0.003        -0.010        0.002
                                                            (0.029)       (0.033)              (0.031)     (0.033)       (0.041)      (0.045)
  Smoked in past 30 days                           0.163      0.044 *       0.024     0.250      0.047 *     0.089 ***     0.003        0.066 *
                                                            (0.024)       (0.026)              (0.027)     (0.031)       (0.034)      (0.039)
  Ever pregnant or gotten someone pregnant         0.343      0.002        -0.017     0.273     -0.047 *    -0.025        -0.049       -0.009
                                                            (0.028)       (0.031)              (0.026)     (0.031)       (0.038)      (0.044)
APPENDIX TABLE 10 (continued)
Notes : E                                                                                !
squares regression of each outcome on treatment indicators and the baseline covariates listed in Appendix Tables 1 and 1B. Impacts by gender were estimated as an
interaction with treatment status. M − F difference is male − female difference. Robust standard errors adjusted for household clustering are in parentheses. Rows shown in
the table are the components of the mental health, physical health, education, and risky behavior indices in Table 2 (effects on the depression and Generalized Anxiety
Disorder components of the mental health index are withheld). Psychological distress consists of 6 items (sadness, nervousness, restless, hopelessness, feeling that
everything is an effort, worthlessness) scaled on a score from 0 (no distress) to 24 (highest distress) and then converted to a z-score using the mean and standard deviation
for control group youth ages 15-20 (with male and female youth standardized separately). Body mass index (BMI) values greater than the 95th percentile indicate
overweight for youth. Educationally on track indicates the youth was currently in school or had received a high school diploma or certificate of General Educational
Development (GED). Assessment scores are from Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-Kindergarten (ECLS-K) cohort study assessments adapted for the MTO study. The
math and reading achievement assessment measures were converted to z-scores as described above for the psychological distress index. The overweight finding is sensitive
to the measure used: the intent-to-treat effects for females presented above and those for the overall physical health index presented in Table 2 and Appendix Table 3 are
not quite statistically significant when using cutoffs from the International Obesity Task Force as presented in Sanbonmatsu et al. (2011).
Source and Sample : The sample is youth ages 15-20 as of December 2007 interviewed as part of the long-term survey (N=3,621).
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.
             APPENDIX TABLE 11          INTENT-TO-TREAT EFFECTS ON YOUTH ACHIEVEMENT ASSESSMENT SCORES,
                                                BY GENDER AND AGE AT BASELINE
                        All Youth (Ages 15-20)              Female Youth                      Male Youth                      M − F Difference
                         E−C           S−C                 E−C       S−C                    E−C       S−C                     E−C          S−C
A. Gender
   Math                  -0.041          0.010            -0.026          0.007            -0.057          0.014             -0.031           0.007
                        (0.047)        (0.053)           (0.065)        (0.075)           (0.061)        (0.067)            (0.084)         (0.097)

  Reading                -0.002          0.024            -0.019          0.080             0.016         -0.033              0.035          -0.113
                        (0.044)        (0.050)           (0.062)        (0.069)           (0.060)        (0.066)            (0.083)         (0.092)

  Math & Reading         -0.027          0.020            -0.032          0.041            -0.021         -0.002              0.011          -0.043
                        (0.047)        (0.053)           (0.064)        (0.074)           (0.060)        (0.067)            (0.083)         (0.094)

                        All Youth (Ages 13-20)          Under Age 6 at Baseline         Age 6 and Over at Baseline            Difference by Age
                         E−C           S−C               E−C           S−C                 E−C          S−C                   E−C           S−C
B. Baseline age
   Math                  -0.032          0.011            -0.059         -0.039             0.005          0.074              0.064           0.113
                        (0.043)        (0.048)           (0.056)        (0.058)           (0.060)        (0.072)            (0.077)         (0.087)

  Reading                -0.002          0.040             0.025          0.082            -0.039         -0.015             -0.064          -0.097
                        (0.041)        (0.044)           (0.052)        (0.054)           (0.060)        (0.069)            (0.076)         (0.084)

  Math & Reading         -0.015          0.030            -0.014          0.019            -0.018          0.043             -0.004           0.024
                        (0.043)        (0.047)           (0.055)        (0.056)           (0.061)        (0.072)            (0.077)         (0.086)

Notes : E
squares regression of each outcome on treatment indicators and the baseline covariates listed in Appendix Tables 1 and 1B. The estimated equations all
include treatment indicators and the baseline covariates listed in Appendix Tables 1 and 1B. Impacts by gender and by age at baseline were estimated as
an interaction with treatment status. M − F difference is male − female difference. Difference by age is age 6 and over − under age 6. Robust standard
errors adjusted for household clustering are in parentheses. Assessment scores are from Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-Kindergarten (ECLS-K)
cohort study assessments adapted for the MTO study. All measures were standardized using the mean and standard deviation for control group youth
(with male and female youth and youth under age 6 and age 6 and over standardized separately). The combined math and reading z-score is an average
of the math and reading score measures, restandardized as described above.
Source and Sample : The sample in both panels is youth who were interviewed as part of the long-term survey. Panel A includes youth ages 15-20 as of
December 2007, and Panel B includes youth ages 13-20 as of the same date.
                               APPENDIX TABLE 12
 INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES ESTIMATES OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN YOUTH OUTCOMES
       AND DURATION-WEIGHTED TRACT POVERTY RATE OR TRACT SHARE MINORITY
                                                                                                         First Stage
                                                                 Model                                    Statistics
                                                                                                               Angrist-
Outcome and Single Mediator                                      Fuller       Fuller      Fuller       Partial Pischke
Included in Model                        2SLS       LIML         (c=1)        (c=2)       (c=4)        R-Sq. F-stat
Outcome=Physical health index
Share poor (duration-weighted)          -0.028       -0.029       -0.029      -0.028       -0.028       0.106    18.131
                                       (0.060)      (0.061)      (0.061)     (0.061)      (0.060)
Share minority (duration-weighted)       0.029        0.029        0.029       0.029        0.029       0.035    7.242
                                       (0.095)      (0.098)      (0.097)     (0.096)      (0.095)
Outcome=Mental health index
Share poor (duration-weighted)          -0.065       -0.068       -0.068      -0.068       -0.067       0.106    18.131
                                       (0.056)      (0.059)      (0.059)     (0.059)      (0.059)
Share minority (duration-weighted)      -0.093       -0.118       -0.116      -0.115       -0.112       0.035    7.242
                                       (0.095)      (0.114)      (0.113)     (0.112)      (0.110)
Outcome=Education index
Share poor (duration-weighted)          -0.029       -0.028       -0.028      -0.028       -0.028       0.106    18.131
                                       (0.059)      (0.062)      (0.062)     (0.062)      (0.062)
Share minority (duration-weighted)      -0.017       -0.012       -0.013      -0.013       -0.013       0.035    7.242
                                       (0.103)      (0.123)      (0.121)     (0.120)      (0.118)
Outcome=Risky behavior index
Share poor (duration-weighted)          -0.007       -0.009       -0.009      -0.008       -0.008       0.108    18.512
                                       (0.061)      (0.064)      (0.064)     (0.064)      (0.063)
Share minority (duration-weighted)       0.029        0.031        0.031       0.031        0.031       0.036    7.286
                                       (0.100)      (0.117)      (0.116)     (0.115)      (0.113)
Notes : Coefficient estimates for the various instrumental variable regressions shown use site and treatment group
interactions as instruments. Each regression also controlled for the baseline covariates presented in Appendix Tables 1
and 1B and for field release and was weighted. Columns labels are as follows: 2SLS columns report results for two-stage
least squares, LIML is an unmodified limited information maximum likelihood (LIML) model, and columns labeled
Fuller present Fuller-modified LIML models with constants 1, 2 and 4, respectively. Robust standard errors adjusted for
household clustering are in parentheses. All measures were converted to z-scores using the mean and standard deviation
for control group youth ages 15-20 (with male and female youth standardized separately). See the notes to Table 2 for a
description of the indices. Share poor is the fraction of census tract residents living below the poverty threshold, and
share minority is the fraction of census tract residents who are members of racial or ethnic minority groups. Both share
poor and share minority are average measures weighted by the amount of time respondents lived at each of their
addresses between random assignment and May 31, 2008 (just prior to the start of the long-term survey fielding period).
Source and Sample : Share poor and share minority come from interpolated data from the 1990 and 2000 decennial
census as well as the 2005-09 American Community Survey, and the index measures are from the long-term survey. The
sample is all youth ages 15-20 as of December 2007 who were interviewed as part of the long-term survey (N=3,621).
                                  APPENDIX TABLE 13
 INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES ESTIMATES OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN YOUTH OUTCOMES AND
    DURATION-WEIGHTED TRACT POVERTY RATE OR TRACT SHARE MINORITY IN ONE IV MODEL
                                        Model                     First Stage Statistics
                                                                        Angrist- Cragg-
Outcome and Both Mediators              Fuller    Fuller Fuller Partial Pischke Donald
Included in Model          2SLS LIML     (c=1)    (c=2)  (c=4)  R-Sq. F-stat F-stat
Outcome=Physical health index
Share poor, controlling for share -0.078         -0.079       -0.079       -0.078       -0.078      0.070    11.475     8.332
minority (duration-weighted)      (0.086)       (0.088)      (0.087)      (0.087)      (0.085)
Share minority, controlling for     0.124         0.127        0.126        0.125        0.123      0.023     4.871
share poor (duration-weighted) (0.138)          (0.142)      (0.141)      (0.139)      (0.136)
P-value of test that coefficients
are equal                           0.332        0.337         0.335        0.333        0.330
Outcome=Mental health index
Share poor, controlling for share -0.054         -0.047       -0.048       -0.048       -0.049      0.070    11.475     8.332
minority (duration-weighted)      (0.085)       (0.102)      (0.101)      (0.100)      (0.098)
Share minority, controlling for    -0.026        -0.052       -0.051       -0.049       -0.046      0.023     4.871
share poor (duration-weighted) (0.143)          (0.192)      (0.189)      (0.186)      (0.180)
P-value of test that coefficients
are equal                           0.896        0.985         0.991        0.997        0.991
Outcome=Education index
Share poor, controlling for share -0.043         -0.051       -0.050       -0.050       -0.049      0.070    11.475     8.332
minority (duration-weighted)      (0.087)       (0.104)      (0.103)      (0.102)      (0.100)
Share minority, controlling for     0.036         0.057        0.056        0.054        0.052      0.023     4.871
share poor (duration-weighted) (0.152)          (0.201)      (0.198)      (0.195)      (0.189)
P-value of test that coefficients
are equal                           0.726        0.711         0.712        0.713        0.714
Outcome=Risky behavior index
Share poor, controlling for share -0.037         -0.046       -0.046       -0.045       -0.044      0.070    11.510     8.356
minority (duration-weighted)      (0.085)       (0.098)      (0.097)      (0.096)      (0.095)
Share minority, controlling for     0.075         0.094        0.093        0.092        0.089      0.023     4.925
share poor (duration-weighted) (0.139)          (0.180)      (0.177)      (0.174)      (0.169)
P-value of test that coefficients
are equal                           0.590        0.592         0.591        0.591        0.591
Notes : Coefficient estimates for the various instrumental variable regressions shown use site and treatment group interactions
as instruments. Each regression presents coefficients for the respective neighborhood measure controlling for the other
mediator listed. Each regression also controlled for the baseline covariates presented in Appendix Tables 1 and 1B and for
field release and was weighted. Columns labels are as follows: 2SLS columns report results for two-stage least squares, LIML
is an unmodified limited information maximum likelihood (LIML) model, and columns labeled Fuller present Fuller-modified
LIML models with constants 1, 2 and 4, respectively. Robust standard errors adjusted for household clustering are in
parentheses. All measures were converted to z-scores using mean and standard deviation for control group youth ages 15-20
(with male and female youth standardized separately). See the notes to Table 2 for a description of the indices. Share poor is
the fraction of census tract residents living below the poverty threshold, and share minority is the fraction of census tract
residents who are members of racial or ethnic minority groups. Both share poor and share minority are average measures
weighted by the amount of time respondents lived at each of their addresses between random assignment and May 31, 2008
(just prior to the start of the long-term survey fielding period).
Source and Sample : Share poor and share minority come from interpolated data from the 1990 and 2000 decennial census as
well as the 2005-09 American Community Survey, and the index measures are from the long-term survey. The sample is all
youth ages 15-20 as of December 2007 who were interviewed as part of the long-term survey (N=3,621).
                              APPENDIX TABLE 14
  INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES ESTIMATES OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN FEMALE YOUTH
  OUTCOMES AND DURATION-WEIGHTED TRACT POVERTY RATE OR TRACT SHARE MINORITY
                                                                                                         First Stage
                                                                 Model                                    Statistics
                                                                                                               Angrist-
Outcome and Single Mediator                                      Fuller       Fuller      Fuller       Partial Pischke
Included in Model                        2SLS       LIML         (c=1)        (c=2)       (c=4)        R-Sq. F-stat
Outcome=Physical health index
Share poor (duration-weighted)          -0.160 ** -0.169 ** -0.169 ** -0.168 ** -0.166 **               0.110    11.807
                                       (0.079)    (0.084)   (0.083)   (0.083)   (0.082)
Share minority (duration-weighted)      -0.010     -0.023    -0.022    -0.021    -0.020                 0.049    5.672
                                       (0.107)    (0.135)   (0.133)   (0.131)   (0.128)
Outcome=Mental health index
Share poor (duration-weighted)          -0.171 ** -0.192 ** -0.191 ** -0.190 ** -0.188 **               0.110    11.807
                                       (0.078)    (0.088)   (0.088)   (0.087)   (0.087)
Share minority (duration-weighted)      -0.160     -0.239    -0.235    -0.231    -0.224                 0.049    5.672
                                       (0.115)    (0.170)   (0.168)   (0.165)   (0.159)
Outcome=Education index
Share poor (duration-weighted)          -0.014       -0.014       -0.014      -0.014       -0.014       0.110    11.807
                                       (0.078)      (0.081)      (0.080)     (0.080)      (0.079)
Share minority (duration-weighted)       0.023        0.026        0.026       0.025        0.024       0.049    5.672
                                       (0.120)      (0.129)      (0.128)     (0.126)      (0.124)
Outcome=Risky behavior index
Share poor (duration-weighted)           0.003        0.002        0.002       0.002        0.003       0.111    12.092
                                       (0.084)      (0.086)      (0.085)     (0.085)      (0.084)
Share minority (duration-weighted)       0.089        0.093        0.092       0.091        0.089       0.050    5.835
                                       (0.119)      (0.126)      (0.124)     (0.123)      (0.120)
Notes : Coefficient estimates for the various instrumental variable regressions shown use site and treatment group
interactions as instruments. Each regression also controlled for the baseline covariates presented in Appendix Tables 1
and 1B and for field release and was weighted. Columns labels are as follows: 2SLS columns report results for two-stage
least squares, LIML is an unmodified limited information maximum likelihood (LIML) model, and columns labeled
Fuller present Fuller-modified LIML models with constants 1, 2 and 4, respectively. Robust standard errors adjusted for
household clustering are in parentheses. All measures were converted to z-scores using the mean and standard deviation
for control group youth ages 15-20 (with male and female youth standardized separately). See the notes to Table 2 for a
description of the indices. Share poor is the fraction of census tract residents living below the poverty threshold, and
share minority is the fraction of census tract residents who are members of racial or ethnic minority groups. Both share
poor and share minority are average measures weighted by the amount of time respondents lived at each of their
addresses between random assignment and May 31, 2008 (just prior to the start of the long-term survey fielding period).
Source and Sample : Share poor and share minority come from interpolated data from the 1990 and 2000 decennial
census as well as the 2005-09 American Community Survey, and the index measures are from the long-term survey. The
sample is female youth ages 15-20 as of December 2007 who were interviewed as part of the long-term survey
(N=1,845).
                               APPENDIX TABLE 15
   INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES ESTIMATES OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN FEMALE YOUTH
 OUTCOMES AND DURATION-WEIGHTED TRACT POVERTY RATE AND TRACT SHARE MINORITY IN
                                  ONE Model
                                       MODEL                     First Stage Statistics
                                                                                                            Angrist- Cragg-
Outcome and Both Mediators                                   Fuller        Fuller       Fuller      Partial Pischke Donald
Included in Model                   2SLS         LIML        (c=1)         (c=2)        (c=4)       R-Sq. F-stat F-stat
Outcome=Physical health index
Share poor, controlling for share -0.252 ** -0.269 ** -0.267 ** -0.265 ** -0.261 ** 0.087                     8.404     7.106
minority (duration-weighted)      (0.107)   (0.116)   (0.115)   (0.114)   (0.112)
Share minority, controlling for     0.225     0.249     0.246     0.244     0.238   0.039                     4.226
share poor (duration-weighted) (0.148)      (0.172)   (0.169)   (0.166)   (0.161)
P-value of test that coefficients
are equal                           0.043     0.053     0.051     0.050     0.048
Outcome=Mental health index
Share poor, controlling for share -0.170 *       -0.182       -0.182        -0.181       -0.180      0.087    8.404     7.106
minority (duration-weighted)      (0.102)       (0.131)      (0.129)       (0.128)      (0.125)
Share minority, controlling for    -0.002        -0.025       -0.024        -0.022       -0.020      0.039    4.226
share poor (duration-weighted) (0.148)          (0.228)      (0.223)       (0.218)      (0.209)
P-value of test that coefficients
are equal                           0.462         0.641        0.632        0.623        0.606
Outcome=Education index
Share poor, controlling for share -0.038         -0.041       -0.040        -0.040       -0.039      0.087    8.404     7.106
minority (duration-weighted)      (0.106)       (0.112)      (0.111)       (0.110)      (0.108)
Share minority, controlling for     0.058         0.066        0.064         0.063        0.061      0.039    4.226
share poor (duration-weighted) (0.162)          (0.179)      (0.176)       (0.174)      (0.168)
P-value of test that coefficients
are equal                           0.698         0.693        0.694        0.695        0.696
Outcome=Risky behavior index
Share poor, controlling for share -0.055         -0.060       -0.059        -0.058       -0.056      0.088    8.434     7.356
minority (duration-weighted)      (0.108)       (0.111)      (0.111)       (0.110)      (0.108)
Share minority, controlling for     0.140         0.149        0.147         0.145        0.141      0.040    4.392
share poor (duration-weighted) (0.153)          (0.163)      (0.161)       (0.159)      (0.154)
P-value of test that coefficients
are equal                           0.408         0.401        0.403        0.404        0.407
Notes : Coefficient estimates for the various instrumental variable regressions shown use site and treatment group interactions
as instruments. Each regression presents coefficients for the respective neighborhood measure controlling for the other
mediator listed. Each regression also controlled for the baseline covariates presented in Appendix Tables 1 and 1B and for
field release and was weighted. Columns labels are as follows: 2SLS columns report results for two-stage least squares,
LIML is an unmodified limited information maximum likelihood (LIML) model, and columns labeled Fuller present Fuller-
modified LIML models with constants 1, 2 and 4, respectively. Robust standard errors adjusted for household clustering are
in parentheses. All measures were converted to z-scores using mean and standard deviation for control group youth ages 15-
20 (with male and female youth standardized separately). See the notes to Table 2 for a description of the indices. Share poor
is the fraction of census tract residents living below the poverty threshold, and share minority is the fraction of census tract
residents who are members of racial or ethnic minority groups. Both share poor and share minority are average measures
weighted by the amount of time respondents lived at each of their addresses between random assignment and May 31, 2008
(just prior to the start of the long-term survey fielding period).
Source and Sample : Share poor and share minority come from interpolated data from the 1990 and 2000 decennial census as
well as the 2005-09 American Community Survey, and the index measures are from the long-term survey. The sample is
female youth ages 15-20 as of December 2007 who were interviewed as part of the long-term survey (N=1,845).
                               APPENDIX TABLE 16
   INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES ESTIMATES OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN MALE YOUTH
  OUTCOMES AND DURATION-WEIGHTED TRACT POVERTY RATE OR TRACT SHARE MINORITY
                                                                                                         First Stage
                                                                 Model                                    Statistics
                                                                                                               Angrist-
Outcome and Single Mediator                                      Fuller       Fuller      Fuller       Partial Pischke
Included in Model                        2SLS       LIML         (c=1)        (c=2)       (c=4)        R-Sq. F-stat
Outcome=Physical health index
Share poor (duration-weighted)           0.112        0.114        0.114       0.113        0.112       0.108    11.709
                                       (0.088)      (0.089)      (0.089)     (0.089)      (0.088)
Share minority (duration-weighted)       0.084        0.091        0.090       0.088        0.086       0.031    4.354
                                       (0.156)      (0.175)      (0.171)     (0.168)      (0.162)
Outcome=Mental health index
Share poor (duration-weighted)           0.044        0.046        0.045       0.045        0.045       0.108    11.709
                                       (0.080)      (0.084)      (0.083)     (0.083)      (0.082)
Share minority (duration-weighted)      -0.003       -0.015       -0.013      -0.012       -0.009       0.031    4.354
                                       (0.143)      (0.173)      (0.169)     (0.165)      (0.159)
Outcome=Education index
Share poor (duration-weighted)          -0.044       -0.041       -0.041      -0.041       -0.042       0.108    11.709
                                       (0.080)      (0.091)      (0.090)     (0.090)      (0.089)
Share minority (duration-weighted)      -0.144       -0.210       -0.205      -0.201       -0.193       0.031    4.354
                                       (0.150)      (0.269)      (0.260)     (0.252)      (0.238)
Outcome=Risky behavior index
Share poor (duration-weighted)          -0.038       -0.043       -0.043      -0.042       -0.042       0.109    11.892
                                       (0.079)      (0.085)      (0.085)     (0.084)      (0.084)
Share minority (duration-weighted)      -0.138       -0.199       -0.193      -0.188       -0.178       0.032    4.354
                                       (0.140)      (0.196)      (0.191)     (0.186)      (0.177)
Notes : Coefficient estimates for the various instrumental variable regressions shown use site and treatment group
interactions as instruments. Each regression also controlled for the baseline covariates presented in Appendix Tables 1
and 1B and for field release and was weighted. Columns labels are as follows: 2SLS columns report results for two-stage
least squares, LIML is an unmodified limited information maximum likelihood (LIML) model, and columns labeled
Fuller present Fuller-modified LIML models with constants 1, 2 and 4, respectively. Robust standard errors adjusted for
household clustering are in parentheses. All measures were converted to z-scores using the mean and standard deviation
for control group youth ages 15-20 (with male and female youth standardized separately). See the notes to Table 2 for a
description of the indices. Share poor is the fraction of census tract residents living below the poverty threshold, and
share minority is the fraction of census tract residents who are members of racial or ethnic minority groups. Both share
poor and share minority are average measures weighted by the amount of time respondents lived at each of their
addresses between random assignment and May 31, 2008 (just prior to the start of the long-term survey fielding period).
Source and Sample : Share poor and share minority come from interpolated data from the 1990 and 2000 decennial
census as well as the 2005-09 American Community Survey, and the index measures are from the long-term survey. The
sample is male youth ages 15-20 as of December 2007 who were interviewed as part of the long-term survey (N=1,776).
                                APPENDIX TABLE 17
    INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES ESTIMATES OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN MALE YOUTH
 OUTCOMES AND DURATION-WEIGHTED TRACT POVERTY RATE AND TRACT SHARE MINORITY IN
                                   ONE Model
                                       MODEL                    First Stage Statistics
                                                                                                            Angrist- Cragg-
Outcome and Both Mediators                                   Fuller        Fuller       Fuller      Partial Pischke Donald
Included in Model                   2SLS         LIML        (c=1)         (c=2)        (c=4)       R-Sq. F-stat F-stat
Outcome=Physical health index
Share poor, controlling for share 0.167           0.175        0.173         0.170        0.166      0.067    7.367     3.310
minority (duration-weighted)      (0.127)       (0.135)      (0.133)       (0.131)      (0.126)
Share minority, controlling for    -0.140        -0.159       -0.153        -0.148       -0.138      0.019    2.672
share poor (duration-weighted) (0.222)          (0.249)      (0.240)       (0.233)      (0.219)
P-value of test that coefficients
are equal                           0.346         0.354        0.352        0.349        0.345
Outcome=Mental health index
Share poor, controlling for share 0.094           0.120        0.116         0.113        0.106      0.067    7.367     3.310
minority (duration-weighted)      (0.125)       (0.151)      (0.147)       (0.143)      (0.136)
Share minority, controlling for    -0.130        -0.194       -0.185        -0.175       -0.159      0.019    2.672
share poor (duration-weighted) (0.223)          (0.301)      (0.288)       (0.277)      (0.258)
P-value of test that coefficients
are equal                           0.495         0.467        0.470        0.473        0.480
Outcome=Education index
Share poor, controlling for share 0.025           0.147        0.131         0.118        0.097      0.067    7.367     3.310
minority (duration-weighted)      (0.115)       (0.305)      (0.277)       (0.253)      (0.219)
Share minority, controlling for    -0.178        -0.500       -0.457        -0.422       -0.367      0.019    2.672
share poor (duration-weighted) (0.217)          (0.785)      (0.704)       (0.638)      (0.538)
P-value of test that coefficients
are equal                           0.514         0.549        0.543        0.538        0.531
Outcome=Risky behavior index
Share poor, controlling for share 0.034           0.094        0.087         0.081        0.069      0.065    7.317     3.239
minority (duration-weighted)      (0.116)       (0.174)      (0.167)       (0.160)      (0.149)
Share minority, controlling for    -0.184        -0.355       -0.335        -0.317       -0.285      0.019    2.647
share poor (duration-weighted) (0.203)          (0.382)      (0.360)       (0.340)      (0.306)
P-value of test that coefficients
are equal                           0.464         0.404        0.406        0.409        0.416
Notes : Coefficient estimates for the various instrumental variable regressions shown use site and treatment group interactions
as instruments. Each regression presents coefficients for the respective neighborhood measure controlling for the other
mediator listed. Each regression also controlled for the baseline covariates presented in Appendix Tables 1 and 1B and for
field release and was weighted. Columns labels are as follows: 2SLS columns report results for two-stage least squares,
LIML is an unmodified limited information maximum likelihood (LIML) model, and columns labeled Fuller present Fuller-
modified LIML models with constants 1, 2 and 4, respectively. Robust standard errors adjusted for household clustering are
in parentheses. All measures were converted to z-scores using mean and standard deviation for control group youth ages 15-
20 (with male and female youth standardized separately). See the notes to Table 2 for a description of the indices. Share poor
is the fraction of census tract residents living below the poverty threshold, and share minority is the fraction of census tract
residents who are members of racial or ethnic minority groups. Both share poor and share minority are average measures
weighted by the amount of time respondents lived at each of their addresses between random assignment and May 31, 2008
(just prior to the start of the long-term survey fielding period).
Source and Sample : Share poor and share minority come from interpolated data from the 1990 and 2000 decennial census as
well as the 2005-09 American Community Survey, and the index measures are from the long-term survey. The sample is
male youth ages 15-20 as of December 2007 who were interviewed as part of the long-term survey (N=1,776).
Appendix Exhibit References

Ludwig, Jens. 2012. “The Long-Term Results From the Moving to

     Opportunity Residential Mobility Demonstration.” Cityscape 14

     (2): 1–28.

Sampson, Robert J., Patrick Sharkey, and Stephen W. Raudenbush.

     2008. “Durable Effects of Concentrated Disadvantage on Verbal

     Ability Among African-American Children.” Proceedings of the

     National Academy of Sciences 105 (3): 845–852.
