                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




SHOPPING EXTERNALITIES AND SELF-FULFILLING UNEMPLOYMENT FLUCTUATIONS

                                              Greg Kaplan
                                              Guido Menzio

                                          Working Paper 18777
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w18777


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       February 2013




 We thank the Kielts-Nielsen Data Center at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business for
 providing access to the Kielts-Nielsen Consumer Panel Dataset. We thank the editor, Harald Uhlig,
 and three anonymous referees for insightful and detailed suggestions that helped us revising the paper.
 We are also grateful to Mark Aguiar, Jim Albrecht, Michele Boldrin, Russ Cooper, Ben Eden, Chris
 Edmond, Roger Farmer, Veronica Guerrieri, Bob Hall, Erik Hurst, Martin Schneider, Venky Venkateswaran,
 Susan Vroman, Steve Williamson and Randy Wright for many useful comments. The views expressed
 herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2013 by Greg Kaplan and Guido Menzio. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
 two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
 is given to the source.
Shopping Externalities and Self-Fulfilling Unemployment Fluctuations
Greg Kaplan and Guido Menzio
NBER Working Paper No. 18777
February 2013, Revised October 2013
JEL No. D11,D21,D43,E32

                                             ABSTRACT

We propose a novel theory of self-fulfilling unemployment fluctuations. According to this theory,
a firm hiring an additional worker creates positive external effects on other firms, as a worker has
more income to spend and less time to search for low prices when he is employed than when he is
unemployed. In response to the increase in demand and prices, other firms enter or increase their presence
in the product market by hiring additional workers. We quantify the external effects of employment
on demand and prices and show that they are sufficiently strong to generate multiple rational expectations
equilibria and, hence, self-fulfilling economic fluctuations.


Greg Kaplan
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
gkaplan@princeton.edu

Guido Menzio
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
467 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
gmenzio@econ.upenn.edu
1     Introduction
We propose a novel theory of self-ful…lling unemployment ‡uctuations. According to our
theory, a …rm hiring an additional worker creates a positive external e¤ect on other …rms,
as a worker has more income to spend and less time to search for low prices when he is
employed than when he is unemployed. In response to the increase in demand and prices,
other …rms enter or increase their presence in the product market by hiring additional work-
ers. The feedback between employment, demand and prices can lead to multiple rational
expectations equilibria. If agents expect lower unemployment, labor demand is higher, more
vacancies are created and, eventually, lower unemployment materializes. If agents expect
higher unemployment, labor demand is weak, fewer vacancies are created and, eventually,
higher unemployment materializes. Hence, economic ‡uctuations can be caused not only by
changes in technology, preferences or other fundamentals, but also by self-ful…lling changes
in the agents’expectations about future unemployment.

    The theory is motivated by the observation that unemployed and employed people behave
di¤erently in the product market. First, unemployed people spend more time shopping.
Using the American Time Use Survey (ATUS) and other time-use surveys, Kruger and
Muller (2010) …nd that unemployed people spend between 15 and 30% more time shopping
than employed people. Second, unemployed people pay lower prices. Using the Kielts-
Nielsen Consumer Panel Data (KNCPD), Kaplan and Menzio (2013) …nd that households
where at least one head is non-employed pay between 1 and 4% less for the same goods
than households where all heads are employed. Third, unemployed people spend less. Using
the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), Stephens (2001) …nds that households reduce
their food expenditures by approximately 15% after becoming unemployed.

    We use search theory to build a model economy that captures the above di¤erences in
shopping behavior between employed and unemployed people. We model the labor market
as in Mortensen and Pissarides (1994). In this market, unemployed workers and vacant jobs
come together through a constant return to scale matching function. In equilibrium, there
is unemployment as it takes time for a worker to …nd a viable job. Moreover, there is an
income di¤erential between employed and unemployed workers, because employed workers
can extract a fraction of the surplus that they create when matched with a …rm. We model
the product market as in Burdett and Judd (1983). In this market, sellers (i.e. …rm-worker
pairs) post prices and buyers (i.e. workers) search for sellers with an intensity that depends
on their employment status. In equilibrium, sellers post di¤erent prices for identical goods.
Sellers who post relatively high prices enjoy a higher margin per unit of output sold but they
sell fewer units, as they only attract buyers who did not …nd any other seller. Sellers who


                                              2
post relatively low prices enjoy a lower margin but they sell more units, as they attract both
buyers who did not meet any other seller and buyers who met other, but more expensive
sellers. Unemployed buyers search more, they are more likely to meet sellers posting relatively
low prices and, on average, they pay lower prices than employed buyers.
   We …rst carry out a theoretical analysis of the model. We …nd that the model admits
multiple steady states if unemployed buyers have a su¢ ciently low income relatively to
employed buyers or if unemployed buyers spend a su¢ ciently large amount of time searching
for low prices relative to employed buyers. The result is intuitive. When a …rm decides
to increases its workforce, it creates external e¤ects on other …rms. On the one hand, it
increases the tightness of the labor market and, hence, it makes it more costly for other
…rms to hire an additional worker. We refer to this e¤ect as the congestion externality. On
the other hand, when a …rm increases its workforce, it makes it more pro…table for other …rms
to hire additional workers as it tilts the composition of buyers towards types (i.e. employed
buyers) who have higher income and, hence, spend more, and who have less time to devote to
shopping and, hence, are more likely to be willing to purchase goods at the monopoly price.
We refer to these e¤ects as the shopping externalities. In particular, we refer to the e¤ect of
employment at one …rm on other …rms’demand as the demand externality and to the e¤ect
of employment at one …rm on other …rms’probability of making a sale at the monopoly price
as the market power externality. If the di¤erence in either income or search intensity between
employed and unemployed buyers is su¢ ciently large, the shopping externalities dominate
the congestion externality and the employment decisions of di¤erent …rms become strategic
complements. When this happens, multiple steady states obtain.
   When the model admits multiple steady states, it also has multiple rational expecta-
tions equilibria for some initial conditions. Di¤erent equilibria are associated to di¤erent
expectations that the agents have about future unemployment. Yet, in each equilibrium, the
agents’expectations about future unemployment are correct, in the sense that the path of
unemployment that materializes is exactly the one expected by the agent. The existence of
multiple equilibria implies that the behavior of our model economy us not only determined
by fundamentals (e.g., technology, preferences and policy), but also by the agents’expecta-
tions about future endogenous outcomes. Moreover, for some initial conditions, the model
admits rational expectations equilibria that converge to di¤erent steady states. This implies
that the agents’expectations about future unemployment can be so important as to a¤ect
the long-run outcomes of the economy.
   We then carry out a quantitative analysis of the model. We calibrate the parameters
of the model so as to match the di¤erence in expenditures, shopping time and prices paid
between employed and unemployed workers, as well as the frequency at which individual

                                              3
workers transition between the states of employment and unemployment. The calibrated
model admits three steady states— two with some economic activity and one without trade—
and, for any initial condition, it has rational expectations equilibria converging to each of
the three steady states. Multiplicity obtains because the empirical di¤erences in expenditure
and shopping time between employed and unemployed buyers are so large that the shopping
externalities dominate the congestion externality and, hence, the employment decisions of
di¤erent …rms are strategic complements. Interestingly, the key shopping externality is the
market power externality. Speci…cally, the demand externality is proportional to 15% of
the expenditures of unemployed buyers, which is the empirical di¤erence in expenditures
between employed and unemployed buyers. The market power externality is proportional
to more than 30% of the expenditures of unemployed buyers, a magnitude implied by the
empirical di¤erence in shopping time between employed and unemployed buyers.

   We use the calibrated model to measure the e¤ect of a negative shock to the agents’
expectations about the long-run. Formally, we model these expectation shocks as a 2-state
Markov switching process. In what we call the optimistic state, agents expect the economy
to converge to the steady state with the lowest unemployment rate. In the pessimistic
state, agents expect the economy to converge to the steady state with the intermediate
unemployment rate. We then examine the response of the economy to a switch from the
optimistic to the pessimistic state. We …nd that the unemployment rate increases from 5 to
10% and then slowly declines towards 9%, which is the rate associated with the pessimistic
steady state. Moreover, unemployment remains stuck at this higher rate for as long as the
agents’expectations about the future remain pessimistic. We …nd that the equity value of
a …rm falls by approximately 30% and its decline precedes the increase in unemployment.
Finally, we …nd that the increase in unemployment and the decline in the equity value of
…rms take place without any concurrent decline in real labor productivity. We show that
the response of the economy to a negative shock to long-run expectations is qualitatively
and quantitatively similar to the behavior of the US economy during the Great Recession
and its aftermath. These …ndings suggest the possibility that the …nancial crises that caused
the Great Recession might have been ampli…ed and protracted by coordinating the agents’
expectations towards a steady state with higher unemployment.

   The theory of multiple equilibria in this paper hinges on two mechanisms. The …rst
mechanism links unemployment, search and competition: when unemployment is lower,
buyers spend less time searching for low prices and, in doing so, they make the product
market less competitive and drive prices up. We …nd that this mechanism is consistent with
the recent behavior of prices and unemployment. The second mechanism links revenues,
entry and labor demand: when revenues are higher because of either higher demand or

                                             4
higher prices, new …rms want to enter the product market, established …rms want to scale-
up their presence in the product market and, since both activities require some labor, labor
demand increases. This mechanism is consistent with the …ndings in Bilbiie, Ghironi and
Melitz (2012), who show that the introduction of new products and the entry of new …rms
is strongly procyclical and, hence, positively correlated with employment. Similarly, Hall
(2013) shows that advertisement expenditures (which presumably measure an e¤ort to reach
new buyers) are procyclical.

   Our contribution is to advance a novel and quantitatively relevant theory of multiple
equilibria and non-fundamental ‡uctuations. In Benhabib and Farmer (1994), Farmer and
Guo (1994), Christiano and Harrison (1999) and Mortensen (1999), multiplicity and non-
fundamental shocks arise because of increasing returns to scale in production. Similarly, in
Diamond (1982), Diamond and Fudenberg (1989) and Boldrin, Kyiotaki and Wright (1993),
multiplicity obtains because of increasing returns to scale in matching. In contrast to these
papers, we assume constant returns to scale in both production and matching and obtain
multiplicity from the di¤erences in the shopping behavior of employed and unemployed
buyers. Moreover, while there is no clear empirical evidence of increasing returns to scale
in either production or matching, the di¤erences in the shopping behavior of employed and
unemployed buyers are well documented. In Heller (1986), Roberts (1987) and Cooper and
John (1988), multiplicity obtains because of demand externalities. The demand externality—
which is due to the di¤erence in the expenditures of employed and unemployed buyers— is
an integral part of our theory as well. However, we …nd that the demand externality is
quantitatively much less important than the market power externality— which is due to the
di¤erence in the search intensity of employed and unemployed buyers— and, alone, it is not
su¢ cient to generate multiple equilibria.

   More recently, Angeletos and La’O (2013) and Benhabib, Wang and Wen (2012) con-
sider environments where agents have heterogeneous beliefs about the gains from producing
and trading. They show that, even when the complementarity between the agents’ pro-
duction decisions is not strong enough to create multiplicity, non-fundamental ‡uctuations
in economic activity can arise from correlated shocks to the agents’ higher order beliefs.
In contrast to these papers, we assume that all agents have common knowledge. Finally,
Farmer (2012a,b) obtains non-fundamental ‡uctuations by letting sentiments, rather than
bargaining, determine the equilibrium wage in a labor market with search frictions. As a
result, non-fundamental shocks generate a positive correlation between wages of new hires
and unemployment. In contrast to Farmer, we assume that wages are given as the unique
Nash bargaining solution and, hence, non-fundamental shocks in our model generate a neg-
ative correlation between wages of new hires and unemployment, the same correlation found

                                             5
in the data (see, e.g. Pissarides 2009).


2     Environment and Equilibrium
We develop a model economy with search frictions in the labor and the product markets.
The labor market is modeled as in Mortensen and Pissarides (1994). In this market, search
frictions generate equilibrium unemployment and income di¤erences between employed and
unemployed workers, as employed workers can capture some of the quasi-rents associated
with the creation of a …rm-worker match. The output generated by a …rm-worker pair is
partly sold in a product market modeled as in Burdett and Judd (1983). In this market,
search frictions induce identical sellers to post di¤erent prices for identical goods. Unem-
ployed buyers, having more time available for shopping around, end up paying lower prices
and, having less income, demanding lower quantities than employed buyers.

    The equilibrium conditions for our model economy are identical to the equilibrium condi-
tions in Mortensen and Pissarides (1994), except for one aspect. In Mortensen and Pissarides
(1994), the output produced by a …rm-worker pair generates revenues that are constant as
it is sold in a perfectly competitive market where demand is in…nitely elastic. In our model,
the output produced by a …rm-worker pair generates revenues that depend on the unemploy-
ment rate. This is because part of the output is sold in an imperfectly competitive market
where the extent of competition and the level of demand depend on the unemployment rate.
This small di¤erence between our model and Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) may be of
great consequence. In fact, as we shall see in Section 3, when revenues depend negatively on
unemployment, multiple rational expectations equilibria may arise.


2.1    Environment
We consider a discrete-time, in…nite-horizon economy populated by two types of agents—
workers and …rms— who exchange three goods— labor and two consumption goods. Labor
is traded in a decentralized and frictional market modeled as in Mortensen and Pissarides
(1994). The …rst consumption good is traded in a decentralized and frictional market mod-
eled as in Burdett and Judd (1983). We shall refer to this good as the Burdett-Judd (BJ)
good. The second consumption good is traded in a centralized and frictionless product
market. We shall refer to this good as the Arrow-Debreu (AD) good.

   The measure of workers in the economy is normalized to one. A worker has preferences
                                 P
described by the utility function 1          ¬
                                   =0 (1 + )  (   ), where 1(1 + ) 2 (0 1) is the
discount factor and  ( ) is a periodical utility function de…ned over consumption of the


                                             6
BJ good, , and consumption of the AD good, . We assume that  ( ) is of the Cobb-
Douglas form   1¬ , where          2 (0 1). A worker has access to a technology that allows him
to transform the AD good into the BJ good at the rate of  to 1, with   0. This technology
guarantees that a worker can consume some of the BJ good even when he fails to meet a
seller in the BJ market. In every period, a worker is endowed with one indivisible unit of
labor, which he may sell to a …rm (if he has found an employer) or use for home-production
(if he is unemployed). When the worker is employed, his labor income is worth ( ) units
of the AD good, where ( ) is a bargaining outcome which depends on the unemployment
rate  . When the worker is unemployed, his labor income is worth  units of the AD good,
       0. This income can be interpreted as either the value of home-production or as the
value of an unemployment bene…t that is …nanced by lump-sum taxes levied on the …rms.
For the sake of simplicity, we assume that workers can neither borrow nor save income or
goods across periods.1

   The measure of …rms in the economy is also normalized to one. A …rm has preferences
                                 P
described by the utility function 1         ¬
                                  =0 (1 + )  (   ) ¬  , where  (   ) is a periodical
utility function de…ned over consumption of the BJ and AD goods,  is the number of
vacancies created by the …rm and   0 is the disutility cost of creating a vacancy. A …rm
creates vacancies in order to …nd employees. Every employee of the …rm can produce any
combination of  units of the BJ good and  units of the AD good such that  +  =  ,
with  2 (0 ) and   0. The parameter  describes the productivity of labor, measured
in units of the AD good. The parameter  describes the rate at which …rm-worker matches
can implicitly transform the AD good into the BJ good.2 As we shall see momentarily, the
allocation of production between the AD and the BJ good depends on whether the …rm-
worker pair meets a buyer in the BJ market and, if so, on the quantity demanded by that
buyer. For the sake of simplicity, we assume  ( ) = . That is, we assume that …rms
only care about consuming the AD good.3 Moreover, we assume that …rms cannot store
     1
     In the quantitative section of the paper, we will try to address this unrealistic feature of the model by
making sure that the decline in expenditures experienced by a worker who becomes unemployed is in line
with what we observe in the data.
   2
     The production technology can be interpreted as follows. The …rm has to allocate a unit of the worker’s
time between producing the AD good and the BJ good. Producing each unit of the AD good requires
1 units of time and producing each unit of the BJ good requires  units of time. According to this
interpretation,  is the highest quantity of the AD good that the worker can produce and  is the opportunity
cost of allocating the worker’s time to producing an extra unit of the BJ good rather than to producing the
AD good. The assumption that every …rm produces both the BJ and AD goods is not crucial. Indeed, we
could have used a model where …rms choose whether to specialize in the BJ good or in the AD good.
   3
     We assume that the owners of the …rms are di¤erent agents than the workers. In particular, we assume
that the owners of the …rms have linear preferences over the AD good. The assumption implies that …rms
simply want to maximize of the present value of pro…ts measured in units of the AD good. If, in contrast, we
were to assume that …rms are owned by workers, …rms would maximize the present value of pro…ts with an
endogenous discount factor that depends on the consumption path of workers. The model would be harder


                                                      7
goods from one period to the next.
     Markets open sequentially in every period . The …rst market to open is the Mortensen-
Pissarides (MP) labor market. In this market, …rms create vacancies at the disutility cost .
Then unemployed workers, ¬1 , and vacant jobs,  , come together through a constant return
to scale matching function  (¬1   )  minf¬1   g. The probability that an unemployed
worker matches with a vacancy is (  )                   (1  ), where         denotes the tightness of the
labor market,  ¬1 , and            : R+ ! [0 1] is a strictly increasing and concave function with
boundary conditions (0) = 0 and (1) = 1. Similarly, the probability that a vacant job
matches with an unemployed worker is (  )                    (1=   1), where     : R+ ! [0 1] is a strictly
decreasing function with boundary conditions (0) = 1 and (1) = 0. When an unemployed
worker and a vacant job match, they bargain over the current wage and enter the BJ and
AD market to produce and sell output. While vacant jobs and unemployed workers search
for each other in the MP market, existing …rm-worker pairs are destroyed with probability
  2 (0 1).
     The second market to open is the BJ product market. In this market, each …rm-worker
pair (henceforth, a seller) posts a price , measured in units of the AD good, at which it is
willing to sell the BJ good. Each worker (henceforth, a buyer) searches for sellers with an
intensity that depends on his employment status.4 In particular, if a buyer is unemployed,
he makes one search with probability 1 ¬                ,   and two searches with probability            ,   where
    2 [0 1]. If a buyer is employed, he makes one search with probability 1 ¬                          and two
searches with probability          ,   where      2 [0 1]. We assume                in order to capture the
idea that a buyer has less time to search the product market when he is employed.5
     Sellers and buyers come together through a constant return to scale matching function
 (( ) ( )), where ( )         1+    + (   ¬    )   is the measure of buyers’searches, ( )
1 ¬  is the measure of active sellers and  is the measure of unemployed workers at the
opening of the BJ market. A seller meets a buyer with probability ( ( ))                        (1= ( ) 1),
to solve but we believe that the main results would still go through.
    4
      We do not interpret the search process in the BJ market as a process of discovery of prices. Rather, we
interpret it as a constraint on the number and location of stores a buyer can visit in a given interval of time.
On some day, the buyer may be busy tending to his kids and he is able to shop only at the local convenience
store. On some other days, the buyer may be relatively free and he is able to shop both at the supermarket
in the suburbs and at the local convenience store.
    5
      We assume that the average number of searches of employed and unemployed buyers is exogenous. Thus,
it is legitimate to wonder what would happen if we were to endogenize the search intensity of the buyer.
In general, unemployment would have two countervailing e¤ects on search intensity. On the one hand,
an unemployed buyer has more time and, hence, faces a lower cost of searching. On the other hand, an
unemployed buyer has lower consumption and, hence, faces a lower return to searching. Thus, in principle,
an unemployed buyer could choose to search more or less than an employed one. Empirically, though, we
…nd that unemployed buyers spend 20 to 30 percent more time shopping than employed buyers and, in the
quantitative part of the paper, we use this information to discipline the choice of the exogenous parameters
   and  .


                                                         8
where      ( ) denotes the tightness of the product market, ( )( ). Similarly, a buyer
who makes one search meets a seller with probability ( ( ))                (1 ( )), while a buyer
who makes two searches meets two sellers with probability ( ( ))2 and one seller with
probability 2 ( ( ))(1 ¬ ( ( ))). When a buyer meets a seller, it observes the price and
decides whether and how much of the BJ good to purchase. We assume  (( ) ( )) =
minf( ) ( )g in order to focus on search frictions (i.e. buyers meeting a random subset
of sellers and sellers meeting random buyers) and abstract from matching frictions.6

       The last market to open is the AD product market. In this market, each …rm-worker
pair produces and sells a quantity of AD goods which depends on the quantity of BJ goods
it produced and sold in the BJ market. Each worker purchases and consumes an amount of
AD goods that depends on the income that he spent in the BJ market. The AD market is
frictionless and perfectly competitive.7

       The medium of exchange in our economy is a perfectly divisible and transferrable one-
period IOU. In the MP market, …rms pay wages to their workers by issuing IOUs promising
a payment worth ( ) units of AD goods in the current period. Firms also pay taxes to the
government by issuing IOUs, which are then transferred by the government to unemployed
workers. In the BJ market, sellers exchange the BJ good for the IOUs carried by employed
and unemployed buyers. In the AD market, …rms use the IOUs that they have collected in
the BJ market to purchase AD goods and they repay the IOUs that they have issued to their
workers by selling AD goods.

       It may be useful to point out the two features of the environment that are critical to
our theory of self-ful…lling unemployment ‡uctuations. The …rst feature is that some of
the output produced by a …rm-worker pair is sold in an imperfectly competitive market
(the BJ market) where the fraction of employed and unemployed buyers a¤ects demand
   6
      The theoretical results in Section 3 carry over to more general matching functions  ( ) with the
property that the elasticity of  with respect to  is not too large.
    7
      The AD goods and the BJ goods are two groups of consumer goods which di¤er with respect to the
structure of the market where they are traded. The AD goods are traded in a perfectly competitive market,
where the Law of One Price holds. The BJ goods are traded in an imperfectly competitive market where
price dispersion obtains. In Kaplan and Menzio (2013), we …nd that price dispersion is pervasive, but the
extent of it varies across di¤erent types of goods. Thus, one can think of the AD goods as the subset
of consumer goods that feature relatively little price dispersion and think of the BJ goods as the subset
of consumer goods that feature a relatively large amount of price dispersion. We need both goods in our
model. We need BJ goods for substantive reasons. Indeed, our theory of multiplicity is based on the idea
that the extent of competition in the product market is endogenous and, hence, we need some goods to be
traded in an imperfectly competitive market. We need the AD goods for technical reasons. In our model,
the buyers of BJ goods compensate the sellers of BJ goods by giving them claims to contemporaneous AD
goods. Hence, all trades are completed within each period. If the model did not have AD goods, buyers
of BJ goods could only pay the sellers of BJ goods with claims to future BJ goods. Hence, trades would
not be completed within each period and we would have to keep track of the credit/debit position of all the
agents in the economy. The role of AD goods is to act as a medium of exchange; a sort of …at money that
is consumed and is perishable.

                                                    9
(because of di¤erences in income) and the extent of competition (because of di¤erences in
search intensity).8 As we shall see, this feature implies that the revenues generated by a
…rm-worker output pair tend to decrease with unemployment. The second feature is that a
…rm needs to hire labor in order to enter or scale up its presence in the product market.9
As we shall see, this feature implies that when the product market features low demand and
more competition, a …rm demands less labor and creates fewer vacancies.


2.2     Individual Problems and Terms of Trade
Having described the environment, we now proceed to analyze the problem of individual
agents and the determination of the terms of trade in the di¤erent markets.


2.2.1    Individual Problems

Problem of the buyer. Consider an unemployed buyer who enters the BJ market with an
income worth  units of the AD good. With some probability, the buyer does not contact
any seller in the BJ market. In this case, the buyer spends all of his income on the AD good
and then transforms some of the AD goods into BJ goods at the rate of  to 1. With some
probability, the buyer contacts one or two sellers. Let  denote the lowest price of the BJ
good among the sellers contacted by the buyer. If   , the buyer spends all of his income
on the AD good and then transforms some of the AD good into the BJ good at the rate of
 to 1. If       , the buyer purchases both the AD good and the BJ good on the market.
In particular, the buyer chooses how to allocate his income  between consumption of the
   8
      Besides ours, there are many other models of the product market with the property that the fraction of
employed and unemployed buyers a¤ects the level of demand and the extent of competition. For instance,
the property would obtain in a version of the monopolistic competition model of Dixit and Stiglitz (1974)
where unemployed buyers have lower income and are more willing to substitute di¤erent varieties of goods.
Similarly, the property would obtain in a version of the search-theoretic model of Albrecht, Gautier and
Vroman (2006) where unemployed buyers have lower income and are more likely to make multiple searches,
meet multiple sellers of identical goods and engage these sellers in Bertrand competition. In contrast, the
property would not emerge in a version of the search-theoretic model of Bai, Rios-Rull and Storesletten
(2012) where unemployed buyers search more than employed buyers. In their model, a buyer who searches
more meets more sellers. However, as each seller has limited capacity, the buyer purchases from every seller
that he meets rather than only from the one with the lowest price. Hence, in their model, higher search
intensity does not increase the competitiveness of the product market.
    9
      This feature follows from the assumption that each …rm-worker pair represents a distinct seller in the
product market. In the context of our search-theoretic model of imperfect competition, there is a natural
interpretation for this assumption. New …rms can enter the product market by opening a production-and-
retail outlet and existing …rms can expand their presence in the product market by opening additional
outlets. Each outlet requires a …xed amount of labor for production and retail. Each outlet is a di¤erent
seller because it is located in a di¤erent area and, hence, reaches a di¤erent set of buyers. In the context of
a Dixit-Stiglitz model of monopolistic competition, the assumption can be interpreted as follows. New …rms
can enter the product market by setting up a plant producing a new variety of goods and existing …rms can
expand their presence in the product market by setting up new plants. Each plant requires a …xed amount
of labor to be run. Each plant is a di¤erent seller because it produces a di¤erent variety of goods.


                                                      10
BJ good and consumption of the AD good so as to maximize its periodical utility function.
Formally, the problem facing the buyer is

                                   max   1¬ , s.t.  +  =                                                 (1)
                                    


   The solution to the problem of an unemployed buyer is

                                      =  ,  = (1 ¬ ) .                                                    (2)

That is, the buyer spends a fraction          of his income on the BJ good and a fraction 1 ¬                     on
the AD good. The solution to the problem of an employed buyer is the same as (2), except
that the income is the wage ( ) rather than the unemployment bene…t  .

Problem of the seller. Consider a seller entering the BJ market. The seller chooses the
relative price of the BJ good so as to maximize its total revenues from sales in the BJ and
AD markets. The seller takes as given the composition of buyers between employed and
unemployed, the demand of each type of buyer, the total number of sellers, and the distribu-
tion of posted prices, an endogenous object which we shall denote as  (  ). Formally, the
problem facing the seller is to maximize (  )+ with respect to , where (  ) denotes
the seller’s expected revenues in the BJ market net of the opportunity cost of producing the
BJ good.

   The net revenue function (  ) is given by

                               (1 +  )    2            ( ( )) (  )       ( ¬ )
     (  )   = ( ( ))               1¬
                                  ( )                    1+                        
                                                                                                                 (3)
                            (1 ¬  )(1 +     )           2      ( ( )) (  )     ( )( ¬ )
                 + ( ( ))                          1¬                                                 .
                                  ( )                             1+                       

Consider the …rst line in the above expression. The probability that the seller meets a buyer
is ( ( )). The probability that the buyer is unemployed is  (1 +                     )( ),   the fraction of
buyers’searches originating from unemployed workers divided by the total number of buyers’
searches. Conditional on being unemployed, the probability that the buyer is not in contact
with a seller charging a price less than  is given by the term in square brackets, which is equal
to the complement to 1 of the product between the probability that the buyer is in contact
with a second seller, 2      ( ( ))(1 +    ),   and the probability that the second seller charges
a price less than ,  (  ). Conditional on being unemployed and not being in contact with
a seller charging less than , the buyer purchases   units of the BJ good. For every unit
of the BJ good sold, the seller’s revenue net of the opportunity cost of production is  ¬ .
Summarizing, the …rst line in (3) represents the seller’s expected net revenue from meetings
with unemployed buyers. Similarly, the second line in (3) represents the seller’s expected

                                                      11
net revenue from meetings with employed buyers. The two lines di¤er because unemployed
and employed buyers are willing to purchase at the price  with di¤erent probabilities and
because, when they do, they demand di¤erent quantities.

Problem of the …rm. Consider a …rm entering the MP market. The …rm decides how many
vacancies to create by comparing the cost and the bene…t of opening a vacancy. The cost of
opening a vacancy is given by the disutility cost . The bene…t of opening a vacancy is given
by the product of the probability of …lling a vacancy, (  ), and the present discounted value
of the pro…ts generated by an additional employee,  . Since the …rm operates a constant
return to scale technology, the value of an additional employee to the …rm is independent
of the number of workers employed by the …rms and, hence, the …rm’s problem is linear.
The solution of the problem is such that the …rm does not open any vacancies if    , it
opens in…nitely many vacancies if    , and it is indi¤erent between opening any number
of vacancies if  =  .

   The value of an employee to the …rm is such that
                                                                   1¬
                            = max [(  ) +  ] ¬ ( ) +      +1 .                 (4)
                                                                  1+

The above expression is easy to understand. In the current period, the …rm collects max [(  ) +  ]
revenues in the BJ and AD markets and it pays the wage ( ) to the worker. In the next
period, the worker leaves the …rm with probability and stays with the …rm with probability
1 ¬ . In the …rst case, the continuation value of the employee is zero. In the second case,
the continuation value of the employee is +1 .


2.2.2   Terms of Trade and Market Tightness

Terms of trade in the BJ market. The distribution of posted prices in the BJ market,  ,
is consistent with the seller’s optimal pricing strategy if and only if any price on the support
of the distribution maximizes the seller’s total revenues (  ) +  or, equivalently, the
seller’s net revenues in the BJ market, (  ). Lemma 1 states that there exists a unique
price distribution that is consistent with the seller’s optimal pricing strategy. The proof of
the lemma is similar to the one in Burdett and Judd (1983) or in Head, Liu, Menzio and
Wright (2012) and is presented in Appendix A.

Lemma 1 (Equilibrium Price Distribution): The unique price distribution consistent with




                                                  12
the seller’s optimal pricing strategy is

                                                        2     ( ( ))        ( ¬ )
            (  ) =      (1 +    )   1¬ 1¬                                       
                                                              1+              ( ¬ )
                                                                   2   ( ( ))       ( ¬ )             (5)
                           +(1 ¬  )(1 +     )    1¬ 1¬                                       ( )
                                                                       1+             ( ¬ )
                          2 ( ( )) f        + (1 ¬  )      ( )g


with support [   ], where      = .

Proof : See Appendix A.

       The price distribution  is continuous. In fact, if  had a mass point at some 0  ,
a seller posting 0 could increase its gains from trade by charging 0 ¬ . This deviation
would increase the probability of making a sale by a discrete amount, but it would leave the
net revenues on each unit sold approximately constant.10 The support of  is connected. In
fact, if the support of  had a gap between 0 and 1 , the seller’s gains from trade would
be strictly higher at 1 than 0 , as the probability of making a sale is the same at 0 and 1
but the net revenues on each unit sold are strictly greater at 1 . For the same reason, the
highest price on the support of  is the buyer’s reservation price .

       An implication of the previous lemma is that the maximized net revenues of the seller in
the BJ market,  ( ) = max (  ), are equal to the net revenues for a seller who charges
the buyers’reservation price, i.e. , and only sells to captive buyers, i.e. buyers that contact
the seller and nobody else. That is,  ( ) is given by

                                        (1 +  )    2  ( ( ))                  ( ¬ )
               ( )     = ( ( ))               1¬
                                           ( )       1+                            
                                                                                                            (6)
                                     (1 ¬  )(1 +       )            2   ( ( ))     ( )( ¬ )
                          + ( ( ))                              1¬                                   .
                                           ( )                          1+                

Terms of trade in the MP market. The wage in the MP market is determined as the
outcome of a bargaining process between the …rm and the worker. We assume that the
wage outcome is such that the additional income that the worker and the …rm can generate
together is divided between the worker and the …rm according to the constant and exogenous
fractions      and 1 ¬ , with         2 (0 1). Formally, we assume that the wage outcome is given
  10
    The price 0 cannot be equal to  because the seller’s net revenues in the BJ market are always strictly
positive. To see this, note that the seller’s net revenues are bounded below by the (strictly positive) revenues
associated with posting the reservation price  and selling only to the buyers who are not in contact with
any other seller.




                                                         13
by11
                                  ( ) =  + ( ( ) +  ¬  )                                   (7)

       The wage outcome in (7) coincides with the Generalized Nash Bargaining Solution when
the worker’s and …rm’s outside options are as follows. The outside option of the worker is
to enjoy an income worth  units of the AD good, to make one search in the BJ marker
with probability 1 ¬          and two searches with probability         ,   and to enter the next MP
market still matched with the …rm. The outside option of the …rm is to generate no revenues
from the worker in the BJ and AD markets and to enter the next MP market still matched
with the worker. That is, a failure to agree on the terms of trade results in the …rm and
the worker not producing together in the current period and trying to agree on the terms of
trade again in the next period. Moreover, a failure to agree on the terms of trade costs the
worker some time and results in him searching the BJ market with the same intensity as an
employed buyer.12

Tightness of the MP market. The tightness of the MP market,                      ,   is consistent with the
…rm’s optimal vacancy creation strategy if and only if it is equal to
                                     (
                                       0            if    ,
                             ( ) =     ¬1
                                                                                                       (8)
                                            ( ) if   .

If the cost of creating a vacancy, , is strictly greater than the value of an additional worker
to the …rm,  , the tightness of the MP market is zero. In fact, if    , the cost of creating a
vacancy certainly exceeds the bene…t of creating a vacancy, which is given by the probability
of …lling the vacancy times the value of a worker to the …rm. If, on the other hand,  is
smaller than  , the tightness of the MP market is such that (  ) = . In fact, if                   ,
…rms continue to create new vacancies until the tightness of the MP market is high enough
and, hence, the probability of …lling a vacancy is low enough to equalize the cost and the
bene…t of opening an additional vacancy.
  11
      Since employed and unemployed workers pay di¤erent prices in the BJ market, the wage bargaining
outcome (7) does not guarantee that a worker is better o¤ employed than unemployed. In the theoretical
part of the paper, we proceed under the assumption that employed workers are always better o¤. In the
quantitative part of the paper, we verify that employed workers are better o¤ than unemployed workers in
all rational expectations equilibria.
   12
      The outside options here may be more or less realistic than the outside options in Pissarides (1985),
Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) and many subsequent papers. They certainly simplify the analysis. The
assumption that, in case of disagreement, the …rm and the worker do not lose contact with each other
simpli…es the analysis by making the wage only a function of current variables. The assumption that, in case
of disagreement, the worker searches with the same intensity as an employed buyer simpli…es the analysis
by making the wage independent of the price distribution  .




                                                    14
2.2.3   Unemployment Dynamics

The law of motion for unemployment is

                               = ¬1 (1 ¬ (  )) + (1 ¬ ¬1 ) .                         (9)

The measure of unemployed workers at the opening of the MP market in period  is ¬1 .
During the MP market, an unemployed worker becomes employed with probability (  )
and an employed worker becomes unemployed with the exogenous probability . Thus, the
measure of unemployed workers at the opening of the BJ market in period  is given by
the right-hand side of (9). Clearly, this is also the measure of unemployed workers at the
opening of the MP market in period  + 1.


2.3     Rational Expectation Equilibrium
We are now in the position to de…ne an equilibrium for our model economy.

De…nition 1: A discrete-time Rational Expectation Equilibrium is a sequence f   g such
that:

  (i) For  = 0 1 2 ,  satis…es the Bellman Equation

                                                                 1¬
                             = (1 ¬ ) [ ( ) +  ¬  ] +      +1 .                 (10)
                                                                 1+

 (ii) For  = 0 1 2 ,  satis…es the law of motion

                                = ¬1 (1 ¬ ( ( ))) + (1 ¬ ¬1 ) .                    (11)

(iii) lim!1  is …nite and ¬1 is given.


   Condition (i) is the Bellman Equation (4) describing the value of an additional worker to
a …rm, where we have replaced the wage with its equilibrium value (7). Condition (ii) is the
equation (9) describing the law of motion for the unemployment rate. Finally, condition (iii)
describes the boundary conditions for the system of di¤erential equations de…ned by condi-
tions (i) and (ii). In particular, condition (iii) states that the initial value of unemployment
is given and that the value of a worker to a …rm satis…es a transversality condition. Given
a sequence f   g that satis…es the above equilibrium conditions, one can recover all the
other equilibrium objects, such as the terms of trade in the MP and BJ markets (which are
functions of the contemporaneous unemployment rate) and the tightness of the MP market
(which is a function of the contemporaneous value of a worker).

                                               15
     In this section, which was mainly devoted to describing the environment and the equilib-
rium conditions, it was natural to make the assumption of discrete time. In the remainder of
the paper, which is mainly devoted to characterizing the set of rational expectations equilib-
ria, it is more convenient to work in continuous time. We formally derive a continuous-time
version of our discrete-time model in Appendix B. There, we assume that, over a period of
length     , the vacancy cost is  , the productivity of labor is  , the unemployment income
is  , the job-loss probability is 1 ¬ exp(      ), the MP matching function is  ( ) , while
the parameters      ,   ,    ,  and  are independent of   . We then take the limit as   goes
to zero and obtain the continuous-time equivalent to the equilibrium conditions (10) and
(11). This leads to the following de…nition of equilibrium for the continuous-time version of
the model.

De…nition 2: A continuous-time Rational Expectation Equilibrium is a path f   g such
that:

    (i) For all    0,  satis…es the Bellman Equation

                                 ( + )  = (1 ¬ ) (( ) +  ¬  ) +  ;                (12)

 (ii) For all      0,  satis…es the law of motion

                                         = ¬ ( ( )) + (1 ¬  ) ;                      (13)

(iii) lim!1  is …nite and 0 is given.



3       Equilibrium Characterization
In this section, we characterize the equilibrium set for our model economy. First, we analyze
the set of steady states. We show that the revenues generated by a …rm-worker pair are
decreasing in unemployment if the income of employed buyers is su¢ ciently high relative to
the income of unemployed buyers and/or if the search intensity of employed buyers in the
BJ product market is su¢ ciently low relative to the search intensity of unemployed buyers.
Moreover, we show that if the revenues generated by a …rm-worker pair are decreasing
in unemployment, so are the …rms’incentives to employ workers and, given an appropriate
choice of the vacancy cost and the labor market matching function, the model admits multiple
steady states.

     We then analyze the set of rational expectations equilibria. If the model admits a unique
steady state, we …nd that there is also a unique rational expectations equilibrium for any

                                                   16
initial condition of the economy. If the model admits multiple steady states, we …nd that
there are always multiple rational expectations equilibria for some initial conditions of the
economy. These equilibria di¤er with respect to the agents’expectations about future un-
employment. Yet, in each equilibrium, the agents’ expectations are correct, in the sense
that the actual path of unemployment coincides with the one forecast by the agents. The
existence of multiple rational expectations equilibria implies that the behavior of our model
economy is determined not only by fundamentals (i.e. technology and preferences), but also
by expectations.


3.1    Steady States
A steady state is a point ( ) such that the unemployment rate and the value of a worker
to a …rm are stationary. In order to characterize the set of steady states, we use equation
(13) to …nd the locus of points where the unemployment rate is stationary (henceforth, the
-nullcline) and equation (12) to …nd the locus of points where the value of a worker to a
…rm is stationary (henceforth, the -nullcline). We then look for the set of intersections
between the two loci.

   The locus of points where unemployment is stationary is given by

                                     =                .                                (14)
                                            + ( ())

The stationary value of unemployment is given by the ratio of the worker’s job loss rate, ,
and the sum of the worker’s job loss and the job …nding rates, + ( ()). When the value
to the …rm from employing an additional worker, , is smaller than the cost of creating a
vacancy, , the tightness of the MP market, (), and the job-…nding rate, ( ()), are both
equal to zero and, hence, the stationary value of unemployment is equal to        1. When
 is greater than , () and ( ()) are both strictly positive and strictly increasing in
. Hence, the stationary value of unemployment is strictly smaller than one and strictly
decreasing in . In the limit for  ! 1, () ! 1 and ( ()) ! 1. Hence, the stationary
value of unemployment converges to          (1 + ). Figure 1 plots the -nullcline in the
( )-space.

   The locus of points where the value of a worker to a …rm is stationary is given by

                                    (1 ¬ ) [ () +  ¬  ]
                               =                             .                         (15)
                                               +
The stationary value of a worker is given by the ‡ow of revenues generated by a …rm-worker
pair and accruing to the …rm, (1 ¬ ) [ () +  ¬  ], capitalized by the factor 1( + ).


                                             17
                      J

                                 ů=0




                                                                      ů=0


                                                                        u




                              Figure 1: The  and  nullclines

The stationary value of a worker is bounded because the ‡ow revenues,  () +  , are
bounded. Moreover, the stationary value of a worker is increasing, constant or decreas-
ing with respect to unemployment depending on whether the ‡ow revenues are increasing,
constant or decreasing with respect to unemployment. Figure 1 illustrates several possible
shapes for the -nullcline in the ( )-space.

   From the properties of the -nullcline and -nullcline, we can already reach some general
conclusions about the set of steady states. First, the model always admits one steady state,
as the -nullcline and the -nullcline must cross at least once. Second, if the -nullcline is
constant or upward sloping, the model admits only one steady state. If, on the other hand,
the -nullcline is downward sloping, the model may admit multiple steady states. Whether
this is the case depends on the exact shape of the -nullcline, which depends on the vacancy
cost, , on the shape of the matching function in the MP market,  , and on the shape of
the -nullcline, which depends on the shape of the seller’s revenue function  () +  .

   In equilibrium, the seller’s revenues are equal to the revenues for a seller that, in the BJ
market, posts the reservation price  and sells only to buyers who are not in contact with
any other sellers (i.e. captive buyers). The derivative of the seller’s revenues with respect to
unemployment,  0 (), is a complicated expression that can be written as the sum of three
terms— the market power e¤ect  (), the demand e¤ect (), and the tightness e¤ect
 ()— scaled up by a multiplier 1(1 ¬   ()). That is, the derivative of the seller’s




                                              18
revenues can be written as
                                            () + () +  ()
                                0 () =                                                     (16)
                                                1 ¬   ()

   The market power e¤ect of unemployment is given by

                 (1 +      )(1 +   )       2  (1 ¬ )     2  (1 ¬ )        ( ¬ )
     () = ¬                                           ¬                                   (17)
                         ()2             1 +  ()      1 +  ()              

The …rst term in the expression above is the derivative with respect to unemployment of the
probability that, in the BJ market, the seller meets a buyer who is employed rather than
unemployed. The second term is the di¤erence between the probability that a buyer is captive
conditional on being employed rather than unemployed. The last term is the seller’s revenue
(net of the opportunity cost of production) from making a sale to an unemployed buyer.
Thus, the market power e¤ect measures the decline in seller’s revenues caused by the fact
that an increase in unemployment raises the seller’s probability of meeting an unemployed
buyer and, since unemployed buyers search more, lowers the probability that the buyer is
captive.

   The demand e¤ect of unemployment is given by

                       (1 +     )(1 +   )          2  (1 ¬ )     (() ¬  ) ( ¬ )
           () = ¬                          1¬                                             (18)
                              ()2                1 +  ()               

The …rst term in the expression above is derivative with respect to unemployment of the
probability that, in the BJ market, the seller meets a buyer who is employed rather than
unemployed. The second term is the probability that an employed buyer is captive. The last
term is the di¤erence between the net revenues that the seller makes if it sells to a buyer who
is employed rather than unemployed. Thus, the demand e¤ect measures the decline in seller’s
revenues caused by the fact that an increase in unemployment raises the seller’s probability
of meeting an unemployed buyer and, since unemployed buyers have lower income, it lowers
the quantity demanded by a captive buyer.

   The tightness e¤ect of unemployment is given by

                                 (1 +  ) 2           ( ¬ )
                  ()       =                  2
                                    ()    ()           
                                                                                              (19)
                                (1 +  )(1 ¬ ) 2  (1 +  )        ()( ¬ )
                              +
                                      ()         ()2 (1 +  )       

The tightness e¤ect measures the increase in seller’s net revenues due to the fact that an
increase in unemployment lowers the seller-to-buyer ratio in the BJ market and, hence,
increases the probability that a buyer in a particular employment state is captive. Formally,

                                                   19
the …rst line is the product of the seller’s probability of meeting a buyer who is unemployed,
the derivative with respect to unemployment of the probability that the buyer is captive, and
the seller’s net revenues from trading with the buyer. Similarly, the second line is the product
of the seller’s probability of meeting a buyer who is employed, the derivative with respect
to unemployment of the probability that the buyer is captive, and the seller’s revenues from
trading with the buyer.
   An increase in unemployment a¤ects the sellers’ revenues through the market power,
demand and tightness e¤ects. But by a¤ecting the sellers’ revenues, an increase in unem-
ployment also a¤ects the wage of employed workers, the quantity sold by sellers upon meeting
a captive employed buyer and, in the end, the sellers’revenues. This feedback e¤ect between
revenues and wages multiplies the market power, the demand and the tightness e¤ects by
the factor 1(1 ¬   ()), where   () is given by

                              (1 +    )(1   ¬ )          2  (1 ¬ )          ( ¬ )
                   () =                         1¬                                            (20)
                                     ()                1 +  ()               

which is the derivative of the seller’s revenues with respect to the wage of employed workers
times the derivative of the wage of an employed worker with respect to the revenues him and
his employer generate.
   Overall, the sign of the derivative of the seller’s revenues with respect to unemployment—
and, hence, the slope of the -nullcline— is positive if the demand and the market power
e¤ects dominate and it is negative if the tightness e¤ect dominates. The following theorem
provides two necessary and su¢ cient conditions under which the derivative of the seller’s
revenues is negative and, hence, the -nullcline downward sloping. Further, the theorem
proves that, when  0 () is negative, one can …nd parameter values such that the -nullcline
crosses the -nullcline multiple times.
Theorem 1 (Multiplicity of Steady States): (i) For any  2 [ ] there is a   ()                 
             0
such that  ()  0 i¤     (). (iii) There exists a ~  0 such that, for any  2 [ ~]
there is a    ()      such that  0 ()  0 i¤ 0                ().   (i) I¤  0 ()  0 for some
 2 [ ], there is a vacancy cost  and a labor market matching function  such that the
model admits multiple steady states.
Proof : See Appendix C.
   The …rst part of Theorem 1 states that the seller’s revenues are decreasing in unemploy-
ment if and only if the productivity of labor,  , is su¢ ciently high relative to the income
of the unemployed,  . This result is intuitive. The higher is  relative to  , the larger is
the di¤erence in income between employed and unemployed workers and, hence, the larger
is the demand e¤ect of unemployment. The second part of Theorem 1 states that the seller’s

                                                    20
revenues are decreasing in unemployment if and only if the search intensity of employed
buyers,   ,   is su¢ ciently small relative to the search intensity of employed buyers,     .   This
result is also intuitive. The lower is        relative to   ,   the larger is the di¤erence between
the probabilities than an employed buyer and an unemployed buyer are captive and, hence,
the larger is the market power e¤ect of unemployment. The last part of Theorem 1 states
that, if and only if the seller’s revenues are decreasing in unemployment, one can …nd a value
for the vacancy cost, , and a legitimate matching function,  , such that the -nullcline
crosses the -nullcline multiple times and, hence, the model admits multiple steady states.
Intuitively, if  0 ()  0, a higher unemployment rate lowers the …rm’s value of hiring a
worker, it lowers the …rm’s incentive to create vacancies and, if the matching function 
is chosen appropriately, the decline in vacancy creation sustains the higher unemployment
rate.

   It is useful to interpret the existence of multiple steady states as the outcome of the
externalities that a …rm imposes on other …rms if it permanently increases its workforce.
If a …rm increases its workforce, it increases the other …rms’ cost of hiring an additional
worker by increasing the tightness of the labor market. We refer to this external e¤ect as the
congestion externality. The congestion externality is negative and its strength is measured
by the slope of the -nullcline. Moreover, if a …rm decides to increase its workforce, it a¤ects
the other …rms’bene…t from hiring an additional worker by lowering the unemployment rate
and, thus, increasing the tightness of the product market and changing the composition of
the buyers populating it. The increase in the tightness of the product market lowers the
other …rms’bene…t from hiring an additional worker as it lowers the probability that a …rm-
worker pair meets an employed or unemployed buyer who is captive. This external e¤ect is
captured by the   term in (19). The change in the composition of buyers increases the
other …rms’bene…t from hiring an additional worker as it increases the probability that a
…rm-worker pair meets an employed buyer, which is the type that demands more and is more
likely to be captive. This external e¤ect is captured by the   and  terms in (17) and
(18). We refer to the sum of TE, ME and DE as the shopping externalities of employment.
The shopping externalities may be positive or negative and their strength is measured by
the slope of the -nullcline.

   If, at some steady state, the shopping externalities are positive and dominate the conges-
tion externality, the employment decisions of di¤erent …rms are strategic complements, in
the sense that if a …rm increases its workforce, other …rms want to increase their workforce as
well. This strategic complementarity in employment leads to multiple steady states. Graph-
ically, if, at some steady state, the shopping externalities are positive and dominate the
congestion externality, the -nullcline is downward sloping and crosses the -nullcline from

                                                   21
above, which, as one can see from Figure 1, guarantees the existence of multiple intersections
between the two curves.

   The existence of multiple steady states rests on the demand and the market power ex-
ternalities which, in turn, originate from the fact that employed buyers demand more and
search less than unemployed ones. Theoretically, either one of these externalities in isolation
is su¢ cient to obtain multiplicity. Indeed, one can easily verify that the seller’s revenues
can be decreasing in unemployment (and, by virtue of Theorem 1, multiplicity may emerge)
even when the search intensity of employed and unemployed buyers is the same and, hence,
the market power externality is shut o¤. Similarly, one can easily verify that the seller’s
revenues can be decreasing in unemployment even when the income of employed and un-
employed workers is the same and, hence, the demand externality is shut o¤. Empirically,
though, we shall see that the market power externality— which is the genuinely novel feature
of our theory— is much more important than the demand externality.


3.2    Rational Expectation Equilibria
When the model admits only one steady state, it is easy to prove that there exists a unique
rational expectations equilibrium for any initial unemployment rate. When the model admits
multiple steady states, the characterization of the set of rational expectations equilibria is
more complicated. First, we need to characterize the solutions of the dynamical system given
by the di¤erential equations (12) and (13) around each steady state. Second, we need to
characterize the solutions of the dynamical system (12)-(13) away from the steady states.
Finally, we need to check the transversality condition, in order to understand which solutions
are indeed rational expectations equilibria. For the sake of concreteness, we will carry out
the analysis for the case in which there are three steady states.

   Let  = (   ) denote the steady state with the -th lowest unemployment rate. The
linear approximation of the dynamical system (12)-(13) around  is

                         ¬ ¬ ( ( )) ¬ 0 ( ( )) 0 ( )           ¬ 
                      =                                                                  (21)
                         ¬(1 ¬ ) 0 ( )     +                     ¬ 

The behavior of the dynamical system (12)-(13) in a neighborhood of the steady state 
depends on the sign of the two eigenvalues of the 2x2 matrix in (21). At the steady state with
the lowest unemployment rate, 1 , the two eigenvalues are real and have opposite signs. This
means that the steady state is a saddle and, hence, there exists one and only one trajectory—
the stable manifold— that converges towards 1 . We …nd it useful to denote as 1 () the
set of ’s such that the point ( ) belongs to the stable manifold converging to 1 . At the
steady state with the intermediate unemployment rate, 2 , the two eigenvalues are complex

                                              22
conjugates. The sign of the real part of these eigenvalues is negative if   ( + )
and positive if         ( + ). This means that, if                 ( + ), the steady state
is a sink and, hence, any trajectory starting in a neighborhood of 2 converges towards
2 . If   ( + ), the steady state is a source and, hence, any trajectory starting
in a neighborhood of 2 diverges from 2 . Finally, at the steady state with the highest
unemployment rate, 3 , the two eigenvalues are real and have opposite signs. Hence, the
steady state 3 is also a saddle. We denote as 3 () the set of ’s such that the point ( )
belongs to the stable manifold converging to 3 .
   The global behavior of the dynamical system (12)-(13) depends on the shape of the stable
manifolds associated with the steady states 1 and 3 and on whether the steady state 2
is a source or a sink. Figure 2 illustrate the solutions of the dynamical system (12)-(13)
when: (i) the backward extension of 1 to the left of 1 exits from  and the backward
extension of 1 to the right of 1 exits from ; (ii) the backward extension of 3 to the left
of 3 exits from  and the backward extension of 3 to the right of 3 exits from ; (iii)
2 is a sink. Fix any initial unemployment 0 2 [ ]. First, consider the point (0  0 )
where 0 = 1 (0 ). The solution to the dynamical system starting from (0  0 ) is the stable
manifold that converges to 1 . This trajectory is an equilibrium because it satis…es the
di¤erential equations (12) and (13) in De…nition 2, as well as the transversality condition.
Second, consider the point (0  0 ) where 0 = 3 (0 ). The solution to the dynamical system
starting from (0  0 ) is the stable manifold that converges to 3 . Clearly, this trajectory is
also an equilibrium. Third, consider any point (0  0 ), where 0 2 (3 (0 ) 1 (0 )). Given
the initial condition (0  0 ), the solution to the dynamical system is a trajectory that remains
in the shaded area in Figure 3 and converges to either 2 or to a limit cycle surrounding 2 .
Clearly, the trajectory constitutes an equilibrium in either case. Finally, consider any point
                      [3 (0 ) 1 (0 )]. Given the initial condition (0  0 ), the solution to the
(0  0 ), where 0 2
dynamical system is a trajectory such that the value of the worker to a …rm,  , diverges
to plus or minus in…nity. Hence, the trajectory does not constitute an equilibrium because
it violates the transversality condition. Overall, for any initial unemployment 0 , there are
three types of rational expectations equilibria: the stable manifold converging to 1 , the
stable manifold converging to 3 and a continuum of equilibria starting between the two
stable manifolds and converging to either 2 or to a limit cycle around 2 .

   In Appendix D, we characterize the solutions to the dynamical system (12)-(13) and
the set of rational expectations equilibria when 2 is a sink— which is the relevant case for
most reasonable parametrizations of the model— and the stable manifolds associated with
1 and 3 take on shapes di¤erent than in Figure 2. All of these cases share two key
features with the one illustrated in Figure 2. First, there are initial unemployment rates

                                                   23
                      J
                                     ů=0

                                      E1
                                                         J1s




                                             E2


                               J3s
                                                               E3     ů=0

                                                                       u




                          Figure 2: Rational Expectation Equilibria

for which the model admits multiple rational expectations equilibria. These equilibria di¤er
with respect to the agents’ expectations about future unemployment. However, in each
one of these equilibria, the agents’ expectations are correct, in the sense that the realized
path of unemployment coincides with the one expected by the agents. The existence of
multiple rational expectations equilibria is due to the fact that the expectation of higher
unemployment in the future lowers the …rm’s value of a worker, it lowers the …rm’s incentives
to create vacancies now and, in turn, lower vacancies can ful…ll the expectation of higher
future unemployment. The existence of multiple rational expectations equilibria implies that
the behavior of our model economy is not only determined by fundamentals (e.g., preferences
and technology), but also by the agents’expectations about future unemployment.

   Second, there are initial unemployment rates for which the model admits rational ex-
pectations equilibria that converge to di¤erent steady states. The coexistence of equilibria
converging to di¤erent steady states means that the agents’expectations can be so important
as to determine the long-run outcomes of the economy, and not simply the path that the
economy follows in the short run. This is a key feature of our model. In our model— like
in any textbook search models of the labor market— the transition of the economy towards
the steady state is rapid because, empirically, workers move rather quickly in and out of
unemployment. Therefore, changes in the agents’ expectations could not possibly have a
signi…cant impact on labor market outcomes if these expectations only a¤ected the transi-


                                             24
tion path of the economy towards the steady state, and not the steady state towards which
the economy is headed.


4     Calibration and Validation
In this section, we calibrate the parameters of the model so as to match US data on the
di¤erence in shopping behavior between employed and unemployed workers, on the rate at
which workers transit between employment and unemployment, and on the distribution of
prices at which identical goods trade in the same market and in the same period of time.
We …nd that the calibrated model admits multiple steady states. Moreover, we …nd that, for
any initial condition, the calibrated model admits multiple rational expectations equilibria
and that some of these equilibria converge to di¤erent steady states. Multiplicity obtains
because unemployment has a very strong negative e¤ect on the revenues generated by a
…rm-worker pair and, hence, on the …rms’incentives to hire. In turn, unemployment has a
strong negative e¤ect on the revenues generated by a …rm-worker pair not so much because
unemployed buyers spend less than employed buyers, but mainly because unemployed buyers
spend more time searching for low prices and, in doing so, they increase the competitiveness
of the product market. Finally, we show empirical evidence of the e¤ect that suggests that,
indeed, when the unemployment rate is higher product markets are more competitive.


4.1    Calibration Strategy
Preferences are described by the discount factor, , and by the periodical utility function
of workers,  ( ) =   1¬ , and …rms,  ( ) = . The technology operated by …rm-
worker pairs is described by the productivity of labor measured in units of the AD good,  ,
and by the implicit rate of transformation of the AD good in the BJ good, . The technology
operated by workers is described by the value of home production/unemployment bene…ts
measured in units of the AD good,  , and by the rate of transformation of the AD good in the
BJ good, . Search and bargaining in the MP market are described by the vacancy cost, , by
the matching function  , which we assume to be of the CES form  ( ) = ( + )¬1= ,
by the worker’s bargaining power, , and by the job-loss rate, . The search frictions in the
BJ market are described by the probability that an unemployed worker searches twice,         ,

by the probability that an employed worker searches twice,    ,   and by the matching function
 , which we assume to be of the form  ( ) = minf g.
    The model is described by a total of 12 parameters. The value of these parameters
is chosen so that the model, evaluated at the steady-state with the lowest unemployment,
matches features of the US economy over the period 1987-2007. We choose the vacancy

                                             25
cost, , and the job-loss rate, , so that the model matches the empirical average of the
worker’s monthly transition rate between unemployment and employment (the UE rate)
and between employment and unemployment (the EU rate). We choose the parameter                          in
the MP matching function so that the model matches the empirical elasticity of the UE rate
with respect to the vacancy to unemployment ratio. This part of our calibration strategy is
standard (see, e.g., Shimer 2005).

   The calibration strategy for the remaining 9 parameters is novel and we shall describe
it in greater detail. We normalize labor productivity,  , to 1 and we choose  so that the
model matches the empirical ratio between the expenditures of unemployed workers and the
expenditures of employed workers. This is an appropriate calibration target because, in the
model, the ratio of expenditures for unemployed and employed workers,  , is increasing
in  . We assume that the rate of transformation between the AD and the BJ good in
the market, , equals one and we choose the rate of transformation at home, , so that the
model matches the average ratio between the highest and the lowest price at which identical
goods trade in the same geographical market and time period. This is an appropriate target
because, in the model, the ratio of the highest to the lowest price increases with . The pro…t
rate enjoyed by a …rm, (1 ¬ )( () +  ¬  )( () +  ), is decreasing in the worker’s
bargaining power . Thus, it is natural to choose         so as to match an empirical measure of
pro…ts.

   We choose the search intensities        and       so that the model matches the empirical
ratio between the amount of time spent shopping by employed and unemployed workers, as
well as the empirical ratio between the prices paid by employed and unemployed workers.
These are natural targets. Under the assumption that the average number of searches is
proportional to the time spent shopping, one can recover               from the amount of time
spent shopping by employed and unemployed workers. Then, one can recover                         from the
price paid by employed and unemployed workers because the return of                 ¬      additional
searches (measured by the decline in the average price paid) is decreasing in                .    Finally,
we choose alpha so that the model matches the average standard deviation of prices for
identical goods. Intuitively, alpha determines the size of the BJ market (where there is price
dispersion) and the size of the AD market (where there is no price dispersion) and, hence,
it determines the average dispersion of prices.


4.2       Data Sources and Target Values
Table 1 summarizes the value of the empirical targets used to calibrate the parameters of the
model. We construct empirical measures of the workers’transition rates between employment


                                              26
                                   Table 1:     Calibration targets
          Product Market Targets                       Labor Market Targets
          Expenditures of U relative to E        0.85 Monthly transition rate, UE             0.433
          Shopping time of U relative to E       1.25 Monthly transition rate, EU             0.024
          St dev log prices                      0.15 Elasticity UE wrt tightness             0.650
          Max-min ratio                          1.70 Other Targets
          Price paid by U relative to E          0.98 Pro…t margin                            0.05
                                                       Real annual interest rate              0.035


and unemployment following the methodology developed by Shimer (2005). Over the period
1987-2007, we …nd that the average monthly UE rate was 43% per month and the average
monthly EU rate was 2.4%. We also …nd that the elasticity of the UE rate with respect
to the vacancy-to-unemployment rate was approximately 25%. However, as discussed in
Petrongolo and Pissarides (2000) and Menzio and Shi (2011), this is a biased estimate of
the elasticity of the UE rate with respect to labor market tightness because, in reality, both
employed and unemployed workers search for jobs. Hence, we choose to target an elasticity
of the UE rate with respect to theta of 65%, which is the value estimated by Menzio and
Shi (2011) after accounting for search on the job. In Appendix E, we consider alternative
calibrations where the targeted elasticity varies between 45 and 70%.

       We choose the target for the di¤erence in expenditures between employed and unem-
ployed workers by looking at several of the existing estimates of the decline in expenditures
experienced by households who transit from employment to unemployment. Bentolila and
Ichino (2008) use the PSID to estimate the e¤ect of moving into unemployment on a house-
hold’s food expenditures. They …nd that a year of unemployment leads to a 19% decline
in food expenditures. Restricting attention to households who move into unemployment
because of either business closures or mass layo¤s, Stephens (2001) …nds that a year of un-
employment leads to a 14% decline in food expenditures. Stephens (2004) obtains similar
…ndings using data from the Health and Retirement Survey (HRS) in addition to the PSID.13
Based on these estimates, we target a 15% di¤erence in expenditures between employed and
unemployed workers. In Appendix E, we vary this target between 10 and 40%.

       We choose the target for the di¤erence in shopping time between employed and unem-
ployed workers using cross-sectional data from the American Time Use Survey (ATUS).
Restricting attention to individuals aged 22-55, we …nd that employed people spend between
24 and 33% less time shopping than non-employed people, and between 13 and 20 % less
  13
    The elasticity of food expenditures with respect to income is likely to be low compared to other expendi-
tures categories, such as luxury goods or semi-durable goods. Therefore, the estimated e¤ect of moving into
unemployment on food expenditures is likely to be low compared with the e¤ect on overall expenditures.



                                                     27
than unemployed people.14 Krueger and Mueller (2010) also measure di¤erences in shopping
time between workers in di¤erent employment states. They …nd a di¤erence in shopping
time between employed and unemployed individuals of 29% in the US, 67% in Canada and
Western Europe and 56% in Eastern Europe. On the basis of these …ndings, we target a
25% di¤erence in shopping time between employed and unemployed workers. In Appendix
E, we let this target vary between 10 and 40%.

       We use the Kielts-Nielsen Consumer Panel Data (KNCDP) to measure the dispersion of
prices for the same good, in the same market and at the same time.15 We consider di¤erent
de…nitions of a good. In our narrowest de…nition, we group together all products that have
di¤erent barcodes, but are identical along all other dimensions (i.e. brand, size, color, shape,
packaging, etc. . . ). In our intermediate de…nition of a good, we group together all products
that are identical except for their barcode and brand. In our broadest de…nition of a good,
we group together all products that are identical except for their barcode, brand and size.
We de…ne a market as Scantrack Market Area, which is the notion of market used by Nielsen.
We de…ne a time period as a quarter. Then, for each triple of good, market and time, we
compute the distribution of prices (expressed as ratios of the average price), the standard
deviation of prices and various percentile ranges. We …nd that the average standard deviation
of prices ranges between 19 and 36% and that the average 90-to-10 percentile ratio ranges
between 1.7 and 2.6, depending on the de…nition of a good. Considering that some price
dispersion is likely to be caused by factors that are not in our model (e.g., measurement error
and seller’s heterogeneity), we decided to target a standard deviation of prices of 15%, and
a max-to-min price ratio of 1.7. In Appendix E, we consider alternative parametrizations.

       We follow the methodology developed by Aguiar and Hurst (2007) to measure the dif-
ference in prices paid by employed and non-employed households. We restrict attention to
households where the head of the family is aged 25 to 55. For each household in our sample,
we construct a price index that is de…ned as the ratio of the household’s actual expendi-
tures to the counterfactual expenditures that the household would have incurred if it had
purchased goods at their average market price. We then regress the household’s price index
on the household’s employment status and on a number of other household’s characteristics.
  14
     The estimation results vary depending on the de…nition of shopping time. We consider a broad de…nition
of shopping time which includes time spent purchasing all goods and services plus related travel time, and a
narrow de…nition of shopping time which includes time spent purchasing consumer goods and groceries plus
related travel time. All details are available upon request.
  15
     The KNCPD is a panel dataset covering approximately 50,000 households over the period 2004-2009.
Respondents use in-home UPC scanning devices to record information (price, quantity, outlet, etc. . . ) about
their purchases of grocery and non-grocery household items, which account for roughly 30 percent of total
expenditures. This data is similar, although much broader in scope to that used by Aguiar and Hurst (2007)
in their analysis of the shopping behavior of retired households. The reader can …nd all details about the
data and the measurement of price dispersion in Kaplan and Menzio (2013).


                                                     28
                            Table 2: Calibrated parameters
 Preference Parameters                         Labor Market Parameters
     Discount factor                   0.003        Vacancy cost                   8.02
     BJ exponent in utility             1.00        Exogenous destruction rate     0.024
 Technology Parameters                              MP matching function parameter 1.24
  Market production, AD goods         1.00        Workers’bargaining power       0.74
  Home production, AD goods           4.91 Shopping Parameters
   Market transformation, AD to BJ 1.00           Prob unemployed search twice   0.27
  Home transformation, AD to BJ        15.7       Prob employed search twice     0.02

We …nd that the presence of an additional non-employed household head leads to a decline
in the price index ranging between 1 and 3.5%, depending on the de…nition of a good. More-
over, we …nd that at most one third of the e¤ect can be accounted for by stores’…xed e¤ects.
Based on these …ndings, we choose to target a di¤erence in prices paid by employed and
unemployed workers of 2%.


4.3    Properties of the Calibrated Model
Table 2 reports the calibrated parameter values. Given these values, we …nd that the model
admits three steady states. At the …rst steady state, the unemployment rate is 5.3% and
the value of a worker to a …rm is 11.3. At the intermediate steady state, the unemployment
rate is 8.1% and the value of a worker to a …rm is 9.5. At the last steady state, there is
no economic activity as the unemployment rate is 100%. Moreover, we …nd that the set of
rational expectations equilibria is as in Figure 2. For any initial unemployment rate, there
is a rational expectations equilibrium converging to the low unemployment steady state, one
converging to the high unemployment steady state and a continuum of equilibria converging
to the intermediate steady state.

   The calibrated model admits multiple steady states— and, consequently, multiple rational
expectations equilibria— because unemployment has a su¢ ciently strong negative e¤ect on
the revenues generated by a …rm-worker pair and, in turn, on the value of a worker to a …rm.
To understand why this is the case, it is useful to decompose the e¤ect of unemployment on
the revenues of a seller according to

                                         () + () +  ()
                             0 () =                                                 (22)
                                             1 ¬   ()

At the low unemployment steady state, the demand e¤ect DE, which measures the decline
in seller’s revenues due to the fact that unemployed buyers spend less than employed buyers,
is ¬16% of  +  (). The market power e¤ect ME, which measures the decline in seller’s
revenues due to the fact that unemployed buyers search more and, hence, are less likely to

                                               29
be captive, is ¬33% of  +  (). The tightness e¤ect TE, which measures the increase
in seller’s revenues due to the fact that higher unemployment increases the tightness of
the product market, is 6% of  +  (). The multiplier 1(1 ¬   ()), which re‡ects
the feedback between revenues and wages, is 2.7. Overall, the semi-elasticity of the seller’s
revenues with respect to the unemployment rate is ¬115% and the semi-elasticity of the
value of a worker to a …rm is ¬6%. Thus, if we increase unemployment from its lowest
steady-state value of 5.3% to, say, 10%, the stationary value of a worker to a …rm declines
by approximately 28%. Since this is larger than the decline required to support a stationary
unemployment of 10%, a second steady state obtains.
   The main channel through which unemployment a¤ects the seller’s revenues and, hence,
the value of a worker to a …rm is the market power e¤ect, not the demand e¤ect. Indeed,
the demand e¤ect is proportional to the di¤erence between the expenditures of employed
and unemployed workers, which is calibrated to be 15% of  . The market power e¤ect is
proportional to the di¤erence between the probability that an employed and an unemployed
buyers are captive times the expenditures of an unemployed buyer. Since the search intensity
of employed workers, 1 +    ,   is 1.02 and the search intensity of unemployed workers, 1 +   ,

is calibrated to be 25% larger, the di¤erence in the probability that an employed and an
unemployed buyers are captive is 36%. Thus, the market power e¤ect is proportional to
36% of  , which is more than twice as large as the demand e¤ect. If we were to abstract
from the di¤erence in search intensity between employed and unemployed buyers, the model
would not feature multiple equilibria, as the empirical di¤erence in expenditures between
employed and unemployed buyers is only 15%. When we take into account the di¤erence
in search intensity, the model generates multiple equilibria because it behaves like a model
where employed and unemployed buyers only di¤er in expenditures, but where the di¤erence
in expenditures is 51%!
   The market power e¤ect captures the e¤ect of unemployment on the competitiveness of
the product market. For an individual seller posting the reservation price , the market
power e¤ect manifests itself in a decline in the probability of meeting a captive buyer and,
hence, in the probability of making a sale. For sellers as a whole, the market power e¤ect
manifests itself as a decline in the equilibrium distribution of prices. Therefore, one may
wonder how a large market power e¤ect can be consistent with the observation— matched
by the calibrated model— that unemployed buyers pay only 2% less than employed buyers.
In order to answer this question, it is helpful to take a detour in auction theory.
   Consider a …rst-price procurement auction with symmetric information. In this auction,
a seller submits a bid to a buyer knowing the number of sellers who are bidding for the buyer.
The equilibrium in this auction is such that the seller bids the reservation price  if the buyer

                                                30
is in contact with no other seller (i.e. captive), and it bids the opportunity cost  if the buyer
is in contact with other sellers (i.e. non-captive). Since unemployed buyers are more likely
to be in contact with multiple sellers than employed buyers and since the di¤erence between
 and  is large (as implied by the empirical observations on price dispersion), an increase
in unemployment causes a large decline in the seller’s revenues. Note that in this auction,
unemployed buyers end up paying much lower prices than employed buyers. The BJ market
operates as a …rst-price procurement auction with asymmetric information. In this auction,
a seller submits a bid to a buyer without knowing the number of sellers who are in contact
with the buyer. The expected revenues for a seller in the asymmetric information auction
are the same as in the symmetric information auction and, hence, they are very sensitive
to changes in unemployment. But equilibrium prices in the asymmetric information auction
are di¤erent than in the symmetric information one, as sellers cannot discriminate between
captive and non-captive buyers. In particular, in the asymmetric information auction, part of
the gains from trade that are extracted by non-captive buyers are "stolen" as informational
rents by captive buyers. For this reason, although employed buyers are much less likely to
be captive than unemployed buyers, they pay only marginally higher prices.


4.4    Discussion and Validation
In the previous subsection, we showed that the model features multiple rational expectations
equilibria when calibrated to match the empirical di¤erences in the shopping behavior of
employed and unemployed workers and the empirical rate at which workers transit between
employment and unemployment. In this subsection, we want to further convince the reader
of the empirical importance of our theory of multiple rational expectation equilibria by
providing some direct evidence in support of the two central mechanisms of our theory.

   The …rst mechanism is the one linking aggregate unemployment to competition: when
aggregate unemployment is higher, buyers spend more time for searching for low prices (or
for cheaper substitutes) and, in doing so, they make the product market more competitive.
We would expect this mechanism to be operative in imperfectly competitive markets where
the fraction of unemployed buyers is equal to the aggregate unemployment rate. As long
as employed workers search more when the value of their time is lower, we would also
expect the mechanism to be operative in imperfectly competitive markets where the fraction
of unemployed buyers is di¤erent from the aggregate unemployment rate. Indeed, when
aggregate unemployment is higher, wages are lower, the value of employed workers’time is
lower and search intensity should increase even in markets visited exclusively by employed
buyers. In contrast, we would not expect the mechanism to be at work in pure monopolies
or in perfectly competitive markets.

                                               31
  .04




                                                                              .21
                                                                    10




                                                                                                                                         10
  .02




                                                                    8



                                                                              .2




                                                                                                                                         8
  0




                                                                    6



                                                                              .19




                                                                                                                                         6
  -.02
  -.04




                                                                    4



                                                                              .18




                                                                                                                                         4
    1985q1    1990q1    1995q1   2000q1   2005q1   2010q1      2015q1          2004q1     2005q3            2007q1   2008q3         2010q1
                                                                                                               t
                   CPI                       Employment rate
                   Unemployment rate                                                    Standard deviation prices    Unemployment rate



 (a) Unemployment, cyclical employment and CPI                                      (b) Unemployment and price dispersion


                       Figure 3: Labor market variables, price level and price dispersion

         Since it is di¢ cult to indentify markets that are perfectly competitive, imperfectly com-
petitive and pure monopolies in the data, we shall look for empirical evidence of the mech-
anism linking unemployment, search and competition at the aggregate level. Indeed, if the
mechanism is at work in the aggregate economy, consumer prices should be lower when the
unemployment rate is higher. Naturally, the predicted relationship between prices and un-
employment may be obscured by other variables (e.g., productivity, money supply, etc. . . )
that change at the same time as the unemployment rate. However, if changes in these other
variables are not too large, we should still see a negative correlation between the price level
and the unemployment rate. Figure 3(a) plots the cyclical component of the Consumer Price
Index (CPI), the unemployment rate and the employment rate over the period 1987-2011.
Clearly, the cyclical component of the CPI moves in the opposite direction of the unemploy-
ment rate, and in the same direction as the employment rate. These comovements are rather
strong during the last 15 years and, in particular, during the Great Recession, a fact that is
quite remarkable considering that the Federal Reserve Bank has followed a very expansive
monetary policy since 2008.

         There is a second testable implication of the mechanism linking unemployment, search
and competition. Indeed, if the mechanism is at work in the aggregate economy, the ratio
between the highest and the lowest price for identical goods should increase with unem-
ployment, as unemployed buyers search more and induce some sellers to move their prices
closer to the opportunity cost of production. Moreover, for our calibrated parameters, the
standard deviation of prices for identical goods should increase with unemployment. Again,
one should not expect the prediction to hold exactly in the data because the economy is
likely to be subject to many other changes besides changes in unemployment. However, if

                                                                         32
these changes are relatively small, we should still see a positive correlation between price
dispersion and the unemployment rate. Figure 3(b) plots the average standard deviation of
prices for identical goods in KNCDP and the unemployment rate over the period 2004-2009,
which is the period covered by KNCDP. In the period preceding the Great Recession, the
unemployment rate slowly declined and so did price dispersion. Between 2008 and 2009,
the unemployment rate rapidly rose from 4.5 to 10% and the standard deviation of prices
rapidly increased by 15%.

    The second key mechanism in our theory is the one linking entry and labor demand: when
expected revenues are higher, new …rms want to enter the product market, established …rms
want to scale-up their presence in the product market and, since both activities require some
labor input, labor demand increases. The mechanism should be at work in any sector where
the extent of a …rm’s access to buyers depends on labor input. For example, the mechanism
should be at work in the retail sector, where …rms can reach new buyers by opening new
outlets, all requiring some labor input. Similarly, the mechanism should be at work in
the manufacturing sector, where …rms can reach new buyers by introducing new product
lines, all requiring some labor to be managed and run. For the economy as a whole, the
mechanism appears to be empirically important. For example, Bilbiie, Ghironi and Melitz
(2012) show that the introduction of new products and the entry of new …rms account for a
sizeable fraction of yearly manufacturing output in the US and that this fraction is strongly
procyclical and, hence, positively correlated with employment. Similarly, Hall (2013) shows
that advertisement expenditures (which presumably measure an e¤ort to reach new buyers)
are procyclical.


5     Expectation Shocks
When calibrated to the US economy, the model features multiple rational expectation equi-
libria. This suggests that observed ‡uctuations in the US labor market may be caused
not only by changes in preferences, technologies and other fundamentals, but also by non-
fundamental, self-ful…lling changes to the agents’expectations about future unemployment.
In this section, we explore the qualitative and quantitative e¤ects of an expectation shock. In
Section 5.1, we develop a version of the model in which the agents’expectations about long-
run unemployment follow a simple 2-state Markov switching process. In Section 5.2, we use
the augmented model to measure the e¤ect of a negative shock to the agents’expectations
about long-run unemployment. We …nd that, in response to the shock, the unemployment
rate almost doubles, the tightness of the labor market falls by approximately 70%, the eq-
uity value of …rms declines by almost 30% and that these changes take place without any


                                              33
concurrent decline in the real productivity of labor. We also …nd that the decline in the
equity value of …rms leads the rise in unemployment.


5.1    Modeling Expectation Shocks
We consider a version of the model in which the expectations of the agents about long-run
unemployment follow a 2-state Markov process. In the optimistic state, , agents expect the
economy to converge to the steady state with the lowest unemployment rate (conditional on
remaining in the optimistic state). In the pessimistic state, , agents expect the economy
to converge to the steady state with the intermediate unemployment rate (conditional on
remaining in the pessimistic state). The agents’ expectations switch from optimistic to
pessimistic at the Poisson rate        ,   in which case the value of a worker to a …rm jumps by
 ( ). Similarly, the agents’expectations switch from pessimistic to optimistic at the
Poisson rate    ,   in which case the value of a worker to a …rm jumps by  ( ).

   In the optimistic state, the evolution of the economy is described by the following pair
of di¤erential equations
                                      = ¬ ( ( )) + (1 ¬  )                           (23)

                ( + )  = (1 ¬ ) [ ( ) +  ¬  ] +  +            (   )     (24)

The …rst di¤erential equation describes the evolution of unemployment. The second di¤er-
ential equation describes the evolution of the value of a worker to a …rm. The equation
states that the annuitized value of a worker is equal to the sum of three terms. The …rst
term is the ‡ow of revenues generated by the …rm-worker pair and accruing to the …rm. The
second term is the change in the value of a worker conditional on the economy remaining
in the optimistic state. The last term is the rate at which the economy switches to the
pessimistic state,     ,   times the change in the value of a worker conditional on the economy
switching states,  (   ). We denote as f1  2  3 g the steady states associated with
                               
the optimistic state and with 1 the stable manifold associated with the steady state with
the lowest unemployment rate (see Figure 4).

   In the pessimistic state, the evolution of the economy us described by the following pair
of di¤erential equations
                                      = ¬ ( ( )) + (1 ¬  )                           (25)

                ( + )  = (1 ¬ ) [ ( ) +  ¬  ] +  +            (   )     (26)

The …rst di¤erential equation describes the evolution of unemployment, which is the same as
in the optimistic state. The second di¤erential equation describes the evolution of the value
of a worker to a …rm. The …rst two terms in this equation are the same as in the optimistic

                                                    34
                        J
                                  ů=0
                            B
                                   E1B
                            G                                       JBs1
                                 E1
                                  G
                                                                JGs 1


                                                                                 B




                                                                                 G




                                             E2G        E2B
                                                              E3B
                                   JBs3
                                                                           E3G   ů=0

                                                                                     u




                                 Figure 4: Expectation Shocks

state. The last term is the rate at which the economy switches to the optimistic state,
  ,   times the change in the value of a worker conditional on the economy switching states,
 (   ). We denote as f1  2  3 g the steady states associated with the pessimistic
                
state and with 2 the basin of attraction of the intermediate steady state (see Figure 4).

   The expectations of the agents must be rational. First, when the economy switches from
the optimistic to the pessimistic state, the value of a worker to a …rm must fall in the basin
               
of attraction 2 of the intermediate steady state 2 . This condition guarantees that, if the
economy remains in the pessimistic state forever after, it will converge to 2 . Second, when
the economy switches from the pessimistic to the optimistic state, the value of a worker to
                                        
a …rm must land on the stable manifold 1 associated with the low unemployment steady
state 1 . This condition guarantees that, if the economy remains in the optimistic state
forever after, it will converge to 1 . Finally, the initial value of a worker to a …rm must be
on the stable manifold associated with 1 if the initial state of the economy is optimistic,
and it must belong to the basin of attraction of 2 if the initial state of the economy is
pessimistic.

   We are now in the position to formally de…ne an equilibrium. Let  denote a history of
realizations of the 2-state Markov process for the agents’expectations and let  () the -th
time at which the state of the process switches in history . Then:


                                                   35
De…nition 3. A Rational Expectation Equilibrium is a history-dependent path f ()  ()g
such that, for every , the following conditions are satis…ed: (i) For all  2 [  +1 ) with
 = , f   g satis…es (23)-(24); (ii) For all  2 [  +1 ) with  = , f   g satis…es
                                                                           
(25)-(26); (iii) For any  2 [ ] and any  2 1 (),  +  ( ) 2 2 (). For any
                                                                     
 2 [ ] and any  2 2 (),  +  ( ) 2 1 (); (iv) 0 2 1 (0 ) if 0 = , and
      
0 2 2 (0 ) if 0 = .
       Naturally, we could have speci…ed any number of di¤erent stochastic processes for the
agents’ expectations about future unemployment. However, the one that we chose is the
most natural and, arguably, the only one that has the potential to be empirically relevant.
Indeed, shocks to the agents’ expectations about the path that the economy will follow
while converging to a given steady state are unlikely to be quantitatively important, as the
transitional dynamics of the model are very fast. Hence, it is natural to focus on shocks
to the agents’ expectations about the steady state that the economy will reach. Second,
notice that, according to our benchmark calibration, the high-unemployment steady state
features no economic activity. For other reasonable calibration, the high-unemployment
steady state features some economic activity, but still displays an unemployment rate much
greater than anything observed in the history of the US economy. Hence, it is natural to
focus on a stochastic process where the agent’s expect to either reach the steady state with
the lowest unemployment rate or the one with the intermediate unemployment rate. Finally,
the assumption that the stochastic process is Markovian is made, as usual, for the sake of
simplicity.
       The stochastic process for the agents’ expectations is fully characterized by the four
variables f               g.    The arrival rates         and      determine the average
duration of the optimistic state and of the pessimistic state. The jump  determines the
path that the economy will follow in reaching the pessimistic steady state. The jump 
                                                                                          
is actually not a free variable because there is only one path (i.e. the stable manifold 1 )
                                                                                   
that leads to the optimistic steady state and, hence,  ( ) must be equal to 1 () ¬ .
Armed with a version of the model that allows for shocks to technology, preferences and
expectations, one could estimate the values for               ,      and  using time-series data
on unemployment, vacancies, productivity and the stock market. This estimation would be
well beyond the scope of this paper. Here we simply take the view that negative expectation
shocks are rather rare and persistent events associated with a large decline in the value of
…rms. In particular, we choose              so that a negative expectation shock occurs on average
once every 50 years, we choose             so that the shock lasts on average 15 years and we choose
 so that, when the shock hits the economy, the value of the …rms falls by 20%.16
  16
       The response of the economy to a negative expectation shock is not very sensitive to the choice of these

                                                       36
5.2     Response to a Negative Expectation Shock
Figure 5 reports the behavior of unemployment, labor market tightness, labor productivity
and the value of the …rm when the economy is at the optimistic steady state and the agents’
expectation about future unemployment become pessimistic. Panel (a) plots the response of
the unemployment rate, measured as a percentage deviation from its value at the optimistic
steady state. The unemployment rate increases by 120% during the …rst 6 quarters after
the economy is hit by the negative shock. After reaching its peak, the unemployment rate
begins a slow decline towards the pessimistic steady-state, where its value is approximately
80% higher than at the optimistic steady state. This illustrates the …rst key feature of a
negative expectation shock: it causes an increase in unemployment that is very large relative
to, say, the one caused by a productivity shock (see, e.g., Shimer 2005).

   Panel (b) plots the response of the stock market value of an active …rm, measured as a
percentage deviation from its value at the optimistic steady state. The value of an active
…rm in the stock market,  , is equal to the value of the …rm, , net of the repayment of
…rm’s debt, . Under the assumption that  is a constant fraction  = 13 of the value of
the …rm at the optimistic steady state, 1 , this implies that  is equal to  ¬ 1 .17 As
one can see from panel (b), when the economy is hit by the negative shock, the stock market
value of a …rm falls instantly by 30%. Then, the stock market value of a …rm begins a slow
and modest rise towards the pessimistic steady-state, where its value is approximately 25%
lower than at the optimistic steady state. Figure 6 is a scatter plot of unemployment and the
stock market value of a …rm. In this picture, one can clearly see the second key feature of a
negative expectation shock: the decline in the stock market takes place before the increase
in unemployment, as the value responds instantaneously to the change in expectations about
future unemployment, revenues and pro…ts, while the expected increase in unemployment
takes some time to materialize.

   Panel (c) plots the response of labor market tightness (i.e. the vacancy-to-unemployment
ratio), measured as a percentage deviation from its value at the optimistic steady state.
When the economy is hit by a negative shock, the tightness of the labor market falls by
approximately 70%. Then, it begins a slow increase towards the pessimistic steady state,
where its value is 60% lower than at the optimistic steady state. The tightness of the labor
market behaves exactly like the value of an active …rm and, hence, its decline precedes the
particular calibration targets. Indeed, the behavior of the model is driven by changes in the value of an
additional worker to a …rm. Since worker-…rm relationships are on average relatively short (i.e. they last
approximately 4 years), it does not matter much whether a switch in expectations occurs on average once
every 15, 20 or 50 years.
  17
     Over the period 1987-2007, the average ratio of credit market debt to net worth in the non-…nancial
corporate business sector was approximately 50 percent, i.e. (1 ¬ ) = 12 which implies  = 13.

                                                   37
                                                                               0.1
                          Unemployment: Data
 1.5                      Unemployment: Model                                     0
                                                                              −0.1
                                                                              −0.2
  1
                                                                              −0.3
                                                                              −0.4
 0.5
                                                                              −0.5
                                                                              −0.6                            Stock Market: Data
                                                                                                              Stock Market: Model
  0
 2007       2008    2009    2010                             2011      2012      2007      2008     2009    2010        2011    2012
                       Quarter                                                                         Quarter
  (a) Unemployment: deviation from 2007:Q1                                            (b) Stock market: deviation from trend

  0                                                                            0.04
                                                        Tightness: Data
                                                        Tightness: Model
                                                                               0.02
−0.2
                                                                                      0

−0.4
                                                                              −0.02


−0.6                                                                          −0.04

                                                                                                           Labor Productivity: Data
                                                                              −0.06
                                                                                                           Labor Productivity: Model
−0.8
  2007      2008    2009    2010                             2011      2012       2007      2008     2009    2010        2011     2012
                       Quarter                                                                          Quarter
       (c) Tightness: deviation from 2007:Q1                                     (d) Labor productivity: deviation from trend


                    Figure 5: Response to a negative expectation shock


                                                       0.1
                                                                                                   Data
                                                        0                                          Model
                          Deviation of stock market




                                                      −0.1

                                                      −0.2

                                                      −0.3

                                                      −0.4

                                                      −0.5

                                                         0              0.5             1              1.5
                                                                    Deviation of unemployment



                      Figure 6: Unemployment rate and stock market


                                                                            38
increase in unemployment. This …nding is not surprising as the tightness of the labor market
is determined by the value of an active …rm through the free entry condition.
   Panel (d) plots the response of real labor productivity, measured as a percentage deviation
from its value at the optimistic steady state. We de…ne real labor productivity as the ratio
between nominal labor productivity and a consumer price index. Nominal labor productivity
is given by the revenues generated by each employed worker  () +  . The consumer
price index is given by   () +   (), where  and  are the quantities
of the BJ and AD goods sold at the optimistic steady state and  () and  () are
the average prices at which the BJ and AD goods are sold when the unemployment rate
is . As one can see from panel (d), the response of real labor productivity to a negative
expectation shock is very small compared to the response of the other variables. This …nding
is surprising but easy to understand. Nominal labor productivity (the seller’s revenues)
declines substantially in response to the negative expectation shock. However, the decline in
nominal labor productivity takes place mostly because of a decline in prices and not because
of a decline in quantities. Therefore, when we de‡ate nominal labor productivity, we …nd
that real labor productivity does not change much and, indeed, the small change in real
labor productivity is positive. This is the third key feature of a negative expectation shock:
the large increase in unemployment and the large decline in the value of a …rm take place
while real labor productivity remains approximately constant.
   During the Great Recession and its aftermath, the US economy displayed the same
features that characterize the response to a negative expectation shock. First, the unem-
ployment rate more than doubled between the last quarter of 2007 and the second quarter
of 2009 and, since then, it has remained at a level substantially higher than before the be-
ginning of the recession. Second, the stock market fell 40% below trend during 2008 and
its decline preceded the bulk of the increase in the unemployment rate. Third, real labor
productivity only fell below trend by a few percentage points during the recession and was
already back on trend by the second quarter of 2009, a time when the unemployment rate
was still twice as high as before the recession. Fourth, as discussed in Section 4, prices fell
and price dispersion increased during the Great Recession. Figure 6 overlays the behavior
of the US economy from 2007 to 2012 and the response of the model economy to a negative
expectation shock. From this …gure, it is clear that the behavior of the US economy during
this period is not only qualitatively but also quantitatively rather similar to the response to
a negative expectation shock.
   The above observations suggest the possibility that the fundamental shocks to the …-
nancial and housing sectors that have ushered in and, presumably, started the Great Re-
cession may have a¤ected the economy not only directly, but also indirectly by triggering

                                              39
a non-fundamental change in the agents’expectations about long-run unemployment. This
hypothesis would explain why labor market variables responded so strongly to fundamental
shocks that had a rather small impact on labor productivity. Moreover, this hypothesis
would explain why the labor market is still sluggish several years after any e¤ect of the
fundamental shocks on labor productivity has disappeared.


6    Conclusions
The paper advances a novel theory of self-ful…lling unemployment ‡uctuations. According
to our theory, when unemployment is higher, …rms’revenues are lower because unemployed
buyers spend less income and devote more time looking for low prices than employed buyers.
Conversely, when revenues are lower, new …rms are less inclined to enter the product market
and existing …rms are less inclined to expand their presence in the product market and, hence,
labor demand is lower and fewer vacancies are created. In the theoretical part of the paper,
we prove that the feedback loop between unemployment, prices and demand can generate
multiple rational expectations equilibria if the di¤erences between employed and unemployed
buyers in either expenditures or shopping time are su¢ ciently large. In the empirical part of
the paper, we show that the observed di¤erences in the shopping behavior of employed and
unemployed buyers are indeed strong enough to generate multiplicity. Surprisingly, we …nd
that the …rms’revenues are very sensitive to the unemployment rate mainly because of the
di¤erence in the amount of time spent shopping by employed and unemployed buyers and
not so much because of the di¤erence in their expenditures. In the last part of the paper,
we show that, due to the presence of multiple equilibria, the economy may ‡uctuate not
only because of shocks to technology, preferences or other fundamentals, but also because of
self-ful…lling shocks to the agents’expectations about future unemployment. We …nd that
the response of the economy to a negative expectation shock about long-run unemployment
has three distinctive features: (i) a large and persistent increase in unemployment, (ii) a
large decline in the equity value of …rms, which precedes the increase in unemployment, and
(iii) relatively small ‡uctuations in the real productivity of labor.




                                               40
                                             Appendix
A      Proof of Lemma 1
Let  denote an arbitrary distribution of prices for the BJ good. Let F denote the support
of the distribution  and let () denote the measure of prices equal to  in the distribution
 . Given  , the expected revenues for a seller are given by () +  , where  denotes the
price of the BJ good posted by the seller, () denotes the revenues from sales in the BJ
market net of the opportunity cost of producing the BJ good, and  are the revenues from
sales in the AD market plus the opprtunity cost of producing the BJ good. Formally, the
seller’s net revenues in the BJ market are
                       (1 +   )            2      ( ) [ () ¬ ()2]        ( ¬ )
        ()   = ( )                1¬
                                                        1+                       
                                                                                                 (A1)
                     (1 ¬ )(1 +        )           2       ( ) [ () ¬ ()2]   ( ¬ )
               + ( )                         1¬                                              ,
                                                                 1+                 

Note that (A1) assumes that a buyer meeting two sellers charging the price  purchases from
either seller with probability 1/2. However, Lemma 1 holds for any other tie-breaking rule.

    A seller chooses the price  for the BJ good so as to maximize its expected revenues
() +  , or, equivalently, to maximize its net revenues in the BJ market, (). Therefore,
the price distribution  is consistent with the seller’s optimal pricing strategy if and only if

                                    (0 ) =  for all 0 2 F
                                                                                                 (A2)
                                            max ().

Claim 1. For any    0.
Proof. For a seller posting the reservation price , net revenues are

                                   (1 +  ) 1 ¬   ( ¬ )
                     ()       ( )                           +
                                            1+       
                                  (1 ¬ )(1 +  ) 1 ¬  ( ¬ )
                            + ( )                                 0.
                                                 1+       

As      () and ()  0, it follows that   0.

Claim 2. If  satis…es (A2), then  is continuous.
Proof. Suppose that there is a price 0 such that (0 )  0. For a seller posting the price 0 ,




                                                         41
net revenues are
                           (1 +        )         2       ( ) [ (0 ) ¬ (0 )2]         (0 ¬ )
         (0 )    = ( )                     1¬
                                                                1+                           0
                           (1 ¬ )(1 +        )            2       ( ) [ (0 ) ¬ (0 )2]    (0 ¬ )
                   + ( )                           1¬                                                     .
                                                                         1+                     0

For a seller posting the price 0 ¬ , with  0, net revenues are

         (0 ¬ )
                 (1 +   )        2        ( ) [ (0 ¬ ) ¬ (0 ¬ )2]                  (0 ¬ ¬ )
     =     ( )                1¬
                                                     1+                                    0 ¬
                  (1 ¬ )(1 +      )          2       ( ) [ (0 ¬ ) ¬ (0 ¬ )2]             (0 ¬ ¬ )
         + ( )                           1¬
                                                                 1+                             0 ¬
                 (1 +   )        2        ( ) [ (0 ) ¬ (0 )]              (0 ¬ ¬ )
          ( )                1¬
                                               1+                                0 ¬
                  (1 ¬ )(1 +      )          2       ( ) [ (0 ) ¬ (0 )]         (0 ¬ ¬ )
         + ( )                           1¬                                                       ,
                                                           1+                         0 ¬

where the above inequality follows from  (0 ¬ ) ¬ (0 ¬ )2                             (0 ¬ ) and  (0 ¬ ) 
 (0 ) ¬ (0 )/2 Since 0 2 F, (A2) implies (0 ) =   0 and, hence, 0  . In turn,
if 0  , there exists an       small enough that (0 )  (0 ¬ ). As (0 ¬ )                              and
(0 )  (0 ¬ ), (0 )   , which contradicts the hypothesis that  satis…es (A2).

Claim 3. If  satis…es (4), then  = .
Proof. Suppose that   . For a seller posting the price , net revenues are

                                         (1 +     )                2  ( )       ( ¬ )
                    ()      = ( )                         1¬
                                                                     1+             
                                        (1 ¬ )(1 +         )            2  ( )      ( ¬ )
                              + ( )                                  1¬                         .
                                                                          1+           

For a seller posting the price , net revenues are

                                         (1 +     )                2  ( )       ( ¬ )
                    ()      = ( )                         1¬
                                                                     1+             
                                        (1 ¬ )(1 +         )            2  ( )      ( ¬ )
                              + ( )                                  1¬                         .
                                                                          1+           

Clearly ()  ()            , which contradicts the hypothesis that  satis…es (A2). Next,
suppose that   . In this case, the net revenues for a seller posting the price  are () = 0.
The net revenues for a seller posting the price  are ()  0. Hence ()  ()                                ,
which contradicts the hypothesis that  satis…es (A2). Having ruled out    and   , it
follows that  = .


                                                            42
Claim 4. If  satis…es (A2), then F is connected.
Proof. Suppose that F is not connected, i.e. there exist 0 , 1 2 F such that 0  1 and
 (0 ) =  (1 ). For a seller posting the price 0 , net revenues are

                                  (1 +      )         2     ( ) (0 )          (0 ¬ )
               (0 )     = ( )                    1¬
                                                             1+                     0
                                  (1 ¬ )(1 +      )            2       ( ) (0 )   (0 ¬ )
                          + ( )                         1¬                                       .
                                                                        1+             0

For a seller posting the price 1 , net revenues are

                                  (1 +      )         2     ( ) (0 )          (1 ¬ )
               (1 )     = ( )                    1¬
                                                             1+                     1
                                  (1 ¬ )(1 +      )            2       ( ) (0 )   (1 ¬ )
                          + ( )                         1¬                                       .
                                                                        1+             1

Clearly (0 )  (1 )      , which contradicts the hypothesis that  satis…es (A2).

Claim 5.  satis…es (A2) if and only if

                                                         2  ( )            ( ¬ )
               () =       (1 +    )   1¬ 1¬                                      
                                                          1+               ( ¬ )
                                                                     2  ( )      ( ¬ )           (A3)
                           +(1 ¬ )(1 +       )   1¬ 1¬                                   
                                                                      1+         ( ¬ )
                          2 ( ) f        + (1 ¬ )        g


Proof. First, suppose  satis…es (A2). Claim 3 implies that () =  and claim 4 implies
that () =  for all  2 [ ], with  2 ( ). Thus, () = () for all  2 [ ]. The
solution to the equation () = () with respect to  () is (A3). Conversely, suppose that
 is given by (A3) for all  2 [ ], with  =  and  such that  () = 0. Given  , it is easy
to verify that () =   0 for all  2 [ ] ()   for all  2
                                                                    [ ], where                  ()
Hence,  satis…es (A2).


B      Continuous Time Limit
Let     2 (0 1] denote the lenght of a period. A worker has preferences described by the
                  P
utility function 1  =0 
                         ¬ 
                              ( ) ( )1¬ , where ( ) denotes consumption of the BJ
good and ( ) denotes consumption of the AD good in period . In period , a worker has
an income of      units of the AD good if he is unemployed and an income of  (( ))
units of the AD good if he is employed, where ( ) denotes the unemployment rate. A …rm
                                                 P
has preferences described by the utility function 1=0 
                                                        ¬  
                                                             ( ) ¬  ( ) where ( )
denotes consumption of the AD good and ( ) denotes the number of vacancies created

                                                        43
in the MP market. In period , every worker employed by the …rm is able to produce any
combination of AD and BJ goods such that  +  =  .

   Consider the economy at some arbitrary date  =  . In the MP market, unemployed
workers, ( ¬       ), and vacant jobs, (), create  (( ¬               ) ())     matches. Hence, an
unemployed worker meets a vacant job with probability ( ())                     and a vacant job meets an
unemployed worker with probability ( ()) , where () = ()(¬ ). In the MP market,
existing …rm-worker matches are destroyed with an exogenous probability 1¬¬                                 . In the BJ
market, an unemployed buyer searches for a seller once with probability 1¬                           and twice with
probability   .   Similarly, an employed buyer searches once with probability 1 ¬                              and twice
with probability      .   Buyer’s searches, (()) = ()(1 +      ) + (1 ¬ ())(1 +               ),   and sellers,
(()) = 1 ¬ (), create  ((()) (())) matches. Hence, a buyer’s search matches with
a seller with probability ( ()) and a seller matches with a buyer with probability ( ()),
where () = ()().

   It is straightforward to verify that the seller’s net revenues in the BJ market are

                                 (1 +  )    2        ( (())) ( ¬ )
    (())    = ( (()))                 1¬                             
                                  (())              1+           
                                                                                                                     (B1)
                           (1 ¬ ())(1 +        )         2    ( (())) ( ¬ )
               + ( (()))                             1¬                            (())
                                 (())                         1+           

where
                              (()) =      + [ (()) +          ¬  ]                                      (B2)

Similarly, it is straightforward to verify that the tightness () of the MP market is

                                               ¬1           
                                       () =          min     1         .                                           (B3)
                                                            

   The Bellman Equation for the value of an additional worker to a …rm is

               ()        = (1 ¬ ) ( (() ) +         ¬  ) + ¬(        + )
                                                                                        ( +     )
                                                                                                                     (B4)
                           = (1 ¬ ) ( (()) +  ¬  )       + ¬(   + )
                                                                               ( +         )

where the second line makes use of the fact that  (()) =  (()) and  (()) =
 (()), with  () and  () de…ned as in (6) and (7). The law of motion for unemploy-
ment is
                   ()    = ( ¬    )(1 ¬ ( (() )) ) + (1 ¬ ())(1 ¬ ¬                     )
                                                                                                                     (B5)
                           = ( ¬    )(1 ¬ ( ( )) ) + (1 ¬ ())(1 ¬ ¬               )
where the second line makes use of the fact that                 () = (), with () de…ned as in
(8). The limit for          ! 0 of the di¤erence equation (B4) is the di¤erential equation (12).
Similarly, the limit for         ! 0 of the di¤erence equation (B5) is the di¤erential equation

                                                      44
(13).


C         Proof of Theorem 1
Proof of parts (i)-(ii): Given  2 [ ] and                                      , the seller’s net revenues in the BJ
market are
                                               ( ¬ )          (1 +  )      2  (1 ¬ )
                      (  ) =                                         1¬               
                                                                  ()      1 +  ()
                                                (1 ¬ )(1 +           )             2  (1 ¬ )
                                          +                                   1¬                  (  ) 
                                                      ()                         1 +  ()

where
                                          (  ) =  + [ (  ) +  ¬  ] .

    The derivative of  (  ) with respect to  has the same sign as

                         (1 +       )(1 +       )                2  (1 ¬ )                           2  (1 ¬ )
     (  )   =                                          1¬                            ¬ 1 ¬                            ()
                                  ()2                          1 +  ()                            1 +  ()
                              1 +  (1 +  )         (1 +  )(1 ¬ )   
                         +2         2
                                                   +                      () 
                               ()    () 1 +            ()       1+ 

The derivative of                with respect to  is

                         (  )            1+                            4(1 ¬ )             (  )
                                      =¬             1+                  ¬                  1+                                (C1)
                                            ()2                             ()                 

where
   (  )             ( ¬ )        (1 ¬ )(1 +             )               2  (1 ¬ )          (  )
              =                                                       1¬                                          +1           (C2)
                                           ()                             1 +  ()               

After substituting (C2) into (C1), we obtain

                                              1+             4(1 ¬ ) 
                                                     1 +¬ ¬
                            (  )         ()2             ()
                                       =                                                                                       (C3)
                                         1¬          2(1 ¬ )      ( ¬ )
                                         1¬        1+ ¬
                                            ()             ()         


    Letting () denote the right-hand side of (C3), we can write                                        (  )   as

                                                (  )   =     (  )     + () ( ¬  ) .                              (C4)

For any  2 [ ],                (  )   is …nite and () is strictly negative. Therefore, there exists a
  ()    such that               (  )    0 for all  2 [    ()) and             (  )    0 for all     ()


                                                                           45
Since  (  ) has the same sign as                    (  )   this completes the proof of part (i). The
proof of part (ii) is similar and it is omitted for the sake of brevity.
Proof of part (iii): Suppose  0 ()  0 for some  2 [ ] In this case, there exist 0 and
1 such that   0  1   and 0  1 , where 0                           (1 ¬ )( (0 ) +  ¬  )( + ) and
1     (1 ¬ )( (1 ) +  ¬  )( + ). In what follows, we will …nd a vacancy cost  and a
matching function  such that (0  0 ) and (1  1 ) are steady states.
     De…ne 0 as (1¬0 ) 0 and 1 as (1¬1 ) 1 . From the inequalities   0  1  , it
follows that 0  1  0  1. Choose the vacancy cost  to be equal to 1 ¬ , where  0 and
  minf(0 ¬ 1 )(0 ¬ 1 ) 1 g. Such a choice for                         is always possible because 0  1 
                                                                                                              ¬1
0  1 and 1  0. Choose the inverse of the job-…nding probability, ()                                         (), to be
such that (0) = 0 and
                     8
                     > 1 + 2 0 ,                                                           if  2 [0 1 ]
                     >
                     >
                     <
                       1 + 2 0 1 + 2 1 ( ¬ 1 ),                                          if  2 [1  0 ]
            0 () =                                                                                                     (C5)
                     >
                     >                                                   ( ¬ 0 )
                     >
                     : 1 + 2 0 1 + 2 1 (0 ¬ 1 ) +                                  , if  2 [0  1],
                                                                     (1 ¬ 0 )(1 ¬ )

where the parameters         0   and   1   are

                                                                1 ¬ 
                                                        0   =          ,
                                                                 1
                                                    0 0 ¬  1  1 1 + 2 0  1
                                       1   =                       ¬            .
                                                   (0 ¬ 1 )2      0 ¬ 1
     First, notice that () is strictly increasing and strictly convex for all  2 [0 1]. In fact,
  1 implies     0    0 and   1 ¬ 0 (0 ¬ 1 )(0 ¬ 1 ) implies                1    0. In turn,          0    0 and
 1    0 imply that 0 () is strictly positive and strictly increasing for all  2 [0 1]. Second,
notice that () is such that (0) = 0 and (1) = 1. Third, () is such that
                                            R 1                            1  1
                   (1 )    = (0) +          0
                                                    (1 + 2 0 ) =                
                                                                             
                                                                                                                         (C6)
                                               R 0                         0  0
                   (2 )    = (1 ) + 1 (1 + 2 0 1 + 2 1 ( ¬ 1 )) =        .
                                                                             

     From the properties of (), it follows that the job-…nding probability function ( ) is
                                                                                                     0
strictly increasing, strictly concave and such that (0) = 0, (1) = 1 and                                 (0) = 1. In turn,
from the properties of ( ), it follows that the job-…lling probability function ( )                                      ( )=
is strictly decreasing and such that (0) = 1 and (1) = 0. Therefore, the function ()
de…ned in (C5) implies a matching process ( ), ( ),  ( ) = u () that satis…es all
of the regularity assumptions made in Section 2. Moreover, since                               1 ,  =  1 ¬             0
Therefore, the vacancy cost  the assumptions made in Section 2.

                                                                46
    Now, notice that both (0  0 ) and (1  1 ) satisfy the stationarity conditions (14)-(15)
and, hence, both (0  0 ) and (1  1 ) are steady states. In fact, the de…nition of 0 implies
that
                                        (1 ¬ ) ( (0 ) +  ¬  )
                                0 =                                
                                                   +
and the …rst line in (C6) implies that

                            0                        ((0 ))   
                                  =         ()                  =
                           (0 )   0                 (0 )     0

                                                                  ¬1    
                                            ()        0 =
                                                                        0

                                            ()        0 =                   .
                                                               + ( (0 ))

Similarly, the de…nition of 1 and the second line in (C6) imply that

                                        (1 ¬ ) ( (1 ) +  ¬  )
                                1 =                                
                                                   +

                                1 =                   
                                         + ( (1 ))

    Now, suppose  0 ()     0 for all  2 [ ] On the way to a contradiction, suppose that
there exist two steady states (0  0 ) and (1  1 ). From the stationarity condition (15) and
the fact that  0 ()   0 for all  2 [ ] it follows that

                    (1 ¬ ) ( (0 ) +  ¬  )        (1 ¬ ) ( (0 ) +  ¬  )
             0 =                                                                  = 1         (C7)
                               +                                  +

From the stationarity condition (14), it follows that

                            0 =                                       = 1                    (C8)
                                   + ( (0 ))              + ( (1 ))

Since 0    1 , ( ) is increasing in    and () is increasing in , ( (0 ))          ( (1 )), which
contradicts the inequality in (C8).


D      Global Dynamics
In this appendix, we provide a complete characterization of the set of rational expectations
equilibria of the model. We carry out the analysis under the assumption that the dynamical
system (12)-(13) admits exactly three steady states, 1 , 2 and 3 . It is straightforward to
verify that the steady state with the lowest unemployment rate, 1 , is a saddle. Similarly,
the steady state with the highest unemployment rate, 3 , is a saddle. In contrast, the

                                                  47
intermediate steady state, 2 , is a sink or a source depending on whether the unemployment
rate is greater or smaller than ( + ). Here, we assume that 2 is a sink, as this is the
relevant case for most reasonable parametrizations of the model. Moreover, for the sake of
exposition, we assume that the -nullcline is quasi-convex. When the -nullcline is not quasi-
convex, the analysis is slightly di¤erent, but the qualitative features of the set of rational
expectations equilibria are unchanged.
       In Figure D1, we plot the -nullcline, the -nullcline and the direction of motion of the
solutions to the dynamical system (12)-(13) in the six regions de…ned by the intersections of
the two nullclines. Using the direction of motion of the solutions to (12)-(13) and using the
fact that any solution to (12)-(13) must cross the -nullcline vertically and the -nullcline
horizontally, we can characterize the shape of the stable manifold 1 associated with the
steady state 1 and of the stable manifold 3 associated with the steady state 3 . In
particular, it is straightforward to verify that the left backward extension of the stable
manifold 1 to the left of 1 must go through region III and exit the domain at . The
backward extension of 1 to the right of 1 must go through region II and then it may
either: (i) exit the domain at ; (ii) go through regions V and III and exit the domain at ;
(iii) circle around the regions V, III, IV and II without ever exiting the domain.18 Similarly,
the backward extension of the stable manifold 3 to the right of 3 must go through region
VI and exit the domain at . The backward extension of 3 to the left of 3 goes through
region V and then it may either: (i) exit the domain at ; (ii) go through regions III, IV and
II and exit the domain at ; (iii) circle around the regions III, IV, II and V without ever
exiting the domain. After eliminating incompatible cases, the above classi…cation leaves us
with …ve possible scenarios.

       In the main text, we have already analyzed the case in which the right branch of 1
exits at  and the left branch of 3 exits at . Figure D2(a) plots the solution to the
dynamical system (12)-(13) when both the right branch of 1 and the left branch of 3
exit at . Let 1 denote the easternmost point on the stable manifold associated with 1 .
For any initial unemployment 0 2 [ 1 ], there are three types of rational expectations
equilibria. In particular, there are two equilibria along the stable manifold converging to 1
(one starting on the upper branch of 1 and one starting on the lower branch of 1 ), there
is one equilibrium along the stable manifold converging to 3 , and there is a continuum of
equilibria starting between the upper and the lower branches of 1 and converging to either
2 or to a limit cycle around 2 . For any initial unemployment 0 2 (1  ], the only rational
  18
    For the sake of brevity, the analysis abstracts from the knife-edge cases in which the stable manifolds
are either homoclinic— i.e. the backward extension of the stable manifold associated with one saddle steady
state converges to the same steady state— or heteroclinic— i.e. the backward extension of the stable manifold
associated with one saddle steady state converges to the other saddle steady state.

                                                     48
                    J
                                  ů=0
                              I
                                   E1


                                                         II
                                         IV

                                                E2


                                        III                            VI
                                                         V       E3         ů=0

                                                                              u




                               Figure D.1: Direction of Motion

expectations equilibrium is the stable manifold converging to 3 . Figure D2(b) illustrates a
case that is symmetric to the one in Figure D2(a).

   Figure D2(c) plots the solution to the dynamical system (12)-(13) when the right branch
of 1 coils around 2 , while the left branch of 3 exits at . In this case, one can prove
that there exists a repellent limit cycle around 2 (see Boldrin, Kiyotaki and Wright 1993,
Proposition 5). Let 2 denote the limit cycle. Moreover, let 1 and 1 the westernmost
and easternmost points on the stable manifold 1 and let 2 and 2 the westernmost and
easternmost points on the limit cycle 2 . For any initial unemployment 0 2 [ 2 )[(2  1 ],
there are two types of rational expectations equilibria: the stable manifold converging to 1
and the stable manifold converging to 3 . For any initial unemployment 0 2 [2  2 ], there
are two additional types of rational expectations equilibria: the limit cycle and a continuum of
equilibria starting inside the limit cycle and converging to 2 . For any initial unemployment
0 2 (1  ], the only rational expectations equilibrium is the stable manifold converging to
3 . Figure D2(d) illustrates a case that is symmetric to the one in Figure D2(c).




                                               49
J                                                  J
          ů=0                                          ů=0

          E1                                           E1
                                                                            J1s
                             J1s




                 E2                                                  E2
                                                            J3s

    J3s
                                   E3   ů=0                                       E3   ů=0

                                         u                                              u



                (a)                                                 (b)

J                                                  J
          ů=0                                          ů=0

          E1                                           E1
                                                                            J1s

                       J1s




                 J2s
                                                                      J2s
                 E2                                                  E2
                                                              J3s

    J3s
                                   E3   ů=0                                       E3   ů=0

                                         u                                              u



                (c)                                                 (d)


                   Figure D.2: Rational Expectation Equilibria




                                              50
E     Robustness
In Section 4, we showed that a reasonably calibrated version of the model admits multiple
steady states and multiple rational expectations equilibria. In this appendix, we want to un-
derstand whether the existence of multiple steady states and multiple rational expectations
equilibria is robust to alternative choices of calibration targets— especially those describ-
ing the shopping behavior of employed and unemployed buyers— and parameter values—
especially those describing the product market.

    Table E1(a) reports the steady-state unemployment rates as we let the target for the
relative expenditures of unemployed buyers vary between 70 and 90% of the expenditures
of employed buyers (horizontal axis), and the target for the relative time spent shopping
by unemployed buyers vary between 110 and 140% of the time spent shopping by employed
buyers (vertical axis), while keeping the product market parameters ,          and  constant
and recalibrating all the other parameters so as to match their respective empirical targets.
We choose not to recalibrate the product market parameters because they are not precisely
pinned down by the associated empirical targets, in the sense that the calibrated value of
the product market parameters changes quite dramatically in response to relatively small
changes in the value of the other parameters of the model.

    Table E1(a) shows that, for all alternative calibrations, the model admits three steady
states. The unemployment rate at the …rst steady-state is pinned down by the calibration
targets for the workers’transition rates between employment and unemployment and, hence,
does not vary. The unemployment rate at the intermediate steady-state is decreasing in the
relative shopping time of unemployed buyers and increasing in the relative expenditures of
unemployed buyers. These results are intuitive because, whenever we increase the di¤erence
in shopping behavior of unemployed and employed buyers (on either the expenditure or the
shopping time dimension), the seller’s revenues become more sensitive to the unemployment
rate, the -nullcline becomes steeper and the unemployment rate at the intermediate steady
state falls. Note that, for all alternative calibrations, the unemployment rate at the inter-
mediate steady state is between 5.5 and 11%, values that are lower than ( + )             09.
Therefore, the intermediate steady state is always a sink and, in light of Appendix D, the
model admits multiple rational expectations equilibria.

    Since we do not recalibrate the product market parameters ,         and , it is useful to
report the value of the associated calibration targets: the standard deviation of prices, the
ratio of the highest to the lowest price and the relative price paid by unemployed workers
(see Table E1(b)). For most calibration, the extent of price dispersion generated by the
model is broadly consistent with the empirical evidence in Kaplan and Menzio (2013)— once

                                             51
we consider the fact that some of the empirical price dispersion may be due to factors that
are not accounted for in our model (e.g., measurement error, store quality, etc. . . ).

   Table E2(a) reports the steady-state unemployment rates as we let          vary between 0.8
and 1 (vertical axis) and  vary between 10 and 20 (horizontal axis), while keeping          

constant and recalibrating all the other parameters so as to match their respective empirical
targets. For all alternative calibrations, we …nd that the model admits three steady states.
Again, the unemployment rate at the …rst steady state is pinned down by the calibration
targets for the workers’ transition rates and, hence, it does not vary. The unemployment
rate at the second steady state is decreasing in      and . This …nding is intuitive, since
increasing either      or  makes the seller’s revenues more sensitive to unemployment, the
-nullcline steeper and, hence, it lowers the unemployment rate at the second steady state.
Over the entire parameter range, the unemployment rate at the second steady state goes
from a minimum of 8% to a maximum of 14%, values which are all lower than ( + ).
Hence, over the entire parameter range, the second steady state is a sink and the model
admits multiple rational expectations equilibria. Table E2(b) shows that both measures of
price dispersion increase with  and , while the relative price paid by unemployed buyers
hardly changes.

   Finally, Table E3 reports the steady-state unemployment rates as we vary the target for
the elasticity of the UE rate with respect to labor market tightness from 0.45 to 0.75 (ver-
tical axis) and the …rm’s pro…t margin from 5 to 20% (horizontal axis), while keeping the
parameters ,         and  constant and recalibrating all the remaining parameters. We …nd
that, in the region where the elasticity of the UE rate is relatively high or the pro…t margin
is relatively low, the model admits three steady states. In this region, the unemployment
rate associated with the intermediate steady state is decreasing in the elasticity of UE and
increasing in the …rm’s pro…t margin. These …ndings are intuitive because the -nullcline
becomes more curved as we increase the elasticity of the UE rate, and the -nullcline be-
comes steeper as we lower the pro…t margin. It is only in the region where the elasticity
of the UE rate is relatively low and the pro…t margin of the …rm is relatively high that
the model has a unique steady state. Moreover, we …nd that this region shrinks when we
increase the targeted di¤erence in either expenditures or shopping time between employed
and unemployed workers.




                                              52
Table E.1: Robustness: steady-state unemployment rates and price statistics for combina-
tions of targets for expenditure ratio and shopping time ratio of unemployed to employed
                                      Unemployed-employed expenditure ratio
                              0.75             0.8              0.85             0.9

 Panel A: Steady-state      unemployment rates
 Shopping time ratio
         1.1                 5.3, 13.4, 100         5.3, 13.9, 100        5.3, 14.5, 100      5.3, 15.5, 100
         1.2                  5.3, 9.8, 100          5.3, 9.7, 100        5.3, 9.5, 100       5.3, 9.3, 96.9
         1.3                  5.3, 8.0, 100          5.3, 7.7, 100        5.3, 7.4, 100       5.3, 7.1, 94.5
         1.4                  5.3, 6.9, 100          5.3, 6.6, 100        5.3, 6.3, 100       5.3, 6.0, 92.6

 Panel B: Price statistics (see notes)
 Shopping time ratio
         1.1            0.18, 1.56, 0.99         0.19,   1.57,   0.99 0.19, 1.57, 0.99 0.21,      1.58,   0.99
         1.2            0.27, 1.65, 0.99         0.28,   1.66,   0.99 0.3, 1.67, 0.99 0.33,       1.68,   0.99
         1.3             0.4, 1.74, 0.98         0.42,   1.75,   0.98 0.46, 1.77, 0.98 0.51,      1.79,   0.98
         1.4            0.58, 1.82, 0.97         0.62,   1.84,   0.97 0.67, 1.87, 0.97 0.75,      1.89,   0.97


Notes: In Panel B, the numbers in each cell refer to the coe¢ cient of variation of prices, the ratio of the
maximum price to minimum price, and the price paid by unemployed relative to employed.




Table E.2: Robustness: steady-state unemployment rates and price statistics for combina-
tions of and 
                                    Home production technology for BJ goods ()
                              10.00          13.33            16.67              20.00

 Panel A: Steady-state unemployment rates
 Weight on BJ goods ( )
           0.80           5.3, 13.9, 100               5.3, 13.2, 100        5.3, 12.8, 100      5.3, 12.5, 100
           0.87           5.3, 11.9, 100               5.3, 11.3, 100        5.3, 10.9, 100      5.3, 10.7, 100
           0.93           5.3, 10.2, 100                5.3, 9.7, 100        5.3, 9.3, 100        5.3, 9.1, 100
           1.00            5.3, 8.8, 100                5.3, 8.3, 100         5.3, 8.0, 100       5.3, 7.8, 100

 Panel B: Price statistics (see notes)
 Weight on BJ goods ( )
          0.80               0.23, 1.2,      0.99     0.31,   1.35,   0.99 0.4, 1.5, 0.98       0.49,   1.65,   0.98
          0.87               0.24, 1.3,      0.99     0.33,   1.47,   0.98 0.42, 1.63, 0.98     0.51,   1.79,   0.98
          0.93               0.25, 1.4,      0.99     0.34,   1.58,   0.98 0.43, 1.75, 0.98     0.53,   1.93,   0.98
          1.00               0.26, 1.5,      0.99     0.36,   1.69,   0.98 0.45, 1.88, 0.98     0.54,   2.07,   0.98


Notes: In Panel B, the numbers in each cell refer to the coe¢ cient of variation of prices, the ratio of the
maximum price to minimum price, and the price paid by unemployed relative to employed.



                                                       53
Table E.3: Robustness: steady-state unemployment rates and price statistics for combina-
tions of targets for elasticity of UE rate with respect to and …rms’pro…t margin
                                              Firms’pro…t margin
                             .05              .10            .15            .20

     Panel A: Steady-state unemployment rates
     UE elasticity
         0.45       5.3, 20.7, 70.3       5.3                               5.3                    5.3
         0.55       5.3, 12.6, 92.4 5.3, 23.1, 78.1                   5.3, 48.8, 100               5.3
         0.65        5.3, 8.3, 100  5.3, 13.2, 100                    5.3, 18.8, 94.9        5.3, 25.9, 85.6
         0.75        5.3, 5.7, 100   5.3, 8.2, 100                    5.3, 10.7, 100         5.3, 13.4, 100

     Panel B: Price     statistics (see notes)
     UE elasticity
         0.45           0.37,   1.72,   0.98   0.41,   1.72,   0.98   0.44,   1.72,   0.98   0.48,   1.72,   0.98
         0.55           0.37,   1.72,   0.98   0.41,   1.72,   0.98   0.44,   1.72,   0.98   0.48,   1.72,   0.98
         0.65           0.37,   1.72,   0.98   0.41,   1.72,   0.98   0.44,   1.72,   0.98   0.48,   1.72,   0.98
         0.75           0.37,   1.72,   0.98   0.41,   1.72,   0.98   0.44,   1.72,   0.98   0.48,   1.72,   0.98


Notes: In Panel B, the numbers in each cell refer to the coe¢ cient of variation of prices, the ratio of the
maximum price to minimum price, and the price paid by unemployed relative to employed.


References
 [1] Aguiar, M., and E. Hurst. 2007. “Life-Cycle Prices and Production.” American Eco-
     nomic Review 97: 1533–59.

 [2] Albrecht, J., P. Gautier, and S. Vroman. 2006. “Equilibrium Directed Search with Mul-
     tiple Applications.”Review of Economic Studies 73: 869–91.

 [3] Angeletos, M., and J. La’O. 2013. “Sentiments.”Econometrica 81: 739–79.

 [4] Bai, Y., V. Rios Rull, and K. Storesletten. 2012. “Demand Shocks that Look Like
     Productivity Shocks.”Manuscript, University of Minnesota.

 [5] Benhabib, J., and R. Farmer. 1994. “Indeterminacy and Increasing Returns.” Journal
     of Economic Theory 63: 19–41.

 [6] Benhabib, J., P. Wang., and Y. Wen. 2012. “Sentiments and Aggregate Fluctuations.”
     Manuscript, NYU.

 [7] Bentolila, S., and A. Ichino. 2008. “Unemployment and Consumption Near and Far
     Away from the Mediterranean.”Journal of Population Economics, 21: 255–80.



                                                         54
 [8] Bilbiie, F., F. Ghironi, and M. Melitz. 2012. “Endogenous Entry, Product Variety, and
    Business Cycles.”Journal of Political Economy 120: 304–45.

 [9] Boldrin, M., N. Kiyotaki, and R. Wright. 1993. “A Dynamic Equilibrium Model of
    Search, Production, and Exchange.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 17:
    723–58.

[10] Burdett, K., and K. Judd. 1983. “Equilibrium Price Dispersion.” Econometrica, 51:
    955–70.

[11] Christiano, L., and S. Harrison. 1999. “Chaos, Sunspots and Automatic Stabilizers.”
    Journal of Monetary Economics, 44: 3–31.

[12] Cooper, R., and A. John. 1988. “Coordinating Coordination Failures in Keynesian Mod-
    els.”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 103: 441–63.

[13] Diamond, P. 1982. “Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium.” Journal
    of Political Economy 90: 881–94.

[14] Diamond, P., and D. Fudenberg. 1989. “Rational Expectations Business Cycles in Search
    Equilibrium.”Journal of Political Economy 97: 606–19.

[15] Dixit, A., and J. Stiglitz. 1977. “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product Di-
    versity.”American Economic Review 67: 297–308.

[16] Farmer, R., 2012(a). “Con…dence, Crashes and Animal Spirits.”Economic Journal, 122.

[17] Farmer, R. 2012(b). “The Stock Market Crash of 2008 Caused the Great Recession:
    Theory and Evidence.”Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 36: 693–707.

[18] Farmer, R., and J. Guo. 1994. “Real Business Cycles and the Animal Spirits Hypothe-
    sis.”Journal of Economic Theory, 63: 42–72.

[19] Gruber, J. 1997. “The Consumption Smoothing Bene…ts of Unemployment Insurance.”
    American Economic Review, 87: 192–205.

[20] Hall, R. 2012. “The Cyclical Response of Advertising Refutes Countercyclical Pro…t
    Margins in Favor of Product-Market Frictions.”Manuscript, Stanford University.

[21] Head, A., L. Liu, G. Menzio, and R. Wright. 2012. “Sticky Prices: A New Monetarist
    Approach.”Journal of the European Economic Association, 10: 939–73




                                           55
[22] Heller, W. 1986. “Coordination Failure Under Complete Markets with Applications to
    E¤ective Demand.” Equilibrium analysis: Essays in Honor of Kenneth J. Arrow, 2:
    155–175, 1986.

[23] Kaplan, G. and G. Menzio. 2013. “Deconstructing Price Dispersion.” Manuscript,
    Princeton University.

[24] Krueger, A., and A. Mueller. 2010. “Job Search and Unemployment Insurance: New
    Evidence from Time Use Data.”Journal of Public Economics, 94: 298–307.

[25] Menzio, G., and S. Shi. 2011. “E¢ cient Search on the Job and the Business Cycle.”
    Journal of Political Economy 119: 468–510.

[26] Mortensen, D. 1999. “Equilibrium Unemployment Dynamics.”International Economic
    Review, 40: 889–914.

[27] Mortensen, D., and C. Pissarides. 1994. “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
    Theory of Unemployment.”Review of Economic Studies 61: 397–415.

[28] Petrongolo, B., and C. Pissarides. 2001. “Looking into the Black Box: A Survey of the
    Matching Function.”Journal of Economic Literature, 39: 390–431.

[29] Pissarides, C. 1985. “Short-Run Equilibrium Dynamics of Unemployment, Vacancies
    and Real Wages.”American Economic Review 75: 676–90.

[30] Pissarides, C. 2009. “The Unemployment Volatility Puzzle: Is Wage Stickiness the
    Answer?”Econometrica 77: 1339-69.

[31] Roberts, J. 1987. “An Equilibrium Model with Involuntary Unemployment at Flexible,
    Competitive Prices and Wages.”American Economic Review 77: 856–74.

[32] Shimer, R. 2005. “The Cyclical Behavior of Unemployment and Vacancies.” American
    Economic Review 95: 25–49.

[33] Stephens, M. 2001. “The Long-Run Consumption E¤ects of Earnings Shocks.” Review
    of Economics and Statistics, 83: 28–36.v

[34] Stephens, M. 2004. “Job Loss Expectations, Realizations, and Household Consumption
    Behavior.”Review of Economics and Statistics, 86: 253–69.




                                           56
