NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

POLITICAL CENTRALIZATION IN PRE-COLONIAL AFRICA
Philip Osafo-Kwaako
James A. Robinson
Working Paper 18770
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18770

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013

We are greatly indebted to Jan Vansina for his encouragement and suggestions and to Daron Acemoglu
and particularly James Fenske for their comments. We also thank Gérard Roland, Gylfi Zoega and
an anonymous referee. This paper was written in honor of Thrainn Eggertsson on the occasion of his
retirement from the University of Iceland. Any of us who have worked on institutions owe a great
debt to his original and pathbreaking research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Philip Osafo-Kwaako and James A. Robinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Political Centralization in Pre-Colonial Africa
Philip Osafo-Kwaako and James A. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 18770
February 2013
JEL No. N17
ABSTRACT
In this paper we investigate the empirical correlates of political centralization using data from the Standard
Cross-Cultural Sample. We specifically investigate the explanatory power of the standard models of
Eurasian state formation which emphasize the importance of high population density, inter-state warfare
and trade as factors leading to political centralization. We find that while in the whole world sample
these factors are indeed positively correlated with political centralization, this is not so in the African
sub-sample. Indeed, none of the variables are statistically related to political centralization. We also
provide evidence that political centralization, where it took place, was indeed associated with better
public goods and development outcomes. We conclude that the evidence is quite consistent with the
intellectual tradition initiated in social anthropology by Evans-Pritchard and Fortes in the 1940s which
denied the utility of Eurasian models in explaining patterns of political centralization in Africa.

Philip Osafo-Kwaako
Harvard University,
John F. Kennedy School of Government,
79 John F. Kennedy Street, Cambridge, MA 02138.
osafo@fas.harvard.edu
James A. Robinson
Harvard University
Department of Government
N309, 1737 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jrobinson@gov.harvard.edu

1

Introduction

Most of the poor people in the world live in Sub-Saharan Africa (henceforth Africa). The
income per-capita of the poorest countries such as Ethiopia or Sierra Leone di¤er from those
of prosperous OECD countries by a factor of about 40 and these income di¤erences come along
with huge di¤erences in welfare, health, economic opportunities and life chances. 250 years
ago, before the ‘great divergence’ we know that these di¤erences were much smaller. Parts
of the world which have now very di¤erent levels of income per-capita were indistinguishable
according to this metric in 1750. But how poor relatively was Africa compared to other parts of
the world? Some, like Hopkins (1973), Thornton (1992), Jerven (2010) or Ehret (2012), see few
historical di¤erences in institutional dynamics and prosperity between Africa and the rest of
the world. Others are more selective, arguing that while Africa may have been behind Eurasia
it was ahead of the Americas (e.g. Inikori, 2012). Africa was certainly behind the rest of
the world, even the Americas, technologically (Goody 1971, Austen and Headrick, 1983, Law,
1980) and Acemoglu and Robinson (2010, 2012) argue that more generally it was economically
backward in many dimensions at the start of the early modern period, and in particular did not
have the economic and political institutions necessary to generate modern economic growth.
If one accepts that Africa lagged the rest of the world in term of developing basic economic
institutions and public goods which might have stimulated technological change or adoption in
the early modern period what might have been behind that? This question has been answered
in many ways. Easterly and Levine (1997) argued that the great ethnic fragmentation of Africa
was one reason for its relative poverty, Sachs and Warner (1997) suggested Africa had adverse
geography, while Inikori (1992), Nunn (2008), following a large literature in Africa studies,
focused instead on the deleterious impact of the slave trade. Other scholars have instead
emphasized more recent factors potentially causing poor economic performance in Africa, such
as the arbitrary nature of post-colonial national boundaries (Engelbert, 2000).
One thing that everyone seems to agree on is that state institutions have been dysfunctional
in Africa. Much of the political science literature saw economic decline after independence as
being closely related to states that were unable or unwilling to provide public services or
encourage economic activity (Callaghy, 1984, and Turner and Young, 1985, on the totemic
case of Zaire, Young, 1994, for a synthesis). Moreover, the lack of e¤ective centralized states is
clearly a potential factor not just in explaining poor economic performance in Africa since 1960,
but also over a much longer duree. Whatever the impact of the colonial period might have
1

been on state formation in Africa, at a factual level the evidence seems to suggest that Africa
developed centralized states later than the rest of the world. Though Africa certainly did have
states and quite a few emerged and consolidated in the 18th and 19th century, this process
seems to have de…nitely lagged behind Eurasia and at least parts of the Americas (Central
America and Andean South America). One can get some quantitative picture of this via the
data coded by Louis Putterman and his collaborators (Bockstette, Chanda and Putterman,
2002). Figure 1 plots their state antiquity index from 1,000 to 1,500. This captures the extent
to which a country in the world has been under the control of a centralized state. It shows
that though Africa did have greater state antiquity historically than the Americas or Oceania,
it lagged behind the rest of the world, particularly Eurasia.
A large literature in social science places the functioning of the state at the heart of economic development. Ultimately this view comes from the work of Max Weber and recent
comparative work has claimed that the di¤erence between developmental successes and developmental failures is indeed that the former have e¤ective states while the latter do not (see
for example Evans, 1995, or the recent literature by economists: Acemoglu, 2005, Acemoglu,
Robinson and Santos, 2013, Acemoglu, Ticchi and Vindigni, 2011, Besley and Persson 2011).
In the context of Africa the most ambitious version of this argument is due to Herbst (2000)
and Bates (2001). Indeed, as we discuss in Section 2, the case study literature in Africa does
indeed suggest that the absence of centralized state authority is a potent source of poor economic institutions and the absence of public good provision, potentially helping to explain
lagging economic development of Africa.
But what could explain the di¤erential development of centralized states in Africa? This
topic has been researched at least since the famous volume edited by the social anthropologists
Evans-Pritchard and Fortes (1940) and has taken two broad lines. Many scholars, for example
Diamond (1997), Herbst (2000), Bates (2000) and Reid (2012a,b), take what they see as the
successful models which have supposedly explained political centralization in Europe and apply
them to Africa. Here the key would be the absence of the factors which led to the formation
of states in Europe, usually warfare, high population density and trade. For example, factors
unique to Africa such as a very adverse disease environment or lack of domesticable plant
and animal species kept population density low which retarded the development of states.
Other scholars, exempli…ed even by Evans-Pritchard and Fortes (1940) and more recently by
the essays in McIntosh (1999a) particularly McIntosh (1999b) and Vansina (1999), deny the

2

applicability of Eurasian model to explain the dynamics of political institutions in Africa.
Their main point is that it is not simply that there is less political centralization in Africa,
but that the development of political institutions took a di¤erent path historically creating
qualitatively very di¤erent structures from those seen in Eurasia.
Though the causal mechanisms linking population density, warfare and trade to political
centralization may be widely regarded as plausible they su¤er from many problems. Most
obviously to our knowledge there have been only three empirical studies of the determinants
of political centralization in Africa. Though it was not the focus of his research, Nunn (2008)
found an important negative correlation between the intensity of the slave trade and political
centralization. More recently, Fenske (2012) argues for a causal relationship between ecological
diversity and state formation in Africa arguing that this picks up the potential for specialization and trade. Alsan (2012) shows that the incidence of tse-tse ‡y is negatively correlated
with political centralization which she argues works through various channels, including lower
population density and the inability to use draught animals. None of these papers uses the data
we use in this paper or considers other potential hypotheses. Re‡ecting this lack of research
there is also considerable controversy about what the basic correlations are. Evans-Pritchard
and Fortes (1940) famously denied that there was any correlation between state formation and
population density in Africa. Noting (p. 7)
“size of population should not be confused with density of population. There
may be some relations between the degree of political development and the size of
population, but it would be incorrect to suppose that governmental institutions are
found in those societies with great density.”
This view was contested by Stevenson (1968), rea¢ rmed by Vengro¤ (1976), contested by
Bates (1983), but recently rea¢ rmed once more by McIntosh (1999b), though none of these
papers actually looked systematically at the most complete data available. Other issues, such
as the connection between warfare and state formation in Africa seem never to have been
systematically investigated. If the correlations are controversial, this must a fortiori be true
about causal relationships. For example, even if it were true that there is a positive correlation
between population density and state formation, this does not imply that higher density of
populations make it more likely for states to form. It could well be the other way round.
Indeed, much case study evidence from Africa suggests that state formation is followed by

3

population expansion rather than the other way round.1
In this paper we use the Standard Cross Cultural Sample to conduct some preliminary
tests of the conventional hypotheses about the drivers of state formation in the whole world
and Africa. This dataset was …rst constructed by Murdock and White (1969) using materials
from the more frequently used Murdock Ethnographic Atlas, but covering far fewer “cultures”.
The rough idea was that the societies in the Atlas were not independent cultures since many of
them had common roots and were subject to cultural dissemination and contagion. The SCCS
has been greatly added to over time by many di¤erent anthropologists and now includes 186
cultures. This is far fewer than the number of societies in the Atlas but unfortunately that
dataset does not include most of the main explanatory variables in which we are interested.
Though this dataset is less than ideal, and very incomplete since any variable usually has many
missing observations, it does contain quite a lot of important variation in Africa both spatially
and in terms of political centralization (see Figure 2). For instance it includes the !Kung
bushmen and the Hadza, two hunter-gatherer societies; a few classic unpolitically centralized
societies in Africa, these include the Tallensi or Northern Ghana, the Kikuyu of Kenya and
the Tiv of eastern Nigeria; it also includes some salient politically centralized societies such
as the Asante of Ghana, the Ganda of Uganda, and the Hausa of Nigeria. Finally there
are intermediate societies such as the Bemba of Zambia and the Mende on Sierra Leone.
Nevertheless, it only includes 40 cultures in sub–Saharan Africa.2
Our …ndings are quite contrary to the existing literature which has stressed the applicability of Eurasian models of political centralization in Africa. Our initial examination of the
data uses ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions and thus consists only of conditional correlations. However, we …nd that while for the whole world sample there is a very robust positive
correlation between population density and political centralization and at least some evidence
of a positive correlation between trade and warfare and political centralization, this is not so
for the Africa sub-sample. Indeed, within Africa all of these potential explanatory variables are
1
It turns out that this is quite a common feature of the historical record. For instance Stanish (2001)
surveying research on the origins of the state in Latin America remarks (p. 58) “Population spikes tend to
occur after state development, not before. The areas where states …rst developed have the greatest capacity for
sustained demographic increase and the intensi…cation of production”exactly as with the Kuba. Equally telling
is Vansina’s (2004) analysis of the institutional consequences of population expansion in Rwanda. These come
in the 19th century after the state had been created in the 17th century and consolidated in the 18th. Looking
at cross-sectional correlations between population density and political centralization therefore tells us nothing
interesting about state formation.
2
Using the SCCS dataset, we combine 28 ethnic groups listed in the Africa Region, with 12 other sub-Saharan
groups listed under the Circum-Mediterranean region. See Figure 2.

4

uncorrelated with political centralization. Though the sample size is small and these results
should obviously be regarded as preliminary it is quite striking that the theories fail to predict
the correlations in the data so completely.
We investigate this further by developing an identi…cation strategy to cope with the potential endogeneity of population density. Since the SCCS contains a variable for the agricultural
potential of the area inhabited by a particular society we use this as a potentially exogenous
source of variation in population density. In the …rst stage there is a strong positive correlation
between agricultural potential and population density in the world, though this is weaker in
the African sub-samples. In the second stage our Two Stage Least Squares (2SLS) results
con…rm our initial …ndings: there is a robust positive correlation between population density
and political centralization in the whole world but not in Africa.
Finally, since the SCCS also includes various measures of public goods, particularly the
use of money, writing and various modern forms of infrastructure such as roads, we can further use it to investigate whether the correlations are consistent with political centralization
being important for development. We …nd very strong positive correlations between political
centralization and all these public goods outcomes suggesting that the relative lack of political centralization in pre-colonial Africa may indeed be an important part of the story about
African underdevelopment.
Though these results might be thought to be somewhat negative we feel they are an important test of the recent literature on the origins of the state in Africa. They suggest, as
social anthropologists have long argued, that historical states in Africa were not only less centralized but developed according to di¤erent logics than the states of Eurasia. In consequence
the presence or absence of the factors that created states in Eurasia are not relevant for determining the variation in political centralization in Africa. A di¤erent theoretical approach
is required. One alternative which ‡ows from the anthropological literature is that Africa
di¤ers from Eurasia in terms of social structure and this may be an important in‡uence on
political centralization. For example, the types of age structures and organizations common to
many stateless societies in Africa (e.g. Prins, 1953, Bernardi, 1985) may create cross-cutting
cleavages which make it very di¢ cult for one group to accumulate political power and build
a state (see McIntosh, 1999b, for related ideas). We are investigating these ideas in ongoing
research (Acemoglu, Osafo-Kwaako and Robinson, 2012). Our argument is as follows. It is
natural to think of a society lacking political centralization as divided into di¤erent relatively

5

autonomous groups, often based on kinship. Put simply, political centralization involves one
of these groups dominating the others and removing this autonomy. Though many things may
in‡uence the incentives and constraints which face a particular group attempting to dominate
the others, we hypothesize that in Africa a signi…cant important factor is the existence of
cross-cutting cleavages which link groups together. There are many types of such institutions
but the canonical example might be age sets the most famous de…nition of which is due to
Radcli¤e-Brown (1929, p. 21) as
“a recognised and sometimes organized group consisting of persons (often male
persons only) who are of the same age .. In Africa, at any rate in East and South
Africa,an age-set is normally formed of all those males who are initiated at one time
... Once a person enters a given age-set, whether at birth or initiation, he remains
a member of the same age-set for the remainder of his life .. In East Africa, where
the age-organization is highly elaborated, each age-set normally passes from one
grade to another as a whole.”
But they also include many other types of institutions such as secret societies, cult groups,
titling societies and various other types of associations. The hypothesis Acemoglu, OsafoKwaako and Robinson (2012) is that it is unique elements of the social structures of African
societies which make it very di¢ cult to centralize power because they make it di¢ cult for
one group to dominate others, a precondition for political centralization. Though this theme
surfaces at many places in African studies to our knowledge it has not been precisely formulated
before and tested. It dates back at least to a series of critiques of Evans-Pritchard and Fortes’s
dichotomy between state and non-state (lineage) societies. Brown (1951) challenged this on the
basis that “associations” de…ned as “an organized and corporate group, membership in which
does not follow automatically from birth or adoption into a kin or territorial unit”were critical
links between lineages in many non-state societies, such as the Igbo or Tallensi in West Africa
(a point made independently for East Africa by Bernardi, 1952). But she points out (p. 270)
that “no associations were found in Ashanti, and that the associations of Dahomey and Nupe
did not use sanctions against non-members”. Strikingly, of all the places she studied, these
were the ones that had centralized states. Similar issues arise in McIntosh’s critique of the
application of non-African models of political complexity to understanding the development of
political institutions in Africa. She notes “The distribution of power among several corporate
entities (e.g. lineages, secret societies, cults, age grades) can be regarded as a strategy that has
6

successfully resisted in a variety of ways the consolidation of power by individuals” (1999b, p.
4). However, her emphasis is not on how these block the creation of political centralization but
on how they create qualitatively di¤erent complex political organizations. In more specialized
literature, particularly on East African stateless societies, there is a huge amount of emphasis
on such cross-cutting institutions, particularly age-sets and the political role they play (e.g.
Prins, 1953, Dyson-Hudson, 1963, 1966, Bernardi, 1985). At the same time in societies with
states, such as the Buganda, the Basoga, or Rwanda there is often mention of the absence of
these cross-cutting associations (e.g. Fallers 1964 and 1965 on the former two and Vansina,
2004 on the latter), but the comparative picture never seems to have been put together.
The paper proceeds as follows. In the next section we discuss the data we use in detail.
In section 3 we them explore the issue of whether polities with greater degrees of political
centralization have better development, particular public goods, outcomes. This exploration
is important for motivating our study of political centralization and it is interesting to undertake it with the SCCS. We also discuss some case study evidence that the lack of political
centralization in Africa has been responsible for poor economic institutions and poor economic
performance. In section 4 we then turn to a very preliminary analysis of the basic hypotheses
using OLS regressions. Section 4.2 then discusses our identi…cation strategy for population
density and provides our 2SLS estimates. Section 5 concludes.

2

The Data

We now undertake a very preliminary investigation of some basic hypotheses about the determinants of political centralization using data from the Standard Cross-Cultural Sample
(SCCS). The data can be downloaded free from the web site maintained by Douglas White at
UC Irvine (http://eclectic.ss.uci.edu/~drwhite/courses/index.html).

2.1

Measure of Political Centralization

The main variable we use to capture political centralization is “Jurisdictional hierarchy beyond
local community” (variable number 237 in the SCCS) since this is the variable which has previously been used in the economics literature to examine some of the consequences of political
centralization in Africa (e.g., Gennaioli and Rainer, 2007, Michalopoulos and Papaioannou,
2011). This variable ranges from 1, indicating “No levels (no political authority beyond community)”, through 2 (One level, e.g., petty chiefdoms), 3 (Two levels, e.g., larger chiefdoms),

7

4 (Three levels, e.g., states) to 5 (Four levels, e.g., large states).
We investigate the robustness of this by alternately using as the dependent variable ‘Levels
of Sovereignty’(variable 83 in SCCS) originally coded by Tuden and Marshall (1972). It ranges
from 1 which indicates a stateless society (98 cases) up until 4 which indicates the number of
layers of political hierarchy which can be identi…ed (31 cases are coded as 2, 14 as 3, and 41
as 4). These variables are correlated at the level of 0.81 but as will be seen they give slightly
di¤erent results.

2.2

Implications of Centralization

We use various sorts of measures to examine the consequences of centralization. Though as we
noted this is not the focus of the paper, it is nevertheless interesting as part of the puzzle of
long-run African development. The SCCS sample has variables which measure public goods
outcomes and some which are more closely tied to economic development.
For public goods we examine the variables
1. Market exchange within local community (SCCS variable 1733) (1 = no market exchange;
2 = market exchange within local community present; 3 = market exchange within local
community present, involving local and regional products; 4 = market exchange within
local community present, involving local, regional, and supra-regional products.
2. Types of land transport routes (SCCS variable 14) (1 = Unimproved Trails, 2 = Improved
Trails, for porters or animal carriers, 3 = Unpaved Roads, for wheeled vehicles, 4 = Paved
Roads).
3. Use of money as medium of exchange (SCCS variable 17) (1 = No media of exchange or
money, 2 = Domestically usable articles as media of exchange, 3 = Tokens of conventional
value as media of exchange, 4 = Foreign coinage or paper currency, 5 = Indigenous coinage
or paper currency).
4. Presence of police service (SCCS variable 90) (1 = Not specialized; 2 = Incipient specialization; 3 = Retainers of chiefs; 4 = Military; 5 = Specialized).
5. Availability of writing and record-keeping (SCCS variable 149) (1 = None; 2 = Mnemonic
devices; 3 = Nonwritten records; 4 = True writing; no records; 5 = True writing; records).

8

Larger values of any of these variables are naturally associated with greater provision of
public goods, such as market exchange, roads, money, police and writing. Though of course to
some extent these things could arise as the result of private initiative, the historical evidence
suggests that as in Eurasia, the state played an important role in inducing and sustaining all
these things in Africa.
For development outcomes we examined the following dependent variables
1. Mode of land transport (SCCS variable 13) (1 = Human Carriers, 2 = Pack Animals, 3
= Draft Animals (sleds, travois), 4 = Animal Drawn Wheeled vehicles, 5 = Motorized
vehicles).
2. Availability of credit (SCCS variable 18) (1 = Personal loans between friends or relatives;
2 = Internal money lending specialists; 3 = External money lending specialists; 4 = Banks
or comparable institutions).
3. Metal smelting (SCCS variable 129) which we re-coded as a dummy =1 if smelting was
present =0 otherwise.
4. Communality of land (SCCS variable 1726) (1 = land predominantly private property;
2 = land partially communally used; 3 = communal land use rights only). We re-scaled
this variable so that higher values refer to the availability of property rights in land.

2.3

Explanatory Variables for Centralization

We examine three main explanatory variables. The …rst is population density (SCCS variable
64) which is coded as ranging from 1 (less than 1 person per 5 square miles), 2 (1 person per
1-5 square miles), 3 (1-5 persons per square mile) all the way to 7 (over 500 persons per square
mile).
The second is external or “inter-state/polity”warfare which we measure using the variable
“Frequency of external warfare - being attacked”(SCCS variable 893) which seems to capture
best the mechanisms leading from warfare to state formation which scholars have proposed.3
This variable is coded as follows 1 = Continual, 2 = Frequent, 3 = Infrequent and we re-coded
it so that higher values correspond to more frequent warfare.
3

The SCCS database also has a variable "Frequency of Warfare - Attacking” which is strongly positively
correlated with political centralization. Nevertheless, since this variable is obviously very endogenous and likely
re‡ects reverse causality and in any case does not capture the arguments made in the social science literature
we do not present any regressions using it.

9

The third variable we use attempts to capture the extent of trade. It is clear that trade
can precipitate political centralization with well known examples being in the Kathmandu
Valley. In the African case this also looks to be a potentially very interesting mechanism
since the states of the Niger bend in the Middle Ages such as Ghana, Mali and Songhay, have
traditionally been seen as arising from the trans-Saharan trade (see McIntosh, 2005) (and the
SCCS does include the Bambara in modern Mali and Songhay). Other states like Asante and
Dahomey grew in West Africa on the basis of the slave trade. On the other hand, it is also
true that states elsewhere, such as Buganda or Rwanda, emerged and grew in a much more
autarkic environment. To capture trade we use the variable 1734 “Market exchange outside of
local community” coded as 1 = no market exchange outside of local community, 2 = market
exchange outside of local community (at trading posts, market places), 3 = market exchange
outside of local community, involving local and regional products, 4 = market exchange outside
of local community, involving local, regional, and supra-regional products.
Though these are our fundamental explanatory variables the SCCS database also allows
us to investigate some other interesting hypotheses about political centralization. We focus
on two. Though the literature which emphasizes the role of warfare on state formation has
stressed the signi…cance of inter-state warfare (Tilly ed., 1975, being seminal) other scholars
have stressed that internal wars, civil war or rebellions may be important for stimulating state
formation and political centralization. An obvious case is 17th century Britain where the civil
war of the 1640s and the Glorious Revolution of 1688 both led to signi…cant developments
in the state but were internal con‡icts (Brewer, 1988, Braddick, 2000). More recently Slater
(2010) has argued for Southeast Asia that internal con‡icts were critical in stimulating state
formation in the post World War 2 period. We can investigate these ideas through two variables
in the SCCS. The …rst is “Frequency of Internal War” (SCCS variable 891) ranging from 1
(Continual), 2 (Frequent) to 3 (Infrequent). We re-scaled this variable so that higher values
correspond to more con‡ict. We also investigate the correlation between political centralization
and “Types of violence against overarching political institution” (SCCS variable 1739) which
ranges from 0 (no overarching political unit, through 1 (violent acts absent), 2 (acts of violence,
in reaction against attacks by overarching political unit), to 3 (active resistance, aiming at
revolution).
Another interesting hypotheses we can examine which often emerges in the literature on
state formation in Africa (e.g. Kopyto¤, 1989) is that political centralization in inhibited by the

10

possibility of ‘…ssion’(see also Scott, 2010). Since centralization typically involves one sub-set
of a society exerting authority over the rest, this can create resentment and attempts to move
way. In Africa, so the argument goes, low population density and an open frontier facilitate
such …ssion. We can measure this directly via the variable “(No) Local Political Fission of
Dissatis…ed Persons”(SCCS variable 785) coded 1 (Often move to another community following
disputes), 2 (Sometimes move to another community following disputes) and 3 (Rarely or never
move to another community following disputes).

2.4

Other Covariates and Variables

In some speci…cations below, we present results which control for geographical characteristics
and the disease environment. Geographical controls are for latitude and longitude of the
location of the ethnic group as speci…ed in the SCCS. To control for spatial variation in
the disease environment, we include a measure of the total pathogen stress (SCCS variable
1260) which provides a composite measure of the prevalence and severity of seven pathogens
(leishmanias, trypanosomes, malaria, schistosomes, …lariae, spirochetes, and leprosy).
Finally, in section 5 below we propose an identi…cation strategy for the impact of population
density on political centralization using the SCCS variable 921 “Agricultural Potential” as an
exogenous source of variation in population density. This variable provides an index of overall
agricultural suitability and combines indices of terrain slope, soil suitability, and climate. It
is measured on a scale ranging from 4 (for poorest agricultural potential) to 23 (for highest
agricultural potential).

2.5

Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 presents some basic descriptive statistics of these variables. In column (1) we present
the sample means for all observations in the SCCS dataset. To give some ‡avor of the correlations in the data, we also separate the means according to groups with low (below median) and
high (above median) political centralization for the whole world (columns (3) and (4)), and for
the Africa subsamples (columns (7) and (8)). Column 6 presents the African mean. In this
case the median criteria implies that low political centralization refers to observations where
our measure for state centralization, SCCS variable 237, equals 1 (82 observations) while high
political centralization refers to cases where the variable equals 2 or higher (102 observations).
The …rst two rows of the table simply tell us that the di¤erences between low and high political

11

centralization is statistically signi…cant and columns 5 and 9 give the p-value of the t-test to
test for signi…cant di¤erences.
Concentrating …rst on the whole world some interesting patterns emerge. In row 3 we
see that while population density for low centralization polities is 2.675 it is 4.569 for high
centralization. In column 5 the p-value for the t-test for the di¤erence between these numbers
showing that this di¤erence is highly signi…cant statistically. The incidence of being attacked
is also signi…cantly higher for high centralization polities, though trade (row 8) is not. Other
potential explanatory variables seem little di¤erent, for example civil war and insurrection
though the prevalence of …ssion is indeed greater for low centralization polities. Finally it is
interesting to note that some of the potentially important covariates such as latitude or altitude
are not signi…cantly di¤erent between the two groups, though high centralization polities tend
to be in places with greater agricultural potential.
Turning to Africa there are several things to observe. First, the average of political centralization is higher at 2.5 than it is in the entire world where it is just 2.082. Second, many
of the di¤erences which were signi…cant in the entire world are no longer so, this is true for
population density, being attacked and …ssion. Civil war and insurrection remain insigni…cantly di¤erent between low and high political centralization while all of the other variables
are similarly insigni…cantly di¤erent. Given that there are signi…cant di¤erences in the levels
of centralization in Africa these descriptive statistics anticipate some of the regression evidence
we present later in the paper.

3
3.1

Implications of Political Centralization
Case-Study Evidence

Was the absence of political centralization in Africa important for economic development? The
more recent academic literature on states certainly suggests this, though it does not focus on the
extent of political centralization as an explanatory variable. Besley and Persson (2011) present
various form of empirical evidence suggesting that features of ‘strong’states, such as advanced
…scal systems, are positively correlated with economic development. Evans and Rauch (1999,
2000) similarly show that key features of the bureaucracy associated with strong states, such as
meritocratic appointment and promotion, are association with good governance and economic
outcomes. In Africa there is some direct econometric evidence on the impact of pre-colonial
political centralization from Gennaioli and Rainer (2007) and Michalopoulos and Papaioannou
12

(2011). They both show that parts of Africa which were historically more centralized politically
have better public good provision and economic development (as measured by light intensity
at night) today than parts which were less centralized politically.
What case studies we have of societies lacking centralized states suggest that such societies
certainly did not have the potential for economic success. Some of these consequences of the
lack of political centralization can be vividly illustrated by the comparison made by Douglas
and Vansina in the 1950s between the Bushong, the dominant group in the Kuba state, and
the Lele, e¤ectively a stateless society. These two peoples faced each other across the two sides
of the Kasai River in what is now the Democratic Republic of the Congo. As Douglas (1962,
p. 211) herself put it:
“The Lele and the Bushong are separated only by the Kasai River. The two
tribes recognize a common origin, their houses, clothes and crafts are similar in
style, their languages are closely related. Yet the Lele are poor, while the Bushong
are rich ... Everything that the Lele have or can do, the Bushong have more and
can do better.”
Some of the reasons for this relative poverty were obvious to Douglas. For example, the
Lele use inferior technology, they do not use nets for hunting and Douglas noted “the absence
of nets is consistent with a general Lele tendency not to invest time and labor in long-term
equipment”(1962, p. 216). However, she also argued (1962, p. 216) that “Their eager purchase
of …rearms ... Shows their culture does not restrict them to inferior techniques when these do
not require long-term collaboration and e¤ort.” So she did not propose a cultural explanation
for these technological di¤erences. In comparison agricultural productivity in the Kuba state
was much higher (1962, p. 219)
“The Bushong plant …ve crops in succession in a system of rotation that covers
two years. They grow yams, sweet potatoes, manioc, beans, and gather two and
sometimes three maize harvests a year. The Lele practice no rotation and reap
only one annual maize harvest.”
Douglas argued that “If we wish to understand why the Lele work less, we need to consider
whether any social factors inhibit them from exploiting their resources to the utmost” (1962,
p. 224). Indeed, she claimed that the Lele were trapped into an ine¢ cient social equilibrium.
13

There was no process of political centralization (“each village is completely independent”1962,
p. 229) and
“Those who have anything to do with the Lele must have noticed the absence
of anyone who could give orders with a reasonable hope of being obeyed ... This
lack of authority goes a long way to explaining their poverty” (Douglas, 1963, p.
1).
Society was based on a self-reproducing system of dominance of young men by old men.
“Old men monopolized economic activities and resources to extract rents” while young men
were diverted into raiding and abducting and “such insecurity is obviously inimical to trade”
(1962, p. 227). Thus Douglas tied the very poor economic outcomes and backward technology
of the Lele to the fact that they had not undergone any process of political centralization.
The situation was very di¤erent in the Kuba country. As Vansina concluded in his history
of the Kuba state (1978, p. 175)
“A starting point for economic development appears with the reign of Shyaam
... Technological innovations, especially in agriculture, began to spread throughout
the country ... The staple crops were replaced by American crops, which had higher
yields ... The main innovation was the introduction of a double ... even a triple ...
annual harvest of maize.”
During this period, which Vansina dubbed the “Age of Kings”, agricultural output perhead also doubled. To achieve this “the whole agricultural calendar had to be reorganized,
including the division of labor by sex” (1978, p. 177) and
“The …rst step in raising productivity was for the men to work more in the
…elds ... Second, the age of marriage was lowered, bringing young men .. Into the
agricultural labor force. Young men did not work in the …elds at all until marriage
... By the nineteenth century the result was that boys married young, at less than
twenty years of age rather than at twenty …ve or even, as among the Lele, thirty
…ve, thus adding a sizable portion to the labor available for agriculture” (Vansina,
1978, p. 180)
All of this was the outcome of the political innovations created by Shyaam probably in the
1620s. He created a state where one had not existed before.
14

So the contrast between the Bushong and the Lele and the roots of their di¤erential economic development are closely tied to a process of political centralization that the Bushong
experienced but the Lele did not. Once Shyaam had created a state in the Kuba country, the
supply of public goods went up and so did agricultural productivity (and no doubt population
density as well). There were general improvements in technology and market activity spread.
One can easily …nd many other descriptions in the literature of the institutions of stateless
societies which suggest that they could not have experienced economic development (for instance Lewis, 1961, on Somalia, or Coulson, 1969 on the Plateau Tonga of Zambia). Similarly
one can also …nd other examples of political centralization playing a key role in promoting
development. For one thing it is clear that the only societies in pre-colonial Africa which
built large scale public goods like roads were those with the most centralized states (Asante,
Buganda, Dahomey, and Ethiopia). Asante tried to build a railway and Ethiopia succeeded.
Perhaps the most interesting example in Africa is Botswana. In Botswana, though population
density was extremely low, the Tswana created a group of states4 where political power was
centralized but controlled by an elaborate system of mechanisms of accountability focused on
the kgotla. A Schapera (1940, p. 72) put it in his study of the Ngwato, the largest of the
Tswana states
“all matters of tribal policy are dealt with …nally before a general assembly of the
adult males in the chief’s kgotla (council place). Such meetings are very frequently
held . . . among the topics discussed .. are tribal disputes, quarrels between the
chief and his relatives, the imposition of new levies, the undertaking of new public
works, the promulgation of new decrees by the chief . . . it is not unknown for the
tribal assembly to overrule the wishes of the chief. Since anyone may speak, these
meetings enable him to ascertain the feelings of the people generally, and provide
the latter with an opportunity of stating their grievances. If the occasion calls for
it, he and his advisers may be taken severely to task, for the people are seldom
afraid to speak openly and frankly.”
The Tswana tribes had states at least partially controlled by a kgotla which created both
public goods and economic institutions such a secure property rights, things which all re4
Tawana (Batawana) in the north-west, Ngwato (Bangwato, Bamangwato or Bagamangwato) in east- central
areas, Kwena (Bakwena) and Ngwaketse (Bangwaketse), Kgatla (Bakgatla) and Tlokwa (Batlokwa), Malete
(Balete or Bamalete) and Rolong (Barolong) in the south-east.

15

searchers place at the heart of Botswana’s extraordinary rate of economic growth since independence (see Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2003, Leith, 2005, and Parsons and Robinson,
2006).
Nevertheless, it is also true that, as elsewhere in the world, political centralization in Africa
did not automatically lead to the type of economic development which it did with the Bushong
or the Tswana. It is necessary but not su¢ cient for economic development. Centralized
states can also be predatory and many were in Africa. The most obvious examples being
states during the period of the Atlantic slave trade, such as Kongo or Oyo. Even Asante,
Buganda and Dahomey, though they constructed infrastructure, had many predatory features.
Neither were the states in Burundi or Rwanda developmental. Indeed the state in Rwanda
once it become more powerful in the 1860s and 1870s enserfed most of the rural population
institutionalizing the distinction between Tutsi and Hutu in the process.

3.2

OLS Regression Evidence

As described in the last section the SCCS allows us to examine the correlation between political centralization and a number of public good and development outcomes. We take no
strong stance on causality here but we believe it is interesting to examine whether one actually sees greater public good provision, for example, being positively correlated with political
centralization. We therefore estimate the following model using OLS regressions
yi =

c ci

+ X0i +

(1)

i

where ci is the level of political centralization of society i, yi , the dependent variable, is
a measure either of public good provision in society i or one of the development outcomes
discussed in section 2. X0i are society level covariates and
the above discussion we would anticipate

c

i

is the disturbance term. Based on

> 0, at least in the case where we examine only

the average e¤ects (it is quite possible that investigating heterogeneous e¤ects could help us
understand such cases as Rwanda).
The results from estimating (1) are displayed in Table 2. All columns include continental
…xed e¤ects (Africa, Mediterranean, Eurasia, the Paci…c, North America and South America),
controls for altitude, latitude and longitude and the disease environment captured by total
pathogen stress. In column 1 the dependent variable is market exchange and the estimated
coe¢ cient on centralization is ^ c = 0:252 with a standard error of 0.122 which is signi…cant at
the 5% level. Other things equal higher political centralization is positively correlated with the
16

extent of market exchange. Since a market is one of the most important examples of a public
good which facilitates economic development and are likely supported and organized with the
help of the state this correlation is interesting. In column 2 we have the mode of transportation
as the dependent variable which is a simple development outcome. In pre-colonial Africa most
transportation was by head porterage and this was very ine¢ cient economically.5 A higher
score on the mode of transportation represents a polity which used more e¢ cient methods
of transportation. Column 2 shows that the use of e¢ cient transportation is correlated with
political centralization. Here ^ c = 0:432 (s.e.=0.0798) and highly signi…cant. Indeed, looking
across the columns one sees similar …ndings everywhere. Conditional on the covariates, political
centralization is signi…cantly positively correlated with all of the public goods and development
outcomes.6
Though these regressions establish nothing about the causal relationship between centralization and these outcomes the signi…cant correlations are consistent with the idea that the
relative absence of political centralization in pre-colonial Africa was a potentially important
source of its relatively poor economic performance.

4

Determinants of Political Centralization

4.1

Empirical Results: OLS Regressions

To examine whether or not the conditional correlations in the data are consistent with some of
the fundamental hypotheses about the determinants of political centralization we …rst estimate
Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions of the form
ci =

d di

+

dA (di

DA ) +

i

+

A( i

DA ) +

w wi

+

wA (wi

DA ) + X0i + "i

(2)

where ci is as in (1) the level of political centralization of society i, di is a measure of population
density,

i

is measure of the extent of external trade, wi a measure of the extent of external

warfare. Since our main focus is on the determinants of political centralization in Africa and
the extent to which these match those which have featured in the literature on Eurasia, we
add an “Africa dummy” DA and interact this with the potential explanatory variables. Since
we add no other continental dummies this gives us a simple framework for analyzing whether
5

Chaves, Engerman and Robinson (2012) estimate social rates of return of around 100% associated with the
replacement of head porterage by railways in colonial West Africa.
6
We found very similar results for all the other similar variables we investigated. For instance loom weaving
and pottery production are very similar to metal smelting.

17

or not Africa is di¤erent in the factors that determine political centralization. Finally X0i
are society level covariates which include DA and "i is the disturbance term. The existing
literature in social science suggests the hypotheses that

d

> 0,

particularly interested in the coe¢ cients on the interactions

dA ,

> 0 and
A

and

w

> 0 and we are

wA .

We estimate (2) using the whole world sample in Table 3. In this table the dependent
variable is political centralization as measured by “Jurisdictional hierarchy beyond local community” (we examine Levels of Sovereignty later as a robustness check). In column 1 we
estimate a very parsimonious model where the only explanatory variables are population density, the interaction between population density and the Africa dummy, and the Africa dummy
itself. We see that on it’s own the estimated coe¢ cient on population density is positive and
highly signi…cant, with ^ d = 0:386 with standard error=0:0407. We also see, as Table 1 suggested, that the Africa dummy is positive and signi…cant. Indeed the estimated coe¢ cient
^ A =1.631 (s.e.=0.442) and signi…cant at the 1% level. Though Figure 1 suggested that
is D
relative to much of the world political centralization has been lower historically in Africa, in
the SCCS sample Africa is more centralized on average than the rest of the world. Of most
interest however is the coe¢ cient on the interaction between di and DA . Interestingly we
see ^ dA = 0:317 with standard error=0.115. Not only is the coe¢ cient on the interaction
statistically signi…cant but it is of the opposite sign and very similar in magnitude to the estimated direct e¤ect ^ d . Indeed, it is natural to conjecture that the sum of these coe¢ cients
is statistically indistinguishable from zero. Therefore, in column 1 we report the F-statistic
for this hypothesis which is 0.41 with a p-value of 0.52 suggesting that it is not possible to
reject this null hypothesis. This implies that while for the whole world there is a positive
correlation between population density and political centralization, something many scholars
have conjectured, this correlation is not present in Africa (bearing in mind that this regression does not allow us to say anything about whether there is a causal relationship between
these variables). In column 2 we add the full set of covariates which does little to any of the
estimated coe¢ cients or the standard errors and all the variables are still signi…cant at the
1% level. The p-value for the null hypothesis that there is no correlation between population
density and political centralization in Africa now increases.
In column 3 we then estimate a simple model where we replace population density with
warfare in terms of the frequency of being attacked from outside. Here ^ w = 0:293 with
standard error=0:168 and just signi…cant at the 10% level. Similar to what we found in the

18

…rst two columns, the coe¢ cient on the interaction with the Africa dummy is of opposite
sign and similar magnitude with ^ wA = 0:315 (s.e.=0.382), though it is not statistically
signi…cant. The Africa dummy is also not signi…cant in this regression. We again report the
F statistic and the corresponding p-value for the hypothesis that the sum of the direct and
indirect e¤ects is zero (i.e.

w

+

wA

= 0). As with population density the p-value suggests

that we cannot reject this hypothesis. Column 4 then shows that these estimated e¤ects are
robust to our controlling for geographical characteristics and the disease environment. There
is evidence here that warfare is indeed positively correlated with political centralization for the
whole world but the story for Africa is similar to that with population density - there is no
correlation between being attacked and political centralization.
Columns 5 and 6 then examine the relationship between trade and political centralization,
…rst with our most parsimonious speci…cation and then also with covariates. In column 5
the estimated coe¢ cient of interest is ^ = 0:191 (s.e.=0:112) again positive and statistically
signi…cant at the 10% level, though none of the coe¢ cients of interest are statistically signi…cant
in column 6 once we add the covariates. It is worth noting that we lose about one third of the
sample in examining this channel, so these results might be thought to be even more tentative.
Columns 7-8 then adds all of these variables together without and with covariates and
shows that the point estimate for population density remains statistically signi…cant and hardly
changes in magnitude. Here we test the natural but rather strong hypothesis that all the the
sums of the coe¢ cients of the whole world plus the interaction with the Africa dummy are zero
(i.e.

d

+

dA

= 0 and

+

A

= 0 and

w

+

wA

= 0). The p-value for the F test suggests

that we cannot reject this hypothesis.
Taken together the results of this table show that while the correlations in the SCCS are
consistent with some of the most famous hypotheses about political centralization, this is not
true for Africa. Indeed, in every case, for population density, warfare and trade we cannot reject
the hypothesis that there is no correlation between these variables and political centralization
in Africa.
In Table 4 we then examine the robustness of these results using the di¤erent dependent
variable Levels of Sovereignty. Since the de…nition of this also seems to capture political
centralization it is worthwhile investigating what happens when we use this. The columns of
Table 4 are identical to those of Table 3 but with the di¤erent dependent variable. Taken
together the results with this dependent variable are quite consistent with those in Table 3

19

with a few interesting points. There is less robust evidence that being attacked is a signi…cant
correlate of political centralization for the whole world, while the evidence is more robust for
trade. There is some evidence in the case of being attacked that one can reject the hypothesis
that

w

+

wA

= 0 but if anything the estimated coe¢ cients suggest that in Africa there

is a negative correlation between the frequency of being attacked and political centralization
(though of course one could rationalize such a coe¢ cient as representing reverse causality).
Table 5 now turns to examine some of the other hypotheses which have been proposed
to explain political centralization, in particular …ssion and internal con‡ict measured in two
di¤erent ways. The …rst six columns are designed to examine parsimonious versions of the
hypotheses linking these variables to political centralization while the last four columns add
all the variables simultaneously with and without covariates and with and without population
density. In columns 1 and 2 the main explanatory variable is Fission, in columns 3 and 4 it
is our …rst measure of internal con‡ict “Frequency of Internal War” while in columns 5 and
6 it is our second measure, “Types of violence against overarching political institution.” The
message that comes out of the parsimonious regressions in this table is quite clear. There
is no evidence here for any robust statistically signi…cant correlations between any of these
variables and political centralization giving little support to theories which have proposed
these as important explanatory variables in Africa or anywhere else (though column 1 does
give a suggestion that the relationship in the whole world - though not Africa - does go in the
right direction for the conventional wisdom). The regressions in the last three columns are
more interesting, though given the very small sample size they should be treated with great
caution. Taken at face value they present some evidence that there is a signi…cant and positive
correlation between civil war and political centralization in Africa. There is also some evidence
that there may be a signi…cant relationship between …ssion and centralization, though it has
a sign which is di¤erent from that conjectured in the literature.

4.2

An Identi…cation Strategy

Though the correlations of the last section are interesting we do not propose that they have
a causal interpretation. In this context it is easy to think of many omitted variables which
could be correlated with both the dependent and independent variables. This could cut both
ways. It could imply that the positive correlations we found in the whole world between,
for example trade, and political centralization are spurious. Perhaps centralized polities are

20

better able to enforce property rights and contracts and thus generate more trade, a situation
of reverse causation. Or perhaps political centralization is more likely in places on the coast
or rivers where naturally trade tends to be higher, a case of omitted variable bias. Likewise
as we alluded to above, political centralization could lead to population expansion because it
leads to increased agricultural productivity (as explicitly discussed in Vansina, 1978). In the
African case it could be that other factors are biasing downwards the estimated coe¢ cients.
For instance, it is possible that even though population density does have a positive causal
e¤ect on political centralization, high population density tends to be associated with other
factors which independently depress political centralization, maybe the disease environment.
Though we have tried to control for omitted variables to the extent possible with the SCCS
data this is not a substitute for a proper identi…cation strategy.
Ideally, we would like instruments for all the main independent variables of interest, population density, trade and warfare. Though we investigated several options in the end we
decided that we only had a credible instrument for population density. Still, since this variable
plays the central role in Herbst (2000) and Bates (2001) it is possibly the most interesting to
investigate. It is also almost certainly measured with greater precision than the other variables.
The historical literature suggests a clear source of variation in population density, namely the
agricultural potential of the region in which the state forms. Some work has directly tied the
emergence of political centralization to agricultural potential (see Kottack, 1972, or Reid, 2002,
on Buganda) and the mechanism is clear.7
We therefore now move to estimate 2SLS models where the …rst stage is
di =

p pi

+

i

+

w wi

+ X0i

+

i

(3)

where pi is the agricultural potential of society i and then we estimate the second-stage model
ci =

^+

d di

i

+

w wi

+ X0i + "i

(4)

where the key exclusion restriction is that pi is a determinant of population density but does
not in‡uence the extent of political centralization either directly (so it does not appear in (4))
7

We experimented with other variables as sources of variation. For example, the SCCS contains variables
on the number of societies within various radii, 100 miles, 200 miles etc. This turned out to be uncorrelated
with either trade or warfare. We also examined various measures of disease incidence, such as the intensity of
malaria and “total pathogen stress” as sources of variation in population density. However, all these measures
were strongly positively correlated with population density suggesting reverse causality so we did not develop
these ideas either.

21

or through any other channel. For this exercise we let ci be jurisdictional hierarchy beyond
the local community as in Table 3.
To make these results as easy to interpret as possible, and at the cost of some econometric
e¢ ciency, we estimate (3) and (4) separately for the whole world and Africa. The bottom panel,
panel B of Table 6 presents the results of estimating (3) for both the whole world (columns 1
and 2) and just Africa (columns 3 and 4). In all speci…cations, there is a …rst stage between our
instrument (agricultural potential) and the endogenous variable (population density) though
it is obviously weak in Africa. In column 2 for the whole world we …nd that ^ p = 0:147
(s.e.=0.0397) so highly signi…cant and the regression as an F statistic of 13.67. For Africa in
column 4 when we add the covariates we …nd ^ p = 0:176 (s.e.=0.0928) which is signi…cant at
the 10% level but with an F statistic of only 3.6 suggesting there may be a problem of a weak
instrument (see Andrews and Stock, 2007).
Table 6, panel A, the top panel, then shows the resulting 2SLS estimates of (4). The
magnitude of the 2SLS estimates are higher compared with our previous OLS results in Table
3. For example, in the 2SLS speci…cation ^ d = 0:590 with a standard error of 0:156 compared
with ^ = 0:363 (s.e.= 0:0407) in the corresponding OLS regression. The higher 2SLS point
d

estimates may partly be due to omitted variables which create a downward bias in our OLS
results and it could also be due to classical measurement error biasing downwards the OLS
coe¢ cient, a problem which is solved with a valid IV strategy. However, the general pattern
of our previous …ndings is con…rmed in our IV results as we observe a positive relationship
between population density and state formation in our full sample, but not in the Africa
sub-sample.

5

Conclusions

In this paper we have undertaken to what our knowledge is the …rst systematic empirical
investigation of the extent to which some of the classical hypotheses about the emergence of
political centralization and states using the SCCS dataset. Though our particular focus has
been Africa, this data allows us to put the African experience into a comparative context,
though of course we recognize that there are many issues raised by the potentially selected
nature of SCCS sample and the reliability of the data. Nevertheless, given the very high ratio
of theory to evidence in this literature, such an exercise seems to be justi…ed.
We found that while for the whole world there is very robust evidence that population
22

density is signi…cantly positively correlated with political centralization. We also found some
evidence that the same is true for trade and the frequency of being attacked. Thus for the
whole SCCS sample, the conditional correlations are consistent with some of the most famous
hypotheses about state formation and the emergence of political centralization. We provided
some evidence for the case of population density that these results can be interpreted as causal.
Yet we also showed that none of these correlations are present for Africa. Indeed, none of
the most famous hypotheses about political centralization are consistent with the variation in
political centralization in Africa. We also showed that public goods and development outcomes
are indeed positively correlated with political centralization in the SCCS which is consistent
for the retarded extent of political centralization in Africa historically being an important part
of the explanation for its relative underdevelopment.
These …ndings are very inconsistent with a large recent literature which has attempted to
explain the development of African states through the lens of the Eurasian models (particularly
Herbst, 2000, Bates, 2001, and Reid, 2012a,b). In fact they are more consistent with some
of the views staked out as long ago as 1940 by Evans-Pritchard and Fortes which suggest
that African state formation followed a di¤erent logic to that of Eurasia and indeed the rest
of the world. In some sense this is not surprising. Just thinking about the variation in the
40 polities in the African sub-sample of the SCCS without running any type of regression,
suggests it is very unlikely that there are simple relationships between these classical variables
and the extent of political centralization. The sample includes such societies as the Igbo and
Tiv in Eastern Nigeria and the Kikuyu of Kenya. All lived in fertile zones of high population
density, none featured political centralization. At the same time other societies, such as the
Tswana, lived in much more marginal ecological conditions with low population density, but
states. Similarly the Igbo traded intensely, while Buganda developed without intensive external
contact. It could be that the SCCS sample is in some sense unrepresentative, which the results
of Fenske (2012) might be interpreted to suggest, yet we doubt this is the case. Rather, we
have suggested that the history of African political centralization is instead a fertile source of
ideas for a di¤erent politics of political centralization and state formation.

6

References

Acemoglu, Daron (2005) “Politics and Economics in Weak and Strong States,”Journal of
Monetary Economics, 52, 1199-1226.
23

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2003) “An African
Success: Botswana,” in Dani Rodrik ed. In Search of Prosperity: Analytic Narratives on
Economic Growth, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Acemoglu, Daron, Philip Osafo-Kwaako and James A. Robinson (2012) “Social
Structure and State Formation in Sub-Saharan Africa” work in progress.
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2010) “Why is Africa Poor?”Economic
History of Developing Regions, 25, 21-50.
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2012) Why Nations Fail, New York:
Crown.
Acemoglu, Daron, James A. Robinson and Rafael J. Santos (2013) “The Monopoly
of Violence: Theory and Evidence from Colombia,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 11(1), 5-44.
Acemoglu, Daron, Davide Ticchi and Andrea Vindigni (2011) “Emergence and
Persistence of Ine¢ cient States”Journal of the European Economic Association, 9(2), 177-208.
Alsan, Marcella M. (2012) “The E¤ects of the Tse-Tse Fly on African Development,”
http://www.people.fas.harvard.edu/~malsan/tsetse.pdf
Andrews, Donald A. and James H. Stock (2007) “Inference with Weak Instruments,”
in Richard Blundell, Whitney K. Newey, and Torsten Persson eds. Advances in Economics and
Econometrics, Theory and Applications: Ninth World Congress of the Econometric Society,
Vol. III, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Austen, Ralph A. and Daniel Headrick (1983) “The Role of Technology in the
African past,” African Studies Review, 26, 163-184.
Bates, Robert H. (1983) Essays on the Political Economy of Rural Africa, New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Bates, Robert H. (2001) Prosperity and Violence, New York: W.W. Norton and Co.
Bernardi, Bernardo (1952) “The age-system of the Nilo-Hamitic peoples,” Africa, 22,
316-332.
Bernardi, Bernardo (1985) Age Class Systems: Social Institutions and Polities based
on Age, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Besley, Timothy and Torsten Persson (2011) Pillars of Prosperity, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Braddick, Michael J. (2000) State formation in Early Modern England, c. 1500-1700,

24

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brewer, John (1988) The Sinews of Power: war, money, and the English state, 16881783, New York: Knopf.
Brown, Paula (1951) “Patterns of Authority in West Africa,” Africa, 21(4), 261-278.
Bockstette, Valerie, Areendam Chanda and Louis Putterman (2002) “States and
Markets: The Advantage of an Early Start,” Journal of Economic Growth, 7: 347-69.
Callaghy, Thomas M. (1984) The State-Society Struggle: Zaire in Comparative Perspective, New York: Columbia University Press.
Chaves, Isaías, Stanley L. Engerman and James A. Robinson (2012) “Reinventing
the Wheel: The Economic Impact of Railways Construction in British Colonial West Africa,”in
Emmanuel Akyeampong, Robert H. Bates, Nathan Nunn and James A. Robinson eds. African
Development in Historical Perspective, forthcoming.
Colson, Elizabeth L. (1969) “African Society at the Time of the Scramble,” in Lewis
H. Gann and Peter Duignan eds. Colonialism in Africa, 1870-1960. Vol. 1: The History and
Politics of Colonialism, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Douglas, Mary (1962) “Lele Economy compared to the Bushong,” in Paul Bohannan
and George Dalton eds. Markets in Africa, Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
Douglas, Mary (1963) The Lele of Kasai, New York: Oxford University Press.
Dyson-Hudson, Neville (1963) “The Karimojong Age System,”Ethnology, 2, 353-401.
Dyson-Hudson, Neville (1966) Karimojong Politics, Oxford: The Clarendon Press.
Easterly, William and Ross Levine (1997) “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and
Ethnic Divisions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(4), 1203-1250.
Ehret, Christopher (2012) “Africa in History,” in Emmanuel Akyeampong, Robert H.
Bates, Nathan Nunn and James A. Robinson eds. African Development in Historical Perspective, forthcoming.
Englebert, Pierre (2000) State Legitimacy and Development in Africa, Boulder: Lynne
Rienner.
Evans, Peter B. (1995) Embedded Autonomy, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Evans, Peter B. and James E. Rauch (1999) “Bureaucracy and Growth: A CrossNational Analysis of the E¤ects of ‘Weberian’State Structures on Economic Growth,” American Sociological Review, 64, 748-765.
Evans, Peter B. and James E. Rauch (2000) “Bureaucratic Structure and Bureau-

25

cratic Performance in Less Developed Countries,” Journal of Public Economics, 75, 49-71.
Evans-Pritchard, E.E. and Meyer Fortes eds. (1940) African Political Systems,
London: Oxford University Press.
Fallers, Lloyd A. ed. (1964) The King’s Men, London: Oxford University Press.
Fallers, Lloyd A. (1965) Bantu Bureaucracy: A Century of Political Evolution Among
the Basoga of Uganda, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Fenske, James (2012) “Ecology, Trade and States in Pre-Colonial Africa,”
http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/40968/1/FenskeEcologyAug2012.pdf
Gennaioli, Nicola and Ilia Rainer (2007) “The Modern Impact of Pre-Colonial Centralization in Africa,” Journal of Economic Growth, 12(3), 185-234.
Goody, Jack (1971) Technology, Tradition and the State in Africa, New York; Cambridge
University Press.
Herbst, Je¤rey I. (2000) States and Power in Africa, Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Hopkins, Anthony G. (1973) An Economic History of West Africa, New York: Addison
Wesley Longman.
Inikori, Joseph E. (1992) The Chaining of a Continent: the export demand for Captives
and the History of Africa South of the Sahara, 1450-1870, Mona: University of the West Indies.
Inikori, Joseph (2012) “Reversal of Fortune and Socioeconomic Development in the
Atlantic World: A Comparative Examination of West Africa and the Americas, 1400-1850,”in
Emmanuel Akyeampong, Robert H. Bates, Nathan Nunn and James A. Robinson eds. African
Development in Historical Perspective, forthcoming.
Jerven, Morten (2010) “African Growth Recurring: An Economic History Perspective
on African Growth Episodes, 1690-2010,”Economic History of Developing Regions, 25:2, 127154.
Kopyto¤, Igor (1989) The African Frontier: The Reproduction of Traditional African
Societies, Bloomington: University of Indiana Press.
Kottak, Conrad P. (1972) “Ecological variables in the origin and evolution of African
states: the Buganda example,” Comparative Studies in Society and History, 14, 351- 380.
Law, Robin C. (1980) “Wheeled Transportation in Pre-Colonial West Africa,” Africa,
50, 249-262.
Leith, Clark J. (2005) Why Botswana Prospered, Montreal: McGill University Press.

26

Lewis, Ioan (1961) A Pastoral Democracy: A Study of Pastoralism and Politics among
the Northern Somali of the Horn of Africa, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McIntosh, Roderick J. (2005) Ancient Middle Niger: Urbanism and the Self-Organizing
Past, New York: Cambridge University Press.
McIntosh, Susan K. ed. (1999a) Pathways to Complexity, New York: Cambridge
University Press.
McIntosh, Susan K. (1999b) ”Introduction” in Susan K. McIntosh ed. Pathways to
Complexity, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Michalopoulos, Stelios and Elias Papaioannou (2011) “Divide and Rule or the Rule
of the Divided? Evidence from Africa,” NBER Working Papers #17184.
Murdock, George P. and Douglas R. White (1969) “Standard Cross-Cultural Sample,” Ethnology, 9, 329-369.
Nunn, Nathan (2008) “The Long Term E¤ects of Africa’s Slave Trades,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 123(1), 139-176.
Parsons, Q. Neil and James A. Robinson (2006) “State Formation and Governance
in Botswana”, Journal of African Economies, 15, 100-140.
Prins, Adriaan H.J. (1953) East African Age-Class Systems: An Inquiry into the Social
Order of the Galla, Kipsigis and Kikuyu, London: Greenwood Press.
Radcli¤e-Brown, A.R. (1929) “Age Sets - Terminology,” Man, 29(1), 31.
Reid, Richard J. (2002) Political Power Pre Colonial Buganda: Economy Society And
Warfare, Oxford: James Currey.
Reid, Richard J. (2012a) “The Fragile Revolution: Rethinking War and Development
in Africa’s Violent Nineteenth Century,”in Emmanuel Akyeampong, Robert H. Bates, Nathan
Nunn and James A. Robinson eds. African Development in Historical Perspective, forthcoming.
Reid, Richard J. (2012b) Warfare in Pre-Colonial Africa, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Sachs, Je¤rey D and Warner, Andrew M. (1997) “Sources of Slow Growth in African
Economies,” Journal of African Economies, 6, 335-76.
Schapera, Isaac (1940) “The Ngwato,”in Meyer Fortes and Edward E. Evans-Pritchard
eds. African Political Systems, New York: Oxford University Press.
Scott, James C. (2010) The Art of Not Being Governed, New Haven: Yale University
Press.

27

Slater, Dan (2010) Ordering Power: Contentious Politics and Authoritarian Leviathans
in Southeast Asia, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Stanish, Charles (2001) “The Origin of State Societies in South America,” Annual
Review of Anthropology, 30, 41-64.
Stevenson, Robert L. (1968) Population and Political Systems in Tropical Africa, New
York: Columbia University Press.
Thornton, John (1992) “Pre-Colonial African Industry and the Atlantic Trade, 15001800,” African Economic History Review, 19, 1-19.
Tilly, Charles ed. (1975) The Formation of national States in Western Europe, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Tuden, Arthur, and Catherine Marshall (1972) “Political Organization: CrossCultural Codes,” Ethnology, 11:436-464.
Turner, Thomas and Crawford Young (1985) The Rise and Decline of the Zairean
State, Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Vansina, Jan (1978) The Children of Woot: A History of the Kuba Peoples, Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press.
Vansina, Jan (1999) “Pathways of political development in Equatorial Africa and neoevolutionary theory,” in Susan K. McIntosh ed. Pathways to Complexity, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Vansina, Jan (2004) Antecedents to Modern Rwanda, Madison: University of Wisconsin
Press.
Vengro¤, Richard (1976) “Population Density and State Formation in Africa,”African
Studies Review, 19(1), 67-74.

28

1

184

Observations

82

1.000
1.183
2.675
1.623
1.486
2.571
1.229
3.238
15.92
1.476
2.182
11.70
13.79
-10.83
428.1
2.610
1.463
1.148
1.308
1.914
1.341
1.646
0.061
1.452
102

2.951
2.670
4.569
1.904
1.602
2.000
1.311
3.393
17.45
1.255
2.402
13.32
15.31
34.66
435.8
2.907
2.040
1.847
1.767
3.178
2.771
2.892
0.304
1.873

High Political
Centralization
(4)

Full Sample

Low Political
Centralization
(3)
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.016
0.288
0.004
0.745
0.438
0.003
0.016
0.100
0.003
0.684
0.001
0.935
0.228
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.012

P-value
(3) vs. (4)
(5)

40

2.500
2.325
4.150
1.875
1.719
2.333
1.235
3.182
17.45
1.650
2.800
16.28
3.252
20.33
743.7
2.650
1.538
1.447
1.324
2.525
1.816
1.875
0.550
1.545

(6)

All

21

1.571
1.619
4.000
1.941
1.765
2.333
1.000
2.750
17.10
1.619
2.810
15.95
4.056
20.66
720.6
2.000
1.500
1.350
1.286
2.238
1.150
1.238
0.429
1.625

Low Political
Centralization
(7)

19

3.526
3.105
4.316
1.800
1.667
2.333
1.364
3.429
17.84
1.684
2.789
16.63
2.362
19.96
769.4
3.083
1.579
1.556
1.375
2.842
2.556
2.579
0.684
1.500

High Political
Centralization
(8)

Africa

0.000
0.000
0.543
0.522
0.711
1.000
0.623
0.071
0.399
0.773
0.919
0.484
0.661
0.892
0.794
0.033
0.798
0.363
0.710
0.145
0.003
0.001
0.110
0.712

P-value
(7) vs. (8)
(9)

NOTES: Summary statistics obtained from the SCCS dataset. Political centralization refers to “Jurisdictional hierarchy beyond local community” (variable §237 in the SCCS) which ranges from 1 (No levels i.e. no political authority beyond community) to 5 (Four levels e.g.,
large states). For columns (3) and (4), Low Political Centralization refers to observations where §237 equals 1, while High Political Centralization refers to cases where variable §237 equals 2 or higher. Additional variables obtained from the SCCS are as follows: levels of
sovereignty (§83), population density (§64), being attacked in war (§893), civil war, i.e. frequency of internal war (§891), fission i.e. local
political fission of dissatisfied persons (§785), insurrection i.e. violence against overarching political institutions (§1739), trade i.e. market
exchange outside community (§1734), and agricultural potential (§921). Total pathogen stress, malaria prevalence and trypanosomes prevalence are respectively variables §1260, §1255, and §1254. Additional variables are as follows: market exchange within local community
(var. §1733), mode of land transport (head porterage, wheeled vehicles, motorized vehicles, etc.) (var. §13), types of land transport routes
(trails, unpaved roads, paved roads, etc.) (var. §14), availability of credit (var. §18), use of money as medium of exchange (var. §17), presence of police service (var. §90), availability of writing and record-keeping (var. §149), metal smelting (var. §129), and communality of land
(var. §1726) — this variable is re-scaled, so that higher values refer to the availability of property rights in land.

2.082
1.989
3.761
1.778
1.550
2.250
1.296
3.333
16.73
1.355
2.301
12.58
14.66
14.55
448.6
2.791
1.795
1.536
1.550
2.607
2.100
2.349
0.199
1.694

(2)

(1)

Political centralization
Levels of sovereignty
Population density
Being attacked
Civil war
Fission
Insurrection
Trade
Agricultural potential
Trypanosomes
Malaria
Total pathogen stress
Latitude
Longitude
Altitude
Market exchange
Mode of transport
Land transport routes
Availability of credit
Money
Police
Writing and record-keeping
Metal smelting
Property rights in land

All

Variables

TABLE 1: SUMMARY STATISTICS

2

95
0.093

Observations
R-squared

183
0.398

0.432***
(0.0798)
179
0.459

0.425***
(0.0497)

Land
transport
routes
(3)

168
0.252

0.221***
(0.0665)

(4)

Availability
of credit

182
0.395

0.486***
(0.0869)

(5)

Money

178
0.483

0.927***
(0.0724)

(6)

Police

184
0.595

0.678***
(0.0754)

(7)

Writing and
record-keeping

184
0.320

0.0784***
(0.0266)

(8)

Metal
smelting

97
0.249

0.167**
(0.0729)

Property
rights
in land
(9)

NOTES: Dependent variables in columns (1) to (9) are as follows: market exchange within local community (var. §1733), mode of
land transport (head porterage, wheeled vehicles, motorized vehicles, etc.) (var. §13), types of land transport routes (trails, unpaved
roads, paved roads, etc.) (var. §14), availability of credit (var. §18), use of money as medium of exchange (var. §17), presence of
police service (var. §90), availability of writing and record-keeping (var. §149), metal smelting (var. §129), and communality of land
(var. §1726) — this variable is re-scaled, so that higher values refer to the availability of property rights in land. All columns include
continent fixed e↵ects and controls for geographic characteristics and the disease environment. Continent fixed e↵ects provide separate
intercepts for 5 regions: Africa, Mediterranean, Eurasia, the Pacific, North America and South America. Geographic controls are for
longitude and latitude. Disease environment controls are for total pathogen stress (SCCS var. §1260), which is a measure of prevalence
and severity of seven pathogens (leishmanias, trypanosomes, malaria, schistosomes, filariae, spirochetes, and leprosy). Robust standard
errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

0.252**
(0.122)

(2)

(1)

Political
Centralization

Mode of
transport

Market
exchange

TABLE 2: POLITICAL CENTRALIZATION AND ECONOMIC INSTITUTIONS

TABLE 3: CORRELATES OF STATE FORMATION
(FULL SCCS SAMPLE)
Dependent variable: Jurisdictional hierarchy beyond local community (SCCS Var. §237)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Population density
Africa*Population density
Being attacked

0.386***
(0.0407)
-0.317***
(0.115)

0.363***
(0.0403)
-0.325***
(0.112)

Africa*Being attacked
Trade

0.293*
(0.168)
-0.315
(0.382)

0.364**
(0.146)
-0.472
(0.379)

3

0.172
(0.115)
0.104
(0.263)
0.253
(0.862)

0.361***
(0.0609)
-0.217
(0.180)
0.263
(0.170)
-0.102
(0.366)
0.0113
(0.107)
0.294
(0.227)
0.595
(1.271)

(8)
0.295***
(0.0590)
-0.173
(0.171)
0.253
(0.175)
-0.220
(0.382)
-0.0375
(0.117)
0.408*
(0.227)
0.263
(1.326)

1.631***
(0.442)

1.644***
(0.413)

0.975
(0.780)

1.064
(0.793)

0.191*
(0.112)
-0.000762
(0.258)
0.863
(0.823)

F-stat
p-value
Geographic controls
Disease environment control

0.41
0.52
NO
NO

0.13
0.72
YES
YES

0.00
0.95
NO
NO

0.10
0.76
YES
YES

0.67
0.41
NO
NO

1.37
0.24
YES
YES

1.06
0.37
NO
NO

1.46
0.23
YES
YES

Observations
R-squared

182
0.342

182
0.369

152
0.040

152
0.206

98
0.099

98
0.272

94
0.381

94
0.440

Africa*Trade
Africa dummy

NOTES: Geographic controls are for longitude and latitude. Disease environment controls are for total pathogen stress (SCCS
var. §1260), which is a measure of prevalence and severity of seven pathogens (leishmanias, trypanosomes, malaria, schistosomes, filariae, spirochetes, and leprosy). F-stat is for the test examining the hypothesis that the sum of the direct e↵ect and
the interaction e↵ect in Africa equals zero. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

4

182
0.355

Observations
R-squared

182
0.373

0.27
0.60
YES
YES

1.445***
(0.535)

0.379***
(0.0379)
-0.314**
(0.129)

(2)

152
0.028

2.07
0.15
NO
NO

1.428**
(0.709)

0.199
(0.156)
-0.645*
(0.347)

(3)

152
0.187

3.10
0.08
YES
YES

1.456**
(0.694)

0.263*
(0.140)
-0.789**
(0.327)

(4)

99
0.108

0.00
0.99
NO
NO

0.248**
(0.103)
-0.254
(0.340)
1.695
(1.126)

(5)

99
0.321

0.08
0.78
YES
YES

0.260**
(0.104)
-0.165
(0.362)
0.980
(1.231)

(6)

95
0.401

0.24
0.87
NO
NO

0.397***
(0.0542)
-0.293
(0.220)
0.106
(0.147)
-0.263
(0.323)
0.0255
(0.0898)
0.0511
(0.375)
1.995
(1.569)

(7)

95
0.505

0.58
0.63
YES
YES

0.325***
(0.0516)
-0.272
(0.199)
0.0423
(0.137)
-0.397
(0.331)
0.0102
(0.0918)
0.160
(0.393)
1.620
(1.664)

(8)

NOTES: Geographic controls are for longitude and latitude. Disease environment controls are for total pathogen stress
(SCCS var. §1260), which is a measure of prevalence and severity of seven pathogens (leishmanias, trypanosomes, malaria,
schistosomes, filariae, spirochetes, and leprosy). F-stat reports the test statistic for hypothesis that the sum of the direct e↵ect
and the interaction e↵ect in Africa equals zero. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

0.62
0.43
NO
NO

1.415**
(0.560)

0.388***
(0.0353)
-0.288**
(0.131)

F-stat
p-value
Geographic controls
Disease environment control

Africa dummy

Africa*Trade

Trade

Africa*Being attacked

Being attacked

Africa*Population density

Population density

(1)

Dependent variable: Levels of sovereignty (SCCS Var. §83)

TABLE 4: CORRELATES OF STATE FORMATION

5

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

64
0.115

Observations
R-squared

64
0.195

0.20
0.66
YES
YES

-0.581
(1.384)

-0.200
(0.154)
0.436
(0.555)

158
0.018

0.06
0.81
NO
NO

0.407
(0.608)

-0.0727
(0.157)
0.00814
(0.305)

158
0.155

0.48
0.49
YES
YES

0.280
(0.647)

-0.119
(0.163)
-0.0623
(0.312)

80
0.085

1.07
0.30
NO
NO

0.582
(0.486)

-0.0363
(0.164)
0.220
(0.242)

80
0.266

1.17
0.28
YES
YES

0.309
(0.581)

-0.0858
(0.145)
0.301
(0.247)

31
0.382

2.66
0.07
NO
NO

-4.458***
(1.442)

-0.355*
(0.207)
1.236**
(0.556)
-0.370
(0.234)
1.477**
(0.597)
0.102
(0.171)
-0.294
(0.374)

31
0.482

2.83
0.06
YES
YES

-4.751**
(1.807)

-0.275
(0.270)
1.415**
(0.670)
-0.231
(0.212)
1.414**
(0.653)
0.0942
(0.176)
-0.384
(0.419)

(8)

31
0.536

1.97
0.14
NO
NO

-0.124
(0.202)
0.980
(0.643)
-0.335**
(0.160)
1.474**
(0.624)
0.0909
(0.129)
-0.295
(0.380)
0.235***
(0.0739)
-0.270
(0.442)
-2.819
(2.929)

(9)

31
0.618

2.18
0.11
YES
YES

-0.207
(0.189)
1.360*
(0.717)
-0.244
(0.163)
1.442*
(0.702)
0.147
(0.131)
-0.441
(0.429)
0.243***
(0.0624)
-0.258
(0.482)
-3.687
(3.184)

(10)

NOTES: Geographic controls are for longitude a+nd latitude. Disease environment controls are for total pathogen stress (SCCS var. §1260),
which is a measure of prevalence and severity of seven pathogens (leishmanias, trypanosomes, malaria, schistosomes, filariae, spirochetes, and
leprosy). F-stat reports the test statistic for hypothesis that the sum of the direct e↵ect and the interaction e↵ect in Africa equals zero. Robust
standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

0.02
0.90
NO
NO

-0.232
(1.268)

-0.298**
(0.140)
0.361
(0.527)

F-stat
p-value
Geographic controls
Disease environment control

Africa dummy

Africa*Population density

Population density

Africa*Insurrection

Insurrection

Africa*Civil war

Civil war

Africa*Fission

Fission

(2)

Dep. variable: Jurisd. hierarchy beyond local community (SCCS var. §237)

(1)

TABLE 5: CORRELATES OF STATE FORMATION — OTHER HYPOTHESES

TABLE 6: INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLE RESULTS
Full Sample
(1)

(2)

Africa Subsample
(3)

(4)

PANEL A: SECOND STAGE REGRESSION
Dep. var.: Jurisdictional hierarchy beyond
local community (SCCS §237)
Population density

0.461***
(0.117)

0.590***
(0.156)

0.337
(0.294)

0.503
(0.451)

PANEL B: FIRST STAGE REGRESSION
Dep. var.: Pop. density (SCCS §64)
Agricultural potential

0.168***
(0.0353)

0.147***
(0.0397)

0.231**
(0.0995)

0.176*
(0.0928)

22.63

13.67

5.39

3.60

Geographic controls
Disease environment control

NO
NO

YES
YES

NO
NO

YES
YES

Observations

184

184

40

40

F-stat

NOTES: In Panel B, the instrument is agricultural potential (SCCS var. § 921). Regressions
in columns (1) and (2) includes a dummy for the African region. Geographic controls are
for longitude and latitude. Disease environment controls are for total pathogen stress (SCCS
var. §1260), which is a measure of prevalence and severity of seven pathogens (leishmanias,
trypanosomes, malaria, schistosomes, filariae, spirochetes, and leprosy). Robust standard
errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

6

7
North America

Middle East

1800

1950

Figure 1: Index of State Antiquity (from Bockstette, Chanda and Putterman (2002)).

Oceania

Latin America and Caribbean

Year

1700

Sub-Saharan Africa

1500

Asia

1000

Europe

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

Index of 0.5
State
Antiquity 0.4

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

Index of State Antiquity
(Bockstette, Chanda and Putterman (2002))

!

Tuareg
!

!

!

Wolof

Songhai
!

!

Mende

Pastoral Fulani

!

Bambara

!

!

!

Teda

Tallensi
!

Hausa

Fur (Darfur)
Otoro Nuba!
ShillukMao

Massa (Masa)

!

!

!

Ashanti!Fon
!

Tiv
Ibo
!
Banen

!

!

!
!

!

Azande

!

!

Bogo

Amhara

Mbuti

Nkundo Mongo

!

Kaffa (Kafa)
Konso
!

Ganda

Kikuyu

!

Hadza!Masai
!

!

Suku
!
!

!

Bemba

Mbundu

!

!

!

!

Luguru

Nyakyusa

Lozi

Kung Bushmen

Nama Hottentot

!

Thonga

Figure 2: African Ethnic Groups (sub-Sahara) in SCCS Dataset.

8

!

Somali

