                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         NATIONAL BANKING'S ROLE IN U.S. INDUSTRIALIZATION, 1850-1900

                                         Matthew S. Jaremski

                                         Working Paper 18789
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18789


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2013




The author thanks Peter Rousseau, Jeremy Atack, Greg Niemesh, Robert Margo, Price Fishback, Richard
Sylla, Eugene White, John James, Jon Moen, Paul Rhode, as well as participants at the NBER-DAE
Summer Institute and the University of Arizona for their insightful comments and suggestions on various
drafts. He also thanks the Economic History Association for financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Matthew S. Jaremski. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
National Banking's Role in U.S. Industrialization, 1850-1900
Matthew S. Jaremski
NBER Working Paper No. 18789
February 2013
JEL No. G21,N21,O43

                                              ABSTRACT

The passage of the National Banking Acts stabilized the existing financial system and encouraged
the entry of 729 banks between 1863 and 1866. The national banks not only attracted more deposits
than previous state banks, but also concentrated in the area that would eventually become the Manufacturing
Belt. Using a new bank census, the paper shows that these changes to the financial system were a major
determinant of the geographic distribution of manufacturing. The sudden entry not only resulted in
more manufacturing capital and output at the county-level, but also more steam engines and value
added at the establishment-level.


Matthew S. Jaremski
Colgate University
Department of Economics
13 Oak Drive
Hamilton, NY 13346
and NBER
mjaremski@colgate.edu
1. Introduction
       Economists posit several reasons for a nation's industrialization: technological innovation
(Goldin and Sokoloff 1982; Engerman and Sokoloff 2000), railroad development (Fishlow 1965;
Williamson 1975), and a strong financial system (Gerschenkron 1962; McKinnon 1973). The
first two factors have been studied at a local level, but the third has traditionally only been
studied using cross-country panels (King and Levin 1994) or aggregated time-series for a single
country (Rousseau and Sylla 2005). These approaches are informative but cannot examine the
geographic distribution of production. This aspect is particularly important for the United States
where industrial production was concentrated in certain counties within the Manufacturing Belt.
Using the first nation-wide bank census spanning 1850 through 1900, this paper examines the
effect of the National Banking Acts on the county-level distribution of U.S. manufacturing.
       Agricultural production dominated in the U.S. before the Civil War. The early industrial
sector was composed of small shops that hired one or two laborers to hand-craft the product. The
few mechanized shops used water power which limited their location and prevented production
throughout the winter months. During the 1840s and 1850s, however, workers in textile mills,
iron foundries, and locomotive works laid the foundation for an industrial revolution by
developing new production techniques and technology (Thomson 2009). Manufacturing still
remained concentrated in the Northeast and focused on the production of primary products, but
the acquired knowledge began to spread throughout the nation (Meyer 1989, 2006).
       Drawing on preceding innovation, the nation experienced a shift of manufacturing after
the Civil War. Most new establishments and industries located in the Midwest and Middle
Atlantic portions of the Manufacturing Belt and mechanized their production processes. For
instance, Atack et al. (2003, 2008) find that the ratio of capital to output in the Belt dramatically
increased during the 1870’s as a result of investment in steam engines. Firms during the
postbellum also began to increase their value added (Niemi 1974).
       Studies such as Perloff (1960), Meyer (1983, 1989), and Klein and Crafts (2010) argue
that railroads and urbanization were responsible for the shift to the Manufacturing Belt. The
traditional story is that urbanization increased demand for industrial goods and railroads enabled
owners to take advantage of the new technology and scale up production rather than allowing




                                                  1
others to serve the new markets. While necessary for mechanization, these elements cannot
explain the geographic distribution of factories since most counties had a railroad by 1860.2
        Recent work has suggested that the National Banking Acts of 1863 and 1864 can explain
why entrepreneurs in certain areas were able to establish mechanized factories while others were
not. Jaremski (2012) finds that 729 new banks entered locations along what would become the
Manufacturing Belt within four years of the legislation. For instance, there was only one state
bank operating in Chicago in 1861, but 15 national banks were created in the city by 1866. Bank
entry was particularly important in the postbellum due to the relative primitive road network.3 As
few individuals could borrow from a bank in another county or state, Sylla (1969) and James
(1976) argue that entry was necessary to reduce monopoly interest rates. The surge in banks thus
should have increased the amount of loanable funds, lowered the cost of borrowing, and enabled
entrepreneurs to invest in capital along the Manufacturing Belt.
        The National Banking Acts could also have been responsible for the persistence of the
Belt. The legislation greatly increased banking in certain areas and its high capital requirements
limited expansion in rural and agricultural areas. As a result, banks remained concentrated in
certain areas of the Manufacturing Belt until the return of state banks during the late 1880s.
Ransom and Sutch (1972, 1977) highlight how the lack of banks in the South slowed industrial
development. Bensel (2000) even goes so far as to argue that most economic policy during the
period redistributed wealth from the West and South (the “peripheral” zones) to the Midwest and
North (the “core” zone).4 In this way, those counties that received a bank during the 1860s would
have had a sizable head start and other counties would not have been able to quickly catch up.
        While state banks would have continued to enter the market in absence of the National
Banking Acts, the stability created by the Acts' high capital and reserve requirements might also
have been necessary for the industrialization. Over a quarter of the 2,200 state banks created
before 1863 defaulted on their notes, whereas less than 5 percent of the more than 5,500 national
banks created before 1900 defaulted.5 Therefore, while Jaremski and Rousseau (2012) show that
the instability of state banks prevented them from having a consistent contribution to economic

2
  Even when including those counties with boundary changes, fewer than 15% of Midwest counties did not have a
railroad in 1860, and even fewer counties in the Northeast did not (Atack et al. 2010, 2011).
3
  See Baum-Snow (2006) and Ramcharan (2008).
4
  Bensel relates that a large portion of western credit was provided at high interest rates by eastern banks.
5
  State bank defaults are taken from Weber (2005) and the Merchants and Bankers' Directory, and national banks
defaults are taken from the Comptroller’s Annual Report in 1900.

                                                       2
growth, Sylla (1969, p. 685) argues that national banking "promoted industrial investment and
growth with a ruthless efficiency".
       The lack of bank-level data has prevented a comprehensive examination of banks and
local economic growth. Seminal studies such as Davis (1965), Sylla (1969), and James (1976)
focus on regional or state differences, whereas the few bank-level studies focus only on a couple
of states (Keehn 1974; Redenius 2002) or only on national banks (Fulford 2010) after 1870.
Therefore, no study has examined the sudden entry of banks during the 1860's or compared
national banks to state banks. As these changes could have contributed to the pattern of
industrialization, I construct a comprehensive bank census from 1850 to 1900 using annual
editions of Merchants and Bankers’ Directory and Rand McNally Bankers’ Directory and
Weber's antebellum bank census (2005). The data are then linked to manufacturing census
records at the county-level (Haines 2004) and the establishment-level (Atack and Bateman
1999), allowing a test of whether the availability of finance altered production decisions.
       The data indicate that the National Banking Acts were a major determinant of the
geographic distribution of manufacturing. Counties that gained a bank immediately after the
legislation experienced an increase of 3.1 percent manufacturing capital per capita and 1.3
percent output per capita relative to counties that did not gain a bank. At the establishment-level,
a new bank not only increased capital by 5.2 percent and output by 3.0 percent, but also
encouraged them to invest in steam power and increase their value added. Moreover, the gap
between counties that gained a bank and those that had no change grew over time, indicating the
legislation helped sustain the concentration of production within the Manufacturing Belt.


2. The Development of the Manufacturing Belt
       Popularized by DeGreer (1927) and Garver et al. (1933), the Manufacturing Belt
describes a geographic region that became the heart of American industrialization. Historians
illustrate the Belt as a parallelogram with points at Milwaukee, St. Louis, Baltimore, and Boston.
As seen in Figure 1, the description is a useful approximation, but ignores the large within-region
variation. For example, the agricultural areas of western Indiana and southern Illinois are
included in the region, yet the industrial areas south of Baltimore are not included. Pockets of
manufacturing eventually developed in western North Carolina and California, yet the Belt still
produced the vast majority of the country's industrial goods through 1970. Industrial production,

                                                 3
therefore, remained concentrated in the Middle Atlantic and Midwest long after their natural
resources were depleted and population had spread throughout the country.
        Early manufacturing was often determined by the location and size of demand. Due to
high transportation costs, establishments could not operate far from natural resources or produce
significantly more than the local market was willing to consume. Most entrepreneurs, therefore,
did not have the incentive (or need) to greatly expand or mechanize production.6 Even the few
shops that employed inanimate power had to rely on waterwheels which constrained their
location and halted production during the summer and winter months (Hunter 1979).
        The manufacturing sector began to innovate during the 1840s and 1850s. Entrepreneurs
in key industries developed new production techniques, leading to a buildup of information.
Meyer (2006) shows that machinists created a network to share technology, whereas Thomson
(2009) describes how technological progress in one industry carried over to the machines of
another. The last decades of the antebellum period, therefore, were a time of innovation that set
the stage for the rise of factories.
        The Manufacturing Belt fully took shape after the Civil War. First, while most
manufacturing had been concentrated in Northeast, postbellum firms tended to locate in the
Midwest. Second, firms across the Belt implemented the recent technological innovation. The
real value of capital per dollar of output increased 10% in the 1850s, but over 18% in the 1860s
and 30% in the 1870s. Atack et al. (2003, 2008) argue that the capital deepening was due to the
adoption of steam engines. The engines allowed establishments to shift away from running
water, operate year-round, and increase their total factor productivity.7 Chandler (1977) also
shows that establishments increased their scale of production after Civil War.
        The Census data in Table 1 illustrate the shift of production into the Manufacturing Belt
and the increasing importance of capital. The Middle Atlantic and New England states
dominated early production, respectively producing 45% and 27% of all U.S. manufacturing
goods in 1850.8 However, by 1900, New England's share of output fell to 14%, while the
Midwest's share doubled from 11 to 25%. The Middle Atlantic fared better (falling slightly to

6
  North (1961) and Field (1978) describe early manufacturing.
7
  Atack, Bateman, and Weiss (1980), and Brown and Philips (1986) examine steam engine diffusion. Golden and
Katz (1998) show that the adoption of electricity continued the technological revolution.
8
  As documented by Gallman (1956) and Davis (2004) among others, manufacturing is not consistently well-defined
over time. Early manufacturing was largely focused on primary products while later manufacturing was
characterized by secondary products.

                                                      4
38%), yet production within the region had also begun to shift to the southwest. The Midwest's
rise and the Middle Atlantic's sustained importance seem to have been the result of higher
investment. Indeed, manufacturing capital in both regions continued to expand even as
population growth slowed.
         Studies such as Perloff (1960), Meyer (1983, 1989), and Klein and Crafts (2010) explain
that when travel costs were high it was only feasible to supply a small region, but as the railroad
network and urban demand grew, manufacturers were able to build factories and supply a large
region. However, while these factors explain why the scale of production and capital investment
could expand, they cannot explain why factories were established in some counties but not in
others. Because of the necessary scale of investment, I focus my attention on the nation's banking
system. Bodenhorn and Cuberes (2010) and Fulford (2010) show that a bank’s presence (or lack
thereof) influenced the speed of local economic growth, but to date, no study has examined the
effect of the National Banking Acts in 1863 and 1864. The rest of the paper tests whether the
changes brought about by the legislation contributed to the postbellum’s distribution of
manufacturing.


3. Finance and Growth Data
         The previous lack of county-level bank data has prevented a comprehensive examination
of U.S. manufacturing and banking. I fill this gap by assembling a nation-wide bank database
from 1850 to 1900. The majority of the data come from the Merchants and Bankers’ Directory
(1860- 1880) and Rand McNally Bankers’ Directory (1890-1900). Similar to modern telephone
books, the bank directories reportedly provide “A complete list of banks, bankers, savings banks,
and principle trust companies”. The directories include the name and location of each bank, as
well as whether they were chartered by a state legislature (called a state bank), the Comptroller
of the Currency (called a national bank), or had no formal charter (called a private banker). 9 I
construct the county-level database by counting the number of all banks that were in operation
from the directory containing information closest to the end of the specified year.10 Because I

9
 The Merchants and Bankers Directory separated bank types into different sections during the early years, while it
lists national banks with their charter number and indented private bankers in other years. The Rand McNally
Directory had special symbols that came after the bank’s name.
10
   Due to the delay of publishing early during the period, the first directory of each year often had the list of banks
for December of the previous year. 1861 is used for 1860, 1864 is used for 1863, 1867 is used for 1866, 1871 is used
for 1870, 1880 is used for 1880, 1890 is used for 1890, and 1900 is used for 1900.

                                                          5
cannot consistently obtain directories before 1860, I link the census to Weber’s antebellum
database (2005) to measure the number of banks in 1850. The resulting database is the most
extensive source of bank information available for the period. The few departures from previous
estimates seem to be due to the timing of observation within the year and the difficulty of
separating private bankers from state banks. Whenever possible, I check the data for errors by
comparing the same bank in different years and across the two directories.
        I link the banking census to two separate manufacturing databases. The first is the
county-census database collected by Haines (2004). The database contains the number of
manufacturing establishments as well as their aggregate capital and output. In order to construct
a consistent panel from 1850 to 1900, I drop out counties that had significant boundary changes
over the period.11 I also restrict the sample to Midwest and Northeast states established prior to
1863 in order to avoid the South's destruction during the Civil War and the institutional changes
in frontier states. As seen in Figure 2, the resulting panel contains decennial observations for 650
counties in 19 states.12
        The second is the establishment-level database collected by Atack and Bateman (1999).
The authors formed the database by drawing representative samples of establishments from the
1850, 1860, 1870, and 1880 Census of Manufacturing. The database contains the base
information for the variables in the county-level data (i.e. manufacturing output and capital), as
well as other characteristics that were not tabulated at the county-level, such as value of inputs,
number of workers, and type of power. Due to self-reporting errors, I follow Atack, Bateman,
and Margo (2008) and drop establishments with (1) no adult employees, (2) non-positive inputs,
capital, or valued added, (3) mixed power sources, (4) extreme rates of return, or (5) a Standard
Industrial Classification codes of 351 (Steam engines), 492 (Gas works), or 999 (Miscellaneous).
In addition to restricting the sample to Midwest and Northeast states, I weight establishments in
1880 to account for industries that were under sampled due to lost data.13 The resulting sample
contains 5,879 establishments in 1850, 5,734 in 1860, 6,185 in 1870, and 8,009 in 1880.



11
   I restrict the sample to counties whose boundaries did not change by more than 2.5 percent over the period
(Minnesota Population Center 2004). The results are not sensitive to slightly tighter or looser cutoffs.
12
   The sample contains: Midwest: Michigan, Indiana, Illinois, Ohio, Wisconsin, Minnesota, Kentucky; Great Plains:
Kansas, Iowa, Missouri; Middle Atlantic: Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Maryland, Delaware, New York; New
England: Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Rhode Island
13
   The under sampling was the result of certain industries being surveyed separately and lost by Census officials.

                                                        6
4. Bank Growth and the National Banking Acts
       The antebellum banking system was infamously unstable: nearly 25% of state banks
closed and did not fully repay their noteholders before 1863. Despite the volatility, financial
reform was only politically feasible after the Civil War removed Southern congressmen and
drained the Union's resources. Secretary of the Treasury Salmon Chase initially raised war funds
by issuing greenbacks and selling national debt through the state banking system. However, after
the debt issues caused a specie suspension, Chase pushed for the National Banking Acts, first
passed in 1863 and then revised in 1864. The legislation was crafted to raise revenue, mitigate
the default risk of the previous system, and introduce a more uniform bank currency.
       First, the Act’s avoided land speculation by prohibiting loans secured by real estate.
Second, they avoided free banking’s attachment to risky state debt by requiring the use of U.S.
Treasury bonds to back bank notes at 90 percent of their value. In this way, banks had to deposit
$100 worth of Treasury bonds for every $90 of notes they issued. Third, they prevented the
creation of rural banks by increasing capital requirements and mandating that it be submitted in
Treasury bonds. The required use of Treasury bonds as capital and note collateral was intended
to help raise funds from national banks, and Congress also passed a 10 percent tax on state bank
notes in 1865 to raise revenue from them or force them to convert to a national charter.
       Even though the new rules only applied to national banks, Congress naively believed that
most state banks would willingly convert to the higher requirements and few new banks would
enter the market. However, by the end of 1866, 729 national banks were created with new
capital, 934 state banks converted to a national charter, and 364 other state banks were driven out
of the market (Jaremski 2012). The banking system increased by over 350 banks and $40 million
in capital, but the geographic changes brought about by the legislation were even more sizable.
Figure 3 shows converted banks were typically in the Northeast, closed banks were in rural areas
of the Midwest and South, and new national banks were spread across the center of the nation in
states such as Indiana, Ohio, and Pennsylvania. The distribution of banks in the Northeast
remained the same, whereas the distributions in other regions dramatically changed.
       The pattern of bank entry was a significant deviation from the antebellum period. First,
while bank growth had been quick during the early 1850s (i.e. 5% per year), it had slowed by
1860 as over 85 percent of counties had a railroad and most states had already liberalized their



                                                 7
bank entry requirements.14 Second, the legislation altered the composition of banks. National
banks were larger, held more reserves, and attracted more deposits than closed state banks.
Subsequent state banks were also smaller and specialized in deposit banking. Finally, the growth
did not correspond to bank closures or financial underdevelopment. Less than half of the 226
counties that had a bank close between 1856 and 1863 gained a new bank by 1866, and many of
those that did receive another bank were in the Northeast. Banks also did not enter frontier areas
where they would have been expected based on population growth.
         The Civil War (1861-1865) is also not responsible for the change in banks. If the fighting
and economic uncertainty influenced the banking system, then it would have caused banks to
close during the War and new banks to have sprung up after the War. However, more than 175
northern banks closed after 1865, and more than 450 northern banks entered before 1865.
Therefore, while the War was responsible for the southern bank closures during 1863 and 1864,
it did not cause the geographic changes in and about the Manufacturing Belt.
         Davis (1910) shows that the legislation as a whole was not intended to expand the
banking system, and if anything, the high requirements were intended to prevent bankers from
entering the market. Instead, the new banks seem to have been created by small note and security
traders (i.e. private bankers) that had been operating without a state charter. Because the
legislation reduced the need for discounting and trading bank notes, many private bankers had to
start a national bank or close. Gische (1979) cites several prominent private bankers turned
national bankers including Jay Cooke, who was the sole subscription agent of federal war bonds,
and John Thompson of Thompson Bank Note Detector. Based on the Merchant and Banker's
Directory, more than 150 (or 20%) of the president and cashiers of new national banks before
1868 can be uniquely matched to the private banker that had been operating in 1860.15 The
measure, however, is a lower bound. Banks had many investors yet only one president and
cashier, and some private bankers were listed by their business' name rather than their personal
name. Indeed, the fact that 63 percent of new national banks were created in locations with a
private banker in 1860 suggests a close connection.16

14
   Most often this was through the passage of a Free Banking Law which enabled banks to enter the market after
meeting a fixed set of requirements rather than obtaining a unique charter from the legislature
15
   I have chosen not to use 1863 due to the possibility that private bankers were entering the market as a result of
banks closing or in anticipation of the National Banking Acts. It is important to note that I cannot trace the other
national bankers because the directories do not provide the full names for most presidents and cashiers.
16
   Barnett (1911) highlights that bank growth after 1890 was due to private bankers converting to formal charters.

                                                           8
        Providing additional evidence that the rise in banks was a one-time response by existing
private bankers to the new legislation, entry slowed after the initial surge and only a few hundred
banks were created over the following decade. The slow growth was likely due to the ceiling on
national bank notes during the early 1870s and the high price of Treasury bonds during the
1880s. The state note tax also prevented state banks from taking advantage of the opportunity. It
was not until the growth in deposits and decline in state capital requirements during the mid-
1880s that state banks returned en masse.17 Because most new banks were created in frontier
states such as Nebraska and Kansas, the bank distribution installed in the Manufacturing Belt by
the National Banking Acts persisted for many decades.


5. National Banks and Economic Growth
        Schumpeter (1912) posits that banking spurs innovation by funding entrepreneurs with
the best chance of successfully implementing technology and production processes. However,
picking projects is only half of a bank’s job in a developing economy. Discussed by McKinnon
(1973), banks are successful when they encourage individuals to lend by providing a safe place
to deposit their funds. This leverage is the key to lowering the cost of capital to establishments,
especially in developing countries. Therefore, while banks do not directly create physical capital,
they facilitate progress by finding and allocating resources to their most productive use.
        Unlike today, postbellum banks subscribed to the Real Bills Doctrine, issuing short-term
and self-liquidating loans. Some banks provided de facto long-term funds to their regular
customers by rolling over debt, but the majority of loans provided operational liquidity, bridged
seasonal needs, and helped purchase small capital improvements. Banks thus were more likely to
fund the purchase of steam engines rather than the construction of large factories. The
availability of working capital loans might also have freed up an establishment's own funds for
capital investment.
        The National Banking Acts and state bank note tax would have influenced growth in a
variety of ways. First, the bank entry during the mid-1860’s expanded the size of loanable funds
and lowered their cost.18 Sylla (1969) and James (1976) argue that the entry of state and national
banks was the main cause of the regional interest rates convergence during the period. Moreover,

17
 White (1983) contains a summary of the changes to capital requirements late in the period.
18
 A comparison of antebellum studies such as Bodenhorn and Rockoff (1992) with postbellum studies such as
Davis (1965) suggests that regions which gained banks during the 1860’s experienced a decline in interest rates.

                                                         9
the private bankers behind the new national banks had information capital and relationships that
would have allowed them to draw more customers and make better loan decisions.
           Second, the Acts and state bank note tax seem to have led to a sudden rise in deposits
across all banks, and by extension, an increase the amount of loanable funds. Figure 4 illustrates
individual deposits per bank rose from $180,000 to $335,000 and the ratio of deposits to capital
rose from 55 to 140 percent between 1862 and 1865. Some of the increase is the result of the
slow growth in deposits after 1845, but the sudden discontinuous jump suggests that the
legislation directly encouraged deposit growth.19 With the exception of the declines around the
U.S.' specie resumption in 1879, the rate of deposit growth also increased after 1862.
           Finally, the high capital and reserve requirements of the Acts might have strengthened the
connection between finance and growth. Despite the large financial system established before
1863, Jaremski and Rousseau (2012) show that many of its banks did not have a significant
impact on economic growth. Similar to Rousseau and Wachtel (2011), they argue that the quality
not the quantity of banking is important for development, as individuals are not likely to place
deposits in risky banks and those banks are not likely to properly invest funds. Therefore even
though state banking would have continued to expand in the absence of national banking, the
resulting financial system might not have been able to affect the same level of investment.


5.1 Identification of Banking’s Effect on Manufacturing
           The challenge encountered when testing the impact of financial development on
manufacturing growth is that the relationship is bi-directional. Economic growth is accelerated
through bank lending, and additional banks are needed to support locations that have experienced
growth. Therefore to identify the causal effect of banks on manufacturing growth, one must
examine an exogenous source of variation in banking that does not independently effect growth.
           A common way to control for this identification problem is to use an instrumental
variable.20 The variable would need to explain bank growth but not affect manufacturing in any
other way. While feasible in some contexts, the need for excludability and the occurrence of the
Civil War eliminates all strong county-level instruments for the period. Instead, I have chosen to
identify the effect of the National Banking Acts based on the geographic changes that they


19
     When regressed alongside a polynomial time trend, the break is statistically significant for either deposit measure.
20
     See for instance studies by Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2004) and Burgess and Pande (2005).

                                                            10
caused. Similar to an instrumental variable approach, the dose response approach plausibly
identifies the causal effect of the legislation on manufacturing as long as the timing of the Acts
and their resulting changes were exogeneous.21
         The Acts were intended to raise funds for the Civil War and the geographic changes to
the banking system seem to have been unintended. Legislators took steps to prevent new banks
from entering the market (e.g., installing a ceiling on national bank notes and higher capital
requirements), and voiced their concerns over the sudden changes in the banking system. On the
other hand, the resulting geographic changes were likely influenced by county-level
characteristics, such as population and urbanization. Because these could also have caused
subsequent manufacturing growth, I start by testing whether there was any factor that influenced
the change in the number of banks between the 1863 and 1866 (Figure 5).
         The narrow window was chosen to capture the immediate effect of the legislation and
limit the effect of other factors such as economic growth.22 Beginning in December of 1862
starts just prior to the passage of the first act and avoids those banks that closed in the Midwest
during 1860 and 1861. Ending in December 1866 gives banks time to convert to a national
charter after the note tax and avoids any economic recovery after the war. The model is:
           ∆         ,                          ,                ,           ,         ∆   ,                        1

where       denotes state fixed effects (controlling for differential laws and regulations), and
denotes the error term.         ,     is the vector of county characteristics: The logarithm of county
population and the percentage of population living in an urban area account for the demand for
banking services, the percentage of non-white residents proxies for education, manufacturing
capital and output per capita account for industrial composition. 23 The logarithm of the initial
number of private bankers (               ,     ) measures the extent that the new national banks were
formed by private banks, and logarithm of the state banks (                       ,    ) measures crowding out.
         The change in banks caused by the legislation seems to have had little to do with
manufacturing (Table 2). Neither the coefficients on manufacturing in 1860 nor the coefficients
on growth during the 1850s are statistically or economically significant. For instance, 10 percent

21
   Unlike a difference-in-difference, the Acts applied to all counties but affected them in different ways (i.e. doses).
22
   The results grow slightly larger if I extend the window to 1868, but begin to decline as I extend the measure any
earlier or later. In this way, the initial effects of the legislation rather than other changes over the entire decade seem
to be most important to the geographic distribution of industrialization.
23
   All variables are deflated to 1860 using Officer (2008). I add one to all values before taking the logarithm in order
to avoid negative and undefined values.

                                                            11
more manufacturing capital per capita in 1860 would only lead to 0.0035 additional banks, and
10 percent higher growth during the 1850s would actually lead to 0.006 fewer banks. The shock
to the banking system caused by the legislation thus was plausibly exogenous to manufacturing
after controlling for the other county-level factors.
            On the other hand, the number of private bankers in 1860 was a key factor for the sudden
change in the number of banks. The more private bankers within a county the more new banks
were established there during the mid-1860s. On the other hand, the coefficient on the number of
state banks is generally not statistically significant, and changes sign depending on the variables
in the regression. The rise in new national banks thus seems to have been driven by private
bankers, and was a significant deviation from the previous banking system.24
            Counties that started with densely populated areas gained banks, but not those counties
that were growing fastest during the 1850s. For instance, a 10 percent higher population in 1860
led to about 0.062 more banks, but a 10 percent higher population growth only led to about 0.017
more banks. The difference is likely driven by the restrictive national bank capital requirements,
as new banks could only be established in areas that had reached some population threshold.


5.2 National Banking and County-Level Growth – 1860-1900
             Table 2 indicates that the change in the number of banks was not correlated with
manufacturing after controlling for the observable county-level characteristics. In the models that
follow, I not only control for the previously tested characteristics, but also for unobservable but
constant factors (e.g., mineral deposits, climate, and topography) using county-fixed effects and
county-specific time linear trends. The causal effect thus will be plausibly identified as long as
there was not some omitted factor that was correlated with the change in banks during the mid-
1860s, but was not correlated with any other county-level characteristic, was not constant, and
did not affect growth in a linear way.
            To be clear, the approach controls for the endogeneity of banks entering during the
1860s, but not for the endogeneity of banks entering thereafter. Following studies such as King
and Levine (1993), I attempt to reduce the problem by using the initial number of banks rather
than the contemporaneous value. The approach will reduce endogeneity, and any remaining bias



24
     Jaremski (2012, Table 4) shows the change in banks outside of the South are also not correlated with closed banks.

                                                           12
should affect both bank types. In this way, the model can examine whether the effect of the two
bank types differed but cannot measure the exact size of their effect on manufacturing.
           While the lack of data in 1850 restricted the previous analysis to per capita measures of
manufacturing, the Census tabulated the number of manufacturing establishments starting in
1860. I, therefore, normalize manufacturing capital and output by population and separately by
the number of establishments. Each measure is modeled from 1860 to 1900 as a linear function
of financial development and other county-level characteristics.25 The full model is as follows:
       ,           ∆          ,        ∗       1860                     ,          ,             ,                    2

                                  ,        ,

where           1860 is an indicator variable that takes the value one when t is greater than 1860,
      denotes county-level fixed effects,          denotes decade fixed effects,                     ,   is a county-level
linear trend, and        ,   denotes the error term.      ,        contains the control variables in equation (1)
plus an indicator variable that denotes whether the county had a reserve city. Note that in this
case, the values of the control variables after 1860 will most likely be endogeneous to the change
in banks during the mid-1860s. The fixed effects will control for some of the endogeneity, and if
anything, the bias should negatively affect the coefficient on ∆                       ,     .
           The lack of data prevents me from directly controlling for railroads, but their exclusion
should not dramatically bias the results. Atack et al. (2010) finds that more than 85% of
Manufacturing Belt counties had a railroad in 1860. Railroad growth after 1860, therefore, would
not be correlated with the change in banks during the 1860s, and should be controlled for by the
county-fixed effects. Moreover, studies such as Jaremski and Rousseau (2012) show that banks
influenced manufacturing growth even after controlling for the presence of a railroad.
           The regression results in Table 3 indicate that the legislation had a significant effect on
manufacturing growth. The coefficient on ∆                          ,       is statistically significant for most of
the manufacturing variables, but more so for the per establishment measures. 26 A county gaining
a national bank immediately after the Acts is expected to have gained 3.1 percent more capital
per capita, but 5.2 percent more capital per establishment. Alternatively, an extra initial bank
would lead to an (insignificant) 1.3 percent more output per capita, but 3.0 percent more output
per establishment. Putting these effects into the context of the average growth between 1860 and

25
     While the panel extends through 1850, the use of lagged variables drops out one decade.
26
     The per capita measures are negatively biased due to the positive effect that banking has on population.

                                                              13
1900, the effect of gaining one bank during the period represented 8% of per establishment
growth and about 2%of per capita growth. Therefore, even without controlling for the indirect
effect that banking had through population and urbanization, the legislation accounts for a non-
trivial portion of the period’s growth.
        While likely positively biased by endogeneity, the entry of national banks after 1870
seems to have affected manufacturing differently than new national banks in the 1860s. National
banks have a positive and significant relationship with manufacturing, but only the relationship
with capital and output per capita is significant alongside the county-level trend. The difference
from the coefficient on ∆           ,         is due to the limited number of new banks between
1866 and 1890. The high capital requirements prevented national bank entry in rural areas,
whereas the tax prevented state bank growth. The legislation thus gave certain counties a head
start, and counties that gained banks later in the period could not catch up.
        The results indicate that the switch from state to national banks also increased
manufacturing growth. The coefficient on national banks is larger than that on state banks for the
per capita measures of growth. A 10 percent increase in banks at the beginning of the decade
would have led to a 0.005 percent rise in manufacturing capital per capita if they were national
banks, but only an (insignificant) 0.003 percent rise if they were state banks.
        Table 4 presents four robustness checks. The top panel replaces the number of banks with
bank capital per capita to control for the differences in bank size.27 The second panel aggregates
state and national banks to test whether postbellum banks had a larger effect than antebellum
ones. The third panel regresses only Midwest counties, testing whether the Northeast's developed
financial system biased the coefficients. The final panel uses dummy variables to test whether
bank losses during the 1860s hurt a county as much as gains helped it.
        The results hold in all specifications. Counties that gained banks during the early 1860's
had more growth than other counties, and postbellum banks have a statistically significant
connection with manufacturing growth per capita. The final panel presents a more nuanced
result: initial bank losses were not statistically or economically important. If anything, counties
were actually better off without the banks. A county gaining a bank immediately after the Acts



27
  The capital for 1860 through 1900 comes from the Merchants and Bankers’ Directory and Rand McNally
Bankers’ Directory, whereas capital in 1850 comes from Weber (2008).

                                                    14
had 15 percent more manufacturing capital per capita than those that did not gain a bank, but a
county losing a bank had (an insignificant) 1 percent more capital.


         5.2.1 Decomposing the County-Level Effect By Decade
         The panel approach is helpful to control for unobserved heterogeneity, but the model only
estimates the average effect of the change in the number of banks over the entire period. As the
effect most likely changed over time, it is informative to run separate regressions for each
decade. The repeated cross-section approach, however, cannot include county-fixed effects or
county-level trends to control for the initial value of manufacturing or the endogeneity of
population and urbanization to bank growth. I, therefore, have chosen to use the values of
manufacturing, population, urbanization, and banks in 1860, effectively testing which initial
characteristics best predicted manufacturing in each subsequent decade. Estimated separately for
each decade, the regressions have the form:
                  ,           ∆         ,                      ,             ,            ,                ,       3
where the variables retain their previous definitions.
         Table 5 illustrates that the effect of the change in the number of banks between 1863 and
1866 had a significant and increasing effect on manufacturing starting in 1870. For instance, a
new bank gained during the mid-1860s increased manufacturing capital per capita 5.1% in 1870,
3.4% in 1880, 7.5% in 1890, and 7.4% in 1900.28 Alternatively, the number of state banks in
1860 was not significantly correlated with any measure of manufacturing after 1870. The data
thus indicate that the initial changes brought about by the National Banking Acts had a larger and
more persistent effect than the initial antebellum banking system.


5.3 National Banking and Establishment-Level Growth – 1850-1880
         The previous regressions suggest that the National Banking Acts fueled manufacturing
growth, but the county-level data only include certain aggregate measures. For instance, they
contain the value of manufacturing capital, but not what type of capital it was or what industry it
was employed in. They also do not contain measures of mechanization or valued added. I,
therefore, use Atack and Bateman's establishment-level manufacturing sample (1999) to pinpoint


28
  The effects for 1880 are generally smaller than those in other decades, suggesting that the price fluctuations
around nation's specie resumption in 1879 negatively affected the previous results.

                                                          15
banking's effect on those characteristics (physical capital, steam power, and value added) and
industries (chemicals, textiles, steel products) that are associated with modern manufacturing.
             There are two drawbacks with the establishment-level data. First, the data do not contain
the same establishments or counties each year and a fixed effects estimator cannot be used. I thus
include the level of ∆               ,            in the regression to capture initial differences between
areas.29 Second, the data do not contain each establishment’s city, meaning establishments and
banks must be matched by county. While the model cannot account for this type of measurement
error, it should bias against finding a significant relationship between banks and manufacturing.
             The full model is:
        ,,            ∆         ,             ∆          ,        ∗     1860                ,               ,      4

                            ,            ,,                                            ,,

where j denotes establishment,            is fixed effects for three-digit industry codes, and all other
variables retain their previous meanings. The control vector                 ,   contains the previous county-
level variables, whereas the vector            ,,   contains a dummy if the establishment is in a city and
dummy variables for its number of employees. The interaction of state-fixed effects with decade
effects capture location-specific institutional development, and the interaction of the industry-
fixed effects with decade effects capture industrial development.
             It is helpful to point out that the model should only provide a lower bound estimate of the
effect of the National Banking Acts. First, some establishments might have been far away for the
bank in their county. Second, any impact the legislation had on whole industries will be captured
by the industry-year fixed effects. Third, the legislation's effect seems to have grown over time,
but the establishment-level sample only contains two observations after 1863.
             The sudden growth of banks during the 1860s seems to have fueled the structural and
technological shifts associated with the establishment of the Manufacturing Belt (Table 6). The
change is positively and significantly correlated with capital per worker. In particular, the new
banks enabled establishments to purchase steam engines. For instance, an extra bank during the
mid-1860’s increased an establishment's capital to labor ratio by 1.3% and the probability of
having steam power by 0.7%. The change is also positively correlated with value added,
indicating that the new banks helped establishments shift into the production of secondary goods.


29
     The sample contains too few observations from the same county in all years to include county fixed effects.

                                                             16
            The coefficients might seem small, but they correspond to large proportions of the actual
growth rates. For instance, the percent of firms with steam engines in the sample only grew from
15% to 18% between 1860 and 1880. Therefore, despite being negatively biased, the estimated
effect of a new bank represented 23% of steam engine growth, 21% of the growth in value
added, and all of the growth in the capital to labor ratio over the period.
            The change in banks was not correlated with the number of workers. The result, however,
seems to be the caused by sampling error, as the average number of workers actually declines in
1880 relative to the 1870 values. When 1880 is removed, the coefficient on the change in banks
becomes positive for the number of workers but does not change for the other outcome variables.
            The insignificant and often negative coefficients on the number of national banks are the
result of the limited number of postbellum observations. National banks do not enter the
regression specification until 1880 and even then they enter at their 1870 values. The correlation
between                    ,        and ∆             ,       thus obscures any measurable effect between
national banks and manufacturing.30


            5.3.1 Alternative Establishment-Level Specifications
            The initial change in banks seems to have encouraged establishments to invest in capital
goods such as steam engines. However, we also want to know if the influx of banks specifically
helped those industries associated with the Manufacturing Belt. This section examines this
question by creating a dummy variable for establishments in key industries: Textiles (SIC code
220), Chemicals (SIC code 280), Rubber and Plastic Products (SIC code 300), Metal Products
(SIC codes 330 and 340), Industrial Equipment (SIC codes 350 and 360), and Instruments (SIC
code 370).31 By interacting ∆                 ,           with this dummy variable (          ), the model tests
whether bank entry affected these industries over others. The model is:
     ,,          ∆         ,           ∆          ,       ∗        1860    ∆       ,      ∗      1860 ∗            5

                               ,                  ,            ,          ,,

                               ,,

where         measures the effect of the change in the number of banks on all industries,               measures
the additional effect on the specified industries.

30
     The results are similar if state and national banks are aggregated.
31
     Automobile production has become synonymous with the Manufacturing Belt, but it did not begin until after 1880.

                                                              17
       Despite the additional interaction term, the change still has a positive and significant
relationship with steam power, value added, and the capital to labor ratio and no relationship
with the number of workers employed across all establishments in Table 7. The interaction with
∆        ,        and        is also statistically significant for steam power and the capital to
labor ratio. For every new bank gained during the 1860s, an establishment would be 1.0% more
likely to adopt steam power and their capital to labor ratio would rise by 1.7%. The statistically
insignificant effect on value added is likely the result of the key industries being high value
added by definition. The new banks thus might have increased the number of these
establishments, but the regression model would be unable to capture the effect. Taken together,
the pattern suggests that the National Banking Legislation helped manufacturing in general, and
particularly those industries associated with Manufacturing Belt production after 1870.


6. Conclusion
       The United States was dependent on agriculture in 1860, yet established itself as the
world’s leading producer of manufacturing goods by 1900. The most significant growth in
manufacturing after the Civil War was located in certain areas of the Manufacturing Belt. This
paper shows that the National Banking Acts could be partially responsible for this geographic
distribution. The legislation stabilized the existing banking system and increased the number of
banks in the Belt immediately prior to the adoption of mechanized factories.
       Two conclusions emerge from a new bank census. First, the initial influx of banks
accelerated manufacturing. At the county-level, the change was correlated with the increase of
output and capital per capita. In fact, the effect of gaining a bank due to the legislation was large
and increasing over time, amounting to at least 5.9% more manufacturing capital and 3.9% more
manufacturing output in 1900. At the establishment-level, new banks allowed entrepreneurs to
invest in steam power, raise their value added, and increase the amount of capital per worker.
The effect influenced all manufacturers but had its greatest effect on those industries that would
come to make up the Manufacturing Belt. Second, the national banking regulation indirectly
contributed to the nation's industrialization. While both effects are likely positively biased by
endogeneity, a national bank had a larger effect on growth than a state bank after 1870,
suggesting that the legislation strengthened the connection between finance and growth.



                                                 18
       There is one caveat that must be kept in mind when interpreting the results. The
concentration of banks in the Midwest and Northeast helped fuel the nation’s industrialization
but it might have been at the expense of growth in frontier states. The high capital requirements
slowed financial development in the West and South, and it was not until the 1890s or later that
the regions gained a larger number of banks. This financial underdevelopment of other regions
thus might be one reason why the Manufacturing Belt was so persistent.
       Over and above presenting a reason for the pattern of the United States' industrialization,
the analysis provides several implications for developing nations. Studies have shown that
financial liberalization can be a catalyst for growth, but this paper shows that the U.S. needed a
stronger banking system in order to achieve its potential. To put it another way, more banks are
not always better. The analysis also provides a reason why Rousseau and Wachtel (2011) find
that the connection between finance and growth has been obscured in the past 20 years. If a
country's liberalization was premature, then the resulting financial system may not have been
strong enough to affect real change in the economy. The paper, therefore, suggests deregulation
is not always the key to growth, as a slow growing but stable financial system achieved what a
fast growing but unstable one could not.




                                                19
References
Atack, J., and F. Bateman. 1999. “U.S. historical statistics: nineteenth century U.S. industrial
       development through the eyes of the census of manufactures”. Historical Methods 32,
       177–188.
Atack, J., F. Bateman, M. Haines and R.A. Margo. 2010. "Did Railroads Induce or Follow
       Economic Growth?: Urbanization and Population Growth in the American Midwest,
       1850–1860". Social Science History 34, 171-197.
Atack, J., F. Bateman, and R.A. Margo. 2003. “Capital Deepening in American Manufacturing,
       1850-1880.” NBER working paper 9923.
Atack, J., F. Bateman, and R.A. Margo. 2008. “Steam power, establishment size, and labor
       productivity growth in nineteenth century American manufacturing.” Explorations in
       Economic History 45, 185-198.
Atack, J., F. Bateman, and T. Weiss. 1980. “The Regional Diffusion and Adoption of the Steam
       Engine in American Manufacturing.” Journal of Economic History 40, 281-308.
Atack, J., M. Haines and R.A. Margo. 2011. "Railroads and the Rise of the Factory: Evidence for
       the United States, 1850-1870". In Economic Evolution and Revolution in Historical Time,
       162-179. Rhode, Rosenbloom, and Weiman, eds. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Barnett, George. 1911. State Banks and Trust Companies since the Passage of the National-Bank
       Act. Washington: Government Printing Office.
Baum-Snow, Nathaniel. 2007. “Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 122, 775-805.
Bensel, Richard Franklin. 2000. The Political Economy of American Industrialization, 1877-
       1900. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bodenhorn, Howard. 2000. A History of Banking in Antebellum America: New York and
       Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bodenhorn, Howard and David Cuberes. 2010. "Financial Development and City Growth:
       Evidence From Northeastern American Cities, 1790-1870." NBER Working Paper 15997.
Bodenhorn, Howard and Hugh Rockoff. 1992. Regional Interest Rates in Antebellum America.
       In Strategic Factors in Nineteenth Century American Economic History, edited by C.
       Goldin and H. Rockoff. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Brown, Martin and Peter Phillips. 1986. “Craft Labor and Mechanization in Nineteenth Century
       American Canning.” Journal of Economic History 46, 743-756.
Burgess, Robin and Rohini Pande. 2005. "Banking for the Poor: Evidence from India". Journal
       of the European Economic Association 3, 268-278.
Chandler, Alfred. 1977. The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business.
       Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Davis, Andrew. 1910. The Origin of the National Banking System. Washington: Government
       Printing Office.
Davis, Joseph. 2004. “An Index of U.S. Industrial Production, 1790-1915”. Quarterly Journal of
       Economics CXIX, 1177-1215.
Davis, Lance. 1965. “The Investment Market, 1870-1914: The Evolution of a National Market.”
       Journal of Economic History 25, 355-399.
DeGeer, Sten. 1927. “The American Manufacturing Belt”. Geografiska Annaler 9, 233-359.
Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 2000. “Technology and Industrialization, 1790-
       1914.” In Stanley Engerman and Robert Gallman, eds. The Cambridge Economic History
       of the United States, Volume II, 367-401. New York: Cambridge University Press.

                                              20
Field, Alexander. 1978. “Sectoral Shift in Antebellum Massachusetts: A Reconsideration.”
        Exploration in Economic History 15, 146-171.
Fishlow, Albert. 1965. American Railroads and the Transformation of the Ante-Bellum
        Economy. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Fulford, Scott. 2010. “Gilded or gold? National banks and development in the United States
        1870–1900.” Unpublished working paper.
Gallman, Robert. 1956. “Value Added by Agriculture, Mining, and Manufacturing in the United
        States, 1840–1880,” unpublished Ph.D. thesis, University of Pennsylvania.
Gerschenkron, Alexander. 1962. Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective. Cambridge:
        Harvard University Press.
Gische, David. 1979. "The New York City Banks and the Development of the National Banking
        System 1860-1870." American Journal of Legal History, 23: 21-67.
Goldin, Claudia and Kenneth Sokoloff. 1982. “Women, Children, and Industrialization in the
        Early Republic: Evidence from the Manufacturing Censuses.” Journal of Economic
        History 42, 741-774.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz. 1998. “The Origins of Technology-Skill Complementarity.”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, 693-732.
Guiso, L., Sapienza, P., Zingales, L. 2004. "The role of social capital in financial development".
        American Economic Review 94, 526–556.
Haines, Michael R. 2004. Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United
        States, 1790-2000. ICPSR Study 2896. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for
        Political and Social Research.
Hunter, L.C. 1979. A history of Industrial Power in the United States, 1780-1930. Greenville,
        DE: Eleutherian Mills-Hagley Foundation.
James, John. 1976. “The Development of the National Money Market: 1893-1911”. The Journal
        of Economic History 36, 878-897.
Jaremski, Matthew. 2012. “State Banks and the National Banking Acts: A Tale of Creative
        Destruction.” Forthcoming Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking.
Jaremski, Matthew and Peter Rousseau. 2012. “Banks, Free Banks, and Economic Growth”.
        Forthcoming in Economic Inquiry.
Keehn, Richard. 1974. “Federal Bank Policy, Bank Market Structure, and Bank Performance:
        Wisconsin 1863-1914”. Business History Review 48, pp. 1-21.
Klein, Alexander and Nicholas Craft. 2010. “Making Sense of the Manufacturing Belt:
        Determinants of U.S. Industrial Location, 1880-1920.” CAGE Online Working Paper.
King, Robert and Ross Levine. 1993. "Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right."
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 717-737.
Meyer, David. 1983. “Emergence of the American Manufacturing Belt.” Journal of Historical
        Geography 9, 145-174.
Meyer, David. 1989. “Midwestern Industrialization and the American Manufacturing Belt in the
        Nineteenth Century.” Journal of Economic History 49, 921-937.
Meyer, David. 2006. Networked Machinists: High-Technology Industries in Antebellum
        America. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
McKinnon, R.I., 1973. Money and Capital in Economic Development. The Brookings Institution,
        Washington, DC.
Minnesota Population Center. 2004. National Historical Geographic Information System: Pre-
        release Version 0.1. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota. http://www.nhgis.org.

                                               21
Niemi, Albert. 1974. State and Regional Patterns in American Manufacturing, 1860-1900.
        Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
North, Douglass. 1961. The Economic Growth of the United States, 1790-1860. Englewood
        Cliffs, NJ: W. W. Norton & Company
Officer, Lawrence . 2008. "What Was the Value of the US Consumer Bundle Then?"
        MeasuringWorth. http://www.measuringworth.org/consumer/
Perloff, Harvey. 1960. Regions, Resources, and Economic Growth. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
        University Press.
Ransom, Roger, and Richard Sutch. 1972. “Debt Peonage in the Cotton South After the Civil
        War”. Journal of Economic History 32, 641-669.
Ransom, Roger and Richard Sutch. 1977. One Kind of Freedom: The Economic Consequences of
        Emancipation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Redenius, Scott. 2002. Between Reforms: The U.S. Banking System in the Postbellum Period.
        Ph.D. diss. Yale University.
Ramcharan, R. 2008. “Why and Economic Core: Domestic Transport Costs”. Journal of
        Economic Geography 9, 559-581.
Rolnick, Arthur J., and Warren E. Weber. 1984. “The Causes of Free Bank Failures: A Detailed
        Examination.” Journal of Monetary Economics 14, 269-91.
Rousseau, Peter, and Richard Sylla. 2005. “Emerging financial markets and early US growth.”
        Explorations in Economic History 42, 1-26.
Rousseau, Peter and Paul Wachtel. 2011.“What is Happening to the Impact of Financial
        Deepening on Economic Growth?” Economic Inquiry 49, 276-288.
Schumpeter, Joseph. 1934. Theorie der Wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung. Leipzig: Dunker &
        Humblot, 1912; Translated by Redvers Opie. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Sokoloff, Kenneth. 1986. “Productivity Gains in Manufacturing During Early Industrialization:
        Evidence from the American Northeast, 1820-1860.” In Stanley L. Engerman and Robert
        E. Gallman, eds. Long-Term Factors in American Economic Growth, Volume 51, 679-
        729. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Sylla, Richard. 1969. “Federal Policy, Banking Market Structure, and Capital Mobilization in the
        United States, 1863-1913.” Journal of Economic History 29: 657-686.
Thomson, Ross. 2009. Structures of Change in the Mechanical Age: Technological Innovation in
        the United States, 1790-1865. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Weber, Warren, 2005. Listing of all State Banks with Beginning and Ending Dates. Research
        Department, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
        http://research.mpls.frb.fed.us/research/economists/wewproj.html.
Weber, Warren. 2008. Balance sheets for U.S. Antebellum State Banks. Research Department,
        Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
        http://research.mpls.frb.fed.us/research/economists/wewproj.html.
Williamson, Jeffrey. 1975. “The Railroads and Midwestern Development 1870-90: A General
        Equilibrium History.” In D. Klingaman and R. Vedder, eds. Essays in Nineteenth Century
        Economic History, 269-352. Athens: Ohio University Press.
White, Eugene. 1983. The Regulation and Reform of the American Banking System, 1900-1929.
        Princeton: Princeton University Press.




                                              22
                   Figure 1: Evolution of the Manufacturing Output Per Capita (1860-1920)
                                   1860                                                                        1880




                                   1900                                                                      1920




Notes: Displays county-level value of output per capita. County boundaries obtained from Minnesota Population Center (2004), and output per capita
from Haines (2004). Counties with less than 1000 people or more than 3000 acres are given zero values to provide a better comparison.


                                                                           23
                           Figure 2: Counties in Regression Analysis




Notes: Figure shades those counties that are included in the regression analysis. County boundaries obtained from
Minnesota Population Center (2004).




                                                        24
                           Figure 3: Changes In Banks (1863-1866)
                 Conversions                                                   Closures




           New National Banks                                      Surviving State Banks




Notes: Displays the county-level changes in banks across the period. County boundaries obtained from Minnesota
Population Center (2004).




                                                      25
                   Figure 4: Individual Deposits (1820-1900)
600,000                                                                                        300%



500,000                                                                                        250%



400,000                                                                                        200%



300,000                                                                                        150%



200,000                                                                                        100%



100,000                                                                                        50%



      0                                                                                        0%
          1820
          1823
          1826
          1829
          1832
          1835
          1838
          1841
          1844
          1847
          1850
          1853
          1856
          1859
          1862
          1865
          1868
          1871
          1874
          1877
          1880
          1883
          1886
          1889
                               Deposits Per Bank            Deposits/Capital

Notes: Contains deposits and capital of state banks before 1860 come from Weber (2005), and
afterwards for both state and national banks from the Comptroller of the Currency. Due to the Civil
War, records between 1861 and 1864 are not available.




                                                26
           Figure 5: Aggregate Change In Number of Banks (1863-1866)




Notes: Figure contains the aggregate change in the number of banks between December 1862 and December 1866.
County boundaries obtained from Minnesota Population Center (2004).




                                                     27
Table 1: Regional Development of Manufacturing (1840-1900)
                                 Manufacturing Output
            Total Production (in millions)        Share of National Production
       New Eng. Mid. Atl. Midwest Total          New Eng. Mid. Atl. Midwest
1840       -          -          -          -         -          -         -
1850      282        481        122       1,048    26.9%      45.9%     11.6%
1860      469        781        283       1,847    25.4%      42.3%     15.3%
1870      775       1,358       599       3,257    23.8%      41.7%     18.4%
1880     1,084      2,174      1,166     5,272     20.6%      41.2%     22.1%
1890     1,676      4,078      2,576     10,523    15.9%      38.8%     24.5%
1900     2,042      5,397      3,470     14,207    14.4%      38.0%     24.4%
                                  Manufacturing Capital
              Total Capital (in millions)            Share of National Capital
        New Eng. Mid. Atl. Midwest Total          New Eng. Mid. Atl. Midwest
1840       93         115         30       286      32.4%      40.0%     10.4%
1850      162         240         54       379      42.8%      63.4%     14.4%
1860      257         426        143       740      34.8%      57.6%     19.3%
1870      376         695        309      1,254     30.0%      55.5%     24.6%
1880      612        1,151       551      2,127     28.7%      54.1%     25.9%
1890     1,315       2,857      1,728     6,010     21.9%      47.5%     28.8%
1900     1,735       4,302      2,429     9,008     19.3%      47.8%     27.0%
Notes: Manufacturing output and capital taken from Haines (2004). Output is not available in the 1840
Census. The regions are defined as Midwest: Michigan, Indiana, Illinois, Ohio, Wisconsin, Minnesota,
Kentucky; Middle Atlantic: Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Maryland, Delaware, District of Columbia, New
York; New England: Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Rhode Island.




                                                      28
Table 2: County-Level Determinants of Bank Growth (1863-1866)
                                             Change in Banks 1863-1866
Characteristic in 1860                   (1)       (2)        (3)                            (4)
Ln(State Banks)                                   -0.174        -0.186        0.305         0.308
                                                 [0.159]       [0.162]       [0.193]       [0.192]

Ln(Private Banks)                               0.746***       0.744***     1.162***      1.159***
                                                 [0.218]        [0.220]      [0.271]       [0.271]
Ln(County Area)                                   0.155         0.161        0.258*        0.260*
                                                 [0.113]       [0.111]       [0.140]       [0.143]

% Urban                                           1.395         1.329
                                                 [0.844]       [0.833]

Ln(Population)                                  0.627***       0.618***
                                                 [0.139]        [0.133]

% Black                                         -1.422*        -1.454*
                                                [0.732]        [0.762]

Ln(Mfg. Capital P.C.)                             0.035
                                                 [0.084]

Ln(Mfg. Output P.C.)                                            0.080
                                                               [0.071]
Change in Characteristic (1850-60)
% Urban                                                                       -0.042        -0.061
                                                                             [0.825]       [0.802]

Ln(Population)                                                                0.172         0.175
                                                                             [0.126]       [0.128]

% Black                                                                       -5.380        -5.434
                                                                             [4.152]       [4.097]

Ln(Mfg. Capital P.C.)                                                         -0.060
                                                                             [0.045]

Ln(Mfg. Output P.C.)                                                                        -0.037
                                                                                           [0.034]
Location Effects?                                 State         State         State         State
Observations                                       637           637           637           637
R-squared                                         0.456         0.457         0.407         0.406
Notes: The table presents the results of an ordinary least squares regression. The dependent variable
is the change in the number of banks between 1863 and 1868. Dollar values are deflated to 1860
using Officer (2008). Standard are provided in brackets and clustered by state. * denotes
significance at 10%; ** at 5% level and *** at 1% level.




                                                          29
Table 3: Measuring National Banking's Effect on County-Level Manufacturing (1860-1900)
                                     Ln(Mfg. Capital               Ln(Mfg. Capital            Ln(Mfg. Output               Ln(Mfg. Output
                                         Per Capita)                  Per Firm)                  Per Capita)                  Per Firm)
                                        (1)       (2)               (3)        (4)              (5)       (6)               (7)        (8)
ΔBanks (63-66) & Yr>1860             0.035** 0.031*              0.041*** 0.052***             0.020     0.013            0.026*     0.030*
                                     [0.015]    [0.018]           [0.014]    [0.017]          [0.015]   [0.018]           [0.014]    [0.017]
L. Ln(National Banks)                0.125*** 0.055**              0.046        -0.012       0.100***      0.037           0.029        -0.030
                                      [0.025] [0.027]             [0.029]      [0.031]        [0.026]     [0.029]         [0.027]      [0.028]
L. Ln(State Banks)                   0.072***      0.034           0.025        0.012         0.048**      0.005           0.003        -0.018
                                      [0.019]     [0.022]         [0.022]      [0.025]        [0.020]     [0.023]         [0.021]      [0.024]
L.% Urban                            1.337***      -0.269        1.122***       -0.207       1.292***      -0.113        1.104***       -0.012
                                      [0.142]     [0.202]         [0.175]      [0.200]        [0.143]     [0.193]         [0.162]      [0.205]
L.Ln(Population)                      0.075*      0.097*           0.042      0.113**        0.111*** 0.129**             0.061*      0.126**
                                      [0.043]     [0.053]         [0.037]     [0.048]         [0.041] [0.057]             [0.035]     [0.049]
L.%Black                               -0.663      -1.050          -0.101       -0.366         -0.857      -1.199          -0.384       -0.552
                                      [0.713]     [0.981]         [0.609]      [1.031]        [0.594]     [1.042]         [0.608]      [0.916]
Reserve City & Yr>1860                 -0.122      0.047           -0.019     0.282**          -0.110      0.032           0.006       0.271*
                                      [0.127]     [0.152]         [0.139]     [0.114]         [0.141]     [0.155]         [0.152]      [0.140]
Location Fixed Effect?                County      County          County       County         County      County          County       County
Location Trend?                        State      County           State       County          State      County           State       County
Year Fixed Effects?                     Yes         Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes             Yes          Yes
Observations                           3,235       3,235           3,235        3,235          3,235       3,235           3,235        3,235
R-squared                              0.633       0.805           0.563        0.765          0.482       0.720           0.411        0.677
Notes: The table presents the results of an OLS regression. The dependent variable is the per capita value of the defined variables. The sample
consists of decadal county-level observations from 1860 through 1900. Dollar values are deflated to 1860 using Officer (2008). Robust standard
errors are provided in brackets. * denotes significance at 10%; ** at 5% level and *** at 1% level.




                                                                             30
Table 4: County-Level Robustness Checks
                                                                    Controlling for Bank Capital
                                    Ln(Mfg. Capital             Ln(Mfg. Capital        Ln(Mfg. Output                   Ln(Mfg. Output
                                      Per Capita)                 Per Firm)               Per Capita)                     Per Firm)
ΔCapital P.C. (63-66)             0.008**      0.009**         0.008**     0.013***         0.006*       0.003          0.005      0.007*
& Yr>1860                         [0.003]      [0.004]         [0.003]      [0.004]         [0.003]     [0.004]        [0.003]     [0.004]
L. Ln(Nat. Bank Cap. P.C.)       0.062***       0.010          0.033*        -0.015        0.041**       0.005          0.017       -0.019
                                  [0.017]      [0.019]         [0.018]      [0.020]        [0.018]      [0.020]        [0.017]     [0.019]
L. Ln(State Bank Cap. P.C.)      0.035***       -0.001         0.025*      0.013         0.021     -0.014               0.010       0.001
                                  [0.013]      [0.016]         [0.014]    [0.018]       [0.013]   [0.017]              [0.013]     [0.017]
Location Time Trend?               State       County           State     County         State    County                State      County
                                                                   Merge All Banks Into One Variable
                                   Ln(Mfg. Capital              Ln(Mfg. Capital          Ln(Mfg. Output                 Ln(Mfg. Output
                                      Per Capita)                  Per Firm)               Per Capita)                     Per Firm)
ΔBanks (63-66) & Yr>1860          0.034**     0.028           0.040*** 0.052***          0.020      0.010              0.025*     0.031*
                                  [0.015]    [0.018]           [0.014]    [0.017]       [0.015]   [0.018]              [0.014]    [0.017]
L. Ln(Banks)                      0.055*       -0.014          0.081**       0.050           0.033      -0.042         0.057*       0.022
                                  [0.029]      [0.035]         [0.034]      [0.041]         [0.029]     [0.036]        [0.031]     [0.037]
L. Ln(Banks) & Yr>1860           0.079***     0.079***          0.001     -0.017      0.064**   0.080**                -0.007      -0.018
                                  [0.026]      [0.027]         [0.033]   [0.033]      [0.028]   [0.031]                [0.032]     [0.031]
Location Time Trend?               State       County           State    County        State    County                  State      County
                                                                        Only Midwest Counties
                                    Ln(Mfg. Capital             Ln(Mfg. Capital        Ln(Mfg. Output                   Ln(Mfg. Output
                                      Per Capita)                 Per Firm)              Per Capita)                      Per Firm)
ΔBanks (63-66) & Yr>1860         0.084***      0.065**         0.052**     0.066**         0.051**       0.011          0.018       0.005
                                  [0.026]      [0.031]         [0.022]     [0.028]         [0.023]      [0.031]        [0.021]     [0.029]
L. Ln(National Banks)            0.111***       -0.001          0.033        -0.054        0.088***      0.018          0.019       -0.034
                                  [0.033]      [0.040]         [0.037]      [0.045]         [0.033]     [0.044]        [0.032]     [0.041]
L. Ln(State Banks)               0.074***       0.051          0.043      0.056        0.032      -0.005                0.001       -0.004
                                  [0.025]      [0.033]        [0.029]    [0.036]      [0.027]    [0.035]               [0.027]     [0.035]
Location Time Trend?               State       County          State     County        State     County                 State      County
                                                             Dummy Variables for Change in Banks (63-66)
                                    Ln(Mfg. Capital            Ln(Mfg. Capital         Ln(Mfg. Output                   Ln(Mfg. Output
                                      Per Capita)                 Per Firm)              Per Capita)                      Per Firm)
Gained Bank (63-66)              0.184***      0.120*         0.156***     0.159**         0.109**       0.011          0.070       0.028
& Yr>1860                         [0.051]      [0.063]         [0.052]     [0.064]         [0.055]      [0.065]        [0.051]     [0.061]
Lost Bank (63-66)                  0.010        0.045           0.132      0.207**           -0.069      -0.037         0.036       0.106
& Yr>1860                         [0.095]      [0.105]         [0.082]     [0.104]          [0.085]     [0.105]        [0.079]     [0.105]
L. Ln(National Banks)            0.115***      0.046*          0.051*        -0.004        0.094***      0.033          0.038       -0.017
                                  [0.024]      [0.027]         [0.029]      [0.031]         [0.025]     [0.029]        [0.027]     [0.028]

L. Ln(State Banks)                 0.072***       0.018         0.054**       0.036         0.049**       -0.004         0.032        0.012
                                    [0.020]      [0.025]         [0.023]     [0.028]         [0.021]     [0.026]        [0.021]     [0.026]
Location Time Trend?                 State      County            State      County           State      County           State     County
Notes: The table presents the results of an OLS regression. The sample consists of decadal county-level observations from 1860 through
1900. Every regression includes county and decade fixed effects as well as the defined location trend and the county-level characteristics
in all previous regression. Dollar values are deflated to 1860 using Officer (2008). Robust standard errors are provided in brackets. *
denotes significance at 10%; ** at 5% level and *** at 1% level.




                                                                    31
Table 5: Examining the Effect of the Change in Banking By Decade
                                       Ln(Mfg. Capital Per Capita)
                                   1860           1870       1880       1890          1900
ΔBanks (63-66)                     0.018      0.051***      0.034*    0.075***     0.074***
                                  [0.019]      [0.017]      [0.017]    [0.023]      [0.023]
Ln(State Banks) in 1860           0.161**        0.077       0.015      -0.025        0.014
                                  [0.068]       [0.057]     [0.057]    [0.076]       [0.071]
Location Fixed Effect?             State         State       State       State        State
                                                Ln(Mfg. Capital Per Firm)
                                    1860        1870         1880       1890         1900
ΔBanks (63-66)                     -0.010     0.055***      0.028*     0.052**     0.059***
                                  [0.017]      [0.015]      [0.016]    [0.020]      [0.023]
Ln(State Banks) in 1860            0.024        0.115*       0.069      0.049         0.063
                                  [0.070]       [0.064]     [0.054]    [0.062]       [0.062]
Location Fixed Effect?             State         State       State      State         State
                                               Ln(Mfg. Output Per Capita)
                                   1860         1870         1880       1890         1900
ΔBanks (63-66)                     0.030       0.034**       0.028     0.054**      0.056**
                                  [0.019]      [0.017]      [0.017]    [0.023]      [0.022]
Ln(State Banks) in 1860          0.227***        0.077       0.019      -0.056        0.034
                                  [0.066]       [0.052]     [0.056]    [0.078]       [0.067]
Location Fixed Effect?             State         State       State       State        State
                                                Ln(Mfg. Output Per Firm)
                                   1860         1870         1880       1890          1900
ΔBanks (63-66)                     0.001       0.036**       0.022      0.032        0.039*
                                  [0.016]      [0.014]      [0.016]    [0.020]       [0.020]
Ln(State Banks) in 1860            0.088        0.106*       0.070      0.030         0.081
                                  [0.063]       [0.056]     [0.051]    [0.061]       [0.057]
Location Fixed Effect?             State         State       State      State         State

Notes: The table presents the results of an OLS regression. The sample consists of county-
level observations for the year specified by the column. The regression also contains the
value of population, urbanization, and percent black in 1860. Starting in 1870 the model also
controls for manufacturing in 1860 and whether the county contained a reserve city. Dollar
values are deflated to 1860 using Officer (2008). Robust standard errors are provided in
brackets. * denotes significance at 10%; ** at 5% level and *** at 1% level.




                                             32
Table 6: Measuring National Banking's Effect on Firm-Level Manufacturing (1850-1880)
                                                                                                             Ln(Capital/Adult
                          Total Adult Workers            Steam Power              Ln(Value Added)                 Workers)
                             (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)            (5)        (6)             (7)         (8)
ΔBanks (63-68)             -0.038       0.042         0.001       -0.000          0.006      0.005         -0.009**     -0.006
                          [0.249]      [0.250]       [0.001]     [0.001]         [0.004]    [0.004]         [0.004]    [0.004]

ΔBanks (63-68)             -0.243      -0.018        0.006***    0.007***       0.021***    0.021***        0.013**     0.011*
& Yr>1860                  [0.611]     [0.582]        [0.002]     [0.002]        [0.006]     [0.006]        [0.007]     [0.006]

L. Ln(National Banks)       1.114       1.321       -0.019***    -0.012**       -0.129***   -0.109***       -0.036*      -0.026
                           [2.270]     [2.167]        [0.006]     [0.006]         [0.019]     [0.019]       [0.021]     [0.021]

L. Ln(State Banks)         -1.344      -1.010        0.011**         0.008*      0.027*      0.027*          0.021       0.027
                           [1.408]     [1.275]       [0.005]         [0.005]     [0.016]     [0.016]        [0.018]     [0.017]

L.% Urban                 14.841***   14.275***      0.027*          0.033**    0.644***    0.654***         0.012       -0.013
                           [3.464]     [3.306]       [0.015]         [0.015]     [0.050]     [0.049]        [0.053]     [0.053]

L.Ln(Population)            -0.628      -0.761        0.000           -0.001     -0.018      -0.014         -0.003       0.004
                           [0.623]     [0.568]       [0.004]         [0.004]     [0.013]     [0.012]        [0.014]     [0.014]

L.%Black                    4.262       2.406         0.041           0.046      0.351**     0.331**         -0.084      -0.135
                           [4.618]     [6.182]       [0.053]         [0.051]     [0.157]     [0.157]        [0.181]     [0.182]

Reserve City                -3.793     -2.903       -0.086***    -0.079***       -0.061      -0.012         -0.053      -0.004
& Yr>1860                  [3.856]     [3.163]        [0.015]      [0.014]       [0.052]     [0.047]        [0.059]     [0.050]

In Town of 2,500+         5.231***    5.204***       0.035***    0.033***       0.361***    0.358***       0.061***    0.067***
People                     [1.299]     [1.356]        [0.006]     [0.006]        [0.018]     [0.019]        [0.020]     [0.020]

6<=Adult Workers<16                                  0.149***    0.138***       1.207***    1.206***         0.020      0.038*
                                                      [0.007]     [0.008]        [0.018]     [0.018]        [0.020]     [0.020]

16<=Adult Workers<100                                0.288***    0.278***       2.300***    2.306***        0.065**    0.074**
                                                      [0.011]     [0.012]        [0.027]     [0.027]        [0.030]    [0.030]

More than 100                                        0.078***    0.080***       0.654***    0.659***         -0.008      0.036
Adult Workers                                         [0.008]     [0.008]        [0.035]     [0.036]        [0.094]     [0.080]

Three-Digit SIC Effects     Yes         Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
SIC Specific Time Trend     Yes          No             Yes            No          Yes         No            Yes          No
Industry X Yr Effects       No          Yes             No            Yes          No          Yes            No          Yes
State Fixed Effects         Yes         Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
State Time Trend            Yes         Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
Yr Fixed Effects            Yes         Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
Observations               17,971      17,971         25,196         25,196      25,196      25,196         18,439      18,439
R-squared                  0.153       0.145           0.276         0.300        0.493       0.501         0.372        0.385
Notes: The table presents the results of an OLS regression. The sample consists of decadal firm-level observations from 1850
through 1880. The dependent variable is defined by the column heading. Dollar values are deflated to 1860 using Officer (2008).
Robust standard errors are provided in brackets. * denotes significance at 10%; ** at 5% level and *** at 1% level.




                                                                33
Table 7: Isolating National Banking's Effect on Key Industries (1850-1880)
                                                                                                                                    Ln(Capital/Adult
                                Total Adult Workers                  Steam Power                     Ln(Value Added)                     Workers)
                                  (1)          (2)                 (3)          (4)                   (5)        (6)                 (7)          (8)
ΔBanks (63-68)                   0.212        0.201               0.001        0.001               0.011***   0.011***              0.003       0.001
                                [0.276]      [0.284]             [0.001]      [0.001]               [0.004]    [0.004]             [0.005]     [0.005]

ΔBanks (63-68)                   -0.232       -0.172            0.004**          0.003*            0.018***     0.018***            0.011       0.012*
& Yr>1860                        [0.569]      [0.539]           [0.002]          [0.002]            [0.006]      [0.006]           [0.008]      [0.007]

Mfg Dum. & ΔBanks                 0.770        0.496             0.006*         0.011***            -0.008       -0.011             0.014       0.017**
& Yr>1860                        [1.168]      [0.965]            [0.003]         [0.003]            [0.010]      [0.008]           [0.010]      [0.007]

L. Ln(National Banks)             -0.014       0.077              0.001           0.000            -0.006***    -0.006***        -0.007***     -0.004**
                                 [0.168]      [0.174]            [0.001]         [0.001]            [0.002]      [0.002]          [0.002]       [0.002]

L. Ln(State Banks)                -0.188       -0.152           0.002***        0.001***             -0.000       -0.000         -0.006***     -0.005**
                                 [0.161]      [0.157]            [0.001]         [0.000]            [0.002]      [0.002]          [0.002]       [0.002]

L.% Urban                      14.541***     14.906***            0.000           -0.002           0.642***     0.643***           -0.099       -0.084
                                [3.668]       [3.699]            [0.017]         [0.017]            [0.054]      [0.055]           [0.060]      [0.060]

L.Ln(Population)                -1.670**     -1.242**          -0.021***        -0.022***          -0.033**      -0.030**        -0.071***     -0.057***
                                 [0.693]      [0.583]           [0.005]          [0.004]            [0.013]       [0.012]         [0.017]       [0.017]

L.%Black                          -3.534       -4.262             -0.080          -0.075             0.198        0.195            -0.394*      -0.422*
                                 [7.905]      [8.179]            [0.063]         [0.063]            [0.163]      [0.163]           [0.222]      [0.221]

Reserve City                     -1.619       -0.320           -0.070***        -0.076***            0.001        0.012             0.100       0.141**
& Yr>1860                        [4.249]      [3.796]           [0.017]          [0.016]            [0.055]      [0.052]           [0.062]      [0.059]

In Town of 2,500+              6.859***      6.998***             -0.005          -0.004           0.360***     0.364***         -0.107***     -0.102***
People                          [1.904]       [1.957]            [0.006]         [0.006]            [0.021]      [0.021]           [0.024]       [0.024]

6<=Adult Workers<16                                             0.163***        0.162***           1.259***     1.260***            -0.024       -0.026
                                                                 [0.008]         [0.008]            [0.018]      [0.018]           [0.023]      [0.023]

16<=Adult Workers<100                                           0.312***        0.312***           2.425***     2.422***            0.031        0.028
                                                                 [0.012]         [0.012]            [0.025]      [0.025]           [0.032]      [0.032]

More than 100                                                   0.102***        0.103***           0.716***     0.721***           -0.025       -0.023
Adult Workers                                                    [0.010]         [0.010]            [0.044]      [0.044]           [0.088]      [0.089]

Manufacturing Dummy                 Yes           Yes                 Yes           Yes                  Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes
Manufacturing Time Trend            Yes            No                 Yes            No                  Yes           No              Yes         No
Manufacturing X Yr Effects           No           Yes                  No           Yes                  No            Yes             No          Yes
State Fixed Effects                 Yes           Yes                 Yes           Yes                  Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes
State Time Trend                    Yes           Yes                 Yes           Yes                  Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes
Yr Fixed Effects                    Yes           Yes                 Yes           Yes                  Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes
Observations                       17,971        17,971              25,196        25,196              25,196        25,196          18,439      18,439
R-squared                          0.040         0.042               0.118         0.118                0.430         0.431           0.068       0.069
Notes: The table presents the results of an OLS regression. The sample consists of decadal firm-level observations from 1850 through 1880. Manufacturing
Dummy denotes establishments in certain key industries (Textile Mills, Chemicals, Rubber Products, Metal Products, Industrial Machinery, Electronic
Equipment, and Instruments). The dependent variable is defined by the column heading. Dollar values are deflated to 1860 using Officer (2008). Robust
standard errors are provided in brackets. * denotes significance at 10%; ** at 5% level and *** at 1% level.




                                                                           34
