                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              HETEROGENEOUS WORKERS AND INTERNATIONAL TRADE

                                         Gene M. Grossman

                                        Working Paper 18788
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18788


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2013




Based on the Bernhard Harms Prize Lecture delivered at the Kiel Institute of World Economics on
October 31, 2012. Part of the work on this lecture was completed when I was visiting STICERD at
the London School of Economics and Centre de Recerca en Economia Internacional (CREI) in Barcelona.
I thank both institutions for their hospitality and support. I am grateful to Arnaud Costinot, Elhanan
Helpman, Stephen Redding, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg for their comments and suggestions. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Gene M. Grossman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Heterogeneous Workers and International Trade
Gene M. Grossman
NBER Working Paper No. 18788
February 2013
JEL No. F11,F16

                                              ABSTRACT

In this paper, I survey the recent theoretical literature that incorporates heterogeneous labor into models
of international trade. The models with heterogeneous labor have been used to study how talent dispersion
can be a source of comparative advantage, how the opening of trade affects the full distribution of
wages, and how trade affects industry productivity and efficiency via its impact on sorting and matching
in the labor market. Some of the most recent contributions also introduce labor market frictions to
study the effects of trade on structural unemployment and on mismatch between workers and firms.


Gene M. Grossman
International Economics Section
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
grossman@princeton.edu
1    Introduction
Traditionally, trade theory has addressed the causes and consequences of international trade using
models featuring broad factor aggregates. Distinctions typically are drawn between capital and
labor or between skilled and unskilled labor, with land and other natural resources also distinguished
in some applications. In the familiar theories, such as the Heckscher-Ohlin model, di¤erences in
aggregate factor endowments drive comparative advantage, as some countries are assumed to be
relatively better endowed with capital versus labor or with skilled versus unskilled labor. The
Stolper-Samuelson theorem and the Ricardo-Viner comparative statics speak to the distributional
e¤ects of trade and trade liberalization in terms of pro…ts versus wages or the skill premium for
highly-educated versus less-educated workers. When these models are used to address the e¢ ciency
of resource allocation, again the aggregates feature prominently in discussions of employment versus
unemployment or the sectoral misallocation of labor.
    Recently, trade economists have gained access to an array of …rm-level data and, in particular,
data that link workers to their employers. The matched employer-employee data allow researchers
to gather information about the career experiences of individual workers including their education,
years on the job, demographic characteristics and wage history, and also information about the …rms
for which they work, including their longevity, investments, employment levels and composition,
industries of operation, and their output and export experiences. With these rich data, it becomes
possible to study the sources of comparative advantage and the income distributional impacts of
trade at much …ner levels of detail than ever before. For example, one can ask whether and how a
country’s distribution of factors distinguished by quality or skills a¤ects its pattern of specialization
and trade.    One can ask how globalization a¤ects compensation not only in terms of the skill
premium, but over the entire spectrum of the wage distribution. And one can ask how trade a¤ects
a country’s productivity by in‡uencing the matching of heterogeneous workers and heterogeneous
…rms and the formation of diverse production teams.
    In this paper, I will survey an emerging theoretical literature that introduces worker hetero-
geneity into models of international trade. These are papers that typically assume a continuum
of di¤erent types of labor.    They ask, how do these heterogeneous workers sort to the di¤erent
industries in the economy and how do they match in their chosen industry of employment with
other workers, with …rms that di¤er in technologies, and with other factors of production. They
also ask how the opening of trade a¤ects the wage distribution and, in some cases, how the sorting
and matching of workers compares to the e¢ cient allocation of resources.
    A word on terminology is in order. Throughout this survey, I use “sorting” to refer to the
allocation of resources between sectors of the economy and “matching” to refer to the allocation
of resources within sectors. This terminology is not standard in the literature where, in fact, the
words sorting and matching are often used interchangeably. In some general, theoretical sense
there is no conceptual di¤erence between a worker’s decision about the industry in which to seek
employment and the choice of …rm within an industry. Firms have intangible assets that allow them
to produce output and a particular combination of assets can make a …rm especially productive

                                                   1
within its chosen industry or relatively productive in one line of business compared to another. Yet,
I …nd it useful when thinking about international trade to distinguish resource allocation between
and within industries. Many policies (and most trade policies) are levied at the industry level and
apply to all …rms in an industry. So, when considering international trade, we are used to thinking
about the determinants of resource allocation and the sources of comparative advantage at the
industry level. Moreover, much of the data on outputs and wages is reported at the industry level.
So, for example, we know about the aggregate output of …rms in particular industries but not the
aggregate output of …rms of certain types, and we often hear observations about between-industry
and within-industry wage inequality. While there is no strong conceptual distinction between
sorting to industries and matching within industries, the determinants of each draw on slightly
di¤erent parts of the trade literature and they speak to slightly di¤erent features of the data.
   I begin in Section 2 by introducing a production function that relates output of some good in
some country to the number of workers and the type of workers employed by a …rm there, to the
type of the …rm or of the other factors with whom the workers are matched, and to the quantities
of any other inputs that may be used by the …rm. This production function is su¢ ciently general
to nest assumptions about technology in all of the papers that I review here and it provides an
organizing principle for the subsequent discussion.
   Complementarities are important for the sorting and matching of heterogeneous labor. Workers
will sort to industries and choose occupations whose requirements are complementary to their skills
and they will match with other workers and with technologies and other factors that enhance
their own productivity. In Section 3, I provide a brief digression on supermodularity and log
supermodularity, two mathematical concepts that capture the notions of complementarity that
feature most prominently in the literature.
   The literature survey begins in Section 4. There, I describe models that feature sorting of
workers to industries but no matching of workers within industries. In that section, I discuss papers
that assume constant returns to scale in the number of workers (i.e., linear production technologies),
whereas in Section 5 I consider models that introduce diminishing returns to the quantity of labor.
Matching does not occur in the papers reviewed in Sections 4 and 5, either because labor is the
only factor of production (Section 4) or because all …rms in an industry are assumed to be similar
to one another and all other productive factors are assumed to be homogeneous (Section 5).
   Section 6, in contrast, describes models with matching but no sorting. Here, workers match with
…rms that use di¤erent technologies or with managers that have di¤erent abilities. The authors of
these papers abstract from issues of sorting by assuming that the economy comprises a single sector.
Finally, in Section 7, I consider an economy with multiple industries and heterogeneous …rms within
each industry. Then, the heterogeneous workers potentially sort to the di¤erent sectors and they
match with particular managers or other factors within each sector. Sorting and matching are
interdependent choices here, inasmuch as a worker’s choice of sector depends on what other types
of factors he will be able to match with in each industry and the matching options for workers in
a sector depend on the sorting decisions made by these other factors.


                                                  2
   Most of the literature until now has studied economies with frictionless labor markets. However,
the e¢ ciency issues that arise in conjunction with the matching and sorting of heterogeneous
workers become especially interesting when search frictions preclude instantaneous matching with
heterogeneous …rms and when imperfect information about worker types prevents …rms from hiring
the types of workers that might be most appropriate for their technologies and other attributes. In
Section 8, I describe a few recent papers that incorporate either search frictions and unemployment
or imperfect information and mismatch.
   This survey focuses on the theoretical literature. However, before beginning that task, I set
the stage by brie‡y describing a few empirical observations that have motivated some of the recent
theorizing. This is not intended to serve as a comprehensive or systematic review of the empirical
literature, but rather to provide a bit of context for the modeling e¤orts that I shall describe. I
o¤er the following …ve motivating observations.

   (i) Skill dispersion can be a source of comparative advantage

   Bombardini et al. (2011) use micro data from the International Adult Literacy Survey (IALS)
to document the existence of substantial cross-country di¤erences in skill dispersion. The IALS
provides internationally comparable measures of worker-related skills for 19 countries. The authors
show that cross-country di¤erences in the standard deviation of scores on standardized exams are
1.6 times as large as are the cross-country di¤erence in mean scores. They proceed to establish that
di¤erences in bilateral trade ‡ows by industry are correlated not only with cross-country di¤erences
in the means of IALS scores but also with di¤erences in the variances. Using data for the year 2000
on trade ‡ows between 19 exporters and 145 importers in 63 industries, they …nd that both the mean
and the standard deviation of test scores in‡uence the relative exports of two manufactured goods
to a given market. In particular, countries with more (residual) skill dispersion tend to specialize in
industries that exhibit weaker complementarities between workers skills. This evidence motivates
the development of models in which the distribution of worker types is an independent determinant
of specialization and perhaps models in which imperfect observability of worker type generates
mismatch that a¤ects relative industry productivity.

   (ii) Wages vary widely across workers in the same occupation and sector

   If worker heterogeneity matters for the e¤ects of trade on income distribution, then we should
expect to …nd that wage inequality exists not only between occupations and sectors but also within
those occupations and sectors. Helpman et al. (2012) use matched employer-employee data for
Brazil to document the importance of within industry and occupation wage inequality. When
workers are distinguished by …ve occupation groups (professional and managerial, skilled white
collar, unskilled white collar, skilled blue collar and unskilled blue collar) and by twelve industry
categories, the within component accounts for more than two-thirds of the wage inequality that ex-
isted in Brazil in 1990 and more than two-thirds of the change in inequality from 1986 through 1995.
Even at a much …ner level of disaggregation, with 348 occupation categories and 283 industries,
the within-cell component accounts for 52% of Brazilian wage inequality in 1990 and 54% of the


                                                  3
decadal change. Helpman et al. (2012) further report that residual wage inequality— the inequality
that remains after accounting for observable di¤erences in worker characteristics— explains about
half of the overall level and growth of wage inequality in Brazil from 1986-1995. Residual wage
inequality largely is found within occupation and sector categories. Obviously, the trends in such
inequality cannot be understood using models that assume identical workers.

   (iii) Recent trends in wage inequality are not captured well by the skill premium

   Many papers have documented a substantial widening of the wage distribution in the United
States and elsewhere during the 1980’s, whether measured by educational or occupational group-
ing, by age, or by experience. Residual wage inequality within demographic and skill groups also
increased at the time. Given the broad pattern of increased wage inequality— reinforced by sim-
ilar changes in non-wage compensation— it seemed appealing to summarize the evolution of wage
inequality using a simple statistic like the skill premium.
   Autor et al. (2008) report that subsequent trends for the 1990’s and early 2000’s are more
subtle. Whereas inequality has continued to grow in the upper half of the male wage distribution
in the period after 1990, that among workers in the lower half of the distribution has narrowed
during this later period. The authors describe the evolution of the U.S. wage distribution in recent
years as being one of “polarization,”with income gains at the top and the bottom of the distribution
relative to those in the middle. They …nd polarization not only for the overall distribution of wages,
but also for residual wage inequality and for earnings among workers at di¤erent education levels.
Needless to say, polarization cannot be explained in a setting such as the Heckscher-Ohlin model
that incorporates only two types of workers.

   (iv) Exporters pay a wage premium, but ...

   Many studies beginning with Bernard and Jensen (1995) have found that …rms that export pay
higher average wages than …rms that serve only their domestic market, even after controlling for
observable …rm characteristics. Helpman et al. (2012) is a recent example of a paper that establishes
an exporter premium (in Brazilian wages) after controlling for …rm size and some observable worker
characteristics. Premia such as those that have been identi…ed could be an indication that exporting
…rms earn rents that they share with their workforce or simply that the composition of workers
in exporting …rms is di¤erent from that in …rms that serve only the domestic market. Schank
et al. (2007) provide some evidence in favor of the latter interpretation using matched employer-
employee data for Germany. When they include person characteristics and person …xed e¤ects to
control for “worker quality” in their wage equations, they …nd that the estimated coe¢ cient on a
variable measuring the share of a …rm’s output that is exported shrinks substantially compared to a
regression without these controls, and that export status (a dichotomous variable re‡ecting whether
a …rm exports or not) does not seem to a¤ect the wages that a …rm pays at all. These …ndings imply
that unobserved worker characteristics are positively correlated with export behavior, as would be
expected in a labor market with positive assortative matching.

   (v) Trade may a¤ ect the matching process, especially in export-oriented industries

                                                  4
       Labor economists have been asking for some time whether the more productive workers tend to
work for the more productive …rms. Beginning with the in‡uential work of Abowd et al. (1999), a
common methodology employed in the search for evidence of positive assortative matching (PAM)
in labor markets uses matched employer-employee data to correlate the estimated …xed e¤ect in a
regression of employee wages with the estimated …xed e¤ect in a regression of the wages …rms pay.
The idea is that workers who receive a high wage in all their jobs beyond what can be attributed to
their observable characteristics are especially productive workers and …rms that pay high wages to
all workers beyond what would be predicted based on their observable characteristics are especially
productive …rms. Although the results of these many studies are mixed (see Postel-Vinay and
Robin (2006) for a survey), by and large the evidence has been disappointing for those who believe
that complementarities between worker skills and …rm technologies are an important property of
modern production processes.
       Several authors have questioned whether the Abowd et al. (1999) methodology is up to the task
up measuring PAM. For example, de Melo (2009) argues that there is a severe downward bias in
using correlations between …xed e¤ects to measure PAM.1 The downward bias he suggests re‡ects
non-monotonicities in the relationship between worker quality and wages caused by variation in
…rms’bargaining power. Productive …rms may have stronger bargaining power than less productive
…rms, in which case they may pay lower wages to any given type of worker in the presence of costly
search and labor market frictions. The productive …rms may indeed hire the better workers, yet this
may not be revealed by the wages they pay. Using an alternative measure that does not rely on …xed
e¤ects, Bagger and Lentz (2012) …nd signi…cant evidence of PAM in matched employer-employee
data for Denmark.
       Davidson et al. (2010) is another recent study that …nds evidence of PAM, in this case using
data on Swedish workers and …rms for the period 1995 to 2005. Interestingly, from the point of
view of this survey, Davidson et al. (2010) proceed to investigate whether the degree of matching
they …nd in a given industry and year is in‡uenced by the extent of the industry’s openness to
trade. For openness, they use foreign industry tari¤ rates to re‡ect Swedish …rms’access to foreign
markets and Swedish tari¤ rates to re‡ect competition from imports. When they divide their
sample into export-oriented industries and import-competing industries, they …nd that increased
foreign openness strengthens the forces for PAM in Swedish export industries. In import-competing
industries, by contrast, there is little evidence of a signi…cant in‡uence of (Swedish) trade openness
on the degree of matching.

       Taken together, these observations illustrate the many interesting lessons that can be gleaned
from detailed information about …rms and their workers. They suggest the subtle mechanisms of
matching and sorting that operate in any labor market, mechanisms that only can be studied in
models that allow for worker heterogeneity.
   1
    See also Cahuc et al. (2006) and Eeckhout and Kircher (2011) on the bias that can result from using worker …xed
e¤ects in wage regressions to measure unobserved quality in the presence of search frictions in the labor market.




                                                        5
2     Modeling Worker Heterogeneity
Workers di¤er in a multitude of ways.               A list of personal attributes that could be relevant for
labor market outcomes would include health, gender, childhood background, family circumstances,
years of schooling, years of job experience, reasoning ability, artistic ability, communication skills,
organizational skills, and many others. Most of these attributes have several dimensions and they
interact with job characteristics and industry of employment to determine a worker’s productivity
and pay.
    In contrast to the richness of the actual di¤erences between workers in the economy, the theo-
retical literature on labor heterogeneity deals with a much simpli…ed abstraction. For purposes of
surveying this literature, it will be enough to index workers by a variable qL that describes a single
dimension of variation.2 It is typical to assume— as I will here— that workers with “more” of qL
(i.e., a higher index) are potentially more productive in all economic activities. In recognition of
this assumption, I refer to qL as a worker’s “ability.”I do allow the contribution that ability makes
to a worker’s productivity to vary across industries and occupations.
    I posit a production function for the output of good i in country k that allows for (i) cross-
country di¤erences in technology, (ii) cross-industry di¤erences in the contribution of ability to
productivity, (iii) complementarities between worker ability and the quality or ability of any other
factors or workers with whom a given worker is matched, (iv) constant or diminishing returns to the
number of workers, given the quantities of any other inputs with which these workers are combined,
and (v) cross-industry di¤erences in the extent of any diminishing returns, which re‡ect di¤erences
in sectoral labor intensities. Speci…cally, I write

                                            xki =     k
                                                      i   (qL ; qH ) fi (`) ,                                     (1)

where xki is the output of good i in country k when ` workers with ability qL are combined with
one unit of some other factor (if any) of quality or ability qH and I assume fi0 (`)                0. If there is a
second factor, it might be physical capital or managerial time, or it might be another worker that
is needed in combination with the worker in question to perform other of the various tasks required
                                             k
of a production team. The function           i   (qL ; qH ) captures the contribution of ability to productivity
in country k and industry i, as well as the complementarity or substitutability between factors or
team members in the production process. The possibility that fi (`) is a declining function captures
the potential diminishing returns to one factor, holding the quantity of another input …xed. These
diminishing returns can re‡ect the scarcity of a manager’s time, congestion on machines, or the
diminishing productivity of doing more of one task without doing more of others. The industry
subscript on fi allows for the possibility that factor intensities di¤er across industries, as is common
in multi-factor and multi-sector models of international trade.3
   2
     Equivalently, there might be many dimensions of variation provided that these dimensions can be summarized
in a single su¢ cient statistic for purposes of predicting labor market outcomes.
   3
     A more general speci…cation of the production technology would be to write xki = gik (qL ; qH ; `; h), where h is
the quantity of the second factor whose quality is qH . This would allow, for example, for the possibility that the



                                                             6
    Note that the production function (1) embeds the familiar, neoclassical production function
with constant returns to scale that applies with homogeneous factors. If all types of a factor are
                         k                                                                     k
equally productive,      i   (qL ; qH ) is just a constant, in which case xki =                i fi (`)   is output per unit
capital (or per manager) in industry i and country k. In this case, we would typically assume that
fi0 (`) < 0, in recognition of diminishing returns to labor for a given quantity of capital or managers.
Of course, if labor is the only input, then constant returns would imply a linear production function,
                               k
so we would write xki =        i `.



3     A Short Digression on Complementarity
Complementarity features prominently in the literature on the sorting and matching of heteroge-
neous labor. Two types of complementarity are captured in the literature. First, there may be
complementarity between the attributes of a worker and the occupation or sector in which he or
she is employed. A more able worker, though absolutely more productive in all activities, may be
relatively more productive in certain occupations depending on the job requirements. For example,
some occupations or industries may use production methods that are more technologically complex
and therefore may reward greater technical sophistication on the part of their employees. More
able workers may be only slightly more productive than their less able counterparts in a sector that
uses a simple technology, but considerably more productive in one that uses a complex technology.
Then, we would say that there is complementarity between the type (ability) of the worker and
the type (technological complexity) of the industry or job. Second, but related, there may be com-
plementarity between the type of a worker and the type of any other factor or team member with
whom the worker is paired. In any given industry or occupation, a more able worker may be more
productive than a less able worker when matched with a given manager or machine, but the more
able worker may be especially productive compared to the less able worker when the manager or
machine also is of high quality.
    Mathematically, the concept of complementarity can be captured by the property of supermod-
ularity. A function of two variables F (x; y) is supermodular if

                               F (x2 ; y2 ) + F (x1 ; y1 )       F (x2 ; y1 ) + F (x1 ; y2 )                             (2)

for all pairs x2 > x1 and y2 > y1 in the domain of F ( ). By rearranging terms, this inequality is
equivalent to F (x2 ; y2 )     F (x1 ; y2 )   F (x2 ; y1 )       F (x1 ; y1 ); i.e., the extra “output” generated by
increasing the …rst input from x1 to x2 is greater if the input is combined with the larger “other
input” y2 than if it is combined with the smaller y1 . If the function F ( ) is twice di¤erentiable,
this is equivalent to the cross-partial derivative, F12 (x; y) ; being positive for all x and y.
    A stronger notion of complementarity is log supermodularity.4 A function F (x; y) is log super-
diminishing returns to the quantity of labor depends on the quality of labor that is employed. I do not write the
technology this way, because little of the literature that I shall review has anything to say about this more general
case. But see Eeckhout and Kircher (2012), who study the the conditions for PAM in this more general environment.
   4
     Actually, log supermodularity need not be a stronger requirement than supermodularity for functions that are


                                                             7
modular if
                                 F (x2 ; y2 ) F (x1 ; y1 )        F (x2 ; y1 ) F (x1 ; y2 )                     (3)

for all pairs x2 > x1 and y2 > y1 in the domain of F ( ). If F (x; y) > 0 for all (x; y), then this is
equivalent to requiring that the function log F (x; y) be supermodular. This time, we can rewrite the
inequality as F (x2 ; y2 ) =F (x1 ; y2 )     F (x2 ; y1 ) =F (x1 ; y1 ), which means that output rises relatively
more when the …rst input is increased from x1 to x2 if that input is combined with a larger other
input y2 than if it is combined with the smaller y1 .
    For some purposes, it will also be useful to de…ne a property of a function that characterizes
strong substitutability between the arguments. A function F (x; y) is submodular if

                              F (x2 ; y1 ) + F (x1 ; y2 )         F (x2 ; y2 ) + F (x1 ; y1 )                   (4)

for all pairs x2 > x1 and y2 > y1 in the domain of F ( ). This is, of course, just the opposite of the
inequality that de…nes supermodularity in (2). A production function might be submodular if the
output depends mostly on the greater of the two inputs. Then, it would be ine¢ cient to “waste”a
good input by combining it with another good input, when the input could do nearly as well with a
poorer partner and the better “other input” could be saved for combination with a lesser partner.


4     Sorting without Matching: Constant Returns to Labor
I begin by discussing the sorting of workers to industries in a setting in which there is no matching
of workers with other factors or teammates and no issue of diminishing returns to the quantity of
labor. This sorting problem has been studied in its most general form in Costinot (2009). Costinot
generalizes prior work by Ru¢ n (1988), Matsuyama (1992), and Bougheas and Riezman (2007).5
    Consider a perfectly competitive economy and suppose that output in sector i and country k is
a linear function of the number of workers after adjustment is made for each worker’s sector-speci…c
productivity. That is, write aggregate output in sector i and country k as
                                                     Z
                                           Xik   =           k
                                                             i   (q)   k
                                                                           (q) Lk dq
                                                     q2Qki

where Qki is the set of worker types that sorts to industry i in country k in the competitive
                k
equilibrium,        (q) is the probability density of workers of type q in country k, and Lk is the total
                                                                                                k
mass of workers in country k. Notice that workers of type q have productivity                   i   (q) in industry
i in country k and that aggregate output in the industry is just the sum of what the individual
not monotone. But since the functions we consider here are all monotonically increasing in their arguments, we can
consider log supermodularity as the more stringent condition.
   5
     Costinot allows for an arbitrary number (or a continuum) of workers, industries and countries. Ru¢ n assumes
there are two countries that share common productivity for a given worker type in a given industry. Bougheas and
Riezman focus on an economy with two sectors in which all workers are equally productive in one of them. Finally,
Matsuyama analyzes a small country with two sectors in which newborn agents can choose their industry of lifetime
employment after learning their individual comparative advantage. He studies the dynamics of resource allocation
as workers die and are replaced by new generations.


                                                             8
workers who are employed there produce “on their own”. In this setting, a worker of type q in
                                                               k
country k can produce output with value pi                     i   (q) by working in industry i. Competitive …rms in
industry i will bid this amount for the worker’s services. In equilibrium, each worker will sort to
whichever sector o¤ers him the highest wage.
   Costinot …rst describes the equilibrium sorting pattern for two special cases. In a setting with
only Ricardian technological di¤erences across countries,

                                     k
                                          (q)       ~k
                                     i2                  i2
                                     k
                                                =             for all q and all (i1 ; i2 ) .
                                     i1   (q)       ~k
                                                         i1

That is, the relative productivity of a worker in country k in any two di¤erent industries is the
same, regardless of the worker’s type. Here, the more able workers in a country are proportionally
more productive than their less able counterparts in all sectors of the economy. Yet, (all) workers
in a country may be relatively more productive in some industry than another compared to the
relative productivity of workers located in some other country.
   In such a setting, if a worker with ability q1 prefers to work in industry i1 than in industry
i2 — because he is o¤ered a higher wage there— then so does a worker with some di¤erent ability
level q2 . At given prices, all workers in a country sort to the same industry, or to multiple industries
only if the relative price exactly compensates for the relative productivity di¤erential. The sorting
in di¤erent countries will vary depending on the international pattern of technological comparative
advantage.
   Costinot shows for this case that, if countries and industries can be ordered in such a way
that productivity as a function of k and i is log supermodular (that is, if high-index countries
are relatively more productive in high-index industries), then aggregate output also will be a log
supermodular function of k and i. The high-index countries will produce relatively more in the
high-index industries and will export these goods in a trade equilibrium. Trade has no e¤ect on
the distribution of income in any country, because the relative productivity of any two workers
in country k depends only on their relative ability levels and not on their ultimate industry of
employment.
   In Costinot’s second special case, countries di¤er from one another in their endowment distri-
butions and workers di¤er in their relative productivities in di¤erent industries, albeit in a similar
way across countries. If there are any cross-country di¤erences at all in technologies, they are
Hicks-neutral with respect to worker-type and industry. More formally, suppose that

                                k
                                     (q)        ~ (q)
                                i2               i2
                                            =         for all q and all (i1 ; i2 ) .
                                k
                                i1   (q)        ~ (q)
                                                    i1

Here, the relative productivity of a worker in two di¤erent industries i1 and i2 depends on the
worker’s ability q, but it does not depend on the country in which that worker is located. Ac-
cordingly, workers of a given type q will face the same relative wage opportunities in any pair of
industries irrespective of where these workers live, and hence they will make the same employment

                                                                    9
choices.
       The implied pattern of specialization is reminiscent of the Heckscher-Ohlin theorem. Suppose
that industries can be ordered such that productivity is a log supermodular function of i and
worker ability q; i.e., more-able workers are relatively more productive in higher-index industries.
And suppose that countries can be ordered so that the probability density of workers is a log
supermodular function of k and q; i.e., more-able workers are relatively more abundant in high-
index countries.6 Then aggregate output will be a log supermodular function of i and k; i.e., a
country with a higher index will produce relatively more of a good with a higher index among any
pair of goods. This re‡ects the fact that sorting in any pair of countries is the same and so relative
output re‡ects the relative numbers in the countries’endowments of di¤erent types of labor.
       Costinot and Vogel (2010) study a world economy comprising two countries that have similar
technologies but di¤erent distributions of worker types, as in Costinot’s second special case.7 They
focus on the e¤ects of trade on income distribution, a question that Costinot (2009) does not
consider. In a variant of the model that might describe “North-South trade”, let the North be
relatively well endowed with the more able workers among any pair of workers types. Then the
integrated world economy has a relatively greater number of the less able workers among any
pair of worker types than does the Northern economy in autarky, but it has a relatively smaller
number of the less able of any pair of worker types than does the Southern economy in autarky.
Assuming that consumers worldwide have identical, constant-elasticity-of-substitution preferences
across the many goods produced by these economies, the authors show that, in a trade equilibrium,
Northern workers of any given ability level …nd employment in a higher-indexed industry than
where they work in autarky, and that Southern workers of any given ability level …nd employment
in a lower-indexed industry than where they work in autarky. Intuitively, the high-ability workers
are relatively more scarce in the integrated world economy than they are in the autarky equilibrium
in North, so they are more “needed”to produce in industries that are complementary to their skills.
The upshot is that trade causes the relative wage of the more able worker in any pair of workers to
rise in the North and to fall in the South. The more able Northern workers see their scarcity rise
as a result of integration with the South, whereas the less able Southern workers see their scarcity
rise as a result of integration with the North.
       Now consider a variant that might describe certain instances of “North-North trade” in which
the two countries di¤er in the diversity of their distributions of worker ability but not necessarily
in their mean ability levels. Let one country, say “West,” have a relatively greater endowment of
the less able workers than “East” for any pair of worker types with indexes q1 and q2 both less
than some q 0 , but a relatively greater endowment of the more able workers for any pair of worker
types with indexes q3 and q4 both greater than q 0 . In other words, West has more workers in the
tails of the distribution compared to East, with relatively many of the very high ability workers
   6
      Let V (q; k) be the supply of workers of type q in country k. Then if V is log supermodular, V (q1 ; k1 ) =V (q0 ; k1 ) >
V (q1 ; k0 ) =V (q0 ; k0 ) whenever q1 > q0 and k1 > k0 .
    7
      Actually, Costinot and Vogel allow for cross-country productivity di¤erences provided they are Hicks-neutral;
i.e.,proportionately the same for all worker types and industries.



                                                              10
but also relatively many of the very low ability workers. In this case, it is the extreme workers in
West who …nd that their relatively scarcity increases as a result of trade with East. Every Western
worker with ability q > q 0 sorts to a higher-indexed sector in the trade equilibrium than in autarky
while every Western worker with with ability q < q 0 sorts to a lower-indexed sector in the trade
equilibrium than in autarky. As a result, the relative wage of the more able worker of any pair
rises in the West, if both workers in the pair have ability above q 0 ; while the relative wage of the
more able worker of any pair falls in West, if both members of the pair have ability less q 0 ; i.e.,
trade causes a polarization of the income distribution. The distributional e¤ects of trade are just
the opposite in East.
       Returning to the analysis of sorting in Costinot (2009), consider the more general case in which
relative productivity in two industries is common neither across worker types in a given country
nor across countries for a given worker type. Costinot considers the case in which productivity
is a log supermodular function of industry i, country k, and ability q.8 He examines the pattern
of specialization when the distribution of worker types is a log supermodular function of k and q;
i.e., the higher indexed country in any pair has a relatively larger endowment of the more able of
any pair of worker types. This, he shows, is not su¢ cient to allow a complete description of the
sorting pattern. In particular, the higher-index country in a pair may produce relatively more in
some industry i1 compared to i2 , even if i1 < i2 . All that we know in general is that the higher-
index country in a pair produces relatively more in the highest-index industry and relatively less
in the lowest-index industry among all the industries in the world economy. In other words, if
cross-country di¤erences in relative sectoral productivities and cross-industry di¤erences in relative
worker productivities (in conjunction with di¤erences in type distributions across countries) are
both sources of comparative advantage, then the pattern of international specialization is clear
only for the two most extreme sectors.
       Ohnsorge and Tre‡er (2007) study a similar economy in which there again are no diminishing
returns to labor and workers di¤er in their relative productivity across sectors. They begin with
the intriguing possibility that each worker is endowed with a pair of attributes, qa and qb . Of
course, a worker brings both of his attributes to any industry in which he accepts employment.
A worker’s productivity depends on this pair of attributes and the industry of application, but
not on the country in which the worker is located. This would seem a more complicated problem
than Costinot’s, because the pair of attributes that describe a worker may contribute di¤erently
to productivity in the di¤erent sectors. However, Ohnsorge and Tre‡er assume that                         i (qa ; qb )   is
homogeneous of degree one, that is, it can be written as

                                              i (qa ; qb )   = qa ~ i (qb =qa ) :
   8
    A function of three arguments is log supermodular if it is log supermodular as a function of any pair of arguments,
holding the third argument constant. In our setting, this would mean that higher index workers are relatively more
productive in higher index industries in every country, higher index workers are relatively more productive in higher
index countries in every industry, and higher index countries have a relatively better technology in higher index
industries for every worker type.




                                                              11
With this assumption, the relative wage that any worker can earn in any pair of industries depends
only on his relative endowment of the two attributes, qb =qa , and not on his absolute endowment of
either one. All workers with the same relative endowment make the same job choices, regardless of
their locations and regardless of their absolute abilities as captured here by qa . It follows that sorting
to industries is guided once again by a unidimensional ordering of worker types. If productivity is
a log supermodular function of industry and relative attribute endowment qb =qa , then the worker
that has a higher qb =qa among any pair will sort to the industry with the higher index in the pair.
    One can examine in this setting how the distribution of attributes across the labor forces of
two countries a¤ects the pattern of specialization and the e¤ects of trade on the wage distribution.
Suppose that productivity is a log supermodular function of i and qb =qa ; i.e., a high relative
endowment of attribute b compared to attribute a confers a comparative advantage to a worker in
industries with higher indexes. Then, for example, if log qa and log qb =qa are spread among workers
according to a bivariate normal distribution, and if the means and variances of these variables are
the same in the two countries, the country with the higher correlation between log qa and log qb =qa
will produce relatively more of the higher-indexed goods. The explanation for this should be clear.
The sorting of workers to industries re‡ects the relative attribute endowment of the workers and
is common in the two countries. Then the country with the higher correlation between log qa and
log qb =qa has, on average, more absolutely productive workers among those that have a comparative
productivity advantage in the high-index industries.
    The Ohnsorge-Tre‡er model features both between-industry and within-industry wage inequal-
ity. The inequality across industries re‡ects, as in Costinot and Vogel (2010), the di¤erent relative
productivity of workers with di¤erent qb =qa in the various sectors. The within industry inequality
re‡ects the fact that di¤erent workers who sort to the same industry (because they have the same
qb =qa ) have di¤erent absolute productivity levels. Looking across industries, the country with the
higher correlation between absolute and comparative advantage has a steeper wage pro…le and
therefore more between-industry wage inequality. However, for given qb =qa , a higher correlation
between log qa and log qb =qa implies a lower variance of qa . Hence, the high-correlation country has
lower within industry wage inequality.


5    Sorting without Matching: Diminishing Returns to Labor
In the last section, I described sorting to industries based on worker comparative advantage in a
setting in which each individual worker can make his employment decision independently from the
decisions of others. A worker’s potential productivity in an activity did not depend on his pairing
with other workers or other factors of production, nor did it depend on the number of other workers
who choose the same sector of employment. Accordingly, the workers only need information about
their own relative strengths in di¤erent occupations and information about the market prices of
…nal outputs in order to decide where to seek and accept employment. In this section, I continue
with the assumption that a worker’s productivity depends only on his own attributes and not on


                                                    12
the attributes of others in the …rm or of the factors with which he is combined. But now I introduce
diminishing returns to the quantity of labor. These diminishing returns may re‡ect congestion on
capital equipment or increasing scarcity of a manager’s time. For concreteness, I adopt the latter
terminology. In order to postpone the discussion of matching between workers and managers,
I follow Grossman et al. (2013) in beginning with the simpler (if unrealistic) case in which all
managers are similar.
         Consider a two-sector world economy in which managers are mobile across the sectors.9 Suppose
that the potential output in sector i that can be produced by a single manager and ` workers with
ability q is given by xi =           i (q) `
                                               i   . In this technology— which is common to the two countries— the
extent of diminishing returns to the quantity of labor per manager is re‡ected in the parameter
 i   < 1. These diminishing returns can di¤er across sectors as they will if the managerial input is
relatively more important in one sector than the other. This captures, of course, the cross-industry
di¤erences in factor intensities that are common in models of trade based on factor endowments.
         In this setting, …rms in each industry must choose how many managers to hire, what type
of workers to hire, and how many workers to combine with each manager. In the competitive
equilibrium, as usual, the size of the individual …rm (i.e., the number of managers in a particular
…rm) is not determined. The equilibrium salary of managers will be such that all active …rms
make zero pro…ts and each individual …rm is indi¤erent as to the number of managers it employs.
However, the aggregate employment of managers in each sector is uniquely determined in the
general equilibrium, as is the number of workers per manager.
         An individual …rm may opt to hire a particular type of labor, depending on the wage schedule
it faces. Moreover, the ability level of workers determines a …rm’s productivity and so a …rm that
hires more able workers may decide to combine a greater number of workers with each manager
that it employs. A …rm’s pro…t maximization problem can be solved in two steps, by …rst writing
the optimal number of workers per manager as a function of the ability levels of those workers and
their market wage (also a function of ability) and then by optimizing over the choice of q. The
resulting …rst-order condition that re‡ects both optimal type and optimal number can be written
as
                                                          " i (q)
                                                                    = "w (q) ,                                           (5)
                                                             i

where "        i
                   (q) is the elasticity of the productivity function            i   for sector i with respect to ability and
"w (q) is the elasticity of the wage schedule with respect to ability. The left-hand side of (5) re‡ects
the marginal bene…t to the …rm in industry i (expressed as an elasticity) from upgrading the quality
of its workforce, taking into account both the direct e¤ect on productivity and the indirect e¤ect
that results from its adjustment in the size of its work unit. More able workers are more productive
(as re‡ected by " i ) but they also are hired in greater numbers, the more so in labor-intensive
industries. Essentially, the …rms faces a choice between hiring better workers or more workers to
produce its desired output per manager and the trade-o¤ is resolved when the …rm equates the
     9
         Mussa (1982) has a similar model, except that his second factor— which he calls capital— is speci…c to an industry.



                                                                    13
ratio of the elasticity of output with respect to ability (given `) relative to the elasticity of output
with respect to quantity (given q) with the elasticity of the wage schedule.10
       It might seem from equation (5) that all …rms in sector i will hire the same type of worker
by choosing the q that maximizes pro…ts. However, were that to occur, many types of workers
would …nd themselves unemployed. Of course, such unemployment does not arise in a competitive
equilibrium with ‡exible wages and ‡exible input ratios. Instead, the wage schedule adjusts in
equilibrium to ensure that (5) is satis…ed for the entire range of workers that sorts to sector i. In
short, the wage of a worker with ability q who works in sector i is

                                                            1=
                                       w (q) = wi [   i (q)]
                                                                 i   , for q 2 Qi ,                                (6)

where wi is a scalar that anchors wages in the sector. Facing this wage schedule, the …rms operating
in sector i are indi¤erent among the various worker types that sort there, and so all will be hired
by some …rm or another.
       The wage schedule reveals the equilibrium sorting pattern in both countries. If " 1 (q)=                   1   >
" 2 (q)=    2   for all types q in the labor force, then the more able workers with q > q for some
endogenous q will sort to industry 1 and the less able workers with q < q will sort to industry
2. With any other pattern of sorting, the …rms in industry 1 could …nd some high-ability workers
in industry 2 whom they would prefer to hire than their own employees. Similarly, the …rms in
industry 2 could …nd some low-ability workers in industry 1 that would be more pro…table as hires
than their own employees. As Grossman et al. discuss, if the ranking of the sectors in terms of
" i (q)=   i    reverses in the domain of worker types for the economy, then the sorting pattern will
be more complex with, perhaps, high and low-ability workers employed in one sector, and middle-
ability workers employed in the other.11
       The pattern of trade re‡ects both the countries’aggregate relative abundance of managers versus
workers and the distributions of worker types in each country. Suppose, for example, that the two
countries share the same probability density functions for q but that H A =LA > H B =LB , where
H k is the number of managers in country k. Then the distributions of worker types generates no
comparative advantage for either country, but country A, with its relative abundance of managers,
has a comparative advantage in the manager-intensive sector. That is, if                 2   >   1   and the countries
have identical and homothetic preferences, country A will be relatively specialized in producing good
  10
    Note that (6) represents a generalization of the wage equation (11) in Costinot and Vogel (2010). In my notation,
let (q; i) be the productivity of a worker with ability q in industry i. Then, Costinot and Vogel prove in their
Lemma 2 that
                                                  " [q; (q)] = "w (q)
where (q) is the equilibrium sector of employment of a worker with ability q and "          q (@ =@q) = . Their model
has constant returns to labor, so implicitly (i) = 1. Therefore, their Lemma 2 also implies that wages rise with
an elasticity equal to the elasticity of productivity with respect to ability divided by the elasticity of output with
respect to quantity (which, in their case, is equal to one).
  11
     Of course, if 1 = 2 , then the sorting pattern re‡ects a comparison of " 1 and " 2 . The better workers will
sort to industry 1 if and only if productivity is a log supermodular function of ability and industry. This observation
represents a generalization of the …ndings of Costinot (2009) to the case with diminishing returns when factor
intensities are the same in all industries.



                                                          14
1 and will export this good in the trade equilibrium. Alternatively, if H A =LA = H B =LB but the
distribution of talent is shifted proportionately to the right in country A relative to country B, then
country A will produce relatively more in the industry where ability contributes more elastically to
productivity. That is, if "   i
                                  (q) > " j (q), country A will have a comparative advantage in producing
good i relative to good j. Notice that this need not be the good produced by the country’s most
able workers.
    How does trade a¤ect the wage distribution here? The opening of trade generates no change in
any within-industry distribution inasmuch as (6) pins down the relative wages of any pair of workers
employed in the same industry as a function of their respective ability levels and technological
considerations. However, trade does a¤ect the relative wages of workers employed in di¤erent
sectors, as movements in relative price induce changes in the equilibrium wage anchors, w1 and
w2 . Grossman et al. show that an increase in the relative price of the exported good increases the
relative wage of any worker employed in the export industry compared to any worker employed
in the import-competing sector. If the two industries do not di¤er much in labor intensity, so
that   1    2,   then workers who remain in the import-competing industry will see their real wage
fall as a result of an increase in the price of the export good, while those initially in the export
industry will bene…t from such a price change. Alternatively, if " 1 (q)=             1   " 2 (q)=   2,   then all
workers in the economy will gain from an increase in the relative price of exports if and only if
the export sector is more labor intensive than the import-competing sector. These …ndings can
be understood with reference to the well-known results for the Heckscher-Ohlin and Ricardo-Viner
models for the case of homogeneous labor. If factor intensities are similar in the two industries,
there are no Stolper-Samuelson forces to bene…t workers at the expense of managers, or vice versa.
What remains is the fact that some workers have comparative advantage in the export industry
as a re‡ection of their (high or low) ability levels, while others have comparative advantage in the
import-competing industry. These comparative advantages create partial sector speci…city, as in
Mussa (1982) or Grossman (1983). On the other hand, if the incentives for sorting are muted,
because " 1 (q)=   1   " 2 (q)=     2,   then there are no strong forces to tie a worker’s fate to his industry
of employment. Instead, all workers gain in real terms when an increase in the price of the labor-
intensive good generates an economy-wide increase in the demand for labor. The workers in the
export sector will gain more, unless the forces that induce intersectoral sorting are absent entirely.


6      Matching without Sorting
I turn next to models that examine the matching of heterogeneous workers with managers or
technologies. The simplest such models abstract from the sorting of workers to industries by
assuming that the economy has only one sector. In the case of Antràs et al. (2006), the world
economy is competitive and …rms everywhere produce a homogeneous good. In such a setting,
there is no “trade” (except to balance factor payments) and the focus instead is on the formation
of international production teams. In the case of Sampson (2012), the world economy produces


                                                         15
symmetrically di¤erentiated products under conditions of monopolistic competition. Then, there
is intra-industry trade but, of course, no interindustry trade. In both cases, the authors show
conditions for PAM and analyze how globalization a¤ects the wage distribution by changing the
equilibrium matching of workers to managers or …rms.
    Antràs et al. (2006) develop an elegant model of production hierarchies based on Garicano and
Rossi-Hansberg (2006). In their model, every individual— who is endowed with one unit of time
but has di¤erent ability or “knowledge”— faces an occupational choice between becoming a worker
or a manager. If an individual chooses to be a worker, he will have the opportunity to use his
unit of time to produce a unit of output of the homogeneous …nal good. However, …rst he must
solve a “problem” that arises in the course of production. A worker of ability (or with knowledge)
qL can solve the problem that confronts him with probability qL . If the worker cannot solve the
problem, he can pass it along to his manager. The manager presumably is more able (or has greater
knowledge) than the workers on his team, so the original problem is solved with probability qH > qL
when the manager has ability qH . However, each problem that is brought to the attention of the
manager absorbs a fraction     of his time endowment. The authors ask, which individuals choose
to be managers and which choose to be workers, what production units form in equilibrium, and
how does integration with another economy that has a di¤erent distribution of ability levels a¤ect
team formation and the resulting distribution of income?
    We can write the productivity of a production team here in terms of our earlier notation. A
manager with ability qH can supervise 1= (1      qL ) workers of ability qL , considering that a fraction
1   qL of the problems that these workers face will be passed on to the manager and that each such
problem uses a fraction    of the manager’s time. Considering the manager’s time constraint, the
output of a production team with a manager of ability qH and workers of ability qL is given by

                                                         qH
                                        (qH ; qL ) =           .                                     (7)
                                                       (1 qL )

    The productivity function (7) is supermodular, which induces positive assortative matching
between managers and workers. PAM means that the more able of any pair of managers always
is teamed with the more able group of workers. PAM derives from the complementarity between
manager ability and worker ability that is implicit in (7). The contribution of the manager’s ability
to team output depends on how many opportunities the unit has to generate output. More workers
provide more production opportunities. And the manager can support a greater number of workers,
and thereby confront a greater number of production opportunities, when the workers can solve
a greater fraction of the problems on their own. It follows that the contribution of a manager’s
ability to his unit’s output increases with the ability of his team of workers.
    Antràs et al. (2006) establish the existence of a “threshold equilibrium” for this economy. In
this equilibrium, the most able individuals with ability greater than some q choose to become
managers while the less able individuals with ability less than q choose to become workers. The
complementarity between worker and manager abilities, together with the resulting pattern of PAM,



                                                  16
generates an earnings schedule (of worker’s wage or manager’s salary) that is a strictly convex
function of q. Now suppose that “North” integrates with “South,” where the former country has
a uniform distribution of abilities q on support [0; 1] and the latter has a uniform distribution of
                            S ], for some q S
abilities q on support [0; qmax            max < 1. In the integrated world economy, …rms can
combine a manager located in one country with workers situated in the other.
   The integrated equilibrium with global production teams features fewer Southern managers
and more Southern workers than does the autarky equilibrium in the South. This is because some
of the Southerners that choose to become managers in autarky opt instead to become workers
in international production teams when they can join with more able Northern managers. The
matches formed by all of the original Southern workers are upgraded as the result of globalization,
because the management pool improves with the addition of the able Northern managers and the
exit of the least able of the former Southern managers. Meanwhile, the matches of the remaining
Southern managers deteriorate inasmuch as these managers must compete for workers with the
group of talented Northerners. Considering that the return to ability for a worker increases with
the ability of the manager with whom he is teamed and similarly the return to ability for a manager
increases with the ability of the workers that report to him, the authors …nd a steepening of the
wage pro…le for the initial Southern workers and a ‡attening of the salary pro…le for the original
Southern managers. The steepening of the wage pro…le together with the addition to the worker
pool of some former managers implies an increase in within-worker wage inequality in the South.
   In the North, some middle-ability individuals who opt to be workers in the autarky equilibrium
choose instead the alternative occupation in the integrated equilibrium in order to serve as managers
for the larger pool of less-able workers. It follows that a group of the lowest ability Northern workers
will see the quality of their manager downgraded as the threshold for choosing management as an
occupation falls. The best Northern workers, in contrast, …nd better matches in the integrated
equilibrium than in autarky, since some of their most able competitors now opt out of the worker
pool in order to manage international production teams. Meanwhile, the least able Northern
managers in the autarky equilibrium …nd themselves matched with better workers in the integrated
equilibrium, but the most able Northern managers may see their matches deteriorate. The upshot
is that the return to ability falls for low-ability Northern workers, but rises for high-ability Northern
workers. The authors show that overall wage inequality can rise or fall in the North as a result of
integration with the South.
   Sampson (2012) studies matching between heterogeneous …rms and heterogeneous workers in
an economy in which the …rms have access to di¤erent technologies. The better the technology, the
more productive is the …rm, but productivity also depends on the ability qL of the workers that the
…rm hires. In our notation, a …rm with technology qH that hires ` workers with ability qL produces

                                            x=    (qH ; qL ) `

units of output, where     (qH ; qL ) is assumed to be log supermodular to capture complementarity
between technology and worker type. Notice that the production technology is linear in the number

                                                   17
of workers. But Sampson assumes that the …rms produce di¤erentiated products and therefore face
downward sloping demands. It follows that the …rms perceive diminishing marginal revenue from
additional employment.
   Here, the log supermodularity of         (qH ; qL ) induces PAM between workers and …rms; i.e., the
best workers are hired by the …rms with the best technologies. Facing demands of the form Zpj ,
where pj is the price of variety j and        is the elasticity of substitution between any pair of goods,
the optimal employment for a …rm with technology qH that hires workers of ability qL and pays
them the competitive wage w (qL ) is

                                                  1                          1
                           ` (qH ; qL ) =               Z (qH ; qL )             w (qL )   .

Using this expression for optimal employment in the …rm’s pro…t function, Sampson relates the
optimal match to the elasticity of the wage schedule, namely

                                        "   L [m (qL ) ; qL ]   = "w (qL )                                   (8)

where m (qL ) is the type of the …rm that hires workers of ability qL , "w (qL ) is the elasticity of the
wage schedule, and "   L   = qL [@ =@qL ] =     is the (partial) elasticity of productivity with respect to
worker ability. Notice two di¤erences between (8) and (5), which is the analogous expression for
optimal hiring in a competitive model with homogeneous managers and …rms. First, the left-hand
side of (8) is not divided by an output elasticity with respect to labor quantity, which re‡ects
the fact that, in Sampson’s model, there are no diminishing returns to the number of workers.
Second, the elasticity of productivity in Sampson’s setting depends not only on the worker’s type,
but also on the type of the …rm that employs him, with such matching determined in the general
equilibrium.
   The distribution of technologies across …rms and the wage schedule together govern the aggre-
gate demands for workers at the various ability levels. In equilibrium, these demands must match
the exogenous supplies. Let H and L represent the masses of …rms and workers in equilibrium
(the former endogenous and the latter exogenous) and let              F   (qF ) represent the probability density
function that describes the distribution of factor types for F = H; L. Then labor market clearing
for every ability level requires

                                                  L    L (qL )      1
                                     m0 (qL ) =                             .                                (9)
                                                  H    H (qH ) ` (qH ; qL )

Together (8) and (9) comprise a pair of di¤erential equations that determine the equilibrium wage
schedule and the equilibrium matching schedule, once the mass and distribution of …rm types is
known.
   From this, Sampson makes an interesting observation. The di¤erential equation (8) can be




                                                        18
solved for wages in terms of the equilibrium matches, which gives
                                          Z   qL max
                                                           1           @ [m (qL ) ; qL ]
                       w (qL ) = exp                                                     dqL .
                                           qL min      [m (qL ) ; qL ]     @qL

It follows that, once the matching function is known, so is the wage schedule, and thus the former
is a su¢ cient statistic for the latter. Moreover, the complementarity between …rm type and worker
ability implies that output is more responsive to worker ability in …rms with better technologies.
Therefore, if a shock causes a subset of workers to match with better …rms than before, the wage
schedule becomes steeper and inequality rises among this set of workers. This is true also in
Costinot and Vogel (2010) and in Antràs et al. (2006), where in place of “better …rms” we would
say “higher-indexed industries” in the former and “better managers” in the latter.
       Sampson goes on to consider an economy in which …rms draw their technologies qH from a
truncated Pareto distribution upon paying a sunk entry cost, as in Melitz (2003). After entering
and learning its type, a …rm must pay a …xed cost in order to produce and an additional …xed
cost for the opportunity to export. The mass of entrants is such that expected pro…ts are zero.
In this setting— as is well known from Melitz— it may be that only the …rms that draw the best
technologies choose to export. In such an equilibrium, the opening of trade allows all workers to
match with better quality …rms than in autarky inasmuch as the …rms with the worst technologies
exit the market when confronted by competition from imports. The technological upgrading by
workers bene…ts especially the most able among them, and so there is a pervasive increase in
wage inequality. Finally, the combination of PAM and the fact that only the …rms with the best
technologies choose to export generates an exporter wage premium. Here, the premium arises solely
from the di¤erent composition of workers in …rms that export compared to that in …rms that sell
only domestically.
       In the Melitz model and its extension by Sampson to a setting with heterogeneous labor, the
distribution of technologies among …rms is exogenous. Alternatively, one might imagine situations
in which …rms can choose their technologies by, for example, opting to install certain types of
machines. Yeaple (2005) was the …rst to consider such endogenous technology choice in a model with
heterogeneous workers and trade.12 He assumed that …rms that produce di¤erentiated products
can choose one of two machine types and one of two worker types. Better machines cost more to
install. Better workers have a comparative advantage in operating the better machines. There are
both …xed and variable costs of trade between two identical countries.13
       In this setting, the distribution of technologies adapts to the distribution of workers. The …rms
that hire the less able workers with qL < qL install the cheaper and less productive machines. Firms
that hire the more able workers install better machines. The latter …rms produce more and pay
higher wages. Moreover, for a range of parameter values, the high-tech …rms choose to export, while
  12
    See also Bustos (2011).
  13
    In Yeaple (2005), there is also a homogeneous good, so there is both matching within the di¤erentiated products
sector and sorting between sectors. Here, I focus on the implications of his model for matching, and so I omit the
homogeneous good from my discussion.



                                                         19
the low-tech …rms do not. Thus, again, we …nd an exporter wage premium. Yeaple shows that a
reduction in variable trade costs increases pay at the top of the wage distribution but reduces pay
at the bottom, thereby increasing inequality. Sampson (2012) extends this one-sector variant of the
Yeaple model to include a continuous choice of technology with an entry cost that is an increasing
function of machine quality qH . He shows that the endogenous distribution of technologies re‡ects
the exogenous distribution of labor, so that if the latter is continuous the former will be so as
well. Under the assumption that          (qH ; qL ) is log supermodular, the equilibrium features PAM. An
opening to trade causes …rms that hire the more able workers to upgrade their technologies. The
return to ability rises for exporters and wage inequality among those who work in …rms that export
increases. In contrast, trade has no e¤ect on the wage distribution among workers employed by
…rms that sell only domestically, but the wage of anyone who works in an export …rm rises relative
to that of anyone who works in a …rm that sells only on the domestic market.


7    Matching and Sorting
Until now, I have discussed sorting and matching in isolation. But, clearly, there can be important
interactions between the two. If workers of a certain type are most productive when they participate
in production units with some particular composition, then the forces that in‡uence the sorting of
other factors must also in‡uence the sorting of workers. And if other factors sort in a certain way,
then the matching possibilities for workers will be constrained by the choices made by these others.
Moreover, in a world with both matching and sorting, the e¤ects of trade on the wage distribution
re‡ect both the changes in the demand for labor that result as export sectors expand and import-
competing sectors contract and the change in the returns to ability that result as workers reorganize
into new production units. In this section, I discuss some recent research that features both the
formation of multi-factor or multi-worker production teams and the allocation of labor to one of
several industries that di¤er in their uses of worker attributes.
    Grossman et al. (2013) consider an economy with two goods and two inelastically-supplied
factors in which both workers and managers are heterogeneous in their abilities. The output of
good i that results when h managers of ability qH are combined with ` workers of ability qL is

                                           xi = h    i (qH ; qL ) (`=h)
                                                                          i   .

                                                 c                                                      c
Country c is endowed with a density H c          H   (qH ) of managers of ability qH and a density Lc   L (qL )
of workers of ability qL .
    The optimal choice of worker type by a …rm in industry i requires that

                                         qL    iL [m (qL ) ; qL ]
                                                                    = "w (qL )                            (10)
                                           i   i [m (qL ) ; qL ]

where    iL    @   i (qH ; qL ) =@qL   is the marginal contribution of worker ability to productivity in
industry i (given the ability of the worker’s manager) and m (qL ) is the ability of the manager that


                                                          20
is paired with workers of type qL . Similarly, the optimal choice of manager implies

                                    m (qL ) iH [m (qL ) ; qL ]
                                                                 = "r [m (qL )] ,                                              (11)
                                    (1     i ) i [m (qL ) ; qL ]

where    iH     @   i (qH ; qL ) =@qH   is the marginal contribution of manager ability to productivity
in industry i, r (qH ) is the salary schedule as a function of managerial ability, and "r (qH ) is the
elasticity of that schedule with respect to ability. Notice that (10) is analogous to (5), which applies
when all managers are similar, except that now the elasticity of productivity with respect to worker
ability can depend on the type of the manager with whom the workers are matched. Also, since the
elasticity of output in sector i with respect to the number of managers is 1                             i,   (11) has a similar
interpretation to (10), equating the ratio of the elasticity of productivity with respect to ability to
the elasticity of output with respect to quantity (on the left-hand side) with the elasticity of the
factor price with respect to ability (on the right-hand side).
   Consider …rst, as Grossman et al. do, the special case that arises when

                                                  i (qH ; qL )    = qHi qLi .                                                  (12)

In this “Cobb-Douglas” case, the elasticity of productivity in sector i with respect to managerial
ability is a constant   i,   independent of the composition of the production unit in which the manager
participates, and the elasticity of productivity with respect to worker ability is                            i,   independent of
the ability of the manager in charge. Then the left-hand side of (10) is the constant                                i= i   and the
left-hand side of (11) is the constant      i = (1         i ).   It follows that a range of workers can be absorbed
into industry i if and only if the wage schedule has a constant elasticity equal to                                i= i   over that
range, and a range of managers can be absorbed into industry i if and only if the salary schedule
has a constant elasticity equal to       i = (1      i)   over that range. Given such constant-elasticity wage
and salary schedules, …rms will earn the same pro…ts no matter which type of manager they team
with which type of workers among those that sort to the industry. In other words, the matching
of managers and workers is indeterminate in this case. The sorting pattern, in contrast, is clear
enough; high-ability workers sort to sector 1 if and only if                        1= 1     >   2= 2;   whereas high-ability
managers sort to sector 1 if and only if          1 = (1          1)   >   2 = (1     2 ).
   The determinants of the trade pattern in the case of Cobb-Douglas productivity are similar to
those for a two-factor economy with heterogeneous workers and homogeneous managers. If two
countries share the same distributions of worker and manager abilities and if one country has a
relatively larger number of managers compared to workers than the other, then the country that
is relatively abundant in managers produces relatively more of the good that uses managers more
intensively in the production process; i.e., the good i with the smaller                            i.   If, instead, the two
countries have the same relative numbers of managers versus workers and identical distributions
of manager ability but one has more able workers in the sense of a proportional rightward shift
in distribution, then the country with the better distribution of workers produces relatively more
in the industry in which ability contributes more elastically to productivity; i.e., the good i with


                                                              21
the larger     i.    Finally, if the two countries have the same relative numbers of managers versus
workers and identical distributions of worker ability but one has more able managers in the sense
of a proportional rightward shift in distribution, then the country with more able managers will
produce relatively more of the good for which manager ability contributes more elastically to
productivity; i.e., the good i with the larger           i.
   With Cobb-Douglas synergies between heterogeneous workers and heterogeneous managers, the
e¤ects of trade on income distribution also are similar to those in an economy with homogeneous
managers and a more general productivity function. First, trade has no e¤ect on within-industry
wage distributions, because wages in sector i must rise with a constant elasticity                  i= i   as a function
of worker ability in order that …rms are indi¤erent among the types that sort there. The relative
wage of any two workers employed in sector i is equal to their relatively ability level raised to
the power      i= i,     irrespective of the country’s openness to trade. The between-industry wage
distribution again re‡ects a mix of Stolper-Samuelson and Ricardo-Viner forces. If                     1= 1          2= 2
and   1 = (1        1)     2 = (1   2 ),   then an opening of trade boosts the real wage of all workers in the
country that exports the labor-intensive good and reduces the real wage of all workers in the country
the imports that good. The assumptions that               1= 1           2= 2   and   1 = (1   1)   2 = (1      2)   mute
the forces for sorting across industries, leaving only the the aggregate e¤ect of trade on the demand
for labor versus managers. In contrast, when              1        2,   the opening of trade raises the real wage of
all workers initially in a country’s export sector and reduces the real wage of workers who remain
in the import-competing sector. In this case, the similarity of factor intensities in the two sectors
means that relative demands for the factors are unchanged as one sector expands and the other
contracts. But workers with di¤erent ability levels have di¤erent comparative advantage in the
two industries and those with a relative advantage in the expanding sector gain while those with a
relative advantage in the contracting sector lose.
   Grossman et al. proceed to examine the determinants and e¤ects of trade in an environment
with stronger complementarities between worker ability and manager ability than are implied by
the Cobb-Douglas form for           i (qH ; qL ).   In particular, they consider a setting in which           i (qH ; qL )
is strictly log supermodular for i = 1; 2. In equilibrium, the best workers with ability greater than
some qL and the best managers with ability greater than some qH may sort to sector 1 while the
remaining workers and managers sort to sector 2. Alternatively, the best workers may sort to sector
1, while the best managers sort to sector 2. The authors provide su¢ cient conditions for each of
these outcomes. Still other sorting patterns are possible; for example, the workers that sort to
industry 1 may include the most and least able among those in the workforce but not workers with
intermediate ability levels. In any case, there is always positive assortative matching between the
workers and the managers employed in a given industry.
   Suppose that the equilibrium sorting pattern is characterized by a pair of cuto¤ ability levels,
qL and qH , such that a worker sorts to industry 1 if and only if his ability exceeds qL and a manager
sorts to either sector 1 or sector 2 (as the case may be) if and only if his ability exceeds qH . Grossman
et al. refer to an equilibrium in which the best types of both factors sort to industry 1 as an HH=LL


                                                              22
equilibrium and one in which the best workers sort to industry 1 while the best managers sort to
industry 2 as an HL=LH equilibrium. In either case, as they show, if the distribution of abilities of
each factor is the same in two countries then the country that has relatively more workers compared
to managers exports the labor-intensive good.
   The setting with two heterogeneous factors and the strong complementarities that are associated
with a log supermodular productivity function is one in which trade a¤ects both the within-industry
and between-industry distributions of income. In an HL=LH equilibrium, the opening of trade
draws more workers and more managers into the export sector. Consider, for example, a country
that exports good 1, the good produced by the industry that attracts the best workers (and the
worst managers). An increase in the price of good 1 attracts marginal workers to the industry that
are less able than those employed their initially, while it draws marginal managers to the industry
that are more able than those employed there initially. As a result, workers initially employed in
industry 1 …nd improved matches after the opening of trade, whereas managers initially employed
there see their matches deteriorate. The complementarities between worker and manager ability
imply that the improved matching bene…ts especially the workers of greatest ability. Therefore, the
opening of trade induces a steepening of the wage pro…le in the export industry and a spread in the
wage distribution there. Meanwhile, in the import-competing sector, the workers that depart after
an opening of trade are more able than those that remain in the industry, whereas the managers
that leave are less able than those that remain behind. As a result, those workers who remain in the
industry are able to …nd better matches than before, while the managers that stay behind su¤er the
opposite fate. Here, too, the wage schedule steepens and the distribution of wages becomes more
unequal. Managers’salaries become more compressed in both industries due to the deterioration
in the quality of their matches.
   The e¤ects of trade on between-industry distribution are reminiscent of those described before.
Trade may bene…t all workers in the economy if the export industry is labor intensive. But even
if export are labor intensive, the Stolper-Samuelson forces can be overturned for those types of
workers that are relatively most productive in the import-competing industry. And now there is a
third consideration. The return to worker ability rises in an industry if and only if the matching
with managers improves. Improved matching in a sector bene…ts especially those workers at the
top end of the industry’s ability (and wage) distribution.
   Grossman and Maggi (2000) study sorting and matching in an economy with heterogenous
production teams. They suppose that production in each of two industries requires teams of
workers performing di¤erent tasks. For simplicity, let there be two such tasks in each sector, so
that teams everywhere comprise pairs of workers. In sector i, the output of a team depends on the
abilities of the worker who perform each of the tasks. If task a is performed by a worker of ability
qH and task b is performed by a worker of ability qL , then the team output when it operates in
industry i is given by xi =    i (qH ; qL ).
   Grossman and Maggi assume that the tasks in an industry contribute symmetrically to pro-
ductivity, in the sense that   i (qH ; qL )    =   i (qL ; qH ).   They also assume constant returns to worker


                                                          23
ability in both sectors; i.e.,    i (qH ; qL )   = qH     i (qH =qL ; 1)   for i = 1; 2. They study trade between
two countries that have symmetric distributions of worker ability with similar mean ability levels
but a di¤erence in diversity. Diversity is de…ned here in terms of a single crossing of the cumulative
distribution functions at some q 0 ; the country with the more diverse distribution has a greater
fraction of its workers with ability less than q if and only if q < q 0 . The countries are otherwise
similar and in particular neither enjoys a comparative advantage in producing either of the goods.
    Suppose …rst that both       1 (qH ; qL )   and   2 (qH ; qL )   are supermodular functions; i.e., that the two
tasks are complementary in producing output in both industries, albeit possibly to di¤ering degrees.
When the tasks are complementary, e¢ ciency requires “self-matching”; in every production team,
the ability of the individual performing task a should be matched as closely as possible to that
of the individual performing task b. With self-matching in both sectors and constant returns to
ability, a di¤erence in diversity of the labor force creates no comparative advantage in either sector.
Since the authors assume an absence of technological comparative advantage, it follows that two
countries with di¤erent distributions of talent do not trade.
    But now suppose that whereas           1 (qH ; qL )   is supermodular,       2 (qH ; qL )   instead is submodular.
That is, the two tasks needed for producing good 2 are substitutable in the sense that it is better to
have one performed very well and the other poorly than to have both performed at an intermediate
level. With a submodular technology, e¢ ciency dictates “maximal cross-matching”; among the
resources that are devoted to industry 2, the most output is produced when the most able worker
is teamed with the least able worker, the second most able worker is teamed with the second worst
worker, and so on. In the competitive equilibrium that results for any relative price, a country
devotes its most and least able workers to production in industry 2, with cross-matching there,
and its workers of intermediate ability to industry 1, where self-matching prevails. The country
that has the more diverse labor force has more workers in the tails of the distribution and these
workers, when combined in production teams, are especially productive in industry 2. It follows
that diversity breeds comparative advantage in sectors with submodular production technologies
relative to those with supermodular technologies.
    Grossman and Maggi discuss the distributional implications of trade between countries that
di¤er in diversity. In the country with the more diverse work force, trade bene…ts the least able
workers, harms a set of workers with intermediate levels of ability, and may bene…t or harm the
most able workers. The ambiguity for these latter workers re‡ects the fact that an increase in
the price of good 2 redistributes income to workers who are best suited for employment in that
sector, but also to the less able worker amongst any pair of workers producing with the submodular
technology.


8    Sorting and Matching with Labor Market Frictions
Most of the existing literature that studies interactions between worker heterogeneity and interna-
tional trade neglects frictions in the labor market. In the papers that I have described thus far, the


                                                           24
authors have assumed that …rms can readily observe the abilities and other attributes of all workers
they might potentially hire, that these …rms can …ll their vacancies immediately and costlessly, that
workers can switch between jobs without spells of search and unemployment, and that a worker’s
decision to accept an o¤er imposes no externalities on others in the labor market. Of course, labor
markets are plagued by such frictions, which impede the e¢ cient sorting of labor to industries
and the e¢ cient matching of workers to heterogeneous …rms and with others in the formation of
production teams. In this section, I describe a few recent papers that seek to understand how trade
a¤ects matching and sorting, and consequently the distribution of income, in settings with labor
market frictions of various sorts.
   Grossman (2004) studies an economy without search frictions or unemployment in which …rms
are nonetheless hampered by their inability to observe all attributes that contribute to a worker’s
productivity and workers by their inability to observe the output or pro…ts realized by their em-
ployers. In such a setting, employment contracting is bound to be imperfect, because …rms cannot
link compensation to ability, nor can they o¤er piece rates or bonus schemes that reward an individ-
ual’s productivity. The imperfect contracts that can be o¤ered provide for a …xed wage irrespective
of ability and performance and thus they create the possibility that workers will make ine¢ cient
choices of occupation and industry.
   Suppose there are two countries and two industries. One industry requires team production,
with teams of size two that perform complementary tasks. Output of a pair with abilities qa and qb is
given by   (qa ; qb ), where the productivity function   ( ) is supermodular, symmetric, homogeneous
of degree one, and has an elasticity of substitution less than or equal to one. The output produced
by a team is observable only to the one designated as “owner”, who is the residual claimant among
the pair and pays the other a …xed wage. In the second industry, output is linear in ability and
workers can produce alone. Ability levels are distributed di¤erently and exogenously in the two
countries, which are otherwise similar in regard to tastes and technology.
   The …xed-wage contracts that are paid in the sector with team production induce adverse
selection. An owner’s expected pro…t in that sector depends on the wage he o¤ers and the average
output produced by workers who seek positions as employees, but the wage that appeals to a
worker who can produce an average level of output might not appeal to one that can produce much
more than average. These more-able individuals can choose instead to become owner-managers of
…rms in the industry with team production, or else to work as individuals in the sector with solo
production.
   Grossman shows that the equilibrium has a unique and determinate pattern of industry sorting
and occupational choice. For given prices, a set of the least-able individuals in any economy opts
to become employees and collect a …xed wage, a set of intermediate-ability individuals chooses to
become owner-managers in the sector with team production, while the most-able individuals sort
to the industry with individual production and performance pay. The sizes of the …rst two sets
must be equal to allow for pairings within each production team. The size of the third set ensures
that the most able (and risk neutral) owner-manager earns the same expected pro…t in the sector


                                                   25
with team production as he would earn on his own in the sector with solo production. This, in
turn, depends on the relative price of the two goods. The sorting and occupational choice re‡ects
the fact that greater ability earns no marginal return among workers, it earns positive but less
than complete marginal return among managers, and it earns a proportional return in the sector
with individual production. The equilibrium employment pattern is ine¢ cient (compared to a
hypothetical economy with perfect labor contracting) for two reasons. First, workers and managers
are not perfectly self-matched in the sector with team production, as is optimal for a productivity
function that is symmetric and supermodular. Second, there are too few individuals in the sector
with team production, because those that opt for the industry with performance pay do not take
into account that their choice imparts an externality on those in the sector with team production by
depressing the talent pool there. Were the marginal individual in the sector with solo production
to choose instead to work in the sector with team production, his own expected income would be
the same, but the expected income of others in the industry would be higher.
   At any given relative price, an individual with some (high) ability level q faces a greater incentive
to join the industry with solo production in the country that has the larger share of low-ability
workers. That is, if the countries have distributions of ability with the same mean but one has
a greater spread than the other, then an individual with ability q will anticipate a less favorable
pool of potential partners and a smaller expected pro…t from team production in the country with
the larger lower tail of abilities than in the country with the more tightly distributed talent levels.
Accordingly, there exists a set of ability levels such that every individual with ability in this set opts
for team production in the country with the tighter distribution of talents and for solo production
in the country with greater talent diversity. These di¤erences in the incentives for occupational
choice can create an opportunity for trade between otherwise similar countries. For example, if the
countries both have uniform distributions of ability with the same mean but di¤erent supports, the
country with the greater spread of talents exports the good that is produced by individuals and
imports the good that is produced by teams.
   The trade that results from di¤erences in the distributions of ability in the face of imperfect
labor contracting has notable consequences. First, this trade causes a deterioration in the income
distribution in the country that imports the goods produced by teams. On the margin, an increase
in the relative price of the good generated by individual production induces the most talented
individuals to abandon the sector with team production, thereby degrading the talent pool for
those that remain behind. This degradation of the talent pool in the sector with team production
reduces average productivity there, and therefore depresses wages for employees and pro…ts for
owner-managers. Meanwhile, the change in relative price implies that the compensation for those
at the top of the ability distribution rises. Moreover, the departure of the most able individuals
from the sector with team production exacerbates the aforementioned distortion in the allocation
of talent. Since there are fewer workers in the sector with team production than is socially optimal
to begin with, further specialization in the sector with individual production in the country with
the more diverse talent pool might reduce national income even as it worsens the distribution of


                                                   26
income there.
       Bombardini et al. (2011) also study an economy in which …rms are unable to observe perfectly
the ability levels of their potential hires. Their model bears a family resemblance to Grossman
and Maggi (2000) inasmuch as production requires teams of workers and industries di¤er in the
substitutability or complementarity of employee’s talents. Whereas Grossman and Maggi predict
that otherwise similar countries that di¤er only in their distributions of ability will not trade
when productivity functions in all industries are supermodular, Bombardini et al. draw a di¤erent
conclusion in the face of imperfect matching and sorting. They assume a search environment such
that …rms in every sector sample randomly from the country’s talent distribution. As a consequence,
perfect matching of workers with similar ability levels is not possible and e¢ cient sorting of abilities
to industries does not obtain. The ine¢ cient matches that result have implications for relative
outputs across sectors. In particular, the random matches are particularly costly in terms of
expected output in industries where the complementarities between worker talents are greatest.
In a setting with many countries and many goods, the authors derive su¢ cient conditions under
which a country with a lesser dispersion of ability levels exports the goods that are characterized
by greater complementarities in the team production processes.
       Davidson et al. (2008) focus more narrowly on how globalization a¤ects the mismatches that
can result from search frictions. Their starting point is a model of endogenous technology choice
and endogenous selection into exporting, as in Yeaple (2005), and a model of the search process
based on Albrecht and Vroman (2002). In any country, there are …xed supplies of two types of
workers, those with high ability, H; and those with low ability, L. A …rm requires a single worker to
produce output and combines its worker with a chosen quantity of other inputs, which the authors
call “capital.” The …rm has a choice of two technologies to produce the homogeneous …nal good.
The more advanced technology A can only be operated by the high-ability workers, whereas the
more basic technology B can be operated by workers of either type. The more able workers are, of
course, assumed to be more productive than the less able workers, but especially so if they operate
the more advanced technology. In particular, output of a …rm that employs a technology of type
qT = fA; Bg, and worker of type qW = fH; Lg, and k units of capital is x =                     (qT ; qW ) k , where
  (A; H) >      (B; H) >      (B; L) and      (B; L) = 0. Each …rm also faces a choice whether to sell its
output on the domestic market or on the foreign market.14 If it sells domestically, it pays a ‡ow
cost cd to maintain a local distribution network whereas if it exports, it pays the higher ‡ow cost,
cf > cd . The prices in the two markets are pd and pf , where the former is endogenously determined
to equate supply and demand and the latter is taken as exogenous.
       Upon entry, a …rm chooses its technology and posts a vacancy. The vacancy entails a ‡ow cost
and generates a Poisson arrival of randomly selected job seekers. The arrival rate of workers for
any …rm with a posted vacancy depends on the ratio of the aggregate number of vacancies to the
number of unemployed workers. When a worker and …rm meet, the worker decides whether to
  14
    Here, unlike in Yeaple (2005) or Melitz (2003), except in a knife-edge case, every …rm prefers to sell all of its
output in one market or the other. Therefore, domestic …rms do not export, and export …rms do not sell domestically.



                                                         27
accept employment with the …rm and, if so, the two sides bargain over the surplus. Both sides
rationally anticipate whether the …rm will subsequently sell to the domestic market or the foreign
market. Each existing job terminates with some …xed and exogenous ‡ow probability.
       The authors note that two types of equilibria are possible in their model. In a “cross-skill
matching” equilibrium, every high-ability worker accepts the …rst job that comes along. If he
happens to match with a …rm that has chosen an advanced technology, the match is a good one
thanks to the complementarity between technology and ability, and the worker earns a high wage.
If, instead, he matches …rst with a …rm that has chosen the basic technology, the match is less good
and the wage is lower. But for parameters that satisfy the conditions for this type of equilibrium, it
is not worthwhile for the worker to remain unemployed and wait for a better match. In an “ex-post
segmentation” equilibrium, by contrast, the wage gap between what the H worker can earn in a
B …rm versus an A …rm is su¢ ciently large that waiting is the preferred strategy. It is possible
that an equilibrium of either type exists for the some parameters, each supported by the workers’
expectations of what others will do.
       Davidson et al. focus mainly on the equilibrium with cross-skill matching, where the acceptance
of basic jobs by the more able workers represents a sort of mismatch between worker and …rm
types.15 Note that the rami…cations of this mismatch are not limited to the high-ability workers, as
the …lling of vacancies by these workers in …rms with basic technologies a¤ects also the employment
prospects for the less able workers.
       The authors …rst show that the …rms that choose the advanced technology and match with
the high-ability workers face the strongest incentives to sell to the foreign market. The …rms that
choose the basic technology and match with the less-able workers face the weakest such incentives.
The incentives facing the mismatched …rms are somewhere in between. Thus, there are foreign
prices and cost parameters such that only …rms with advanced technology and high-ability workers
export, such that all …rms with high-ability workers export, and such that …rms with any of the
three combinations of technology and worker export. Now consider the e¤ects of a reduction in the
‡ow cost of serving the foreign market. If the economy starts in a cross-matching skill equilibrium
and remains in one after the fall in cf , then industry productivity is enhanced by the reallocation
of market shares in favor of …rms using the advanced technology, and the frequency of mismatch
between high-ability workers and …rms that use the basic technology falls. The reduction in trade
costs increases the surplus created by matches between advanced …rms and high-ability workers,
and so the H workers employed by A …rms gain from liberalization of this sort. Since the outside
opportunities for high-ability workers that happen to match with the other …rms improve, the wages
of H workers rise even among those employed by …rms using the basic technology. Meanwhile, the
shrinking percentage of …rms that use the basic technology implies fewer job opportunities for
the less able workers and, with their diminished bargaining power these workers might lose from
globalization.
  15
    Given the costliness of search, it is not necessarily socially optimal for the high-ability workers to decline o¤ers
from …rms with the basic technology. But the externalities associated with the employment decision suggest that
cross-matching skill equilibrium will be ine¢ cient for some parameter values.


                                                          28
   A fall in trade costs can increase the pro…tability of …rms that choose the advanced technology
and export relative to …rms that choose the basic technology and sell domestically to such an
extent that the cross-matching skill equilibrium ceases to exist. In the equilibrium with ex-post
segmentation that replaces it, there is no longer the possibility of mismatch between workers and
technologies. In the event, the aggregate productivity gains for the economy can be quite substantial
as the number of …rms adopting the basic technology falls dramatically. It is interesting to note
that the aggregate productivity gains are realized despite the fact that the weak …rms that still
enter su¤er an expected loss in productivity from the fact that they no longer have any chance to
hire the more able workers.
   Davidson et al. also consider the impact of falling trade costs on productivity in import-
competing industries. A fall in the cost of imports reduces the gap in revenues between …rms that
choose the advanced technology (in this case, to sell domestically) and …rms that choose the basic
technology. This makes it easier for …rms using the basic technology to attract the more able
workers. It follows that, if the economy begins in an equilibrium with ex-post segmentation in an
import-competing industry and trade costs fall, the increased openness can cause a switch to an
equilibrium with cross-skill matching. Alternatively, if the initial equilibrium already has cross-skill
matching, then the frequency of mismatch increases with openness to trade. Accordingly, the model
predicts that globalization generates a more e¢ cient allocation of labor and a boost to productivity
in export industries but the opposite outcomes in import-competing industries.
   These predictions are more nuanced in an extended version of the model incorporating mo-
nopolistic competition and intra-industry trade that has been developed by Davidson and Matusz
(2012). In this variant, …rms initially draw their types from a continuous distribution, as in Melitz
(2003), albeit with a …xed number of …rms. The productivity function exhibits complementarity
between worker and …rm types. It follows that …rms with a technology parameter that exceeds
some critical value will only hire the high-ability workers, whereas …rms with a less sophisticated
(and less productive) technology will hire whichever worker they match with …rst. In this setting, a
reduction in the …xed cost of exporting for domestic …rms has a non-monotonic impact on the degree
of mismatch in the labor market. When domestic …rms face a high …xed cost of exporting, a fall in
these costs reduces the critical value for technical sophistication beyond which …rms are selective in
their hiring. As a result, the frequency of mismatch falls. However, when …xed exporting costs are
already low for domestic …rms and fall further, the result is reversed. In contrast, a decline in the
…xed cost of exporting for foreign …rms, which implies an intensi…cation of import competition, has
an ambiguous e¤ect on the frequency of mismatch between …rms and workers. The increased com-
petition from imports harms the more technologically sophisticated (and thus larger) …rms more
while they are producing, thereby shrinking the revenue gap between selective and non-selective
…rms. But selective …rms spend a greater fraction of the their time than non-selective …rms with
un…lled vacancies— due to their greater selectivity— which reduces the pro…t gap between the two
types of …rms. The presence of these o¤setting e¤ects accounts for the ambiguous overall …nding.
   Perhaps the most complete analytical framework that has been developed to date for studying


                                                  29
resource allocation and income distribution in an open economy with labor market frictions is
provided by Helpman et al. (2010). Their model includes imperfect information about worker
ability, search frictions for workers and …rms, matching of heterogeneous workers and heterogeneous
…rms, and equilibrium unemployment as a component of worker income variability.
   The authors begin by describing a “sectoral equilibrium” in which workers and …rms take the
employment and wage opportunities outside the sector as given. The heterogeneous …rms in the
industry produce Dixit-Stiglitz di¤erentiated products using heterogeneous workers as their only
input. Worker productivity in a …rm depends upon characteristics of the …rm and on the ex post,
match-speci…c realization of the worker’s ability to serve the …rm. In our notation, the output of a
…rm of type qH that hires ` workers of average ability qL is

                                   x=     (qL ; qH ) f (`) = qH qL ` :

The supermodularity of the productivity function generates incentives for PAM. But neither a …rm
nor the worker know anything about the latter’s match-speci…c ability until after a match has been
consummated. At that point, the …rm can pay a screening cost that allows it to determine whether
or not a worker’s ability in the …rm exceeds q~L . The screening cost is assumed to be an increasing
and concave function of the threshold level, q~L ; i.e., it is more costly for the …rm to distinguish a
narrower set of more able workers, presumably because this requires a more subtle and complex
test. A worker’s ability in a given match is drawn from a Pareto distribution that is independent
across workers and …rms.
   Firms …rst observe their type, then decide whether or not to bear the …xed cost of production,
whether or not to bear the …xed cost of exporting, how many workers to sample for potential hire,
and what threshold to use in screening them. Due to the presence of search frictions, the …rm incurs
a cost for each worker that it samples, which depends in familiar Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides
style on the “tightness” of the labor market; i.e., the ratio of the aggregate number of workers
sampled to the number of workers seeking employment in the sector. If a worker passes a …rm’s
screening test, the two sides bargain over a wage as in Stole and Zwiebel (1996a, 1996b) subject to
their common understanding that the worker’s match-speci…c ability exceeds q~L .
   The more productive …rms have a greater incentive to screen, thanks to the complementarities
between worker ability and …rm technology. Therefore, these higher-type …rms screen more inten-
sively in equilibrium, reject workers with match-speci…c ability below their higher threshold levels,
and end up with a workforce of higher average ability. Moreover, as in Melitz (2003), it is the more
productive …rms that select into exporting. The export opportunities associated with the opening
of trade enhance the incentives for the productive …rms to screen their potential employees and to
apply a more exacting standard in their hiring decisions. Therefore, in a trade equilibrium, the
exporting …rms ensure themselves of a workforce of higher average ability than non-exporters and
they pay higher average wages.
   Helpman et al. are interested in the connection between trade, income distribution, and un-
employment. They show …rst that the opening of trade in a closed economy raises within-industry

                                                  30
wage inequality. Since the larger …rms pay higher wages and the opening of trade raises revenues
especially for the large …rms that export, it follows that wage dispersion is greater in the open than
in the closed economy. Surprisingly, however, the relationship between openness to trade and wage
inequality is non-monotonic. Once trade costs are low enough that all …rms export, an increase in
these costs that causes some of the least productive …rms to cease their export activity will reduce
the wages paid by these …rms relative to the more productive …rms that continue to export,and
thus wage inequality increases.
    Next, the authors address the subtle interplay between wage inequality and structural unem-
ployment. The unemployment rate re‡ects both the fraction of workers searching for jobs who are
lucky enough to be sampled by some …rm and the stringency of the screening tests they face con-
ditional on …nding a job opportunity. The more productive …rms pay higher wages, but they also
turn away a greater percentage of the workers they screen. When trade opens, there are two e¤ects
on unemployment. First, the more productive …rms expand at the expense of the less productive,
which in turn implies more stringent screening that contributes to higher unemployment. Second,
the tightness of the labor market changes and with it the fraction of workers who are able to …nd
job opportunities. Labor market tightness can increase or decrease as trade costs fall, and indeed
so can the unemployment rate.
    Helpman et al. conclude by showing how their model of industry outcomes can be embedded
in a general equilibrium. They consider two alternative approaches, one that includes an “outside
sector”where output is competitively produced and no labor market frictions exist and another that
excludes any outside sector, so that the number of job seekers in the sector equals the economy’s
exogenous labor supply. Then, a worker’s outside opportunity is determined endogenously. They
show, for example, that in either case, if workers are risk neutral, their ex ante expected utility
must rise with the opening of trade.


9    Concluding Remarks
Models of trade with heterogeneous labor a¤ord the researcher the opportunity to study how …ne
details about the skill distribution a¤ect trade patterns and how globalization e¤ects the distribution
of wages and unemployment across the complete spectrum of worker types. The papers that have
been reviewed here provide a rich set of predictions. Some are extensions of familiar results that
apply when labor is homogeneous. For example, when the di¤erent workers in a country have
equal relative productivity in di¤erent activities, the trade pattern is determined by comparative
technological di¤erences across countries. When countries have similar distributions of worker types,
then trade is governed by countries’relative abundance of di¤erent factors in terms of quantities.
And when globalization causes a change in relative prices, there are Stolper-Samuelson forces that
favor factors used intensively in expanding industries and Ricardo-Viner forces that favor factor
types that have comparative advantage in those industries.
    Others predictions are new. In some settings, diversity of factor types can be an independent


                                                  31
source of comparative advantage and trade between countries that have similar aggregate endow-
ments of factors. This is true, for example, when workers’ skills or abilities are complementary
contributors to team production in one sector, but substitutable in another, or when the extent of
complementarity between the abilities of team members di¤ers across sectors and imperfect infor-
mation impedes the formation of e¢ cient production units. Integration also a¤ects world resource
allocation in production hierarchies when managers in one country can use their superior skill and
knowledge to solve the production problems that confront workers in another.
   In some cases, the models with heterogeneous labor predict that an opening of trade will af-
fect within-industry income distribution. This is typically true when matching between …rms (or
managers) and workers takes place in an environment with strong complementarities between types
and trade impacts the matches that result. In a country where trade improves the matches that
workers achieve in an industry— resulting in these workers …nding employment with either better
managers or better technologies than before— then within-industry wage inequality will increase.
Upgraded matching tends to bene…t all workers in an industry, but especially those at the higher
end of the ability and wage distribution. Also, models in the spirit of Melitz (2003) that predict
that the larger and more productive …rms are the ones that export also typically predict an ex-
porter wage premium. This premium can come about as a result of workers’sharing in the rents
earned by these better …rms, but more typically they re‡ect endogenous di¤erences in the compo-
sition of hires. The “better” …rms may have superior managers or technologies that account for
their greater productivity and these attributes of the manager or technology may dictate positive
assortative matching with workers. In the event, the more productive …rms that export will also
be ones that hire the more skilled or higher-ability workers.
   Particularly promising are a recent set of models that introduce labor market frictions into
a world with heterogeneous workers. In such a setting, trade a¤ects not only the distribution
of income, but also the e¢ ciency of resource allocation. In some cases that have been studied,
globalization reduces the mismatch between technologies and worker types that results from the
inability of …rms to …nd costlessly and immediately their ideal workforces. But in other cases, trade
may dampen the incentives for team production in a country where the number of individuals willing
to lead production teams is ine¢ ciently small. Much work remains to be done on modeling the
search process and labor contracting before we will understand the subtle e¤ects of openness on
labor market performance and determine what, if any, policy remedies are indicated.




                                                 32
                                          References


References
 [1] Abowd, John M., Kramarz, Francis and Margolis, David N., 1999. “High Wage Workers and
    High Wage Firms,” Econometrica 67, 251–334.

 [2] Albrecht, James and Vroman, Susan, 2002. “A Matching Model with Endogenous Skill Re-
    quirements,” International Economics Review 43, 283-305.

 [3] Antràs, Pol, Garicano, Luis and Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban, 2006. “O¤shoring in a Knowledge
    Economy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, 31-77.

 [4] Autor, David H., Katz, Lawrence F., and Kearney, Melissa S., 2008. “Trends in U.S. Wage
    Inequality: Revising the Revisionists,” Review of Economics and Statistics 90, 300-23.

 [5] Bagger, Jesper and Lentz, Rasmus, 2012. “An Empirical Model of Wage Dispersion with
    Sorting.”

 [6] Bernard, Andrew B. and Jensen, J. Bradford, 1995. “Exporters, Jobs, and Wages in U.S.
    Manufacturing: 1976-1987,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics 1995,
    67-119.

 [7] Bombardini, Matilde, Gallipoli, Giovanni and Pupato, Germán, 2011. “Unobservable Skill
    Dispersion and Inequality.”

 [8] Bombardini, Matilde, Gallipoli, Giovanni and Pupato, Germán, 2012. “Skill Dispersion and
    Trade Flow,” American Economic Review 102, 2327-48.

 [9] Bougheas, Spiros and Riezman, Raymond, 2007. “Trade and the Distribution of Human Cap-
    ital,” Journal of International Economics 73, 421-33.

[10] Bustos, Paula, 2011. “Trade Liberalization, Exports, and Technology Upgrading: Evidence on
    the Impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinian Firms,” American Economic Review 101, 304-40.

[11] Cahuc, Pierre, Postel-Vinay, Fabien and Robin, Jean-Marc, 2006. “Wage bargaining with On-
    the-Job Search: Theory and Evidence, Econometrica 74, 323–64.

[12] Costinot, Arnaud, 2009. “An Elementary Theory of Comparative Advantage,” Econometrica
    77, 1165-92.

[13] Costinot, Arnaud and Vogel, Jonathan, 2010. “Matching and Inequality in the World Econ-
    omy,” Journal of Political Economy 118, 747-86.

[14] Davidson, Carl and Matusz, Stephen J., 2012. “A Model of Globalization and Firm-Worker
    Matching: How Good is Good Enough?” Review of Economics and Finance 23, 5-15.

                                               33
[15] Davidson, Carl, Matusz, Stephen J. and Shevchenko, Andrei, 2008. “Globalization and Firm
    Level Adjustment with Imperfect Labor Markets,” Journal of International Economics 75,
    295-309.

[16] Davidson, Carl, Heyman, Fredrik, Matusz, Stephen J., Sjoholm, Fredrik, and Zhu, Susan,
    2010. “Globalization and Imperfect Labor Market Sorting,” Leverhulme Centre for Research
    on Globalization and Economic Policy Research Paper 2010/30.

[17] de Melo, Rafael Lopes, 2009. “Sorting in the Labor Market: Theory and Measurement.”

[18] Eeckhout, Jan and Kircher, Philipp, 2011. “Identifying Sorting – in Theory,” Review of Eco-
    nomic Studies 78, 872-906.

[19] Eeckhout, Jan and Kircher, Philipp, 2012. “Assortative Matching with Large Firms: Span of
    Control over More versus Better Workers.”

[20] Garicano, Luis, and Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban, 2006. “Organization and Inequality in a Knowl-
    edge Economy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 212, 1383-1435.

[21] Grossman, Gene M., 1983. “Partially-Mobile Capital: A General Approach to Two-Sector
    Trade Theory,” Journal of International Economics 15, 1-17.

[22] Grossman, Gene M., 2004. “The Distribution of Talent and the Pattern and Consequences of
    International Trade,” Journal of Political Economy 112, 209-39.

[23] Grossman, Gene M. and Maggi, Giovanni, 2000. “Diversity and Trade,” American Economic
    Review 90, 1255-75.

[24] Grossman, Gene M., Helpman, Elhanan, and Kircher, Philipp, 2013. “Matching and Sorting
    in a Global Economy.”

[25] Helpman, Elhanan, Itskhoki, Oleg and Redding, Stephen, 2010. “Inequality and Unemploy-
    ment in a Global Economy,” Econometrica 78, 1239-83.

[26] Helpman, Elhanan, Itskhoki, Oleg, Redding, Stephen, and Muendler, Marc-Andreas, 2012.
    “Trade and Inequality: From Theory to Estimation.”

[27] Matsuyama, Kiminori, 1992. “A Simple Model of Sectoral Adjustment,” The Review of Eco-
    nomic Studies 59, 375-87.

[28] Melitz, Marc, 2003. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregrate
    Industry Performance, Econometrica 71, 1695-1726.

[29] Mussa, Michael, 1982. “Imperfect Factor Mobility and the Distribution of Income,” Journal
    of International Economics 12, 375-87.



                                              34
[30] Ohnsorge, Franziska and Tre‡er, Daniel, 2007. “Sorting it Out: International Trade with
    Heterogeneous Workers,” Journal of Political Economy 115, 868-92.

[31] Postel-Vinay, Fabien and Robin, Jean-Marc, 2006. “Microeconometric Search-Matching Mod-
    els and Matched Employer-Employee Data", in R. Blundell, W. Newey and T. Persson, eds,
    Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press.

[32] Ru¢ n, Roy, 1988. “The Missing Link: The Ricardian Approach to the Factor Endowment
    Theory of International Trade,” American Economic Review 78, 759-72.

[33] Sampson, Thomas, 2012. “Selection into Trade and Wage Inequality.”

[34] Schank, Thorsten, Schnabel, Klaus and Wagner, Joachim, 2007. “Do Exporters Really Pay
    Higher Wages? First Evidence from German Linked Employer-Employee Data,” Journal of
    International Economics 72, 52-74.

[35] Stole, Lars A. and Zwiebel, Je¤rey, 1996a. “Organizational Design and Technology Choice
    under Intra…rm Bargaining,” American Economic Review 86, 195-222.

[36] Stole, Lars A. and Zwiebel, Je¤rey, 1996b. “Intra-Firm Bargaining under Non-Binding Con-
    tracts,” Review of Economic Studies 63, 375-410.

[37] Yeaple, Stephen R, 2005. “A Simple Model of Firm Heterogeneity, International Trade, and
    Wages,” Journal of International Economics 65, 1-20.




                                              35
