                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        THE ANTITRUST ANALYSIS OF MULTI-SIDED PLATFORM BUSINESSES

                                           David S. Evans
                                        Richard Schmalensee

                                        Working Paper 18783
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18783


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2013




No outside funding was received or relied on for this paper. David Evans works for a large number
of companies that are multi-sided platforms for whom he provides consulting on antitrust related issues.
Many of these relationships are confidential; the public ones include Google and Visa. Evans is Chairman,
Global Economics Group; Lecturer, University of Chicago Law School; Executive Director, Jevons
Institute for Competition Law and Economics and Visiting Professor, University College London.
Schmalensee is Howard W. Johnson Professor of Economics and Management, Emeritus, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. We would like to thank Howard Chang and Steven Joyce for valuable assistance
and helpful comments. We are indebted to Marshall Van Alstyne, Mark Armstrong, Yong Chao, Glen
Weyl, and the editors for useful comments on an earlier draft. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by David S. Evans and Richard Schmalensee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Antitrust Analysis of Multi-Sided Platform Businesses
David S. Evans and Richard Schmalensee
NBER Working Paper No. 18783
February 2013
JEL No. L19,L40

                                             ABSTRACT

This Chapter provides a survey of the economics literature on multi-sided platforms with particular
focus on competition policy issues, including market definition, mergers, monopolization, and coordinated
behavior. It provides a survey of the general industrial organization theory of multi-sided platforms
and then considers various issues concerning the application of antitrust analysis to multi-sided platform
businesses. It shows that it is not possible to know whether standard economic models, often relied
on for antitrust analysis, apply to multi-sided platforms without explicitly considering the existence
of multiple customer groups with interdependent demand. It summarizes many theoretical and empirical
papers that demonstrate that a number of results for single-sided firms, which are the focus of much
of the applied antitrust economics literature, do not apply directly to multi-sided platforms.


David S. Evans
Global Economics Group
18 Tremont Street
Suite 220
Boston, MA 02108
David.Evans@marketplatforms.com

Richard Schmalensee
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-520
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
rschmal@mit.edu
                                                                                                                     2


                                                   ABSTRACT

     This Chapter provides a survey of the economics literature on multi-sided platforms with
particular focus on competition policy issues, including market definition, mergers, monopolization,
and coordinated behavior. It provides a survey of the general industrial organization theory of
multi-sided platforms and then considers various issues concerning the application of antitrust
analysis to multi-sided platform businesses. It shows that it is not possible to know whether
standard economic models, often relied on for antitrust analysis, apply to multi-sided platforms
without explicitly considering the existence of multiple customer groups with interdependent
demand. It summarizes many theoretical and empirical papers that demonstrate that a number of
results for single-sided firms, which are the focus of much of the applied antitrust economics
literature, do not apply directly to multi-sided platforms.

I.       INTRODUCTION
    Economists have identified an important class of businesses that are now generally referred to as
“multi-sided platforms.” 1 Multi-sided platforms create value by bringing two or more different types
of economic agents together and facilitating interactions between them that make all agents better
off. These platforms play critical roles in many economically important industries including
payments, mobile phones, financial exchanges, advertising-supported media, and various Internet-
based industries. In this Chapter we will focus on common aspects of platform businesses that have
important implications for firm behavior and competition, but we will also note some of the novel
and important ways these implications differ across firms and industries.2
    Multi-sided platforms solve a transaction-cost problem that makes it difficult or impossible for
agents in different groups to get together. In most cases, greater involvement by agents of at least
one type increases the value of the platform to agents of other types. Such indirect network effects
function something like economies of scale on the demand side and increase the value economic
agents can realize from the platform. In a two-sided setting, the chance of finding a value-increasing
interaction depends on how many agents of the first kind an agent of the second kind can reach and
often vice versa. A multi-sided platform creates value by coordinating the multiple groups of agents
and, in particular, ensuring that there are enough agents of each type to make participation


     1 They are also sometimes referred to a “two-sided markets.” We resist this terminology because multi-sidedness is
an attribute of an individual business that may not always be shared by all of its competitors.
     2 Over the years, several strands of economic analysis have touched on aspects of these types of businesses.
Economists have understood how intermediaries facilitate value-creating exchange at least since Smith (1776, at 213-
222). The microfinance literature modeled exchange institutions such as those for equities. See Spulber (1996). The
advertising economics literature has examined the role of the media in connecting advertisers and readers. See Bagwell
(2007). The literature on indirect network effects has considered the coordination of demand between users and
producers of complementary goods. See Katz and Shapiro (1994) for a survey. On the surface, multi-sided platforms
resemble ordinary multi-product firms, but, as we discuss below, they in fact differ fundamentally.
                                                                                                                       3


worthwhile for all types.
    The fundamental insight that there is a broad class of businesses that act as catalysts for creating
value for two or more groups of customers and have economic features not well explained by the
standard economics of the firm was made by Jean-Charles Rochet and Jean Tirole (2003) in a paper
that started circulating around 2000.3 Their main focus in developing an economic model of multi-
sided platforms was on how the relative prices charged to the two sides of the platform coordinated
demand. They showed that the optimal prices—both from the standpoint of profit-maximization
and social welfare maximization—could entail pricing below the marginal cost of provision to one
side and above the marginal cost of provision to the other side. Evans (2003a) showed that there
were numerous industries in which firms acting as catalysts set some prices below marginal cost and
sometimes at zero. These include software platforms, advertising-supported media, exchanges, and
payment systems. They range from the old (the village matchmaker) to the new (mobile-based social
networking).
    Since the birth of the multi-sided platform literature, three noteworthy developments have taken
place that are particularly relevant to this Chapter. First, there has emerged a large and rapidly
expanding literature on multi-sided platforms in economics, antitrust, and strategic management. We
have identified more than 200 articles on multi-sided platforms that have appeared in print or in
working paper form since we last surveyed this area in 2007.4 It is still early in the development of
this corner of industrial organization, and all the important questions have by no means been
answered. Second, competition authorities around the world have used the multi-sided platform
framework to evaluate cases and reach decisions. See OECD (2009) for a survey of the how various
authorities are approaching cases involving platforms.5 The multi-sided platform literature is
regularly cited in submissions in legal and investigative proceedings. Third, a number of large global
multi-sided platforms have emerged as a result of ongoing revolutions involving the Internet, mobile
devices, and information technology more broadly, as described in Evans (2008). These platforms
have garnered considerable attention from antitrust authorities—for example the U.S. Federal Trade
Commission’s and the European Commission’s investigations of Google—and private
complainants—such as Qihoo 360’s lawsuit against Tencent in China and the Consumer Watchdog
complaint against Facebook in the U.S.6
    Experienced antitrust practitioners know that no two businesses or markets are alike and may


     3 Other key theoretical papers are Caillaud and Jullien (2003), Armstrong (2006), and Rochet and Tirole (2006).

Weyl (2010) generalizes and unifies the models in these papers. Most of the subsequent literature builds on these papers.
In the context of information goods, Parker and Van Alstyne (2000) introduced a model with interdependent demand
between two groups of customers. Their model is a linear version of the model subsequently developed by Armstrong
(2006).
     4 The appendix provides a bibliography of the literature on multi-sided platforms through 2012.
     5OECD Competition Committee (2009). The first author was an advisor to the OECD and helped draft the
OECD’s report.
     6 Washington Post, October 14, 2012; Wall Street Journal Online, November 29, 2012; Qihoo v. Tencent.
                                                                                                               4


wonder why one class of businesses, multi-sided platforms, deserves a chapter in a volume on
antitrust. After all, grocery stores and copper mines also differ in fundamental ways. Indeed, early
in the emergence of the economic literature on multi-sided platforms, some commentators argued
that there was nothing new in the economics of multi-sided platforms and thus no reason for
competition analysis to treat them differently from grocery stores or copper mines.
     Few hold this view today. The economics literature that has developed since 2000 shows
robustly that many results derived from models of one-sided businesses generally do not apply to
multi-sided platforms that serve different interdependent customer groups. The clearest example of
this involves price. When competition is imperfect, long-run equilibrium prices exceed marginal cost
in traditional models but not necessarily in multi-sided platform models. Similarly, many of the
analytical methods that are commonly used in antitrust matters, such as the SSNIP test or models
for evaluating exclusionary abuses through tying, do not necessarily apply, without significant
adaptation, to industries with multi-sided platforms.
     An additional reason for a separate focus on multi-sided platforms is that there are important
similarities in the business models adopted by multi-sided platforms in different industries, and the
literature has already identified some important determinants of both those similarities and of
differences of the sort that distinguish grocery stores from copper mines. The selective survey in
this Chapter is intended to provide insights from across these industries that readers may find useful
in specialized cases. In this sense, surveying multi-sided platforms is similar to considering
franchises. The economics and the case law related to one kind of franchises or multi-sided platform
are relevant to other kinds of franchises or multi-sided platforms, but in both cases it is important to
pay attention to sources of differences between individual businesses and markets.
     As we noted above, some early commentators argued that the economics of multi-sided
platforms was old wine in new bottles: just a new label for industries with indirect network effects
that economists had written about since the mid-1980s. Others claimed that these platforms did not
raise any issues that required significant modification to traditional antitrust tools.7 We have asserted
above and will demonstrate below that the burgeoning economics literature on multi-sided
platforms has shown that there are new wines here—particularly good, complex vintages in fact—
and that one-sided tools often do not apply, at least not without substantial changes, to multi-sided
platforms. Much of the work discussed below is making its way into the interactions among
authorities, complainants, defendants, and courts. And there is more to come.

II.     ECONOMICS OF MULTI-SIDED PLATFORMS
   It is useful to start with an example of a two-sided platform to establish some basic concepts.
OpenTable is an American-based company that provides a platform for fine-dining restaurants and


   7 See, e.g., Plaintiffs’ Pretrial Brief at 17-24, United States v. First Data Corporation, No. 03-2169 (D.D.C.

December 10, 2003).
                                                                                                     5


consumers in various cities in the U.S. and other countries.8 It enables consumers to make and
restaurants to accept reservations for tables over the Internet. It helped solve a transaction problem
for consumers and restaurants. Consumers used to have to call a restaurant and, assuming they
reached someone, ask whether a particular time was available for their party. If they were unable to
make a reservation, they would repeat the process for another restaurant, perhaps many times.
Restaurants used to have to devote resources to taking phone calls, many of which did not result in a
reservation, and keeping track of the reservations they did take. As anyone who has used both
methods has observed, the web-based reservation systems enable consumers to search very quickly
for restaurants with availability and make reservations at them. Figure 1 shows OpenTable’s view of
the transaction cost problem that it solved.




                                      Figure 1: OpenTable and Transaction Costs
    For OpenTable to provide this service it needed to have significant numbers of both consumers
and restaurants using its platform. OpenTable started by providing table management software to
restaurants—a one-sided business. Once it had signed up a sufficiently large number of restaurants
in some cities, it developed a web-based platform for consumers to make reservations that would be
automatically incorporated into its table management software. OpenTable provided this service to
consumers for free. In fact, the price to consumers is slightly negative: consumers earn modest
rewards that can be used to reduce their bill at participating restaurants. Restaurants have to license
Open Table’s table management software and pay a fee for every patron they seat who has made a
reservation through OpenTable. As of 2011 OpenTable had 25 thousand restaurants in the U.S. and
sat 9.0 million consumers a month. It earned $139.5 million in revenue.9


   8   For the company’s geographic scope, see OpenTable Inc. (2011), at 3, 7-8.
   9   OpenTable Inc. (2011), at 2, 7.
                                                                                                                        6


    OpenTable has several features that are common among multi-sided platforms.
    First, it has two sorts of indirect network externalities. There is a usage externality: both
consumers and restaurants benefit when the system is used to make a reservation.10 And there is a
membership externality: the system is more valuable to consumers the more different restaurants it lets
them access. It is not clear that restaurants benefit from having more consumers use the system
beyond the benefits related to usage; consumers value variety, but restaurants probably do not. On
the other hand, it is clear that the value of the table management software is greater the more
consumers use it to make reservations.
    Second, Open Table clearly facilitates valuable interactions between two distinct groups of
agents: consumers and restaurants. The fact that members of each groups value interacting with
members of the other group underlies the indirect network externalities just discussed and provided
an opportunity for an entrepreneur to create a profit-making platform that could increase value for
these economic agents by reducing the transactions costs they must incur in order to interact.
Consumers and restaurants were able to find each other and make reservations before OpenTable,
of course. One could even argue that the telephone network was the pre-existing platform, which
generally had no out-of-pocket costs for consumers. But the transactions costs of using the
telephone were nonetheless much higher on both sides of the market.
    Third, the price structure for the two different types of economic agents, which determines the
relative incremental profit earned from the two types, is an important tool in solving the
coordination problem between the two sides in order to capture value from the externalities that link
them. Most likely subsidizing consumers increased the value of the platform to restaurants, which
resulted in OpenTable getting more restaurants, which in turn made if more attractive to consumers.
Note also that restaurants pay a fixed membership fee to license the software that enables them to be
on the platform as well as a usage fee when they take a reservation. It is not uncommon for platforms
to charge fees of both sorts. Consumers pay no membership fee and enjoy a small negative usage
fee. This sort of dramatic asymmetry, with one group of agents paying prices below marginal cost, is
also not uncommon with multi-sided platforms.
A.         DEFINITIONS OF A MULTI-SIDED PLATFORM
    Before relying on the multi-sided platform literature to analyze a business, one obviously needs
to determine whether that business is in fact a multi-sided platform. Economists have proposed
several definitions of a multi-sided platform; they will generally agree in specific cases. Rochet and
Tirole (2006) focused on the price structure in defining two-sided platforms (which they refer to as
two-sided markets):

           A market is two-sided if the platform can affect the volume of transactions by charging more to one side of the

     10   This distinction between usage and membership network externalities was first made by Rochet and Tirole
(2006).
                                                                                                                     7


         market and reducing the price paid by the other side by an equal amount; in other words, the price structure
         matters, and platforms must design it so as to bring both sides on board.

    For a business to be two-sided it must reduce transactions costs for the two sides. Because of
indirect network externalities there is interdependence between the demands of the two sides, and
the price structure is used to balance membership and usage to maximize platform value. Rochet
and Tirole emphasize that a business is not two-sided if the economic agents can easily defeat the
pricing structure through side payments.11 In practice, it is hard to know as a theoretical matter
whether economic agents could defeat a platform’s pricing structure. Restaurants could impose the
charges they pay for reservations onto those who make them, thereby negating the Open Table
subsidies. In fact, restaurants do not do this despite complaining about the charges,12 perhaps
because of transactions costs or because consumers would strongly object to such a charge, since
making a reservation by phone is free – except for the time involved.
    Evans and Schmalensee (2007a) proposed a less formal definition that captures the key features
of platform businesses.13 A multi-sided platform (which they call an economic catalyst), “has (a) two or
more groups of customers; (b) who need each other in some way; (c) but who cannot capture the
value from their mutual attraction on their own; and (d) rely on the catalyst to facilitate value-
creating interactions between them.” The focus of this definition is on the role of the platform in
creating value that would not exist (or would be much smaller) in its absence. This value is created
as a result of solving a coordination—and transaction cost—problem between the groups of
customers. The generation and allocation of this value between the multiple sides is determined
simultaneously. How much value each side gets determines whether they will participate and also
how much is left over as profit for the platform. The price structure is critical in determining that
allocation.
    The multi-sided platform literature assumes the presence of multiple customer groups with
demand that is interdependent in various ways. Perhaps the best test of whether a particular
situation involves one or more multi-sided platforms is whether the multi-sided platform literature
provides useful insights that do not emerge from more standard analysis. In the case of OpenTable
it seems apparent both that there are significant usage and membership externalities and that it
would be difficult to explain Open Table’s subsidization of reservation makers without taking those
externalities into account.
     In the remainder of this chapter we distill insights from the multi-sided platform literature that
are relevant to competition policy. Whether these insights apply to a particular entity, or to
competition policy issues related to that entity, depends on the extent to which the entity is a multi-


     11 Therefore a necessary condition for a firm to be a multi-sided platform is that the Coase (1960) Theorem, which
relies on there being zero transactions costs involved in side payments, does not apply.
     12 Pastore (2010); New York Times, December 12, 2010; Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, May 1, 2011.
     13 Evans and Schmalensee (2007a). Also see Evans (2003b).
                                                                                                      8


sided platform. When in doubt it is useful to consult the Rochet-Tirole or Evans-Schmalensee
definitions and to make sure that the assumptions of the multi-sided platform theoretical model(s)
being considered apply to that entity. It is also important to note that many of the theoretical
models of multi-sided platforms are heavily dependent on assumptions that may not apply in a
particular application or, for that matter, in any application.
B.          EXTERNALITIES
    Externalities are a key aspect of multi-sided platforms. As we noted above, Rochet and Tirole
(2006) observed there are two types of indirect externalities: usage externalities and membership
externalities.
    A usage externality exists when two economic agents need to act together, to use the platform, to
create value. We see that with OpenTable. There is a person who wants to dine at a restaurant at a
particular time and a restaurant that would benefit from serving that individual at that time. They
can enter into a value-increasing exchange only if they can get together. In practice that means the
person and the restaurant finding each other and entering into a transaction. OpenTable and similar
businesses help generate these usage externalities by making it easier for restaurants and diners to
enter into this transaction. They also increase the value of usage externalities by increasing the
quality of the matches: they make it easier for people to find the best restaurant for the particular
occasion involved.
    It is possible that the usage externalities are positive for one type of economic agent but negative
for another type of economic agent. So long as the net value of these externalities is positive there is
a benefit to facilitating interaction, some of which the platform may be able to capture. Some
advertising-supported media are examples. An advertiser benefits from being able to communicate
with a possible customer, but consumers may place a negative value on seeing ads. The platform
enables a value-increasing interaction by subsidizing the consumer so that she is willing to see the ad.
Most advertising-supported media do this by bundling subsidized content with advertising.
Anderson and Gabszewicz (2006), for instance, discuss how free television stations buy consumers’
attention with programming.
    There is a membership externality when the value received by agents on one side increases with
the number of agents—or some related measure of their aggregate value—participating on the other
side. As we noted above, OpenTable is more valuable to consumers the more restaurants that
participate in the service. Smart mobile phone software platforms provide another example.
Developers of applications value a platform more if there are more potential users; users value a
platform more if there are more applications. This phenomenon results in the well-known positive
feedback loop.14 More agents on one side attract more agents on the other side, thereby fueling
growth.
    Yet another example of membership externalities is provided by the entry of Diners Club, the

     14   Katz and Shapiro (1985); Farrell and Saloner (1985); Arthur (1989).
                                                                                                                 9


first general-purpose payment card. At its start it recruited 14 restaurants to take its card and several
hundred consumers to carry its card in Manhattan. Driven by membership externalities, more
restaurants and consumers joined its system in the ensuing months.15 Diners Club ignited. More
restaurants joined to get access to consumers who wanted to use the card to pay and more
consumers joined to pay at more restaurants. By its first anniversary in 1951, Diners Club had
42,000 individuals who carried its card to make payment and 330 merchants that that accepted the
card for payment. By 1956, it was accepted at nine thousand merchants, with an annual transaction
volume of $54 million.16
     The platform plays a key role in creating these indirect network effects. In fact, as described in
Evans and Schmalensee (2010), the major challenge for aspiring platforms is to get enough agents
on each side to secure enough critical mass to propel indirect network effects.17 Platforms generate
indirect network effects, and thus value for the economic agents they aspire to serve, through
pricing, product design, marketing, and other efforts to attract agents on each side. Jullien (2011), for
instance, has stressed the value of “divide and conquer” strategies for a startup or an entrant
challenging an established platform: subsidize agents in the most price-sensitive group, then use
their participation to attract agents in the other group.
     The presence of these indirect network externalities has an important implication for economic
analysis of multi-sided platforms. For traditional one-sided industries, economists ordinarily assume
that demand depends on the price of the product as well as the prices of complements and
substitutes. For multi-sided platforms, the demand by one group of economic agents also depends
on the number (or other measures of the size and quality) of each of the other groups of economic
agents that the platform serves. Loosely speaking, the sides are complements in demand. Failure to
account for these demand interdependencies in an economic model renders the results of that
model suspect if not completely unreliable when such interdependencies are important. We will
return to this point when we discuss economic models commonly used in antitrust.
C.        PRICING
    Pricing in two-sided platforms is more complex than in ordinary multi-product businesses, and it
depends on the nature of the platform. To illustrate both points, we briefly consider pricing in the
two most basic models of two-sided platforms.
    In the first of these models, due to Rochet and Tirole (2003),18 a two-sided monopoly platform
operates with no membership externalities, only usage externalities, and levies no membership
charges, only per-transaction usage charges. The demand for transactions from group i is given by
Di(Pi), for i=1,2, where Pi is the per-transaction charge to members of group i. One can think of the


     15 Evans and Schmalensee (2007b), at 1-2.
     16 Evans and Schmalensee (2007b), Evans and Schmalensee (2005), at 54.
     17 Zhou (2012) provides an empirical study of the critical mass problem in the U.S. video game market.
     18 See also Schmalensee (2002), where this same model is applied to the analysis of payment card systems.
                                                                                                     10


two groups as merchants and consumers and the platform as a payment system that levies only per-
transaction fees. The number of transactions that actually occurs is proportional to the product of
the groups’ demands in this model, so that, as in real payment systems, there is a value to balanced
participation. The platform’s profit is given by


                                                               
                             P1  C1  P2  C2  D1 P1 D2 P2 ,

where Ci is the per-transaction cost of serving a member of group i.
    Let Ei be the (positive) elasticity of Di with respect to Pi. Then Rochet and Tirole (2003) show
that the profit-maximizing prices satisfy the following two optimality conditions:

                           P1  P2    C1  C2   1 ,             and
                                                                                P1 P2
                                                                                   .
                                  C1  C2          E1  E2                    E1 E2

     The first of these resembles the classic Lerner condition for monopoly equilibrium; the total
markup over cost is lower the higher is either demand elasticity. The second condition, however,
makes clear that this is not an ordinary multi-product firm. Such a firm would generally maximize
profit by charging prices that are inversely related to demand elasticities, all else equal. Here,
however, that condition is turned on its head: the optimal prices are directly proportional to demand
elasticities. Intuitively, the reason is that the platform cares about balanced participation of the two
groups, while balance has no value to an ordinary multi-product firm.
     In the second basic model, due to Armstrong (2006), a two-sided monopoly platform operates
with no usage externalities, only membership externalities, and levies no usage charges, only
membership charges. One can think of a heterosexual singles bar or an academic journal. In the
first example men value the presence of many women and vice versa; in the second example authors
value journals with large audiences, and readers value journals in which many good authors want to
publish. The demand of each group for membership depends both on the fee it is charged and on
the number of members from the other group. The firm’s profit function in this model is given by

                   P1  C1  D1  P1 , Q2   ( P2  C2 ) D2  P2 , Q1  ,

where Qi is the number of members from group i and Qi=Di(Pi,Qj), i=1,2, ij.
     This model is formally related to the classic model of a monopoly selling complements. In the
classic example of coffee and cream, lowering the price of coffee increases the demand for cream
because some individuals consume coffee and cream together. Here, however, there are two distinct
groups. In the singles bar example, lowering the admission charge to women will increase the
demand for admission by men as a reaction to the increased number of women in the bar.
                                                                                                     11


    Unlike the Rochet-Tirole (2003) model, the Armstrong (2006) model does not yield simple
optimality conditions that hold for all demand functions. Armstrong (2006) shows that in the
special case where the Di functions are linear, the profit-maximizing prices satisfy the following
conditions:

                        Pi  (Ci  ij )       1
                                                   , i, j  1, 2, i  j.
                              Pi               i

Here i is the elasticity of Di with respect to Pi, holding Qj constant, and ij is a positive term that
measures the impact of increases in Qi on demand from group j, i,j=1,2, ij. As in the case of
complements, prices are lower than they would be in the absence of cross-effects.
    Schmalensee (2011) shows that in both of these models differences in demand functions can
lead to highly skewed pricing of the sort that platform businesses like OpenTable often employ.
Weyl (2010) explores a general model that has these two models as special cases, and he shows that
they have rather different comparative static properties.
    While the Rochet-Tirole (2003) and Armstrong (2006) models form the foundation of much of
the multi-sided platform literature, later authors have introduced additional factors in attempts to
produce more tailored models of particular platform types. Hagiu (2009), for instance, modifies the
Armstrong (2006) model to capture features of platforms like video game consoles, OpenTable,
Amazon, or eBay, that serve to connect differentiated sellers with consumers. He finds that the
stronger consumers’ preferences for variety, the larger the share of a monopoly platform’s profits
that is optimally derived from sellers. He argues that this explains why video game platforms derive
very little of their profits from consumers of video games, who have a strong preference for variety,
while most other software platforms, like Microsoft’s Windows and Apple’s iOS, derive most of
their profits from consumers.
D.     CONSUMER AND SOCIAL WELFARE
    For antitrust an important and immediate implication of the multi-sided platform models is that
an accurate analysis of the impact of any platform decision on consumer welfare must take into
account all interdependent customer groups the platform serves. Search engines, for example,
provide value to three distinct groups of economic agents: (1) websites that are indexed and made
available to people through search queries; (2) people making search queries; and (3) advertisers who
are seeking to reach the people who are looking at the search-results page from the query. There are
usage and membership externalities across all three groups. The search-engine platform has to
balance the interests of these three groups to provide value to them and maximize its own profit.
Business decisions that affect the welfare of one group of users are likely to affect the other groups
of users through indirect network externalities.
    Another welfare issue concerns the relationship between the profit-maximizing decisions by a
platform and the social welfare maximizing decisions. There are two potential market failures
                                                                                                                    12


resulting from multi-sided platforms.
    The first one is the traditional market power failure. In the absence of perfect competition,
which is an implausible market structure for platform-based industries, the platform will set its
overall price level higher than is socially desirable. It will earn at least short-term profits that exceed
the competitive level. Since most firms have market power, and many must have some market
power to compensate for fixed costs and risk taking, the market power failure is not remarkable for
multi-sided platforms. The market power-related market failure is similar to that for a one-sided
firm. The fact that platform-based industries deviate from perfect competition should not raise
competition policy concerns any more than the fact that almost all real-world single-sided markets
also deviate from perfect competition.
    The second possible market failure can result from the platform choosing a price structure that
does not maximize social welfare. In the two basic models considered just above, Weyl (2010)
shows that this distortion arises because the platform considers the impact of its pricing on the
marginal users in the groups it serves in order to balance participation, while the impact on the
average users is what determines the effect on social welfare. This sort of distortion was first
pointed out by Spence (1975) in a model of quality choice by a monopoly. It arises, in principle,
whenever a firm with any market power has more than one decision variable and faces buyers who
are affected differently by the levels of those variables – that is, almost universally. And, unlike the
price level distortion, even its direction depends fundamentally on details of the demand structure:
Spence (1975) shows that market-determined quality may be either too high or too low under
plausible conditions. Perhaps because of this complexity, this sort of distortion has not received
much attention from antitrust authorities or others concerned with public policy.
    Possible distortions created by payment card interchange fees are a notable exception to this
generalization. These fees, which primarily affect the price structure, rather than the overall price
level, are paid by merchant acquirers (and passed on at least in part to merchants) to bank issuers
(and passed on at least in part to consumers) and thereby affect the relative prices paid by merchants
and cardholders. There is no general reason why the profit-maximizing interchange fee would also
maximize social welfare. Bedre-Defolie and Calvano (2012), for example, show that under certain
assumptions payment networks will set the interchange higher than would be socially optimal.19
However, determining the socially optimal interchange fee depends on detailed features of cost and
demand structures and is empirically demanding. Moreover, even when there is a theoretical reason
to believe that the socially and privately optimal pricing structures are different, there is no a priori
reason to believe that they are very different – as observed by Calvano (2011).




    19There is an immense literature on the economics of interchange fees, begun by Baxter (1983). In addition to
Bedre-Defolie and Calvano (2012), other recent contributions include Prager et al (2009), Rochet and Wright (2010), and
Wang (2010).
                                                                                                                            13


III.          COMPETITION AMONG MULTI-SIDED PLATFORMS
    The typical U.S. consumer has many different types of payment methods: cash, checks from at
least one depository institution, at least one debit card, and several credit cards.20 Most retail stores
accept cash, checks, debit, and credit cards. Each of these payment methods is provided by a two-
sided platform serving consumers and merchants. In the U.S., debit cards are provided through
platforms operated by MasterCard and Visa, credit cards through platforms operated by American
Express, Discover, MasterCard, and Visa; cash through a platform operated by the U.S. Department
of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve System; and checks through a platform operated by the
Federal Reserve System. Some large retail stores also offer store credit or charge cards, which many
consumers also use. These store cards are traditional single-sided products. One can debate which
of these payment methods compete so closely with each other they should be included in the same
relevant market for a merger or antitrust claim—a topic we consider in the next section. But it is
clear consumers and retailers use all of these methods, they all compete with each other to some
degree, and this competition has been going on for decades.
    Diners Club was able to break into the mature payments industry in the U.S. in 1950 through
product differentiation. There were two established payment platforms—cash and checks. Some
retailers also had store cards. Diners Club introduced a charge-card platform that, like cash and
checks, many consumers and merchants could use for payments. Unlike checks, Diners Club
guaranteed payment to the merchant. Unlike store cards, consumers could use the card at many
merchants. And unlike cash and checks, the consumer did not have to pay for the transaction until
her monthly charge card bill came due. Despite the advantage that cash and checks had from
indirect network effects, Diners Club and subsequent payment card entrants were able to introduce
a new payment platform. More than fifty years later, although shares of payments have shifted
dramatically among them, all of these platforms coexist.
    This competition and its evolution are hard to reconcile with the simplest models of network
effects. In these models, a platform is more attractive the more participants it has, and these
demand-side scale economies propel markets to monopoly. In the early literature on direct network
effects, there was emphasis on the impact of certain events—including anticompetitive behavior—
on tipping markets to monopoly.21
    One of the major contributions the multi-sided platform literature has made to industrial
organization has been to demonstrate that indirect network effects are important across a wide range
of industries—from low-tech industries such as shopping malls to high-tech ones such as mobile
phone operating systems. In simple models, indirect network effects can also produce demand-side
economies of scale that lead to monopoly: increased participation on one side of the platform makes
it more attractive to the other side, leading to increased participation there, making participation by


       20   Federal Reserve Board of Governors (2010); Federal Reserve Bank of Boston (2009).
       21   Useful overviews of this literature are provided by Katz and Shapiro (1994) and Farrell and Klemperer (2006).
                                                                                                                  14


the first side more attractive, and so on.
    But many of the industries in which indirect network effects are important do not have a single
monopoly provider and do not seem to be tending toward monopoly. For example, in the U.S., in
addition to several payment systems, there are several competing financial exchanges, numerous
magazines even in narrow categories such women’s fashion, multiple shopping malls that people in
metropolitan areas can patronize, several mobile phone operating systems used by consumers and
developers, numerous dating venues, and three general purpose search engines.
    Two features missing from simple models help explain this apparent discrepancy. First,
competing platforms typically offer differentiated products. Second, in some settings customers on
one or more sides of the business can patronize more than one platform – a phenomenon that has
come to be called “multi-homing.”
    Nevertheless, indirect network effects, like ordinary supply-side scale economies, do tend to
limit the number of viable multi-sided platforms in any market. Most multi-sided platforms thus face
a relatively small number of competitors as they seek to gain customers on all sides of their
businesses. Often, both static and dynamic competition are important in industries with multi-sided
platforms.
A.        PRODUCT DIFFERENTIATION
     The traditional concepts of product differentiation (see Tirole 1988, Chapter 7) for one-sided
firms apply to multi-sided platforms. There is variation across consumers both in the valuation of
various product attributes (horizontal differentiation) and in the willingness or ability to pay for
quality (vertical differentiation).22 Firms can select product attributes to appeal to particular groups
of consumers and to differentiate themselves from competitors.
     For one-sided firms, horizontal and vertical differentiation locates the firm near a pool of
potential customers and helps determine pricing. For multi-sided platforms, by determining the
customers on one side, horizontal and vertical differentiation affect demand on the other sides.
Because of these interdependencies, a platform must usually make differentiation decisions jointly
for all of the sides it serves. Moreover, the selection of customers on one side is one possible way to
differentiate the platform horizontally or vertically.
     A shopping mall developer, for example, must decide on a number of different product
attributes such as location, size, parking, and quality of construction. But it also needs to decide what
kind of stores and customers it wants to attract. Those are obviously interdependent. It could be an
upscale mall and only rent space to merchants with an upscale clientele. If it succeeds in attracting
enough such merchants it will tend to attract an upscale clientele. In order to do this, of course, it is
likely to make other decisions—such as locating close to wealthy towns and using better finishes—


      Ambrus and Argenziano (2009) consider two-sided platforms serving customers who differ in their valuation of
     22

an important dimension of quality: the number of customers on the other side of the platform. They show that multiple
asymmetric platforms can exist in equilibrium.
                                                                                                                      15


that help attract wealthy customers and merchants they tend to patronize.23
    Product differentiation, as this example suggests, is a tactic that firms can use to create value by
making it easier for agents to find counterparties for value-increasing exchange. The upscale mall,
for example, makes it easier for shoppers to find stores that serve their tastes and easier for stores to
find customers. In some cases, platforms differentiate themselves by using what Evans (2012a),
following Strahilovetz (2006), has called the exclusionary vibe.24 The dating site, JDate, does not
prevent Gentiles from using it but engages in various actions that signal that it is primarily for Jewish
singles looking for other Jewish singles. Platforms can also create value for agents on one side by
limiting how much competition they face for a match, as observed by Halaburda and Piskorski
(2011).
    Product differentiation is a key reason why many industries with multi-sided platforms have
multiple competitors even though indirect network effects and sometimes economies of scale would
seem to propel them to monopolies. Job placement provides an interesting example. The online
portion of this industry consists of job boards that help match job searchers with employers through
online postings and search. In the U.S. there are two large job boards that cover many different job
categories. But then there are hundreds of other job boards that specialize in different job segments
such as professionals (LinkedIn.com) and media jobs (mediabistro.com). By specializing, these job
boards presumably increase matching efficiency. Beyond the job boards there are recruiting services
that work for employers or employees. The result is a highly fragmented industry of two-sided
platforms.
B.       MULTI-HOMING
    The competitive dynamics of multi-sided platforms depend in theory and in practice on the
number of platforms that individual economic agents on each side use, on differences between the
two sides in the number of platforms used, and on the ability of an agent on one side to dictate the
choice of platform for the other side.
    Rochet and Tirole (2003) observed that one of the key competitive aspects of multi-sided
platforms was the extent to which economic agents engaged in what they called “single-homing” or
“multi-homing.” An economic agent single-homes if she uses only one platform in a particular
industry and multi-homes if she uses several. In the cases of payments, consumers and merchants
both generally use several payment platforms and therefore multi-home in this sense.
    Armstrong (2006) showed the importance of “multi-homing” for competition. Suppose
platforms in some market create value by having agents of Type A and Type B as members. If Type
A agents only join one platform, then Type B agents can only gain access to Type A agents by
joining that same platform. That makes the Type A side of a platform what Armstrong called a


      23 Galeotti and Moraga-Gonzalez (2009) provide a model of a shopping mall that attracts horizontally differentiated
retailers as well as consumers. The analysis of Hagiu (2009) is also relevant.
      24 For a discussion of the exclusionary vibe in the context of multi-sided platforms see Evans (2012a).
                                                                                                               16


“competitive bottleneck.”25 When there is single homing on one side and multi-homing on the
other side in his model, Armstrong shows that platforms will compete aggressively for the single-
homing customer who will therefore pay low prices. With these customers on board, the platform
will then earn its profits from the customers who multi-home on the other side. Armstrong and
Wright (2007) show that if competing two-sided platforms are viewed as homogeneous by members
of one group but are viewed as differentiated by members of the other, the latter will single-home,
the former will multi-home, and “competitive bottlenecks” will arise endogenously.
    Sometimes one set of multi-homing agents can dictate the choice of platform to agents on the
other side of the market. As we have noted, most consumers use multiple payment methods and
even use multiple payment cards, and most merchants accept all of the payment alternatives. One
can argue, however, that in practice the consumer dictates which payment system is used. The
consumer generally offers one particular payment method at checkout. The merchant then has to
decide whether to reject that payment method. If they do they might lose a sale. In addition, there
may be other reasons why the merchant cannot steer the consumer away from their chosen
method—laws against surcharging payment methods, restrictions imposed by the platform involved,
customs relating to payment acceptance, or transaction costs. If the consumer decides then, by the
logic of competitive bottlenecks, the payment platforms have an incentive to compete aggressively
for the consumer to use their payment method. That is a possible explanation for providing
“rewards” for people to use cards. Bedre-Defolie and Calvano (2012) rely on this assumption in
showing that payment card systems have an incentive to subsidize card users at the expense of
merchants more than is socially optimal.
    It is not clear how robust the “competitive bottleneck” argument is, however. In software
platforms, for instance, the price structure appears to be the opposite of what the competitive
bottlenecks theory would predict. Most personal computer users rely on a single software platform,
while most developers write for multiple platforms.26 Yet personal computer software providers
generally make their platforms available for free, or at low cost, to applications developers and earn
profits from the single-homing user side.
C.        ASYMMETRIC COMPETITION
    The theoretical economics literature on multi-sided platforms has focused on two major cases:
monopoly platforms and competition among (possibly differentiated) multi-sided platforms that
serve the same customer groups. Many platforms, in fact, face more complicated competitive
environments as observed by Evans and Noel (2005) and Eisenman et al. (2011). An n-sided
platform can face competition from:



     25This term seems to have first been used in connection with mobile telephony, where networks may compete for
subscribers but be in a monopoly position for providing access to those subscribers; see Armstrong (2002).
    26 Evans et al (2006).
                                                                                                                        17


                A single-sided firm on any side. We saw that 2-sided payment platforms face
                 competition from 1-sided store cards. The three-sided personal computer software
                 platforms competed at least initially with one-sided platforms such as the IBM
                 mainframe (the mainframe integrated an operating system and hardware and did not
                 encourage the development of general complementary applications.)
                A multi-sided platform that competes on some but not all sides. The Android operating
                 system, for example, serves as a platform for handset manufacturers, users, mobile
                 operators, and software developers. The Apple iPhone operating system serves as a
                 platform for all of these except handset manufacturers, since Apple does not license its
                 operating system to other handset manufacturers.
                A multi-sided platform that has the same sides plus additional ones. That is true for
                 Apple relative to Android. It is also true to a large degree for search platforms versus
                 social networking platforms. Both earn revenue from advertising, but social networking
                 platforms earn revenue from application developers—especially game developers.

    Online advertising is an example of many platforms serving one side—advertisers—but
providing very different products to secure the attention of consumers. In China, for example, the
following platforms all sell online advertising to users but provide very different services to them:
Tencent (instant messaging), Baidu (search engine), Sina (integrated portal), Qihoo (antivirus),
Netease (integrated portal), Taobao (online shopping), Sohu (integrated portal), Youku (online
video), Tudou (Online Video), Google (search engine), Tianya (community), Home of Websites (site
map), Ku6 (online video), Thunder Video (online video), and Phoenix (integrated portal). The
platforms intersect on the advertising side but deviate, at least in terms of the services offered, on
the user side.27 Of course they are all seeking attention from consumers which is what they are
providing to advertisers.

IV.          MARKET DEFINITION AND MARKET POWER
    The fundamental service provided by multisided platforms is the ability of economic agents on
each side to interact in a valuable way with economic agents on other sides. The OpenTable
platform, for instance, makes it easier for consumers and restaurants to schedule a time to dine. A
platform may provide economic agents with various products and services to persuade them to use
the platform and help facilitate the process of searching, matching, and interacting. OpenTable
provides restaurants with table management and reservation software. It provide consumers with a
website that enables them to search for restaurants, see ratings, determine availability for particular
times and numbers of guests, and to make a reservation. But ultimately the platform is generating
value from bringing members of these two groups of customers together. The goods and services
provided to each side are usually the means to that end. OpenTable provided restaurants with a
suite of software services in part to get them to join its network and it provided consumers with a

      27   Evans (forthcoming-a) provides a general discussion of platform businesses that both seek and provide attention.
                                                                                                              18


suite of tools to get them to use its network. (It would be easy for consumers to multi-home; less
easy for restaurants.) These linkages across the multiple groups of customers and the products and
services being offered to each group have to be accounted for in the analysis of the relevant antitrust
market and the assessment of market power.28
    Market definition and market power analysis are primarily methods for summarizing succinctly
the extent to which competitive constraints limit the ability of a firm to engage in various kinds of
behavior that may raise antitrust concerns. Market definition identifies the sources of demand-side
and supply-side constraints that matter in assessing market power. Market power analysis assesses
whether these constraints prevent a firm from charging prices that are noticeably higher than under
competition or otherwise engaging in undesirable behavior that a competitive firm could not do
profitably. We therefore begin by considering differences between competitive constraints for multi-
sided firms and those for single-sided firms.
A.      COMPETITIVE CONSTRAINTS
    Indirect network effects result in three major considerations for the analysis of competitive
constraints.
    First, the positive feedbacks between the sides that indirect network effects produce need to be
considered when analyzing the profitability of increasing price. Consider a platform with sides A
and B. An increase in price, or a reduction in quality, to A-type customers will reduce the number of
A’s that belong to the platform and the extent to which they participate in it. Since B-type
customers value the platform because of their ability to access and interact with A-type customers,
the demand by B’s will fall even if the prices they face have remained the same. The result is that
the demand by As will fall more since the platform is less valuable to them now that it has fewer B’s.
As noted by Armstrong (2006), the demand on each side of the platform is more elastic, and the
profitability of a price increase is lower, when these positive feedback effects are considered than
when they are not considered. In a study of magazines, Song (2011) found that these effects
doubled estimated price elasticities. Of course, it is possible that these feedback effects are small
and could be ignored in any particular setting. But if the subject of an antitrust inquiry is a multi-
sided platform, one would at least need to inquire into the strength of these feedback effects in
assessing the profitability of raising prices on any side.
    Second, the competitive constraints on raising price to one side, or engaging in any other
strategy, can come directly or indirectly from any and all sides of competing platforms. A platform
that considers raising its price to one side, for example, has to consider the extent to which
customers leave that side; how that affects customer losses on other sides; the extent to which other
platforms pick up those customers; and how the addition of customers on each side of a competing
platform increases the value of that platform to the other sides through positive feedback effects.

   28 For our general views on the proper analysis of market definition and market power in antitrust matters see

Chang et al (2011a, 2011b) and Evans (2012b).
                                                                                                                      19


More generally, platforms engaging in any competitive move affecting one group it serves would
need to consider counterstrategies aimed at that group or any other it serves. For example, if a
platform attempts to engage in an exclusionary strategy on one side it is possible that a rival could
counter with strategies that involve that, the other, or both sides. It is, of course, an empirical
matter as to whether customers can turn to other platforms, as is the extent to which indirect
network effects require looking beyond competition between the similar sides of alternative
platforms.
    Third, the existence of indirect network effects can also limit supply-side substitutability and
increase entry barriers for multi-sided platforms. Successful incumbent firms have, by definition,
obtained a critical mass of users on their several sides and benefit from the positive feedback effects
between these customer groups. Entrants have to obtain critical mass as well and that often takes
time. Moreover, in a mature market the entrant has the challenge of persuading users who may
benefit from these positive feedback effects to switch to a platform that has a smaller and therefore
possibly less valuable group of customers on the other side.29 In practice product differentiation and
the possibilities of multi-homing are critical determinants of the degree of difficulty faced by
entrants.
B.         MARKET POWER
    Market power is commonly defined as the ability of a firm (or group of firms) to raise prices
significantly above the competitive level, although there is no consensus on exactly how much above
the competitive level constitutes significant market power. The competitive level is generally taken to
be the price that would prevail under perfect competition, so that price is set at marginal cost.30
There are difficulties and nuances in analyzing market power in single-sided markets that we do not
address here.31 Instead we focus on how the existence of demand interdependencies affects
commonly used approaches to assessing market power.
     Some models of multi-sided platforms, notably the Rochet-Tirole (2003) model discussed

     29 In U.S. v. Microsoft the government argued that Microsoft had monopoly power in software operating systems

because among other things it was protected by an insurmountable “applications barrier to entry.” In the language of
multi-sided platforms, which had not yet emerged when that case was tried, Windows was a multi-sided platform serving
end users, developers who write applications, and hardware makers. All three are linked by indirect network
externalities. Windows had a critical mass of customers on all three sides, and each group had made investments in the
platform. The market power question is whether an entrant could have overcome these advantages and secured critical
mass for the ignition, and generation of positive feedback effects, for an alternative platform. See United States vs.
Microsoft Corp., 253 F.3d 34 (D.C. Cir. 2001); Evans et al (2000). The answers to questions of this sort are likely to be
market-specific: Apple’s iPhone had an enormous stock of applications (or apps) before the first Android smartphone
was marketed, for instance, yet as this is written Android phones are substantially outselling iPhones.
     30 Areeda and Hovenkamp (2002), Volume IIA, at ¶501; Motta (2004), at 115; Elhauge and Geradin (2007), at 238.

In the EU, dominance has also been defined as holding “a position of economic strength enjoyed by an undertaking
which enables it to prevent effective competition being maintained on the relevant market by affording it the power to
behave to an appreciable extent independently of its competitors, customers and ultimately of its consumers”. See Case
27/76, United Brands Company and United Brands Continental BV v. European Commission, 1978 E.C.R. (1978).
     31 Chang et al (2011b).
                                                                                                     20


above, may provide a theoretical rationale for comparing price and marginal cost by computing a
multi-sided version of the familiar Lerner Index. Similar measures can be computed even when they
lack a theoretical rationale, of course, but their interpretation in unclear in such cases. In general,
multi-sided price-cost margins face the same difficulties in interpretation as do the single-sided price
cost margins. Because competitive firms need to recover fixed costs, unless marginal cost is rising
and exceeds average variable coat, prices cannot be equal to marginal cost in competitive
equilibrium. Marginal cost is clearly not the right benchmark for software or internet-based
products for which marginal cost is typically negligible. And, as Chamberlin (1933) noted long ago,
competitive equilibrium in the presence of product differentiation necessarily involves prices above
marginal cost.
     Market share is often used to assess market power for single-sided firms. The theoretical
justification for inferring market power from market share is weak for single-sided firms. It is no
stronger for multi-sided ones. In addition, it is not always clear how to compute “share” for multi-
sided firms. Consider a software platform. One of the main “products” that software developers get
from the platform is access to users; one of the main “products” that users get is the access to
software developers. One could compare shares for each of these sides across platforms and then
make a judgment about market power based on looking at the shares for both sides, but there is no
reason to expect those shares to be equal.
     In addition, multi-sided platforms often provide one of their products for free or at a subsidized
price. In these cases it is not possible to calculate a value-based market share, which is what is
ordinarily recommended, since the price does not in fact reflect the value received by the user. In
some cases there is a common metric for the multiple sides that provides a natural way to compute
share. For example, buyers and sellers both use payment systems to execute transactions, and one
could calculate shares based on the number or value of these transactions
     Several authors have warned against basing judgments about market power on analysis of only a
single side of a multi-sided platform.32 As noted above, it is theoretically possible and empirically
common for platforms to have prices that are significantly above marginal cost on one side and at or
below marginal cost on the other side. A platform could have a monopoly in which it earns
significantly more than the competitive rate of return yet price at or below marginal cost on one
side. Therefore examining price on that side would result in a false negative test result for market
power. A platform could also earn a competitive rate of return yet price significantly above marginal
cost on one side. Therefore examining price on that side would result in a false positive test result
for market power. In principle an analyst could adjust these prices by assessing the marginal cost of
securing access to a customer on the other side, thereby lowering the effective margin for the high-
price side and raising the effective margin for the low-price side. But this would not be a simple
exercise and would still face the same difficulties as single-sided price-cost margin analyses.


   32   Argentesi and Filistrucchi (2007); Evans (2003b); Song (2011); Weyl (2010); Wright (2004).
                                                                                                                      21


    Profitability is also sometimes used to assess market power for single-sided firms. For multi-
sided platforms the economic rate of return is an appealing measure of market power because it
assesses the extent to which the platform has been able, through setting prices for its multiple sides,
to earn more than a competitive return. Rates of return vary over time, however, and it is well
known that measuring the economic rate of return and comparing it to the competitive rate of
return is challenging at best.33 The manner in which accounting data are collected and reported
makes accurate measurements and comparisons difficult, as does the problem of accounting for risk
and its compensation.
    There is no single reliable method for assessing market power for traditional firms and it is
usually recommended that analysts consider multiple sources of evidence to reduce the chances of
false positives or false negatives. Exclusive reliance on mechanical measures such as market share or
price-cost margins in determining market power is not advisable. The same issues apply to multi-
sided platforms but, as we have discussed, there are further problems. A thorough review of
competitive constraints is normally needed, and analysts need to make judgments based on multiple
sources of evidence on these constraints. In evaluating these constraints, it is important that the
analyst consider the role of interdependent demand as discussed above.
C.        MARKET DEFINITION
    The purpose of market definition is to identify the competitive constraints on the supplier of the
product under consideration – the market forces that reduce the profitability of raising prices above
competitive levels or lowering quality.34 As noted above, these constraints may be imposed by
single-sided firms on any side of the platform under consideration, by other platforms that serve the
same customer groups, by other platforms that serve some but not all of the same groups, or by
other platforms that serve the same groups plus others. Although some of these may be
unimportant in particular instances, it is impossible to rule any of them out without investigation.35
    The literature on multi-sided platforms has examined three issues related to market definition.36
The first concerns the consequences of applying analytical tools that were developed for single-sided
firms to defining markets for a product offered on one side of a multi-sided platform. Evans and
Noel (2005, 2008) show that the failure to consider positive feedback effects in demand can result in
significantly overstating or understating the breadth of the market, depending on the analytical
approach. Consider the simple hypothetical monopolist test.37 Suppose a small but significant, non-

     33Fisher and McGowan (1983); Fisher (1987); Feenstra and Wang (2000).
     34European Commission (1997), at 5; UK Office of Fair Trading (2004), at 3; U.S. Department of Justice and
Federal Trade Commission (2010), at 9-10.
    35 Rysman (2009).
    36 See Evans (2012c) for an overview.
    37 It starts with a hypothetical monopolist, which often consists of two firms that seek to merge. It then asks

whether this hypothetical monopolist could profitably increase price by a small but significant and non-transitory
amount above the current level. If the evidence implies that it could not, then there must be additional substitutes that
constrain its pricing. The test proceeds in principle by including substitutes in the hypothetical monopolist until one
                                                                                                                           22


transitory price increase is profitable on one side under the assumption that nothing changes on the
other side of the platforms included in the hypothetical monopoly. Therefore one could conclude
that the products considered constitute a relevant antitrust market. However, as we have noted, a
price increase on one side results in a reduction of demand by customers for that side and, through
positive feedback effects, a reduction in the demand for the other side; the decline in demand on the
other side further reduces the demand on the first side. Consequently, one might conclude after
considering the positive feedback effects that the price increase is unprofitable. In that case the
market is defined too narrowly. One can identify other techniques, such as those involving critical
loss analysis, which when applied to a single side of a multi-sided platform would result in defining
markets too broadly. The key point is that it is wrong as a matter of economics to ignore significant
demand interdependencies among the multiple platform sides.38
    The second issue concerns determining cases in which it is possible to easily adapt existing tools
for market definition to multi-sided platforms. A special case is when the two sides are tied together
in a fixed proportion, as in the Rochet-Tirole (2003) model. It is then possible to define a composite
price that is equal to the sum of the prices that each customer side pays. The analyst can, in
principle, conduct the SSNIP, critical loss, and Lerner-type market power analysis using this
composite price. In the case of a critical loss analysis the Lerner-based elasticity of demand would be
based on the composite price and the composite marginal cost of providing the service to the two
sides, though the same concerns about these approaches in one-sided analyses would generally
apply. Emch and Thompson (2006) propose applying this approach to payment cards. The
composite price includes the fees charged to merchant acquirers for each transaction (a network fee
plus an interchange fee) and the fees charged to issuers for each transaction (a network fee minus
the interchange fee which they are paid). The U.S. Department of Justice adopted this approach in a
case involving payment cards.39 Many multi-sided platforms do not, however, provide services that
are consumed in fixed proportions by the multiple sides. For example, in the case of mobile
software platforms software developers are provided access to users while users are provided access
to applications.
     The third area involves developing general tools that can be used for assessing market definition
for multi-sided platforms. These generally involve econometric models that explicitly account for


obtains an aggregate that, if acting as a single firm, could profitably increase price, and that aggregate defines the relevant
market. See Kaplow (2013) in this volume.
     38 More generally, Evans and Noel (2008) show that there are two biases. It is possible to predict whether these

biases lead to too narrow or too broad a market in the cases where the platforms are symmetric in the sense that they
serve the same groups, face the same elasticities of demand, and have the same degree of positive feedback effects.
There is an estimation bias that results from estimating a demand system for the potential group of products that ignores
positive feedback effects. This bias leads to markets that are too narrow in the symmetric case. There is the Lerner bias
that results from using the single-sided price-cost margin to estimate demand elasticity and then using this in a critical
loss formula. This would result in defining markets too broadly in the symmetric case. It is not generally possible to
predict the directions of the biases in the empirically more common case of asymmetric platforms.
     39 Hesse and Soven (2006); U.S. vs. First Data Corp., No. 03-CV-02169 (D.D.C. May 25, 2004), Final Judgment.
                                                                                                                      23


interdependencies in demand between the various platform sides. To date, these models have been
developed and deployed entirely in the context of mergers and primarily for newspapers. We
discuss them in the next section.
D.          MULTI-SIDED PLATFORM MARKETS
    As the discussion above demonstrates, multi-sided platforms do not fit neatly into the standard
approaches for assessing market definition and market power. Moreover, extending these
approaches to deal with multi-sided platforms rigorously is technically and empirically challenging.
There is therefore a temptation on the part of analysts to do the best they can with standard tools,
particularly when a case is presented as dealing with only one side of a platform’s business—
magazine advertising rates, for instance. While ideal tools for dealing with many situations do not yet
exist, two basic limitations of standard tools must be dealt with to avoid serious errors.
    First, the analysis needs to consider how positive feedback effects between demands on the
multiple sides affect competition on the side under examination. It is a fundamental mistake to
ignore these positive feedback effects, without at least first evaluating their significance, and
therefore conduct a market definition analysis that focuses on one side and in effect assumes the
other sides away. These features of the market could be considered in the market power prong of
the analysis, but they must be considered somewhere.
    Second, the analysis needs consider the welfare of all customer groups. When there are material
demand interdependencies the welfare of the customers on the multiple sides are inextricably
intertwined, and may move in opposite directions as price structures change. In an empirically-
based simulation of hypothetical magazine mergers, for instance, Song (2011) found that mergers
would sometimes benefit subscribers and harm advertisers and sometimes would have the opposite
effects. Similarly, Jeziorski (2012) finds that the 1996-2006 merger wave in U.S. radio harmed
advertisers but benefitted listeners. In these cases and in general, there is no compelling public
policy rationale for ignoring the welfare of any group of customers as an artifice of market definition
that focuses only on one side. Song’s (2011) analysis indicates that even if advertisers oppose a
particular magazine merger that would harm them and present a compelling analysis of a “magazine
advertising market,” it does not follow that the merger is socially undesirable.

V.          MERGERS
    The basic question in a merger inquiry concerns whether the proposed combination is likely to
decrease consumer or social welfare significantly after accounting for unilateral and coordinated
effects and efficiency.40 We first discuss some significant general issues that arise in the unilateral
effects analysis of mergers between multi-sided platforms in addition to those discussed above
concerning the analysis of market definition and market power.41 (We treat coordinated effects

     40   See Willig and Keating (2013) and Ordover (2013).
     41   An early and important contribution to the literature on multi-sided platforms is Rysman (2004) which developed
                                                                                                                       24


generally in Section VII, below.) While the bulk of the economic literature on multi-sided platforms
has been theoretical, actual and potential mergers involving advertiser-supported media have been
subjected to a good deal of empirical analysis. The second part of this section provides a brief
overview of some recent empirical work on mergers of media businesses.
A.       PREDICTING UNILATERAL EFFECTS OF MULTI-SIDED PLATFORM MERGERS
    There are four general points to be made here:
    First, the “off-the-shelf” analytical tools for assessing unilateral effects from mergers between
one-sided firms may yield incorrect assessments insofar as they fail to account for interdependencies
in demand among the multiple sides. Unfortunately, the multi-sided extensions of the single-sided
tools used for back-of-the-envelope calculations of unilateral effects result in complex formulae that
require estimates that are not likely to be readily available to the analyst. For example, Affeldt et al
(2012) and White and Weyl (2012) explore how the UPP analysis introduced by Farrell and Shapiro
(2010), and subsequently included in the 2011 Horizontal Merger Guidelines in the U.S., must be
modified to account for indirect network effects in analyzing mergers of two-sided platforms. The
formulas become a good deal more complex because a change in any one price affects all four
quantities. To do a complete UPP analysis of a merger between two two-sided platforms, six
diversion ratios must be estimated. These necessarily include estimates of indirect network effects.
Similarly, Filistrucchi et al (2012) show how to perform a two-sided SSNIP test: they estimate the
profitability of a small but significant and non-transitory post-merger increase in either or both of a
two-sided platform’s prices. This analysis requires a complete structural model of the firms’
demands, including both cross-price effects and indirect network effects, a good deal more
information than is necessary in the case of ordinary single-sided firms.
    Second, in some cases it is at least theoretically possible for a merger of two-sided firms to result
in price reductions to both sides even in the absence of efficiency gains. In the Chandra and
Collard-Wexler (2009) model of a two-newspaper market, the main initial effect of a merger is that if
a price increase of one paper causes a reader so switch papers, she is not lost to the merged firm.
The way the model is set up, the first reader to switch away in response to a paper’s price increase is
always the least profitable for that paper. In fact, both newspapers, which are assumed unable to
price discriminate, could well be losing money on their marginal readers at their optimal pre-merger
prices. At those prices, by definition, a tiny increase in either paper’s per-copy price would leave its
profits unchanged. (That is, the derivative of each paper’s profits with respect the per-copy price is
zero.) Suppose at its optimal pre-merger price paper A is losing money on its marginal reader. Post-
merger, a tiny increase in its price would lower the profits of the merged firm, since the unprofitable
marginal reader would switch to the firm’s other paper, thus lowering its profits. (That is, the


and estimated a structural model of Yellow Pages. Subsequent papers that have used a similar framework to analyze
mergers of multi-sided platforms have included Affeldt et al (2012); Chandra and Collard-Wexler (2009); Filistrucchi et al
(2012); Jeziorski (2012); and Song (2011).
                                                                                                                    25


derivative of the merged firm’s profit with respect to the per-copy price of paper A is negative at the
optimal pre-merger prices.) If a small increase in either paper’s price would reduce the merged
firm’s profit, it follows that a small decrease in subscription prices at both papers would increase
profits. Because consumers’ propensity to subscribe to either paper is assumed to be correlated with
their attractiveness to advertisers at that paper, these price cuts bring in subscribers who lower the
average attractiveness to advertisers, thus also making a lower per-subscriber advertising rate
optimal.
     As this discussion indicates, the possibility of this particular result depends on a number of
special assumptions, and even then whether prices go up or down depends on the values of
particular parameters in the model. This model is certainly not generally applicable. But it remains
to be seen whether the possibility to which it points—a platform merger lowering profit-maximizing
prices to both sides even without efficiency gains—is also present in other models that are
descriptive of other market settings. In the absence of further study, one must conclude that it
appears possible that some mergers of multi-sided firms can lead to price cuts on all sides of the
market even in the absence of efficiency gains—something that is simply impossible for mergers of
single-sided firms. Although this possibility may turn out to be a very rare occurrence, its existence
emphasizes once more that analysts need to consider the multi-sided aspects of mergers carefully
and avoid mechanical analysis of multi-sided mergers with traditional one-sided tools.
     Third, all else equal a merger of multi-sided platforms would ordinarily increase indirect network
externalities by increasing the size of all customer groups and thereby provide efficiency benefits.42
There is no similar presumption in the case of mergers of single-sided firms. To evaluate the impact
of the merger on consumer (or social) welfare, analysts need to assess the value of these externalities.
It is particularly important to do so since prices could increase to consumers on one or more side,
while the value consumers are receiving on that side has increased even more as a result of positive
externalities.
     Fourth, to evaluate the impact of a merger of multi-sided platforms on consumer (or social)
welfare it is necessary to consider the impact of all sides. A merger could benefit consumers on one
side but harm those on the other side and the net effect of the merger across all customer groups
could therefore be positive or negative. Suppose, for instance, that Open Table proposed a merger
with a competitor and that it is determined that the merged firm would likely increase prices to
restaurants. It does not follow that the merger is undesirable, however. Restaurants would likely
have access to more consumers, and that might more than make up for the price increase. And if
restaurants single-home and the merged firm does not take the radical step of charging consumers to
make reservation, consumers would clearly be better off: they would still face a zero price and could
access more restaurants on a single platform.


    42 We want to emphasize that we are not advocating a lighter standard of review for multi-sided platform mergers or

any presumption that such mergers are procompetitive.
                                                                                                                     26


B.       ADVERTISING-SUPPORTED MEDIA MERGERS
     Newspapers, magazines, and radio stations are two-sided platforms. Newspapers and magazines
provide news and entertainment to readers and sell space on their pages to advertisers who want to
reach those readers. Radio stations also provide news and entertainment, and they sell airtime to
advertisers who want to reach their listeners. All these media solve a usage externality by providing
a mechanism to bring a possible buyer and seller together. They pay the reader or listener to come
by providing content, often at a subscription price below marginal cost for print media and at a price
of zero for over-the-air radio, and they give the advertiser access to that reader or listener. They also
generate positive externalities for advertisers; advertisers value media with more readers or
listeners.43 Consumers could like or dislike advertising. The evidence from studies so far indicates
that overall advertising does not generate positive or negative externalities for newspaper readers.44
     Chandra and Collard-Wexler (2009) conduct a reduced-form examination of the effects of the
consolidation of the Canadian newspaper industry in the late 1990s on prices charged to consumers
and to advertisers. They find no evidence that mergers led to increases in either price, contrary to
expectations derived from one-sided models, and they interpret this as consistent with their
theoretical model discussed above.
     Several authors have evaluated the effect of newspaper and magazine mergers on prices and
welfare by developing and estimating structural models of these platforms that account for the
possible demand interdependencies between the two sides. Both Affeldt et al (2012) and Filistrucchi
et al (2012) use detailed econometric models of the Dutch newspaper market, and they study how
taking account of two-sidedness affects the evaluation of hypothetical mergers. Affeldt et al (2012)
find that when two-sidedness is ignored, the estimate of upward pricing pressure on advertising is
essentially zero, while they find substantial upward pressure on advertising rates when account is
taken of two-sidedness. Filistrucchi et al (2012) find similar results with a SSNIP test and a full

     43 Economists have recently developed formal models of advertising-supported media that explicitly recognize that

they are multi-sided platforms. Most of the models to date are based on the assumption that consumers rely on a single
platform and that the only way for advertisers to reach a consumer is to advertise on the platform that has a monopoly
on that person. That assumption departs significantly from reality. Consumers obtain content from multiple advertising
platforms. Advertisers consider these alternatives partly as substitutes in deciding how to allocate their advertising
budgets; they also consider these alternatives as complements when they want to reinforce messages in different ways
through different media. Unfortunately, many key results of most models depend on that assumption. For example,
many papers conclude that platforms charge a monopoly price for advertising (since they each have a monopoly over
access to some consumers) and that competition among platforms tends to increase advertising prices (because
platforms that have less advertising can attract more consumers). See Anderson and Coate (2005); Calvano and Jullien
(2012); and Reisinger (2012). Athey, Calvano, and Gans (2012) develop a model that assumes that some people use one
platform while others stochastically search the web. They show that under this more realistic assumption the results of
the earlier models are reversed
     44 See Argentesi and Filistruchhi (2007), Chandra and Collard-Wexler (2009), Fan (forthcoming), and Song (2011).

Note that these results average across different types of advertising in newspapers. We suspect that consumers generally
value classified listings—a service that consumers often seek out offline and online—while they may not value display
advertising mixed with news and entertainment content.
                                                                                                    27


simulation of the post-merger equilibrium: taking into account two-sidedness reveals potential
unilateral effects on the advertising side that do not show up in analysis that ignores indirect
network effects.
      Fan (forthcoming) develops a structural model of newspapers that considers the value of
characteristics to readers and advertisers and the possibility that the owners could change these
characteristics following a merger. She estimates the model for newspapers in Minneapolis and finds
that a hypothetical merger increases subscription prices, lowers the quality of content from the
readers’ perspectives, reduces circulation, and lowers the value that advertisers receive. Given that
multisided platform businesses typically offer a variety of services to attract economic agents to the
platform, analyses such as Fan’s that consider the impact of mergers on non-price dimensions are
likely to prove important in practice.
     Song (2011) estimates a structural model of German TV magazines that ignores two-sidedness
and one that takes it into account. He simulates a merger to monopoly in this market and concludes
that this drastic merger would be much less harmful than an analysis that ignores two-sidedness
would conclude. For many magazines he estimates that the merged firm would lower the per-copy
price, making consumers better off. While advertising rates would generally increase, the greater
circulation induced by lower per-copy prices would generally make advertisers better off as well on
balance.
     Finally, Jeziorski (2012) estimates a structural supply-and-demand model using data from the
1996-2006 merger wave in U.S. radio and taking account of indirect network effects. As noted
above, he finds that this merger wave harmed advertisers but benefitted listeners. Like Fan
(forthcoming), Jeziorski (2012) considers an important non-price dimension of performance.
Consistent with other studies, he also finds that these mergers increased market-specific product
variety, which contributed importantly to consumer benefits.
C.     SOME PRACTICAL GUIDANCE
    Analysts face a quandary in examining mergers of multi-sided platforms. The literature
discussed above indicates that standard back-of-the envelope calculations may give highly misleading
results for the merger of platforms that have significant interdependencies in demand between
customer groups. At least at this point the analogous formulas for multi-sided platforms require
more information than an analyst could easily obtain for an initial screening exercise. They
essentially require the estimation of a structural econometric model. But if such a model can be
estimated, it would clearly be most natural to use that model to estimate the unilateral effects of the
merger. Of course, in practice, the data necessary for estimating structural models are rarely
available, the estimated models may not be robust, and it may take too much time to collect the data
and estimate structural models even when this is feasible.
    Nevertheless, the best has never been the enemy of the good in sound merger analysis, and it
need not be just because multi-sided platforms are involved. The important point is to recognize
the economic structure of these platforms, especially the role of competitive constraints and
                                                                                                                  28


demand-side efficiencies, and factor that into the overall judgment concerning the merger. In some
cases, it may be possible to analyze unilateral effects on each side using traditional tools but factoring
in biases that have been identified in the literature. Conducting a standard one-sided analysis just
because it is easier is tantamount to committing the classic drunk’s mistake—looking under the
streetlight for his lost keys just because the light is better there.

VI.        EXCLUSIONARY CONDUCT
     Economists have developed a variety of models that help analyze whether particular business
practices are likely to harm consumers as a result of excluding competitors from the market or
benefit consumers by reducing prices or increasing quality. These models are typically based on a
variety of assumptions that may or may not apply in any specific market. It is well known that many
of these models are sensitive to these assumptions. Results change when assumptions change.45
Vertical restraints, in particular, can be procompetitive under some conditions and anticompetitive
under others.
     Most of the theoretical models on which antitrust analysis relies assume, explicitly or implicitly,
that the businesses considered are single-sided. They therefore are not obviously applicable to
situations in which firms serve multiple customer groups with interdependent demands. Moreover,
given the sensitivity of many of these models to the specific assumptions on which they rest, there is
no basis for assuming that the results of models built for competition among single-sided businesses
would apply to competition among multi-sided businesses. The only way to know for sure is to do
the math.
     A relatively small number of authors have extended models originally developed to study
business practices by one-sided firms to consider the effects of those practices or similar ones when
engaged in by multi-sided platforms. We provide an overview of some of this work in this section.
It is important to note at the outset that the papers we discuss are more likely to be the first words
on the issues they address than the last words. Much more work remains to be done.
     Overall, the results of these multi-sided models are also sensitive to assumptions, and it remains
true as a general matter that vertical restraints may be pro- or anticompetitive.46 The work to date
shows, however, that one-sided results generally do not apply to multi-sided firms. The point is not
that multi-sided firms cannot or do not engage in anticompetitive practices. They could, in fact,
engage in the same anticompetitive practices as single-sided firms or in very different
anticompetitive practices, not even known or understood yet. Unfortunately, the work economists
have done on single-sided firms does not provide much guidance for evaluating the conduct of
multi-sided firms.


      45Evans and Padilla (2005).
      46See Evans (forthcoming-b) for a general discussion including the possible procompetitive benefits of vertical
restraints for multi-sided platforms.
                                                                                                                 29


A.        CRITICAL MASS AND PLATFORM VIABILITY
    Multi-sided platforms may attempt to use exclusionary practices to deter platform entry. To see
why, we introduce the concept of critical mass and its role in launching a platform business as
developed in Evans (2010) and Evans and Schmalensee (2010). Consider a new B2B exchange for a
particular group of heterogeneous commodities. To provide value to buyers it must have sellers and
to provide value to sellers it must have buyers. And it must have enough of both to be viable, since
the likelihood of any buyer or seller finding a mutually advantageous trade increases with the
number of potential trading partners.
    This leads to the well-known issue of liquidity in trading environments.47 A trading venue is only
viable if there is a sufficient volume of bids and asks for trading to occur and therefore for both
liquidity providers and liquidity takers to incur the expense of coming to the trading platform. If
there is too little liquidity, buyers and sellers will not come to the platform. It there is enough
liquidity, more buyers and sellers will come and the platform will in fact grow and the platform will
be attractive to market specialists and other liquidity providers. But if there are not enough buyers
and sellers, the market will not be attractive to liquidity providers. Critical mass refers to the
minimal level of demand that platforms must have on their various sides. Platforms that reach that
level are viable and positioned to grow more through positive feedback effects. Platforms that fall
short of that level are not viable. In some industries, the level of critical mass may be small portion
of the overall market. For example, Discover appears to be a viable U.S. payment card system even
though it has only about a 3.2 percent share of transaction volume.48
     When platforms are conceived they, of course, do not have any customers on any side. The
challenge for a new platform is to reach critical mass. In some cases, this involves a sequential
process of building up demand on one side and then attracting the other side, perhaps a la the
“divide and conquer” pricing strategies discussed by Jullien (2011). For example, a media property
can invest in building up an audience and then when it gets enough people making that audience
available to advertisers. In other cases the platform must have both sides on board at the beginning
to have any value. That, for example, is clearly the case for matchmaking platforms such as
exchanges and dating venues. In this case, startups encourage early adopters and other people on
both sides that are willing to join the platform in the anticipation that it will achieve critical mass.
      Strategies that prevent platform entrants from gaining critical mass or that push platforms
below critical mass can therefore exclude competitors and preserve the market for the predator.
The usual array of exclusionary tactics may be employed, including exclusive dealing, tying and
bundling, and predatory pricing. For such practices to be successful, they would need to be effective
against the divide and conquer and other entry strategies available to competing platforms.

     47 Harris (2003); O’Hara (1995); Pagano (1989).
     48 Nilson Report No. 988, February 2012, at 8. Note, however, that the Discover Card is accepted a most
merchants that accept cards in the U.S. See “Discover Striving to Raise U.S. Merchants’ Awareness of Card-Acceptance
Abilities,” PaymentsSource, April 21, 2010. http://www. paymentssource.com/news/-3001446-1.html.
                                                                                                                 30


     The existence of interdependent demands, however, also provides rationales for why these
strategies could increase consumer welfare even though they discourage entry. Putting congestion
effects aside, when there are positive feedback effects between the multiple platform sides, increases
in the demand on each side increases the value that the platform can deliver overall. Therefore,
tactics such as requiring customers on one side to consolidate their demand on the platform—e.g.
exclusive dealing—can benefit not only those customers but also the customers on the other side.
These tactics can therefore increase consumer surplus.49 Not surprisingly, as the remainder of this
section demonstrates, depending on the assumptions made, the theoretical models of exclusionary
strategies show that these strategies can increase consumer welfare, decrease consumer welfare, or
have an uncertain effect on consumer welfare.
B.        EXCLUSIVE DEALING
    The Dallas Morning News and the Dallas Times Herald were competing newspapers in Dallas,
Texas. They both obtained content such as columns and comic strips from the Universal Press
Syndicate. In August 1989 the Morning News signed an exclusive contract with Universal. The Times
Herald subsequently lost readership. It filed an antitrust case, and lost.50 In 1991, the parent
company of the Morning News bought the Times Herald and shut it down. Chowdury and Martin
(2010) use this example to motivate their analysis of exclusionary contracts that deny platform rivals
access to a key complementary input. They show that if consumers do not have strong preferences
for one paper over the other and if fixed costs are substantial, social welfare may be higher in the
post-contract, monopoly equilibrium, though consumers are always worse off. Similarly, in the
Armstrong-Wright (2007) model of competition between platforms viewed as differentiated by one
customer group and homogeneous by the other, exclusive dealing can be used to prevent multi-
homing by the latter group and to exclude competitors, and the monopoly equilibrium may
nonetheless be efficient
    In the presence of economies of scale, Segal and Whinston (2000) have demonstrated that an
incumbent monopoly can profitably deter the entry of a more efficient rival by persuading sufficient
customers to sign exclusive dealing contracts before the entrant appears. Doganoglu and Wright
(2010) investigate the effectiveness of this strategy when there are no economies of scale but
network effects are present. In the two-sided case, they find that it is profitable for the incumbent
to exclude a more efficient entrant by offering attractive exclusive dealing contracts to one side of
the market before the entrant appears and then charging high prices to those on the other side. As
in the single-sided case with scale economies, entry is deterred by making it impossible for the
potential entrant to obtain sufficient customers to be viable. With indirect network effects, locking
up either side of the market will make it impossible for an entrant to obtain customers on the other

     49Prices could go up as a result of the value being provided by the platform increasing. Consumer welfare would
nonetheless increase so long as the value increases by more than the price.
    50 Times Herald Printing Co. vs. A.H. Belo Corp, No. A14-90-00856-CV (Texas App. – Houston [14th Dist.]

November 27, 1991).
                                                                                                                        31


side.
     In an empirical study of the video game industry, Lee (2012) finds that exclusive contracts can
facilitate entry rather than deter it. Video game console platforms serve as intermediaries between
people who play games and developers that create games. The platform consists of hardware and
software that developers can use for writing games and that people then use for playing those
games. Developers have a greater incentive to write games for consoles that have more users who
are likely to license those games and users are more interested in buying consoles that have games
they want to play. Video game console makers have a timing issue as discussed by Haigu (2006). It
takes time to develop games. Therefore when a new console maker enters (such as Xbox did in
2001) or Sony creates a new version of its console (as it did with the PlayStation 2 and 3 in 2000 and
2006) it has to persuade developers to write games for that console without knowing the demand for
it.
     Video console providers sometimes write their own games, which become exclusive to them,
and sometimes enter into contracts with game providers to develop games exclusively for their
console. These practices reduce the availability of games to consumers who have purchased other
consoles. However, Lee (2012) finds that in the case of sixth-generation video consoles, exclusive
dealing facilitated entry. In the absence of exclusivity, game developers would write games first for
the incumbent platform because of its larger user base. Only later, if at all, would they port those
games to entrants. Thus the entrants would be unable to match the incumbent’s array of games and
would find it difficult to differentiate themselves in a positive way. With exclusivity, however, as
long as there are uncommitted game developers, entrants can offer games that the incumbent
cannot, thus enabling them to differentiate themselves. Lee’s result is not inconsistent with the
theoretical analysis of Doganoglu and Wright (2010), since exclusive contracts by the incumbent that
prevented entrants from getting access to popular games could exclude entrants and harm consumer
welfare. Nor is it inconsistent with the empirical work of Corts and Lederman (2009), who find that
the increasing prevalence of non-exclusive video games in recent years has led to a cross-hardware-
platform network effect in which game developers react to the installed base of all platforms. This
effect, in turn, is consistent with the persistence of multiple competing hardware platforms.51
     This literature does not necessarily lead to the conclusion that exclusive dealing is
procompetitive for entrants and anticompetitive for incumbents. The entrant could be a significant
multi-sided platform business as Microsoft was when it used exclusive contracts to enter the
browser business in competition with the dominant incumbent Netscape and the video-game
console business in competition with the dominant incumbent Sony PlayStation. In evaluating


      51 The analysis of Hagiu and Lee (2011) is also relevant here. They focus on whether content providers (game

developers here) sell to one or more platforms or simply “affiliate” (be compatible with) one or more platforms and sell
directly to consumers. In their model if content providers are able to extract significant rents from consumers, perhaps
because their wares are highly differentiated, they will choose to affiliate and multi-home, while if their rent-extraction
ability is low, they will sell exclusively to a single platform.
                                                                                                          32


exclusive dealing contracts used by multi-sided platform entrants and incumbents, analysts would
need to consider the context in which those contracts are being entered into—in particular whether
they are part of a plausible anticompetitive strategy by either the entrant or the incumbent—and
their procompetitive effects in achieving or maintaining critical mass.
C.        TYING AND BUNDLING
    In a classic paper, Whinston (1990) showed that in the presence of scale economies in the
market for good B, a monopoly seller of good A would under some conditions find it profitable to
employ tying contracts to become a monopolist in the B market. In his model, tying is not
profitable unless it excludes other sellers of B. Whinston showed that whether or not this reduces
social welfare depends on the details of the situation. Does this one-sided analysis apply to multi-
sided firms? As usual, adding sides also adds a layer of complexity. For instance, Li (2009) analyzes
a version of the Whinston (1990) model in which a two-sided platform facing competition considers
whether or not to tie an unrelated good. She finds that if network externalities are strong enough,
tying may be profitable (and may also be efficient) even if it does not exclude.
    Amelio and Julien (2012) consider a two-sided case in which tying is both profitable and welfare-
increasing. Suppose the profit-maximizing price on one side of the business is negative, but it is not
feasible actually to charge a negative price. (One could argue that OpenTable must have faced this
problem, since, as noted above, it effectively charges a negative price to consumers by providing
rewards for usage.) By bundling another good or service, however, it is possible to make the
effective price on that side negative. They show that this practice increases consumer welfare in the
monopoly case but that it may not do so if there is competition.
    Rochet and Tirole (2008) also model a situation in which tying increases social welfare. They
consider two competing platforms: A, which offers both credit and debit cards, and B, which offers
only a debit card. In their simplest model, allowing A to tie its two cards on the merchant side of
the business, so they must accept either both cards or neither card (the so-called “honor-all-cards”
rule), increases social welfare. Tying allows A to rebalance its pricing by raising the interchange fee
on debit above the competitive level and lowering the interchange fee on credit. While this is always
welfare-enhancing in their simplest model, in more complex models the net effect of tying on
welfare is ambiguous.
    Choi (2010) presents a model designed to shed light on the effects of including Microsoft’s
Windows Media Player with Windows, which was the subject of an antitrust case in Europe.52 This
involves tying two platforms together—an operating system (which connects computer users and
application providers) and a streaming media software application (which connects computer users
and content providers), though Choi does not model the multi-sided aspects of Windows. In this


     52European Commission, Decision of 24 May 2004 Relating to a Proceeding Pursuant to Article 82 of the EC
Treaty and Article 54 of the EEA Agreement Against Microsoft Corporation (Case COM/C-3/37.792 – Microsoft),
Official Journal L 032, 06/02.2007 P. 0023-0028; Ahlborn and Evans (2009).
                                                                                                      33


model, two platforms, A and B, link content providers to consumers, and A also produces a product
M, which must be purchased in order to use either A or B. He assumes that content providers
multi-home. If consumers single-home, tying A to M will exclude B but may increase welfare if
network effects are strong (so there is a large efficiency gain from having more customers on both
sides of A) and consumers do not consider A and B to be very different (so the reduction in variety
from eliminating B is small). If consumers multi-home, however, tying A to M does not exclude B
(there are no economies of scale), and social welfare is unambiguously increased. This analysis
makes clear the importance of understanding where multi-homing occurs and, if it is not observed,
why it does not occur.
    When products are consumed in fixed proportions, as in the Choi (2010) model, tying is
equivalent to pure bundling – selling only bundles of the two products involved. Chao and
Derdenger (forthcoming) investigate mixed bundling – selling the products individually and (at a
discount) in a bundle. Consider a monopoly video game platform that is considering a mixed
bundling strategy: offering a bundle consisting of a console and some games as well as selling the
console alone and allowing video game developers to sell games by themselves. Ignoring indirect
network effects, one would expect that the optimal mixed bundling strategy would have higher
prices for both the console and games when sold separately than would be optimal if the bundle
were not offered, since the bundle enables the firm to segment the market according to the number
of games buyers prefer to consume. Chao and Derdenger (forthcoming) present a theoretical model
in which network effects make it is optimal to reduce both console and game prices if a bundle is
offered. In that model, mixed bundling acts as a price discrimination device, as in one-sided models,
and the presence of the bundle reduces the cost of cutting console and game prices in order to
encourage participation by both consumers and developers. Chao and Derdenger (forthcoming)
present an empirical analysis of video game pricing that reaches conclusions consistent with their
theoretical model.
D.          PREDATORY PRICING
     The general concerns about predatory pricing are as applicable for multi-sided platforms as they
are for single-sided firms. A platform could try to drive rivals out of business by lowering price to
one or several of the groups it serves. That could involve increasing subsidies on one side by
providing more or better free products and services. After driving a rival out of business the
platform, like a single-sided firm, could raise prices and reduce subsidies thereby recouping its losses.
As with the traditional story, one benefit of engaging in this strategy could be developing a
reputation for being a ruthless competitor thereby discouraging entry or competition in multi-market
settings.53 Of course, successful predation may be extremely difficult and unlikely, as it is in single-
sided markets, given that it would entail certain up front losses from pricing below cost in pursuit of
uncertain future gains from driving and keeping competitors out of the market.

     53   Kreps and Wilson (1982); Milgrom and Roberts (1982).
                                                                                                                   34


     The difference is that standard cost-based tests for detecting predatory pricing generally make no
economic sense for a multi-sided business. Those tests are motivated by the standard theoretical
result that profit-maximizing prices are never below marginal cost. But for multi-sided platforms, as
a matter of theory, the profit-maximizing price to one or more sides (though not, of course, to all)
could be lower than marginal cost—or any other measure of per-unit cost. Indeed, as we have
noted, many multi-sided platforms normally charge prices that are less than marginal cost and often
zero or even negative on at least one side. 54
     The flip side of this problem is that a platform could engage in predatory pricing by maintaining
a low price on the “subsidy” side (readers for newspapers) and lower the price on the “money” side
(advertisers for newspapers) so much that the platform overall loses money. Of course, in theory it
would be possible to determine whether the platform has adopted an unprofitable set of prices, but
in practice that would be a more complex analysis than comparing prices and some measure of per-
unit cost as is standard for single-sided firms.
     The important point is that the fact a multi-sided platform is providing goods or services to one
of the groups it serves at prices that do not recover costs provides no meaningful evidence that the
platform is engaging in predatory pricing. On the other hand, a change in pricing policy by a multi-
sided platform that results in an overall lowering of prices to loss-inducing levels and that is not
explained by other changes in the market could provide an indication of a possible abuse. As for
single-sided businesses, one must go beyond analysis of pricing before concluding that predation has
actually occurred.55
     It is also important to note that there may be procompetitive explanations for a change in
pricing policies for multi-sided platforms that result from interdependent demands and that would
not ordinarily be considered for one-sided firms. For example, in examining allegations that The
Times of London engaged in predatory pricing Behringer and Filistrucchi (2011) argue that there is
evidence that The Times lowered subscription prices sharply because it recognized that advertising
prices, and therefore the value of readers, were increasing. It was then profitable to reduce
subscription prices to increase readership so as to be more valuable to advertisers. These authors
suggest that perhaps The Times recognized this before its rivals and therefore lowered its prices
earlier than they did.56
     Predatory pricing strategies could also exploit the role of interdependent demands and critical
mass for platforms. By charging unprofitably low prices (including providing subsidies in kind) a
platform could make it difficult for a rival that cannot match these low prices (or subsidies in kind)
to obtain a critical mass of customers. For example, suppose an incumbent platform faces


     54 Motta and Vasconcelos (2012) present a model of platform competition in which below-cost pricing never occurs

except to deter entry, so that cost-based tests can be employed, but the model seems unlikely to be widely applicable.
     55 See the chapter on predatory pricing in this volume, Elzinga and Mills (2013).
     56 Motta and Vasconcelos (2012) agree that this episode was probably not an instance of predation, but they point

to other cases involving platform businesses that they believe did engage in predatory pricing.
                                                                                                                        35


competition from a venture-backed startup. To prevent the startup from getting enough critical
mass to ignite its platform the incumbent could increase the content offering it is giving customers
for free on one side of its platform. Assuming the startup is liquidity constrained, that could prevent
the launch of its platform.57
E.       EFFICIENCIES
    When it comes to considering efficiencies the main novelty for multi-sided platforms arises from
the fact that platforms serve multiple groups of customers with interdependent demands. Business
practices can increase the overall value of the platform both to its owners and to society in a variety
of ways. By increasing demand on one side, a platform can increase its value to agents on other sides
through indirect network externalities. This is a real social benefit, and the platform is unlikely to be
able to capture it all. In addition, Evans (2012a) shows how platforms develop governance systems
to reduce bad behavior by platform participants that could reduce the platform’s value. The ability
to exclude customers is central to the rules platforms use for this purpose. More generally, Boudreau
and Hagiu (2009) discuss the use of platform regulations to increase positive externalities and
decrease negative ones. In other cases, business process innovations might increase the efficiency of
a platform by providing better and cheaper matches between members of the various sides.
    As a general matter, a platform could increase consumer welfare overall if it increased the value
it delivered by more than it increased the prices it charged. It is possible, however, that change in
platform prices and products benefit customers on some sides while making customers on other
sides worse off. In evaluating such changes, there is no economic reason why one would focus on
losses to one group of consumers and ignore gains by another group. Economists are normally
interested in overall consumer welfare. A court or competition authority could erroneously
conclude, however, that a business practices harms consumers by analyzing competitive effects in a
narrow market that excludes one or more sides of a platform.58 That is a fundamental mistake;
correct analysis of multi-sided platforms always considers all groups served by the platform.

VII.     COORDINATED BEHAVIOR
     Two major issues arise in the analysis of coordinated behavior for multisided platforms:


      57 Of course, it is well known that predatory pricing strategies generally face a number of challenges, and these

challenges also apply to multi-sided firms. Easterbrook (1981); Carlton and Perloff (2005), at 352-360.
      58 Payment card networks have rules that merchants that have agreed to accept a card brand cannot surcharge

consumers for using that brand or selectively refuse to accept cards with that brand. Competition authorities and private
litigants have challenged these rules under various theories including tying. In these cases, the competition authorities
and courts have focused primarily on the merchant side of the payment platforms and ignored the benefits on the
consumer side. Our point is not that these practices are necessarily pro-competitive but that the correct analysis needs to
consider the welfare of customers on both sides of the platforms. See In Re Payment Card Interchange Fee and
Merchant-Discount Antitrust Litigation, No. 05-MD-1720-JG-JO (E.D.N.Y. February 20, 2009), First Amended
Supplemental Class Action Complaint; U.S. vs. American Express Co., No. 10-CV-04496-NG-CLP (E.D.N.Y. October
4, 2010), Complaint.
                                                                                                               36


     First, the welfare analysis of price fixing becomes more complex. When competing single-sided
firms collude on prices, economic theory predicts that they will generally raise prices, reduce output,
and reduce consumer and total welfare.59 The theory of multi-sided platforms yields much less clear
predictions. It is possible that competing platforms have adopted prices that are too low on one
side and too high on another. That is, there is no guarantee that competition will result in platforms
adopting the pricing structure that maximizes consumer welfare. It is therefore possible that a
coalition of platforms could fix prices—raising them on one side and lowering them on another—
that increases consumer welfare.
     Several papers have reached this conclusion directly or indirectly. The analysis of payment card
systems’ “honor-all-cards” rule by Rochet and Tirole (2008) points in this direction. In their model
that rule has the effect of reducing competition between debit cards, permitting a rebalancing of
interchange fees that is socially beneficial under some conditions. Chandra and Collard-Wexler
(2009), discussed above in the context of mergers, finds that a merger of two newspapers or,
presumably, an agreement to fix subscriber and advertiser prices could result in an increase of
consumer welfare as a matter of theory and finds support for this possibility based on Canadian
newspaper data. But, as we noted above, the structural model developed by Fan (forthcoming)
implies that a merger of two Minneapolis newspapers would make both readers and advertisers
worse off.
     Two recent studies have considered coordinated behavior by newspapers that stops short of
fixing all prices. In a model that considers differentiation of newspapers along political lines,
Antonielli and Fillistruchi (2012) find that competition on pricing and political positioning creates
greater consumer welfare than collusion. But they also find that Joint Operating agreements, a
device used in the U.S. that allows newspapers to collaborate on pricing and production but
compete on the editorial side, result in lower consumer welfare than allowing newspapers to
collaborate on all aspects of their business. Gentzkow et al (2012) develop another structural model
that allows newspapers to choose their political positions and estimate it using U.S. data from early
in the 20th century, when it was common for newspapers to declare their political affiliation, and
many more cities had multiple papers. They find that the main effect of allowing collusion on
circulation prices is to reduce consumer and advertiser surplus, while allowing collusion on
advertising prices reduces advertiser surplus but increases consumer, newspaper, and total surplus.
It also induces substantial new entry and increased ideological diversity. Because advertisers value
readers, collusion on advertising rates makes it profitable to lower circulation prices to increase
readership, making consumers better off, and then to extract the increased value to advertisers
through higher advertising rates.
      The second issue is that the existence of inter-linked prices raises the question of whether
collusion is harder or easier for platforms than for single-sided firms. Clearly the need to agree on

    59 The rare case of firms with substantial market power selling complements provides an exception; see Rey and

Verge (2008).
                                                                                                    37


multiple prices makes platform-wide collusion harder, all else equal. Moreover, even ignoring this
issue, Ruhmer (2011) presents a two-platform model with single-homing in which stronger indirect
network effects increase the gains from price-cutting and thereby make collusion harder to sustain.
This result suggests that in analyzing proposed mergers of multi-sided firms, enforcement agencies
might be less concerned about collusion than in mergers of single-sided firms, but it is not clear that
a significant difference can be rationalized unless indirect network effects are very strong indeed.
     Ruhmer (2011) also addresses the question of whether multi-sided platforms can increase profits
by colluding on only some of the prices they charge. Evans and Schmalensee (2007a) argued that
intense competition on one side between two-sided platforms could eliminate the profitability of
collusion on the price charged on the other side. In Ruhmer’s (2011) model, where the two
platforms are imperfect substitutes for consumers and competition is not particularly intense, it is
possible for firms to profitably collude on prices on only one side. The profitability of such
incomplete collusion thus depends on the intensity of competition on the non-collusive side.

VIII.   CONCLUSION
    As economists, we find the rapidly expanding literature on multi-sided markets interesting and
exciting. It is interesting both because of its technical complexity and because of the growing
economic importance of multi-sided platforms. It is exciting because it reveals patterns of behavior
and market outcomes that cannot arise with ordinary single-sided firms. As students of antitrust
policy, however, we look as this expanding literature with some trepidation.
    As this chapter has indicated, correct economic analyses of multi-sided platforms are more
complicated than correct analyses of single-sided firms. Moreover, the relevant theory, at least in its
current stage of development, yields fewer clear predictions, and there is relatively little empirical
work from which one can draw general lessons. Thus it does not now seem possible to come up
with many guidelines that can be used to structure rule of reason inquiries, let alone sharp lines that
would justify per se rules.
    But the world and the economic literature are what they are, to paraphrase a successful
professional (American) football coach. Multi-sided platforms are more complicated than single-
sided firms. Analyses or policy rules that ignore this complexity are prone to commit serious errors.
Just because the economic literature on multi-sided platforms does not have simple extensions of
existing single-sided tools does not provide a license to apply the wrong, single-sided tools to multi-
sided platform issues.
    In the meantime, we can provide some bits of general guidance. Perhaps the most important is
to consider all sides served by a platform carefully and to understand the indirect network effects
that link them. Understanding that newspapers are two-sided platforms does not make analysis of
them simple. But it does serve to structure the analysis in sound and sensible ways. Understanding
that OpenTable is a two-sided platform leads the way to understanding how giving away services to
consumers could be profit maximizing, not predatory. Recognizing that there are multiple customer
groups with interlinked demand may help competition policy analysis identify anticompetitive
                                                                                                  38


strategies and identify possible efficiencies that would not be apparent from applying a traditional
analysis. Finally, recognizing these multiple customer groups is critical for ensuring that antitrust
enforcement does not have the unintended consequence of reducing consumer welfare by causing
more harm on one or more sides of a platform than it provides benefit on another side.
                                                                                                          39




REFERENCES
    Affeldt, Pauline, Lapo Filistrucchi, and Tobias J. Klein (2012), Upward Pricing Pressure in Two-Sided
Markets, TILEC Discussion Paper 2012-029.
    Ahlborn, Christian, and David S. Evans (2009), The Microsoft Judgment and its Implications for
Competition Policy Towards Dominant Firms in Europe, Antitrust Law Journal, 75(3): 887-932.
    Ambrus, Atilla, and Rossella Argenziano (2009), Asymmetric Networks in Two-Sided Markets,
American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 1(1): 17-52.
    Amelio, Andrea and Bruno Jullien (2012), Tying and Freebies in Two-Sided Markets, International
Journal of Industrial Organization, 30(5): 436-446.
    Anderson, Simon P. and Stephen Coate (2005), Market Provision of Broadcasting: A Welfare Analysis,
Review of Economic Studies, 72(4): 947-972.
    Anderson, Simon P. and Jean J. Gabszewicz, The Media and Advertising: A Tale of Two-Sided
Markets, in Victor Ginsburgh and David Thosby (2006), Handbook of the Economics of Arts and Culture,
Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier.
    Antonielli and Lapo Filistrucchi (2012), Collusion and the Political Differentiation of Newspapers,
TILEC Discussion Paper 2012-014.
    Areeda, Phillip E. and Herbert Hovenkamp (2002), Antitrust Law, New York, NY: Aspen Law
and Business, 2002, Volume IIA.
    Argentesi, Elena and Lapo Filistrucchi (2007), Estimating Market Power in a Two-Sided Market: The
Case of Newspapers, Journal of Applied Econometrics, 22(7): 1247-1266.
    Argentesi, Elena and Marc Ivaldi, Market Definition in Printed Media Industries: Theory, Practice, and
Lessons for Broadcasting, in Paul Seabright and Jurgen von Hagen (2007), The Economic Regulation of
Broadcasting Markets, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
    Armstrong, Mark (2002), The Theory of Access Pricing and Interconnection, in Martin E. Cave, Sumit K.
Majumdar, and Ingo Vogelsang, eds., Handbook of Telecommunications Economics, Vol. 1, Amsterdam:
North-Holland.
    Armstrong, Mark (2006), Competition in Two-Sided Markets, RAND Journal of Economics, 37:668-
691.
    Armstrong, Mark, and Julian Wright (2007), Two-Sided Markets, Competitive Bottlenecks, and Exclusive
Contracts, Journal of Economic Theory, 32(2): 353-380.
    Arthur, W. Brian (1989), Competing Technologies, Increasing Returns, and Lock-In by Historical Events,
Economic Journal, 99:116-131
    Athey, Susan, Emilio Calvano, and Joshua S. Gans (2012), The Impact of the Internet on Advertising
Markets for News Media, Working Paper.
    Bagwell, Kyle (2007), The Economic Analysis of Advertising, in Mark Armstrong and Robert Porter,
eds., Handbook of Industrial Organization, Vol. 3, Amsterdam: Elsevier.
    Baxter, William (1983), Bank Interchange of Transactional Paper: Legal and Economic Perspectives, Journal
                                                                                                     40


of Law and Economics, 26(3): 541-588.
    Bedre-Defolie, Ozlem and Emilio Calvano (2012), Pricing Payment Cards, Toulouse School of
Economics and Princeton University, Working Paper.
    Behringer, Stefan and Lapo Filistrucchi (2011), Predatory Pricing in Two-Sided Markets: Lessons from
the UK Quality Newspapers in the ‘90s, Working Paper (Unversitat Bonn and Tilburg University).
    Boudreau, Kevin J. and Andrei Hagiu, Platform Rules: Multi-Sided Platforms as Regulators, in
Annabelle Gawer (2009), Platforms, Markets, and Innovation, Edward Elgar.
    Caillaud, Bernanrd and Bruno Jullien (2003), Chicken and Egg: Competition among Intermediation
Service Providers, RAND Journal of Economics, 34:309-328.
    Calvano, Emilio (2011), Note on the Economic Theory of Interchange, Comment to the Federal Reserve
Board on Proposed Regulation II (Debit Card Interchange Fees and Routing), available at
http://www.federalreserve.gov/SECRS/2011/March/20110328/R-1404/R-
1404_030811_69122_621890579792_1.pdf.
     Calvano, Emilio and Bruno Jullien, Issues in Online Advertsing and Competition Policy: A Two-Sided
Market Perspective, in Joseph E. Harrington ad Yannis Katsoulacos (2012), Recent Advances in the
Analysis of Competition Policy and Regulation, Edward Elgar.
     Carlton, Dennis W. and Jeffrey M. Perloff (2005), Modern Industrial Organization, 4th edition,
Boston: Addison Wesley Longman.
     Chamberlin, Edward (1933), Theory of Monopolistic Competition, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
     Chandra, Ambarish and Allan Collard-Wexler (2009), Mergers in Two-Sided Markets: An Application
to the Canadian Newspaper Industry, Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 18: 1045-1070.
     Chang, Howard H., David S. Evans, and Richard Schmalensee (2011a), Market Definition:
Assessment of the Relevant Market in Competition Matters, Report Prepared for the Federal Competition
Commission of Mexico.
     Chang, Howard H., David S. Evans, and Richard Schmalensee (2011b), Market Power: Assessment
of Market Power in Competition Matters, Report Prepared for the Federal Competition Commission of
Mexico.
     Chao, Yong and Timothy Derdenger (forthcoming), Mixed Bundling in Two-Sided Markets in the
Presence of Installed Base Effects, Management Science, forthcoming.
     Choi, Jay Pil (2010), Tying in Two-Sided Markets with Multi-Homing, Journal of Industrial
Economics, 58(3): 607-626.
     Chowdhury, Subhasish M. and Stephen Martin (2010), Exclusivity and Exclusion on Platform
Markets, Purdue University Economics Working Papers, No. 1254.
     Coase, Ronald H. (1960), The Problem of Social Cost, Journal of Law and Economics, 3:1-44.
     Corts, Kenneth S., and Mara Lederman (2009), Software Exclusivity and the Scope of Indirect Network
Effects in the U.S. Home Video Game Market, International Journal of Industrial Organization,
27(2):121-136.
     Doganoglu, Toker and Julian Wright (2010), Exclusive Dealing with Network Effects, International
                                                                                                       41


Journal of Industrial Organization, 28(2): 145-154.
     Easterbrook, Frank H. (1981), Predatory Strategies and Counterstrategies, University of Chicago Law
Review, 48: 263-337.
     Eisenmann, Thomas R., Geoffrey Parker, and Marshall Van Alstyne (2011), Platform Envelopment,
Strategic Management Journal, 32(12): 1270-1285.
     Elhauge, Einer and Damien Geradin (2007), Global Competition Law and Economics, Portland, OR:
Hart Publishing.
     Elzinga, Kenneth G. and David E. Mills, Predatory Pricing, in Roger D. Blair and Daniel Sokol
(2013), Oxford Handbook of International Antitrust Economics, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
     Emch, Eric, and T. Scott Thompson (2006), Market Definition and Market Power in Payment Card
Networks, Review of Network Economics, 5(1): 15-25.
     European Commission, Decision of 24 May 2004 Relating to a Proceeding Pursuant to Article 82 of the
EC Treaty and Article 54 of the EEA Agreement Against Microsoft Corporation (Case COM/C-3/37.792 –
Microsoft), Official Journal L 032, 06/02.2007 P. 0023-0028
     European Commission (1997), Notice on the Definition of the Relevant Market for the Purposes of
Community Competition Law, Official Journal, C 372 , 09/12/1997 P. 0005 – 0013.
     Evans, David S. (2003a), Some Empirical Aspects of Multi-Sided Platforms, Review of Network
Economics, Vol. 2 (3) 1-19.
     Evans, David S. (2003b), The Antitrust Economics of Multi-Sided Platform Markets, Yale Journal on
Regulation, 20(2): 325-381.
     Evans, David S. (2008), Antitrust Issues Raised by the Emerging Global Internet Economy, Northwestern
University Law Review Colloquy, 102, 285-306.
     Evans, David S. (2010), The Web Economy, Two-Sided Markets, and Competition Policy, Working Paper
(University of Chicago).
     Evans, David S. (2012a), Governing Bad Behavior by Users of Multi-Sided Platforms, Berkeley
Technology Law Journal, 27(2), 1201-1250.
     Evans, David S., Lightening Up on Market Definition, in Einer Elhauge (2012b), Research Handbook
on the Economics of Antitrust Law, Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
     Evans, David S. (2012c), Two-Sided Market Definition, ABA Section of Antitrust Law, Market
Definition in Antitrust: Theory and Case Studies.
     Evans, David S. (forthcoming-a), Attention Rivalry among Online Platforms and its Implications for
Antitrust Analysis, Journal of Competition Law and Economics.
     Evans, David S. (forthcoming-b), Economics of Vertical Restraints for Multi-Sided Platforms,
Competition Policy International.
     Evans, David S., Franklin M. Fisher, Daniel L. Rubinfeld, and Richard L. Schmalensee (2000),
Did Microsoft Harm Consumers? Two Opposing Views, AEI-Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory
Studies.
     Evans, David S., Andrei Hagiu, and Richard Schmalensee (2006), Invisible Engines: How Software
Platforms Drive Innovation and Transform Industries, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
                                                                                                         42


     Evans, David S. and Michael Noel (2005), Defining Antitrust Markets When Firms Operate Two-Sided
Platforms, Columbia Business Law Review 2005(3): 101-134.
     Evans, David A. and Michael Noel (2008), The Analysis of Mergers that Involve Multisided Platform
Businesses, Journal of Competition Law & Economics 4(3): 663-695.
     Evans, David S. and A. Jorge Padilla (2005), Designing Rules for Assessing Unilateral Practices: A Neo-
Chicago Approach, University of Chicago Law Review, 72(1): 73-98.
     Evans, David S. and Richard Schmalensee (2005), Paying with Plastic: The Digital Revolution in Buying
and Borrowing, 2nd edition, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
     Evans, David S. and Richard Schmalensee (2007a), The Industrial Organization of Markets with Two-
Sided Platforms, Competition Policy International, 3(1): 151-179.
     Evans, David S. Evans and Richard Schmalensee (2007b), Catalyst Code: The Strategies Behind the
World’s Most Dynamic Companies, Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
     Evans, David S. and Richard Schmalensee (2010), Failure to Launch: Critical Mass in Platform
Businesses, Review of Network Economics, 9(4): 1-26.
     Fan, Ying (forthcoming), Ownership Consolidation and Product Characteristics: A Study of the U.S. Daily
Newspaper Market, American Economic Review.
     Farrell, Joseph and Garth Saloner (1985), Standardization, Compatibility, and Innovation, RAND
Journal of Economics, 16:70-83.
     Farrell, Joseph and Carl Shapiro (2010): Antitrust Evaluation of Horizontal Mergers: An Economic
Alternative to Market Definition, The B.E. Journal of Theoretical Economics, Policies and Perspectives,
10(1).
     Farrell, Joseph and Paul Klemperer, Co-ordination and Lock-in: Competition with Swtiching Costs and
Network Effects, in M. Armstrong and Robert S. Porter (2006), Handbook of Industrial Organization, Vol.
III (North-Holland, Amsterdam).
     Federal Reserve Bank of Boston (2009), Survey of Consumer Payment Choice, available at
http://www.bos.frb.org/economic/cprc/scpc/index.htm.
     Federal Reserve Board of Governors (2010), Survey of Consumer Finances, available at
http://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/scf/scfindex.htm.
     Feenstra, D.W. and H. Wang (2000), Economic and Accounting Rates of Return, Research Report
00E42, University of Groningen, Research Institute SOM.
     Filistrucchi, Lapo, Tobias J. Klein, and Thomas Michielsen (2012), Assessing Unilateral Effects in a
Two-Sided Market: An Application to the Dutch Daily Newspaper Market, Journal of Competition Law and
Economics, 8(2): 297-329.
     Fisher, Franklin M. (1987), On the Misuse of the Profit-Sales Ratio to Infer Monopoly Power, RAND
Journal of Economics, 18(3): 384-396.
     Fisher, Franklin M. and John J. McGowan (1983), On the Misuse of Accounting Rates of Return to Infer
Monopoly Profits, American Economic Review, 73(1): 82-97.
     Galeotti, Andrea and Jose Luis Moraga-Gonzalez (2009), Platform Intermediation in a Market for
Differentiated Products, European Economic Review, 53: 417-428.
                                                                                                       43


     Gentzkow, Matthew, Jesse M. Shapiro, and Michael Sinkinson (2012), Competition and Ideological
Diversity: Historical Evidence from US Newspapers, Working Paper (University of Chicago and Wharton).
     Hagiu, Andrei (2006), Pricing and Commitment by Two-Sided Platforms, RAND Journal of
Economics, 37(3): 720-737.
     Hagiu, Andrei (2009), Two-Sided Platforms: Product Variety and Pricing Structures, Journal of
Economics and Management Strategy, 18(4): 1011-1043.
     Hagiu, Andrei, and Robin S. Lee (2011), Exclusivity and Control, Journal of Economics and
Management Strategy, 20(3): 679-708.
     Halaburda, Hanna and Mikolaj Jan Piskorski (2011), Competing by Restricting Choice: The Case of
Search Platforms, Harvard Business School Working Paper No. 10-098.
     Harris, Larry, (2003), Trading and Exchanges: Market Microstructure for Practitioners, Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
     Hesse, Renata B. and Joshua H. Soven (2006), Defining Relevant Product Markets in Electronic
Payment Network Antitrust Cases, Antitrust Law Journal, 73: 709.
     In Re Payment Card Interchange Fee and Merchant-Discount Antitrust Litigation, No. 05-MD-
1720-JG-JO (E.D.N.Y. February 20, 2009), First Amended Supplemental Class Action Complaint.
     Jeziorski, Przemyslaw (2012), Effects of Mergers in Two-Sided Markets: Examination of U.S. Radio
Industry, Working Paper (Haas School of Business).
     Jullien, Bruno (2011), Competition in Multi-Sided Networks: Divide-and-Conquer, American Economic
Journal: Microeconomics, 3(4): 1-35.
     Kaplow, Louis, Market Definition, in Roger D. Blair and Daniel Sokol (2013), Oxford Handbook of
International Antitrust Economics, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
     Katz, Michael L. and Carl Shapiro (1985), Network Externalities, Competition, and Compatibility,
American Economic Review, 75:424-440.
     Katz, Michael L. and Carl Shapiro (1994), Systems Competition and Network Effects, Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 8:93-115.
     Kreps, David M. and Robert Wilson (1982), Reputation and Imperfect Information, Journal of
Economic Theory, 27:253-279.
     Lee, Robin S. (2012), Vertical Integration and Exclusivity in Platform and Two-Sided Markets, Working
Paper (Stern School of Business).
     Li, Ting (2009), Tying in Two-Sided Markets, Working Paper (Toulouse School of Economics).
     Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts (1982), Predation, Reputation, and Entry Deterrence, Journal of
Economic Theory, 27(2): 280-312.
     Motta, Massimo (2004), Competition Policy—Theory and Practice, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
     Motta, Massimo and Helder Vasconcelos (2012), Exclusionary Pricing in a Two-Sided Market, CEPR
Discussion Paper No. 9164.
     New York Times (Randall Stross, 2010), The Online Reservations That Restaurants Love to Hate,
December 12, 2010.
                                                                                                      44


    Nilson Report No. 988, February 2012.
    O’Hara, Maureen (1995), Market Microstructure Theory, Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
    OECD Competition Committee (2009), Two-Sided Markets, DAF/COMP(2009)20, available at
http://www.oecd.org/daf/competition/44445730.pdf.
    OpenTable Inc. (2011), Form 10-K for the Period Ending 12/31/11, available at
http://files.shareholder.com/downloads/ABEA-2TKK09/2145589686x0xS1047469-12-
1451/1125914/filing.pdf.
     Ordover, Janusz (2013), Coordinated Effects, in Roger D. Blair and Daniel Sokol (2013), Oxford
Handbook of International Antitrust Economics, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
     Pagano, Marco (1989), Trading Volume and Asset Liquidity, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
104(2): 255-274.
     Parker, Geoffrey G. and Marshall W. Van Alstyne (2000), Internetwork Externalities and Free
Information Goods, in Proceedings of the 2nd ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce, New York: Association
for Computing Machinery, 107-116.
     Pastore Mark (2010), Is OpenTable Worth It? Incanto Letters, October 22, 2010, available at
http://incanto.biz/2010/10/22/is-opentable-worth-it/.
     PaymentsSource, “Discover Striving to Raise U.S. Merchants’ Awareness of Card-Acceptance
Abilities,” April 21, 2010. http://www. paymentssource.com/news/-3001446-1.html.
     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Meghan Keneally, 2011), Restaurants Question OpenTable Fees, May 1,
2011.
     Prager, Robin, Mark Manuszak, Elizabeth Kiser, and Ron Borzekowski (2009), Interchange Fees
and Payment Card Networks: Economics, Industry Developments, and Policy Issues, Federal Reserve Board of
Finance and Economics Discussion Series, 2009-23.
     Qihoo v. Tencent, The High People’s Court of Guangdong Province, P.R. China.
     Reisinger, Markus (2012), Platform Competition for Advertisers and users in Media Markets,
International Journal of Industrial Organization, 30(2): 243-252.
     Rey, Patrick and Thibaud Verge, The Economics of Vertical Restraints, in Paolo Buccirossi (2008),
Handbook of Antitrust Economics, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
     Rochet, Jean-Charles and Jean Tirole (2003), Platform Competition in Two-Sided Markets, Journal of
the European Economic Association, 1:990-1029.
     Rochet, Jean-Charles and Jean Tirole (2006), Two-Sided Markets: A Progress Report, RAND Journal
of Economics, 37:645-667.
     Rochet, Jean-Charles and Jean Tirole (2008), Tying in Two-Sided Markets and the Honor All Cards
Rule, International Journal of Industrial Organization, 26(6): 1333-1347.
     Rochet, Jean-Charles and Julian Wright (2010), Credit Card Interchange Fees, Journal of Banking
and Finance, 24(8): 1788-1797.
     Ruhmer, Isasbel (2011), Platform Collusion in Two-Sided Markets, Working Paper (University of
Mannheim).
     Rysman, Marc (2004), Competition Between Networks: A Study of the Market for Yellow Pages, Review
                                                                                                    45


of Economic Studies, 71: 483-512.
    Rysman, Marc (2009), The Economics of Two-Sided Markets, Journal of Economic Perspectives,
23(3): 125-143.
    Schmalensee, Richard (2002), Payment Systems and Interchange Fees, Journal of Industrial
Economics, 50:103-122.
    Schmalensee, Richard (2011), Why is Platform Pricing Generally Highly Skewed? Review of Network
Economics, 10(4): 1-11.
    Segal, Ilya R. and Michael D. Whinston (2000), Exclusive Contracts and Protection of Investments,
RAND Journal of Economics, 31(4): 603-633.
    Smith, Adam (1776), An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, London, UK: T.
Nelson and Sons, Project Gutenberg.
    Song, M. (2011), Estimating Platform Market Power in Two-Sided Markets with an Application to
Magazine Advertising, The Bradley Policy Research Center Financial Research and Policy Working
Paper No. FR 11-22.
    Spence, A. Michael (1975), Monopoly, Quality, and Regulation, Bell Journal of Economics, 6(2): 417-
429.
    Spulber, Daniel F. (1996), Market Microstructure and Intermediation, Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 10(3): 135-152.
    Strahilevitz, Lior Jacob (2006), Information Asymmetries and the Rights to Exclude, Michigan Law
Review, 104: 1835-1898.
    Times Herald Printing Co. vs. A.H. Belo Corp, No. A14-90-00856-CV (Texas App. – Houston
[14th Dist.] November 27, 1991).
    Tirole, Jean (1988), The Theory of Industrial Organization, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
    United States Government, in OECD Competition Committee (2009), Two-Sided Markets,
DAF/COMP(2009)20, available at http://www.oecd.org/daf/competition/44445730.pdf.
    United Brands Company and United Brands Continetaal BV v. European Commission, 1978
E.C.R. (1978).
    United States vs. Microsoft Corp., 253 F.3d 34 (D.C. Cir. 2001).
    U.S. Department of Justice and Federal Trade Commission (2010), Horizontal Merger Guidelines.
    U.S. vs. American Express Co., No. 10-CV-04496-NG-CLP (E.D.N.Y. October 4, 2010),
Complaint.
    United States v. First Data Corporation, No. 03-2169 (D.D.C. December 10, 2003), Plaintiff’s
Pre-Trial Brief.
    U.S. vs. First Data Corp., No. 03-CV-02169 (D.D.C. May 25, 2004), Final Judgment.
    UK Office of Fair Trading (2004), Market Definition: Understanding Competition Law.
    Wall Street Journal Online (Brent Kendall, Vanessa Mock, and Thomas Catan, 2012), U.S.,
Europe to Huddle on Google Probes, November 29, 2012.
    Wang, Zhu (2010), Market Structure and Payment Card Pricing: What Drives the Interchange?
International Journal of Industrial Organization, 28(1): 86-98.
                                                                                                  46


    Washington Post (Sara Forden and Jeff Bliss, 2012), FTC Draft Memo Recommends an Antitrust Suit
Against Google, October 14, 2012.
    Weyl, E. Glenn (2010), A Price Theory of Multi-Sided Platforms, American Economic Review,
100:1642-1672.
    White, Alexander, and E. Glen Weyl (2012), Insulated Platform Competition, Working Paper
(Tsinghua University and University of Chicago).
    Whinston, Michael D. (1990), Tying, Foreclosure, and Exclusion, American Economic Review, 80(4):
837-859.
    Willig, Robert and Bryan Keating (2013), Unilateral Effects, in Roger D. Blair and Daniel Sokol
(2013), Oxford Handbook of International Antitrust Economics, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
    Wright, Julian (2004), One-Sided Logic in Two-Sided Markets, Review of Network Economics, 3(1):
44-64.
    Zhou, Yiyi (2012), Failure to Launch in Two-Sided Markets: A Study of the U.S. Video Game Market,
Working Paper (State University of New York at Stony Brook).
                                                                                            47


                                          Appendix
                     The Literature on Multi-Sided Platforms Through 2012

    Ackerberg, Daniel A. and Gautam Gowrisankaran (2006), Quantifying Equilibrium Network
Externalities in the ACH Banking Industry, RAND Journal of Economics, 37(3): 738-761.
    Affeldt, Pauline L. (2011), Tying and Bundling in Two-Sided Markets: Why Tying WMP and
the Windows OS Increases Total Welfare, Master’s Thesis, Tilburg University.
    Affeldt, Pauline, Lapo Filistrucchi, and Tobias J. Klein (2012), Upward Pricing Pressure in
Two-Sided Markets, TILEC Discussion Paper 2012-029.
    Albuquerque, Paulo and Polykarpos Pavlidis, Udi Chatow, Kay Yut-Chen, and Zainab Jamal
(2012), Evaluating Promotional Activities in an Online Two-Sided Market of User-Generated
Content, Marketing Science, 31(3): 406-432.
    Alexandrov, Alexi, George Deltas, and Daniel F. Spulber (2011), Antitrust and Competition
in Two-Sided Markets, Journal of Competition Law and Economics, 7(4): 775-812.
    Alexandrova-Kabadjova, Bilana, Edward Tsang, and Andreas Krause (2011), Market
Structure and Information in Payment Card Networks, International Journal of Automation and
Computing, 8(3): 364-370.
    Aloui, Chokri and Khaireddine Jebsi (2010), Optimal Pricing of a Two-Sided Monopoly
Platform with a One-Sided Congestion Effect, International Review of Economics, 57(4): 423-
439.
    Ambrus, Attila and Rossella Argenziano (2009), Asymmetric Networks in Two-Sided
Markets, American Economic Journal: Micoeconomics, 1(1): 17-52.
    Ambrus, Atilla, Emilio Calvano, and Markus Reisinger (2012), Either or Both Competition:
A ‘Two-Sided’ Theory of Advertising with Overlapping Viewerships, Working Paper (Duke
University, Bocconi University, and WHU-Otto Beisheim School of Management).
    Amelio, Andrea and Bruno Jullien (2012), Tying and Freebies in Two-Sided Markets,
International Journal of Industrial Organization, 30(5): 436-446.
    Anderson, Robert M., Glenn Ellison, and Drew Fudenberg (2010), Location Choice in Two-
Sided Markets with Indivisible Agents, Games and Economic Behavior, 69(1): 2-23.
    Anderson, Simon P., Regulation of Television Advertising, in Paul Seabright and Jurgen von
Hagen (2007), The Economic Regulation of Broadcasting Markets, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 189-224.
    Anderson, Simon P. and Stephen Coate (2005), Market Provision of Broadcasting: A
Welfare Analysis, Review of Economic Studies, 72(4): 947-972.
    Anderson, Simon P. and Andre de Palma (2009), Information Congestion, RAND Journal of
Economics, 40(4): 688-709.
    Anderson, Simon P., Oystein Foros, Hans Jarle Kind, and Martin Peitz (2012), Media Market
Concentration, Advertising Levels, and Ad Prices, International Journal of Industrial
                                                                                           48


Organization, 30(3): 321-325.
    Anderson, Simon P. and Jean J. Gabszewicz, The Media and Advertising: A Tale of Two-
Sided Markets, in Victor Ginsburgh and David Throsby (2006), Handbook of the Economics of
Art and Culture, Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier.
    Antonielli and Lapo Filistrucchi (2012), Collusion and the Political Differentiation of
Newspapers, TILEC Discussion Paper 2012-014.
    Argentesi, Elena and Lapo Filistrucchi (2007), Estimating Market Power in a Two-Sided
Market: The Case of Newspapers, Journal of Applied Econometrics, 22(7): 1247-1266.
    Argentesi, Elena and Marc Ivaldi, Market Definition in Printed Media Industries: Theory,
Practice, and Lessons for Broadcasting, in Paul Seabright and Jurgen von Hagen (2007), The
Economic Regulation of Broadcasting Markets, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
225-254.
    Argenton, Cedric and Jens Prufer (2012), Search Engine Competition and Network
Externalities, Journal of Competition Law and Economics, 8(1): 73-105.
    Armstrong, Mark (2006), Competition in Two-Sided Markets, RAND Journal of Economics,
37(3): 668-691.
    Armstrong, Mark and Julian Wright (2007), Two-Sided Markets, Competitive Bottlenecks,
and Exclusive Contracts, Journal of Economic Theory, 32(2): 353-380.
    Ashlagi, Itai, Benjamin Edleman, and Hoan Soo Lee (2010), Competing Ad Auctions,
Harvard Business School Working Paper No. 10-055.
    Athey, Susan and Joshua S. Gans (2010), The Impact of Targeting Technology on
Advertising Markets and Media Competition, American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings, 100(2): 608-613.
    Athey, Susan, Emilio Calvano and Joshua S. Gans (2012), The Impact of the Internet on
Advertising Markets for News Media, Working Paper (Harvard Univeristy, Bocconi University,
and University of Toronto).
    Bakos, Yannis and Evangelos Katsamakas (2008), Design and Ownership of Two-Sided
Networks: Implications for Internet Intermediaries, Journal of Management Information
Systems, 25(2): 171-202.
    Baldwin, Carliss Y. and C. Jason Woodard, The Architecture of Platforms: A Unified View,
in Annabelle Gawer (2009), Platforms, Markets, and Innovation, Cheltenham, UK: Edward
Elgar.
    Baraldi, A. Laura (2004), Equilibrium Size in Network with Indirect Network Externalities,
Rivista Italiana Degli Economisti, 9(3): 475-494.
    Bardey, David, Helmuth Cremer, and Jean-Marie Lozachmeur (2010), Competition in Two-
Sided Markets with Common Network Externalities, IDEI Working Paper Number 578.
    Bardey, David, Helmuth Cremer, and Jean-Marie Lozachmeur (forthcoming), Doctors’
Remuneration Schemes and Hospital Competition in a Two-Sided Market, B.E. Journal of
                                                                                          49


Economic Analysis and Policy.
    Bardey, David and Jean-Charles Rochet (2010), Competition among Health Plans: A Two-
Sided Market Approach, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 19(2): 435-451.
    Baxter, William (1983), Bank Interchange of Transactional Paper: Legal and Economic
Perspectives, Journal of Law and Economics, 26(3): 541-588.
    Bedre-Defolie, Ozlem and Emilio Calvano (2012), Pricing Payment Cards, Working Paper
(European School of Management and Technology and Bocconi University).
    Behringer, Stefan and Lapo Filistrucchi (2011a), Hotelling Competition and Political
Differentiation with More Than Two Newspapers, Working Paper (Unversitat Bonn and Tilburg
University).
    Behringer, Stefan and Lapo Filistrucchi (2011b), Predatory Pricing in Two-Sided Markets:
Lessons from the UK Quality Newspapers in the ‘90s, Working Paper (Unversitat Bonn and
Tilburg University).
    Belleflamme, Paul (2005), Versioning in the Information Economy: Theory and Applications,
CESifo Economic Studies, 51(2-3), 329-358.
    Belleflamme, Paul and Nicolas Neysen, Coopetition and Infomediation: General Analysis
and Application to e-Tourism, in A. Matias, P. Nijkamp, and M. Sarmento (2009), Advances in
Tourism Economics, Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer, 217-234.
    Belleflamme, Paul and Martin Peitz (2010), Platform Competition and Seller Investment
Incentives, European Economic Review, 50(8): 1059-1076.
    Belleflamme, Paul and Eric Toulemonde (2004), B2B Marketplaces: Emergence and Entry,
CORE Discussion Papers, Number 2004/78.
    Belleflamme, Paul and Eric Toulemonde (2009), Negative Intra-Group Externalities in Two-
Sided Markets, International Economic Review, 50(1): 245-272.
    Beltran, Fernando and William W. Sharkey (2008), A Dynamic Model of Next-Generation
Networks with Two-Sided Platform Competition, TPRC Conference Paper.
    Bergh, Harald Nygard, Hans Jarle Kind, Bjorn-Atle Reme, and Lars Sorgard (2012),
Competition between Content Distributors in Two-Sided Markets, CESifo Working Paper, No.
3885.
    Birke, Daniel (2009), The Economics of Networks: A Survey of the Empirical Literature,
Journal of Economic Surveys, 23(4): 762-793.
    Bohme, Enrico (2012), Second-Degree Price Discrimination on Two-Sided Markets, MPRA
Working Paper 40951.
    Bolt, Wilko (2007), Retail Payments and Card Use in the Netherlands: Pricing, Scale, and
Antitrust, Competition Policy International, 3(1): 257-270.
    Bolt, Wilko and Sujit Chakravorti (2008), Economics of Payment Cards: A Status Report,
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Economic Perspectives, 32(4): 15-27.
    Bolt, Wilko, Elizabeth Foote, and Heiko Schmiedel (2011), Consumer Credit and Payment
                                                                                          50


Cards, DNB Working Papers, No. 332.
    Bolt, Wilko, and Kimmo Soranaki (2008), Competition, Bargaining Power, and Pricing in
Two-Sided Markets, DNB Working Papers, No. 181.
    Bolt, Wilko and Alexander F. Tieman (2006), Social Welfare and Cost Recovery in Two-
Sided Markets, Review of Network Economics, 5(1): 103-117.
    Bolt, Wilko and Alexander F. Tieman (2008), Heavily Skewed Pricing in Two-Sided
Markets, International Journal of Industrial Organization, 26(5): 1250-1255.
    Bomse, Stephen V., and Scott A. Westrich (2005), Both Side Now: Buyer Damage Claims in
Antitrust Actions Involving 'Two-Sided' Markets, Columbia Business Law Review, 2005(3): 643-
666.
    Borestam, Ann and Heiko Schmiedel (2011), Interchange Fees in Card Payments, ECB
Occasional Paper, No. 131.
    Boudreau, Kevin J. (2010), Open Platform Strategies and Innovation: Granting Access vs.
Devolving Control, Management Science, 56(10): 1849-1872.
    Boudreau, Kevin J. (forthcoming), Let a Thousand Flowers Bloom? An Early Look at Large
Numbers of Software ‘Apps’ Developers and Patterns of Innovation, Organization Science.
    Boudreau, Kevin J. and Andrei Hagiu, Platform Rules: Multi-Sided Platforms as Regulators,
in Annabelle Gawer (2009), Platforms, Markets, and Innovation, Cheltenham, UK: Edward
Elgar.
    Boudreau, Kevin J. and Lars B. Jeppesen (2011), Unpaid Complementors and Platform
Network Effects, Working Paper (London Business School and Bocconi University).
    Bourreau, Marc, and Marianne Verdier (2010), Private Cards and the Bypass of Payment
Systems by Merchants, Journal of Banking and Finance, 34(8): 1798-1807.
    Brown, Jennifer, and John Morgan (2009), Equilibrium Coexistence on Competing Online
Auction Sites, Journal of Political Economy, 117(4): 668-700.
    Brown, Thomas P., and Kevin L. Yingling (2007), Antitrust and Real Estate: A Two-Sided
Approach, Competition Policy International, 3(1): 225-235.
    Budzinski, Oliver and Janina Satzer (2011), Sports Business and Two-Sided Markets:
Towards a New Analytical Framework? IME Working Paper, No. 109/11.
    Cabral, Luis M.B. (2006), Market Power and Efficiency in Card Payment Systems: A
Comment, Review of Network Economics, 5(1): 15-25.
    Caillaud, Bernard, and Bruno Jullien (2001), Competing Cybermediaries, European
Economic Review, 45(4-6): 797-808.
    Caillaud, Bernard, and Bruno Jullien (2003), Chicken and Egg: Competition among
Intermediation Service Providers, RAND Journal of Economics, 34(2): 309-328.
    Calabrese, Armando, Massimo Gastaldi, Irene Iacovelli, and Nathan Levialdi Ghiron (2008),
Innovation and Competition in Two-Sided Markets: The Case of Payment Systems, International
Journal of Management and Network Economics, 1(1): 1-20.
                                                                                           51


    Calabrese, Armando, Irene Iacovelli, Nathan Levialdi Ghiron, and Massimo Gastaldi (2008),
Ultrabroadband Competition in Two-Sided Markets, Communications and Strategies, Special
Issue, November 2008: 131-148.
    Calvano, Emilio (2011), Note on the Economic Theory of Interchange, Comment to the
Federal Reserve on Proposed Regulation II: Debit Card Interchange Fees and Routing.
    Calvano, Emilio and Bruno Jullien, Issues in Online Advertising and Competition Policy: A
Two-Sided Market Perspective, in Joseph E. Harrington and Yannis Katsoulacos (2012), Recent
Advances in the Analysis of Competition Policy and Regulation, Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar,
179-197.
    Canon, Carlos (2009), Regulation Effects on Investment Decisions in Two-Sided Market
Industries: The Net Neutrality Debate, Working Paper (Toulouse School of Economics).
    Canon, Carlos (2011), Matching and Information Provision by One-Sided and Two-Sided
Platforms, NET Institute Working Paper, No. 11-20.
    Cantillon, Estelle and Pai-Ling Yin (2011), Competition between Exchanges: A Research
Agenda, International Journal of Industrial Organization, 29(3): 329-336.
    Cantillon, Estelle and Pai-Ling Yin (2011), Competition between Exchanges: Lessons from
the Battle of the Bund, Working Paper.
    Cao, Wen and Qinyang Sha (2011), Platform Competition at an Online Two-Sided Market –
Evidence from eBay, Working Paper (The Chinese University of Hong Kong and Indiana
University).
    Carbo Valverde, Santiago, Sujit Chakravorti, and Francisco Rodriguez Fernandez (2011),
Regulating Two-Sided Markets: An Empirical Investigation, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
Working Paper 2009-11.
    Carlton, Dennis W. (2010), Externalities in Payment Card Networks: Theory and Evidence:
A Commentary, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, The Changing Retail Payments
Landscape: What Role for Central Banks?
    Carlton, Dennis W. and Alan S. Frankel (2005), Transaction Costs, Externalities, and 'Two-
Sided' Payment Markets, Columbia Business Law Review, 2005(3): 617-642.
    Carrillo, Juan D. and Gofu Tan (2006), Platform Competition: The Role of Multi-Homing
and Complementors, NET Institute Working Paper No. 06-30.
    Casadesus-Masanell, Ramon and Hanna Halaburda (2012), When Does a Platform Create
Value by Limiting Choice? Harvard Business School Working Paper, No. 11-030.
    Casadesus-Masanell, Ramon and Gaston Llanes (2012), Investment Incentives in Proprietary
and Open-Source Two-Sided Platforms, Harvard Business School Working Paper, No. 12-114
    Casadesus-Masanell, Ramon and Francisco Ruiz-Aliseda (2009), Platform Competition,
Compatibility, and Social Efficiency, Harvard Business School Working Paper, No. 09-058.
    Caves, Kevin W. (2012), Modeling the Effects of Net Neutrality Regulation: A Comment on
Economides and Tag, Information Economics and Policy, 24(3-4): 288-292.
                                                                                            52


    Chakravorti, Sujit (2003), Theory of Credit Card Networks: A Survey of the Literature,
Review of Network Economics, 2(2): 50-68.
    Chakravorti, Sujit (2010), Externalities in Payment Card Networks: Theory and Evidence,
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, The Changing Retail Payments Landscape: What Role for
Central Banks? 99-124, reprinted in Review of Network Economics, 9(2): 1-26.
    Chakravorti, Sujit, and Roberto Roson (2006), Platform Competition in Two-Sided Markets:
The Case of Payment Networks, Review of Network Economics, 5(1): 118-142.
    Chandra, Ambarish (2009), Targeted Advertising: The Role of Subscriber Characteristics in
Media Markets, Journal of Industrial Economics, 57(1): 58-84.
    Chandra, Ambarish and Allan Collard-Wexler (2009), Mergers in Two-Sided Markets: An
Application to the Canadian Newspaper Industry, Journal of Economics and Management
Strategy, 18(4), 1045-1070.
    Chandra, Ambarish and Ulrich Kaiser (2011), Targeted Advertising in Magazine Markets
and the Advent of the Internet, Working Paper (University of Toronto and University of Zurich).
    Chang, Howard, David S. Evans, and Daniel D. Garcia Swartz (2005), The Effect of
Regulatory Intervention in Two-Sided Markets: An Assessment of Interchange-Fee Capping in
Australia, Review of Network Economics, 4(4).
    Chao, Yong and Timothy Derdenger (forthcoming), Mixed Bundling in Two-Sided Markets
in the Presence of Installed Base Effects, Management Science.
    Chen, Kong-Pin and Yen-Chi Huang (forthcoming), A Search-Matching Model of Two-Sided
Platforms, CESifo Economic Studies.
    Chen, Kai and Edison Tse (2007), Long Term Dynamics of Differentiated Platform
Competition in Two-Sided Markets, Working Paper (Stanford University).
    Chen, Kai and Edison Tse (2008), Dynamic Platform Competition in Two-Sided Markets,
Working Paper (Stanford University).
    Choi, Jay Pil (2010), Tying in Two-Sided Markets with Multi-Homing, Journal of Industrial
Economics, 58(3): 607-626.
    Choi, Jay Pil and Byung-Cheol Kim (2010), Net Neutrality and Investment Incentives,
RAND Journal of Economics, 41(3): 446-471.
    Chowdhury, Subhasish M. and Stephen Martin (2010), Exclusivity and Exclusion on
Platform Markets, Purdue University Economics Working Papers, No. 1254.
    Claussen, Jorg, Tobias Kretschmer, and Philip Mayrhofer (2012), Incentives for Quality over
Time – The Case of Facebook Applications, CEP Discussion Paper No. 1133.
    Constantine, Lloyd, Jeffrey I. Shinder, and Kerin E. Coughlin (2005), In re Visa
Check/MasterMoney Antitrust Litigation: A Study of Market Failure in a Two-Sided Market,
Columbia Business Law Review, 2005(3): 599-614.
    Cortade, Thomas (2006), A Strategic Guide on Two-Sided Markets Applied to the ISP
Market, Communications and Strategies, 61.
                                                                                           53


    Corts, Kenneth S. and Mara Lederman (2009), Software Exclusivity and the Scope of Indirect
Network Effects in the U.S. Home Video Game Market, International Journal of Industrial
Organization, 27(2): 121-136.
    Crampes, Claude, Carole Hartchabalet, and Bruno Jullien (2009), Advertising, Competition,
and Entry in Media Industries, Journal of Industrial Economics, 57(1): 7-31.
    Cremer, Helmuth, Philippe De Donder, Francois Boldron, Denis Joram, and Bernard Roy,
Social Costs and Benefits of the Universal Service Obligation in the Postal Market, in Paul R.
Kleindorfer and Michael A. Crew (2008), Competition and Regulation in the Postal and
Delivery Sector, Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 23-35.
    Curchod, Corentin and Nicholas Neysen (2009), Disentangling Positive and Negative
Externalities on Two-Sided Markets: The eBay Case, CRE CIS Working Paper, No. 02-2009.
    Cusumano, Michael, and Fernando Suarez, The Role of Services in Platform Markets, in
Annabelle Gawer (2009), Platforms, Markets, and Innovation, Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
    Damiano, Ettore and Hao Li (2007), Price Discrimination and Efficient Matching, Journal of
Economic Theory, 30(2): 243-263.
    Damiano, Ettore and Hao Li (2008), Competing Matchmaking, Journal of the European
Economic Association, 6(4): 789-818.
    Danilov, Vladimir I., Gleb A. Koshevoy, and Christine Lang, Substitutes, Complements, and
Equilibrium in Two-Sided Market Models, in Murat R. Sertel and Semih Koray (2003), Advances
in Economic Design, Berlin: Springer, 103-125.
    Danilov, Vladimir I., Gleb A. Koshevoy, and Christine Lang (2004), Competitive Two-Sided
Markets with Complements, NCCR FINRISK Working Paper, No. 193.
    De Corniere, Alexandre, and Greg Taylor (2012), Integration and Search Engine Bias,
Working Paper (Nuffield College and Oxford Internet Institute).
    De Grauwe, Paul, Laura Rinaldi, and Patrick Van Cayseele (2006), Towards a More Efficient
Use of Payment Instruments, Working Paper (University of Leuven).
    Derdenger, Timothy (2009), Vertical Integration and Two-Sided Market Pricing: Evidence
from the Video Game Industry, Ph.D. Dissertation.
    Devine, Kristine L. (2008), Preserving Competition in Multi-Sided Innovative Markets: How
Do You Solve a Problem Like Google? North Carolina Journal of Law and Technology, 10(1):
59-118.
    Dewenter, Ralf, and Juergen Roesch (2012), Market Entry into Emerging Two-Sided
Markets, Economics Bulletin, 32(3): 2343-2352.
    Dewenter, Ralf, Justus Haucap, and Tobias Wenzel (2011), Semi-Collusion in Media
Markets, International Review of Law and Economics, 31(2): 92-98.
    Dietl, Helmut, Tobias Duschl, Egon Franck, and Markus Lang (2012), A Contest Model of a
Professional Sports League with Two-Sided Markets, Journal of Economics and Statistics,
232(3): 336-359.
                                                                                          54


    Ding, Ke, and Jiutang Pan (2011), Platforms, Network Effects, and Small Business Dynamics
in China: Case Study of the Shanzhai Cell Phone Industry, IDE Discussion Paper, No. 302.
    Doganoglu, Toker and Julian Wright (2006), Multihoming and Compatibility, International
Journal of Industrial Organization, 24(1): 45-67.
    Doganoglu, Toker and Julian Wright (2010), Exclusive Dealing with Network Effects,
International Journal of Industrial Organization, 28(2): 145-154.
    Donze, Jocelyn and Isabelle Dubec (2009), Paying for ATM Usage: Good for Consumers,
Bad for Banks, Journal of Industrial Economics, 57(3): 583-612.
    Dou, Jiangli and Bing Ye (2011), Multi-homing, Product Differentiation, and Competition,
Working Paper.
    Dube, Jean-Pierre H., Gunter J. Hitsch, and Pradeep K. Chintagunta (2010), Tipping and
Concentration in Markets with Indirect Network Effects, Marketing Science, 29(2): 216-249.
    Economides, Nicholas and Benjamin E. Hermalin (forthcoming), The Economics of Network
Neutrality, RAND Journal of Economics.
    Economides, Nicholas, and Evangelos Katsamakas (2006), Two-Sided Competition of
Proprietary vs. Open Source Technology Platforms and the Implications for the Software
Industry, Management Science, 52(7): 1057-1071.
    Economides, Nicholas and Joacim Tag (2012), Network Neutrality on the Internet: A Two-
Sided Market Analysis, Information Economics and Policy, 24(2): 91-104.
    Economides, Nicolas, and Joacim Tag (2012), Modeling the Welfare Effects of Network
Neutrality Regulation: A Response to Caves's Comment, Information Economics and Policy,
24(3-4): 293.
    Eichhorn, Christoph, and Marco Sahm (2010), Why Were FIFA World Cup Tickets so
Cheap? Monopoly Pricing, Demand Quality, and Two-Sided Markets, Journal of Economic
Psychology, 31(2): 212-217.
    Eisenmann, Thomas R., Geoffrey Parker, and Marshall Van Alstyne (2006), Strategies for
Two-Sided Markets, Harvard Business Review, October 2006.
    Eisenmann, Thomas R., Geoffrey Parker, and Marshall Van Alstyne, Opening Platforms:
How, When, and Why? in Annabelle Gawer (2009), Platforms, Markets, and Innovation,
Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
    Eisenmann, Thomas R., Geoffrey Parker, and Marshall Van Alstyne (2011), Platform
Envelopment, Strategic Management Journal, 32(12): 1270-1285.
    Eliaz, Kfir, and Ran Spiegler (2011), A Simple Model of Search Engine Pricing, Economic
Journal, 121(556): F329-F339.
    Ellison, Glenn, and Drew Fudenberg (2003), Knife-Edge or Plateau: When Do Market
Models Tip? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4): 1249-1278.
    Ellision, Glenn, Markus Mobius, and Drew Fudenberg (2004), Competing Auctions, Journal
of the European Economic Association, 2(1): 30-66.
                                                                                          55


   Ellman, Matthew and Fabrizio Germano (2009), What Do the Papers Sell? A Model of
Advertising and Media Bias, Economic Journal, 119(537): 680-704.
   Emch, Eric, and T. Scott Thompson (2006), Market Definition and Market Power in
Payment Card Networks, Review of Network Economics, 5(1): 45-60.
   Epstein, Richard A. (2005), The Regulation of Interchange Fees: Australian Fine-Tuning
Gone Awry, Columbia Business Law Review, 2005(3): 551-597.
   Etro, Federico, Leadership in Multi-Sided Markets and Dominance in Online Advertising, in
Joseph E. Harrington and Yannis Katsoulacos (2012), Recent Advances in the Analysis of
Competition Policy and Regulation, Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 214-236.
   Evans, David S. (2003a), Some Empirical Aspects of Multi-Sided Platform Industries,
Review of Network Economics, 2(3): 191-209.
   Evans, David S. (2003b), The Antitrust Economics of Multi-Sided Platform Markets, Yale
Journal on Regulation, 20(2): 325-381.
   Evans, David S. (2006a), Two-Sided Platforms and Analysis of Single-Firm Conduct,
Submission to the Joint DOJ-FTC Section 2 Hearings, Project No. P062106.
   Evans, David S. (2006b), Interchange Fees: Is There a Competition Problem, and If So, How
Do We Approach Solving it? Working Paper Based on a Presentation Given at the OECD
Meeting on Payment Cards, Paris, 5 June 2006.
   Evans, David S. (2008), Antitrust Issues Raised by the Emerging Global Internet Economy,
Northwestern University Law Review Colloquy, 102: 285-306.
   Evans, David S., How Catalysts Ignite: The Economics of Platform-Based Start-Ups, in
Annabelle Gawer (2009), Platforms, Markets, and Innovation, Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
   Evans, David S. (2009), The Online Advertising Industry: Economics, Evolution, and
Privacy, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(3): 37-60.
   Evans, David S. (2010), The Web Economy, Two-Sided Markets, and Competition Policy,
Concurrences Competition Laws Journal, 2010(2).
   Evans, David S. (2011), The Antitrust Economics of Free, Competition Policy International,
7(1): 71-89.
   Evans, David S. (2011), Platform Economics: Essays on Multi-Sided Businesses.
CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform.
   Evans, David S. (2011), Interchange Fees: The Economics and Regulation of What
Merchants Pay for Cards. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform.
   Evans, David S. (2012a), Governing Bad Behavior by Users of Multi-Sided Platforms,
Berkeley Technology Law Journal, 27(2), 1201-1250.
   Evans, David S. (2012b), Two-Sided Market Definition, in ABA Section of Antitrust Law,
Market Definition in Antitrust: Theory and Case Studies.
   Evans, David S. (forthcoming), Attention Rivalry among Online Platforms and its
Implications for Antitrust Analysis, Journal of Competition Law and Economics.
                                                                                           56


    Evans, David S. (forthcoming), Economics of Vertical Restraints for Multi-Sided Platforms,
Competition Policy International.
    Evans, David S., Andrei Hagiu, and Richard Schmalensee (2006), Invisible Engines: How
Software Platforms Drive Innovation and Transform Industries, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
    Evans, David S. and Michael D. Noel (2005), Defining Antitrust Markets When Firms
Operate Two-Sided Platforms, Columbia Business Law Review, 2005(3), 667.
    Evans, David S. and Michael D. Noel (2008), “The Analysis of Mergers that Involve
Multisided Platform Businesses,” Journal of Competition Law and Policy, 4(3), 101-134.
    Evans, David S. and Peter Passell (2003), Everything You Wanted to Know about Two-Sided
Markets, Milken Institute Review, Second Quarter 2003: 36-43.
    Evans, David S. and Richard Schmalensee (2005), The Economics of Interchange Fees and
Their Regulation: An Overview, in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Interchange Fees in
Credit and Debit Card Industries: What Role for Public Authorities?
    Evans, David S. and Richard Schmalensee (2005), Paying with Plastic: The Digital
Revolution in Buying and Borrowing, 2nd edition, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
    Evans, David S. and Richard Schmalensee (2007a), The Industrial Organization of Markets
with Two-Sided Platforms, Competition Policy International, 3(1), 151-179; reprinted as Evans,
David S. and Richard Schmalensee (2008), Markets with Two-Sided Platforms, in 1 Issues in
Competition Law and Policy 667 (ABA Section of Antitrust Law 2008).
    Evans, David S. Evans and Richard Schmalensee (2007b), Catalyst Code: The Strategies
behind the World’s Most Dynamic Companies, Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
    Evans, David S. and Richard Schmalensee (2010), Failure to Launch: Critical Mass in
Platform Businesses, Review of Network Economics, 9(4): 1-26.
    Fan, Ying (forthcoming), Ownership Consolidation and Product Characteristics: A Study of
the U.S. Daily Newspaper Market, American Economic Review.
    Faratin, Peyman (2007), Economics of Overlay Networks: An Industrial Organization
Perspective on Network Economics, Working Paper (MIT).
    Faratin, P., and T. Wilkening (2006), Interconnection Discrimination: A Two-Sided Markets
Perspective, Proceedings of the Fifth Hot Topics in Networks.
    Farhi, Emmanuel, and Andrei Hagiu (2008), Strategic Interactions in Two-Sided Market
Oligopolies, Working Paper (Harvard University).
    Fath, Gabor and Miklos Sarvary (2003), Adoption Dynamics in Buyer-Side Exchanges,
Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 1(3), 305-335.
    Farrell, Joseph (2006), Efficiency and Competition between Payment Instruments, Review of
Network Economics, 5(1): 26-44.
    Ferrando, Jorge, Jean J. Gabszewicz, Didier Laussel, and Nathalie Sonnac (2008),
Intermarket Network Externalities and Competition: An Application to the Media Industry,
International Journal of Economic Theory, 4(3): 357-379.
                                                                                            57


    Fiedler, Ingo (2010), Antitrust in Two-Sided Markets: Is Competition Always Desirable?
Berkeley Law and Economics Working Paper Series (University of Hamburg).
    Filistrucchi, Lapo (2005), The Impact of the Internet on the Market for Daily Newspapers in
Italy, EUI Working Paper ECO No. 2005/12.
    Filistrucchi, Lapo (2008a), A SSNIP Test for Two-Sided Markets: Some Theoretical
Considerations, Tilburg University Working Paper (Tilburg University).
    Filistrucchi, Lapo (2008b), A SSNIP Test for Two-Sided Markets: The Case of Media, NET
Institute Working Paper, No. 08-34.
    Filistrucchi, Lapo (2010), How Many Markets Are Two-Sided? Competition Policy
International Antitrust Journal, July 2010(2).
    Filistrucchi, Lapo, Tobias J. Klein, and Thomas Michielsen (2010), Merger Simulation in a
Two-Sided Market: The Case of the Dutch Daily Newspapers, NET Institute Working Paper, No.
10-15.
    Filistrucchi, Lapo, Damien Geradin, Eric van Damme, S. Keunen, Tobias J. Klein, Thomas
Michielsen, and John Wileur (2010), Mergers in Two-Sided Markets – A Report to the NMa,
Nederlanse Mededingingsautoriteit (Netherlands Competition Authority), The Hague,
Netherlands.
    Filistrucchi, Lapo, Luigi Luini, and Andrea Mangani (2012), Banning Ads from Public TV:
Lessons from France, NET Institute Working Paper, No. 12-23.
    Filistrucchi, Lapo, Damien Geradin, and Eric van Damme (2012), Identifying Two-Sided
Markets, TILEC Discussion Paper, No. 2012-008.
    Filistrucchi, Lapo, Tobias J. Klein, and Thomas Michielsen (2012), Assessing Unilateral
Effects in a Two-Sided Market: An Application to the Dutch Daily Newspaper Market, Journal of
Competition Law and Economics, 8(2): 297-329.
    Fleischer, Raphael, and David A. Smith (2012), Two-Sided Markets in the EU: An Attempted
Demystification, University of Chicago Working Paper (University of Chicago).
    Fletcher, Amelia (2007), Predatory Pricing in Two-Sided Markets: A Brief Comment,
Competition Policy International, 3(1): 221-224.
    Foer, Albert A. (2010), Electronic Payment Systems and Interchange Fees: Breaking the Log
Jam on Solutions to Market Power, American Antitrust Institute Working Paper (American
Antitrust Institute).
    Frankel, Alan S., and Allan L. Shampine (2006), The Economic Effects of Interchange Fees,
Antitrust Law Journal, 73(3): 627-673.
    Gabszewicz, Jean, Victor Ginsburgh, and Didier Laussel (2010), Acquiring Foreign
Languages: A Two-Sided Market Approach, ECARES Working Paper, No. 2010-007.
    Gabszewicz, Jean J., and Xavier Y. Wauthy (2004), Two-Sided Markets and Price
Competition with Multi-Homing, CORE Discussion Paper, No. 2004/30.
    Galariotis, Ionnis (2011), Exclusive Contracts in Two-Sided Markets, Master’s Thesis
                                                                                           58


(Tilburg School of Economics).
    Gale, Stephen and Ben Gerritsen (2011), Competition Policy and Credit Card Interchange
Fees in New Zealand, Working Paper (Casalia).
    Galeotti, Andrea and Jose Luis Moraga-Gonzalez (2009), Platform Intermediation in a
Market for Differentiated Products, European Economic Review, 53(4): 417-428.
    Gallaugher, John M. and Yu-Ming Wang (2002), Understanding Network Effects in Software
Markets: Evidence from Web Server Pricing, MIS Quarterly, 26(4): 303-327.
    Gans, Joshua S. and Stephen P. King (2003a), Approaches to Regulating Interchange Fees in
Payment Systems, Review of Network Economics, 2(2).
    Gans, Joshua S. and Stephen P. King (2003b), The Neutrality of Interchange Fees in
Payment Systems, B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy, 3(1).
    Gao, Ming (2010), When to Allow Buyers to Sell? Bundling in Mixed Two-Sided Markets,
Working Paper (Tshinghua University).
    Gaudeul, Alexandre and Bruno Jullien, E-Commerce, Two-Sided Markets, and Info-
Mediation, in Eric Brousseau (2007), Internet and Digital Economics, Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 268-290.
    Gaze, Pierre and Anne-Gael Vaubourg (2011), Electronic Platforms and Two-Sided Markets:
A Side-Switching Analysis, Journal of High Technology Management Research, 22(2): 158-165.
    Genakos, Christos and Tommaso Valletti (2011), Testing the ‘Waterbed’ Effect in Mobile
Telephony, Journal of the European Economic Association, 9(6): 1114-1142.
    Gentzkow, Matthew, Jesse M. Shapiro, and Michael Sinkinson (2012), Competition and
Ideological Diversity: Historical Evidence from US Newspapers, Working Paper (University of
Chicago and Wharton).
    Gick, Wolfgang (2009), Platforms or Franchisors? Two Contractual Forms When
Consumers Care About Quality, Working Paper (Harvard University).
    Gil, Ricard and Daniel Riera-Crichton (2012), Price Discrimination and Competition in Two-
Sided Markets: Evidence from the Spanish Local TV Industry, Working Paper (Johns Hopkins
Business School and Bates College).
    Gil, Ricard and Frederic Warzynski (2011), Vertical Integration, Exclusivity, and Game
Sales Performance in the U.S. Video Game Industry, Working Paper (University of California
Santa Cruz and Aarhus School of Business).
    Godes, David, Elie Ofek, and Miklos Sarvary (2009), Content vs. Advertising: The Impact of
Competition on Media Firm Strategy, Marketing Science, 28(1): 20-35.
    Goldberg, Victor P. and Richard A. Epstein (2005), Introductory Remarks: Some Reflections
on Two-Sided Markets and Pricing, Columbia Business Law Review, 2005(3), 509-514.
    Goldfrain, Katerina and Eugen Kovac (2007), On Compatibility in Two-Sided Markets,
Working Paper (University of Bonn).
    Gomes, Renato (2011), Optimal Auction Design in Two-Sided Markets, Working Paper
                                                                                           59


(Toulouse School of Economics).
    Gomes, Renato and Alessandro Pavan (2011), Price Discrimination in Many-to-Many
Matching Markets, Working Paper (Toulouse School of Economics and Northwestern
University).
    Greiner, Tanja and Marco Sahm (2011), How Effective Are Advertising Bans? On the
Demand for Quality in Two-Sided Markets, CESifo Working Paper No. 3524.
    Guo, Xunhua, Yannan Zhao, Yan Jin, and Nan Zhang (2010), Theorizing a Two-Sided
Adoption Model for Mobile Marketing Platforms, ICIS Proceedings Paper 128.
    Guthrie, Graeme and Julian Wright (2007), Competing Payment Schemes, Journal of
Industrial Economics, 55(1): 37-67.
    Gyselen, Luc (2005), Multilateral Interchange Fees under E.U. Antitrust Law: A One-Sided
View on a Two-Sided Market? Columbia Business Law Review, 2005(3): 703-721.
    Hagiu, Andrei (2006a), Multi-Sided Platforms: From Microfoundations to Design and
Expansion Strategies, Working Paper (Harvard Business School).
    Hagiu, Andrei (2006b), Pricing and Commitment by Two-Sided Platforms, RAND Journal of
Economics, 37(3): 720-737.
    Hagiu, Andrei (2006c), Proprietary vs. Open Two-Sided Platforms and Social Efficiency,
AEI-Brookings Joint Center Working Paper No. 06-12.
    Hagiu, Andrei (2007), Merchant or Two-Sided Platform? Review of Network Economics,
6(2): 115-133.
    Hagiu, Andrei (2009), Two-Sided Platforms: Product Variety and Pricing Structures, Journal
of Economics and Management Strategy, 18(4): 1011-1043.
    Hagiu, Andrei (2011), Quantity vs. Quality: Exclusion by Platforms with Network Effects,
Harvard Business School Working Paper, No. 11-125.
    Hagiu, Andrei and Hanna Halaburda (2011), Expectations, Network Effects, and Platform
Pricing, Working Paper (Harvard University).
    Hagiu, Andrei and Bruno Jullien (2011a), Search Diversion, Rent Extraction, and
Competition,” Harvard Business School Working Paper, No 11-124.
    Hagiu, Andrei and Bruno Jullien (2011b), Why Do Intermediaries Divert Search? RAND
Journal of Economics, 42(2): 337-362.
    Hagiu, Andrei and Robin S. Lee (2011), Exclusivity and Control, Journal of Economics and
Management Strategy, 20(3): 679-708.
    Hagiu, Andrei and Daniel Spulber (2011), First Party Content, Commitment, and
Coordination in Two-Sided Markets, Working Paper (Harvard University and Northwestern
University).
    Hagiu, Andrei and Julian Wright (2011), Multi-Sided Platforms, Harvard Business School
Working Paper, No. 12-024.
    Halaburda, Hanna and Mikolaj Jan Piskorski (2011), Competing by Restricting Choice: The
                                                                                           60


Case of Search Platforms, Harvard Business School Working Paper No. 10-098.
    Halaburda, Hanna and Yaron Yehezkel (2011), Platform Competition under Asymmetric
Information, Working Paper (Harvard Business School and Tel Aviv University).
    Halaburda, Hanna and Yaron Yehezkel (2012), Platform Competition under Partial Belief
Advantage, Working Paper (Harvard Business School and Tel Aviv University).
    Hatchuel, Armand, Pascal Le Masson, and Benoit Weil, Platforms for the Design of
Platforms: Collaborating in the Unknown, in Annabelle Gawer (2009), Platforms, Markets, and
Innovation, Cheltenham, UK: Elgar.
    Hausman, Jerry and Julian Wright, Two Sided Markets with Substitution: Mobile
Termination Revisited, in Gerald R. Faulhaber, Gary Madden, and Jeffrey Petchey (2012),
Regulation and the Performance of Communication and Information Networks, Cheltenham,
UK: Elgar, 284-314.
    Hayashi, Fumiko (2006), A Puzzle of Payment Card Pricing: Why Are Merchants Still
Accepting Card Payments, Review of Network Economics, 5(1): 144-174.
    Hayashi, Fumiko (2009), The Economics of Payment Card Fee Structures: What Drives
Payment Card Rewards? Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Working Paper No. RWP 08-07.
    Hayashi, Fumiko and Stuart E. Weiner (2006), Interchange Fees in Australia, the UK, and
the United States: Matching Theory and Practice, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
Economic Review, Third Quarter 2006: 75-112.
    Heimler, Alberto (2010), Payment Card Pricing Patterns: The Role of Antitrust and
Regulatory Authorities, Working Paper.
    Hendel, Igal, Aviv Nevo, and Francois Ortalo-Magne (2009), The Relative Performance of
Real Estate Marketing Platforms: MLS versus FSBOMadison.com, American Economic Review,
99(5), 1878-1898.
    Hermalin, Benjamin E. and Michael L. Katz (2006), Your Network or Mine? The Economics
of Routing Rules, RAND Journal of Economics, 37(3): 692-719.
    Hermalin, Benjamin E. and Michael L. Katz (2011), Customer or Complementor?
Intercarrier Compensation with Two-Sided Benefits, Journal of Economics and Management
Strategy, 20(2): 379-408.
    Hesse, Renata B. (2007), Two-Sided Platform Markets and the Application of the Traditional
Antitrust Analytical Framework, Competition Policy International, 3(1): 191-195.
    Hesse, Renata B., and Joshua H. Soven (2006), Defining Relevant Product Markets in
Electronic Payment Network Antitrust Cases, Antitrust Law Journal, 73(3): 709-738.
    Hildebrand, Thomas (2011), Two-Sided Markets in the Online World, Ph.D. Dissertation
(European School of Management and Technology).
    Hildebrand, Thomas (2012), Estimating Network Effects in Two-Sided Markets Without Data
on Prices and Quantities, Economics Letters, 117(3): 585-588.
    Hogendorn, Christiaan and Ka Yat Yuen (2009), Platform Competition with ‘Must-Have’
                                                                                         61


Components, Journal of Industrial Economics, 57(2): 294-318.
    Horton, John J. (2010), Online Labor Markets, Working Paper (Harvard University).
    Hossain, Tanjim, Dylan Minor, and John Morgan (forthcoming), Competing Matchmakers:
An Experimental Analysis, Management Science.
    Howell, Bronwyn (2007), Unveiling ‘Invisible Hands’: Competition in Two-Sided Health
Care Markets, Working Paper (New Zealand Institute for the Study of Competition and
Regulation).
    Ida, Takanori and Toshifumi Kuroda (2009), Considering Fixed-Mobile Convergence
Service as a Two-Sided Market, Working Paper (Kyoto University and Tokyo Keizei
University).
    Ida, Takanori and Toshifumi Kuroda (2011), Optimum Pricing Strategy for Fixed-Line
Internet and Mobile Phone Services: A Two-Sided Market Approach, Empirical Economics
Letters, 10(8).
    Ivaldi, Marc and Estelle Malavolti-Grimal (2006), TV on Mobility: A Two-Sided Market
Analysis, Working Paper (Toulouse School of Economics).
    Ivaldi, Marc, Sennay Sokullu, and Tuba Toru (2011), Airport Prices in a Two-Sided
Framework: An Empirical Analysis, Working Paper (Toulouse School of Economics).
    Ivaldi, Marc, Senay Sokullu, Tuba Toru, Are Airports Two-Sided Platforms? A
Methodological Approach, in James Peoples (2012), Pricing Behavior and Non-Price
Characteristics in the Airline Industry (Advances in Airline Economics, Volume 3), Bingley,
UK: Emerald Group Publishing Limited, 213-232.
    Jaag, Christian and Urs Trinkner, Pricing in Competitive Two-Sided Mail Markets, in M.A.
Crew and P.R. Kleindorfer (2008), Competition and Regulation in the Postal and Delivery
Sector, Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
    Jeon, Doh-Shin and Nikrooz Nasr Esfahani (2012), News Aggregators and Competition
among Newspapers in the Internet, Working Paper (Toulouse School of Economics).
    Jeon, Doh-Shin and Jean-Charles Rochet (2010), The Pricing of Academic Journals: A Two-
Sided Market Perspective, American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2(2): 222-255.
    Jeon, Jin (2006), Three Essays on Bundling and Two-Sided Markets, Ph.D. Dissertation
(University of Florida).
    Jeziorski, Przemyslaw (2012), Effects of Mergers in Two-Sided Markets: Examination of
U.S. Radio Industry, Working Paper (Haas School of Business).
    Jin, Ginger Zhe and Marc Rysman (2012), Platform Pricing at Sports Card Conventions,
Working Paper (University of Maryland and Boston University).
    Jonker, Nicole (2011), Card Acceptance and Surcharging: The Role of Costs and
Competition, Working Paper (De Nederlandsche Bank).
    Jullien, Bruno (2005), Two-Sided Markets and Electronic Intermediaries, CESifo Economic
Studies, 51(2-3): 233-260.
                                                                                           62


    Jullien, Bruno, Pricing and Other Business Strategies for e-Procurement Platforms, in
Nicola Dimitri, Gustavo Piga, and Giancarlo Spagnolo (2006), Handbook of Procurement,
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 249-266.
    Jullien, Bruno (2008), Price Skewness and Competition in Multi-Sided Markets, IDEI
Working Paper No. 504.
    Jullien, Bruno (2011), Competition in Multi-Sided Networks: Divide-and-Conquer, American
Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 3(4): 1-35.
    Jullien, Bruno, Two-Sided B2B Platforms, in M. Peitz and J. Waldfogel (2012), Oxford
Handbook of the Digital Economy, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 161-188.
    Jullien, Bruno and Alessandro Pavan (2012), Platform Competition under Dispersed
Information, Working Paper (Toulouse School of Economics and Northwestern University).
    Kaiser, Ulrich and Minjae Song (2009), Do Media Consumers Really Dislike Advertising?
An Empirical Assessment of the Role of Advertising in Print Media Markets, International
Journal of Industrial Organization, 27(2): 292-301.
    Kaiser, Ulrich and Julian Wright (2006), Price Structure in Two-Sided Markets: Evidence
from the Magazine Industry, International Journal of Industrial Organization, 24(1): 1-28.
    Karrberg, Patrik (2010), A Two-Sided Market Approach to Value Chain Dynamics in
Telecom Services: A Study Lens for Mobile Platform Innovation and Pricing Strategies, 2010
Ninth International Conference on Mobile Business, 505-509.
    Katiyar, Akshaya (2011), Price Structure in a Two-Sided Platform, International Journal of
Management and Tourism, 19(2): 159-169.
    Kennes, John and Aaron Schiff (2008), Quality Infomediation in Search Markets,
International Journal of Industrial Organization, 26(5): 1191-1202.
    Kim, Byung-Cheol, Jeongsik “Jay” Lee, and Hyunwoo Park (2012), Two-Sided Platform
Competition in the Online Daily Deals Promotion Market, Working Paper (Georgia Institute of
Technology).
    Kim, Kihoon and Edison Tse (2011), Dynamic Competition Strategy for Online Knowledge-
Sharing Platforms, International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 16(1).
    Kind, Hans Jarle, Marko Koethenbuerger, and Guttorm Schjelderup (2008), Efficiency
Enhancing Taxation in Two-Sided Markets, Journal of Public Economics, 92(5-6): 1531-1539.
    Kind, Hans Jarle, Marko Koethenbuerger, and Guttorm Schjelderup (2009), On Revenue and
Welfare Dominance of Ad Valorem Taxes in Two-Sided Markets, Economic Letters, 104(2): 86-
88.
    Kind, Hans Jarle, Marko Koethenbuerger, and Guttorm Schjelderup (2009), Should Utility-
Reducing Media Advertising be Taxed? Working Paper (Norwegian School of Economics and
Business Administration and University of Copenhagen).
    Kind, Hans Jarle, Tore Nilssen, and Lars Sorgard (2009), Business Models for Media Firms:
Does Competition Matter for how they Raise Revenue? Marketing Science, 28(6): 1112-1128.
                                                                                         63


    Kind, Hans Jarl, Tore Nilssen, and Lars Sorgard (2011), Channel Coordination and
Competition in Two-Sided Markets, Working Paper (Norwegian Schools of Economics and
University of Oslo).
    Kind, Hans Jarle and Frank Stahler (2007), Another Tale of Two-Sided Markets, University
of Otago Economics Discussion Paper No. 0708.
    Kind, Hans Jarle and Frank Stahler (2010), Market Shares in Two-Sided Media Industries,
Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics, 166(2): 205-211.
    Klein, Benjamin, Andres V. Lerner, Kevin M. Murphy, and Lacey L. Plache (2006),
Competition in Two-Sided Markets: The Antitrust Economics of Payment Card Interchange
Fees, Antitrust Law Journal, 73(3), 571-626.
    Koeksal, Emin (2010), Network Neutrality and Quality of Service: A Two-Sided Market
Analysis, Working Paper (Bahcesehir Universitesi).
    Kotsogiannis, Christos and Konstantinos Serfes (2010), Public Goods and Tax Competition
in a Two-Sided Market, Journal of Public Economic Theory, 12(2): 281-321.
    Kourgiantakis, Markos and Emmanuel Petrakis (2007), Modelling B2B E-Marketplaces: The
Role of Intermediaries, Working Paper (University of Crete).
    Krueger, Malte (2009), The Elasticity Pricing Rule for Two-Sided Markets: A Note, Review
of Network Economics, 8(3): 271-278.
    Kumar, Ravi, Yury Lifshifts, and Andrew Tomkins (2010), Evolution of Two-Sided Markets,
Proceedings of the Third ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, 311-
320.
    Kurucu, Gokee (2007), Negative Network Externalities in Two-Sided Markets: A
Competition Approach, Working Paper (Boston College).
    Landman, Vandit and Stefan Stremersch (2011), Multi-Homing in Two-Sided Markets: An
Empirical Inquiry in the Video Game Console Industry, Journal of Marketing, 75(6).
    Lee, Robin S. (2011), Dynamic Demand Estimation in Platform and Two-Sided Markets: The
Welfare Costs of Software Incompatibility, Working Paper (Stern School of Business).
    Lee, Robin S. (2012a), Competing Platforms, Working Paper (NYU Stern School of
Business).
    Lee, Robin S., Home Videogame Platforms, in M. Peitz and J. Waldfogel (2012), Oxford
Handbook of the Digital Economy, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 83-107.
    Lee, Robin S. (2012b), Vertical Integration and Exclusivity in Platform and Two-Sided
Markets, Working Paper (Stern School of Business).
    Lee, Robin S. and Tim Wu (2009), Subsidizing Creativity through Network Design: Zero-
Pricing and Net Neutrality, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(3): 61-76.
    Leonello, Agnese (2009), Horizontal Mergers in Two-Sided Markets, Working Paper
(European University Institute).
    Levin, Jonathan, The Economics of Internet Markets, in D. Acemoglu, M. Arellano, and E.
                                                                                           64


Dekel (forthcoming), Advances in Economics and Econometrics, Tenth World Congress of the
Econometric Society.
    Li, Shengli, Yipeng Liu, and Subhajyoti Bandyopadhyay (2010), Network Effects in Online
Two-Sided Market Platforms: A Research Note, Decision Support Systems, 49(2): 245-249.
    Li, Ting (2009), Tying in Two-Sided Markets, Working Paper (Toulouse School of
Economics).
    Li, Lixiang, Yueting Chai, and Yi Liu (2011), Inter-Group and Intra-Group Externalities of
Two-Sided Markets in Electronic Commerce, Journal of Service Science and Management, 4: 52-
58.
    Lin, Mei, Shaojin Li, and Andrew B. Whinston (2011), Innovation and Price Competition in
a Two-Sided Market, Journal of Management Information Systems, 28(2), 171-202.
    Lindstadt, Nadine (2009), Multisided Media Markets: Applying the Theory of Multisided
Markets to Media Markets, University of Southern Denmark Working Paper 96/09.
    Litan, Robert E. and Alex J. Pollock (2006), The Future of Charge Card Networks, AEI-
Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies Working Paper 06-03.
    Liu, Qihong and Konstantinos Serfes (forthcoming), Price Discrimination in Two-Sided
Markets, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy.
    Lowe, Philip (2005), Payments System Reform: The Australian Experience, Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City, Proceedings – Payments Systems Research Conferences, 269-278.
    Luchetta, Giacomo (2012), Is the Google Platform a Two-Sided Market? 23rd European
Regional Conference of the International Telecommunication Society.
    Manenti, Fabio M. and Ernesto Somma (2011), Plastic Clashes: Competition among Closed
and Open Payment Systems, Manchester School, 79(6): 1099-1125.
    Marcu, Mircea I. (2008), Quality Provision in Two-Sided Markets: The Case of Managed
Care, Working Paper (University of Florida).
    McAndrews, James and Zhu Wang (2008), The Economics of Two-Sided Payment Card
Markets: Pricing, Adoption, and Usage, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Working Paper WP
12-06.
    Mel’nyk, Yuliia (2008), Health Economics: A Two-Sided Approach, Master’s Thesis,
Universitat Aut`onoma de Barcelona.
    Miao, Chun-Hui (2009), Limiting Compatibility in Two-Sided Markets, Review of Network
Economics, 8(4): 346-364.
    Miklos-Thal, Jeanine and Markus Reisinger (2010), Operating System Adoption Decisions in
the Presence of Indirect Network Externalities, Working Paper (Simon School of Business and
University of Kaulbachstr).
    Mooney, Catherine T. (2010), A Two-Sided Market Analysis of Radio Ownership Caps,
Working Paper (University of Oklahoma).
    Mooney, Catherine T. (2010), Market Power, Audience Segmentation, and Radio Advertising
                                                                                          65


Levels, Working Paper (University of Oklahoma).
    Motta, Massimo and Helder Vasconcelos (2012), Exclusionary Pricing in a Two-Sided
Market, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 9164.
    Mueller, Christopher and Enrico Boehme (2011), The Monopoly Benchmark on Two-Sided
Markets, MPRA Working Paper 34987.
    Muris, Timothy J. (2005), Payment Card Regulation and the (Mis)Application of the
Economics of Two-Sided Markets, Columbia Business Law Review, 2005(3): 515-550.
    Musacchio, John and Dohoon Kim (2009), Network Platform Competition in a Two-Sided
Market: Implications to the Net Neutrality Issue, TPRC Conference on Communication,
Information, and Internet Policy.
    Musacchio, John, Galina Schwartz, and Jean Walrand (2009), A Two-Sided Market Analysis
of Provider Investment Incentives with an Application to the Net-Neutrality Issue, Review of
Network Economics, 8(1): 22-39.
    Njoroge, Paul, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Nicolas Stier (2009), Competition, Market Coverage,
and Quality Choice in Interconnected Platforms, Proceedings of NetEcon.
    Njoroge, Paul, Asuman Ozdaglar, Nicolas Stier, and G, Weintraub (2010), Investment in
Two-Sided Markets and the Net Neutrality Debate, Working Paper (MIT and Columbia
University).
    OECD Competition Committee (2009), Two-Sided Markets, DAF/COMP(2009)20, available
at http://www.oecd.org/daf/competition/44445730.pdf.
    Ordover, Janusz A. (2007), Comments on Evans and Schmalensee’s ‘The Industrial
Organization of Markets with Two-Sided Platforms,’ Competition Policy International, 3(1):
181-189.
    Orman, Wafa H. (2008), The Effects of Compatibility on Competition between Proprietary
and Open Two-Sided Platforms, Working Paper (Baylor University).
    Ozman, Muge (2008), The Two Face of Open Innovation: Network Externalities and
Learning, Working Paper (Telecom and Management SudParis).
    Parker, Geoffrey G. and Marshall W. Van Alstyne (2000), Internetwork Externalities and
Free Information Goods, in Proceedings of the 2nd ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce,
New York: Association for Computing Machinery, 107-116.
    Parker, Geoffrey and Marshall W. Van Alstyne (2002a), Information Complements,
Substitutes, and Strategic Product Design, Working Paper (Tulane University and University of
Michigan Ann Arbor).
    Parker, Geoffrey and Marshall W. Van Alstyne (2002b), Unbundling in the Presence of
Network Externalities, Working Paper (Tulane University and University of Michigan Ann
Arbor).
    Parker, Geoffrey and Marshall W. Van Alstyne (2005), Two-Sided Network Effects: A
Theory of Information Product Design, Management Science, 51(10): 1494-1504.
                                                                                          66


    Parker, Geoffrey and Marshall W. Van Alstyne (2009), Six Challenges in Platform Licensing
and Open Innovation, Communications and Strategies, 74: 17-36.
    Peitz, Martin and Tommaso M. Valletti (2008), Content and Advertising in the Media: Pay-
TV versus Free-To-Air, International Journal of Industrial Organization, 26(4): 949-965.
    Peitz, Martin, Sven Rady, and Piers Trepper (2011), Experimentation in Two-Sided Markets,
GESY Discussion Paper No. 365.
    Pezzino, Mario and Giacomo Pignataro (2008), Competition in the Health Care Market: A
‘Two-Sided’ Approach, Working Paper (University of Manchester and University of Cantania).
    Polanski, Arnold and Eyal Winter (2010), Endogenous Two-Sided Markets with Repeated
Transactions, B.E. Journal of Theoretical Economics, 10(1).
    Pollock, Rufus (2008), The Control of Porting in Platform Markets, Working Paper
(University of Cambridge).
    Ponce, Jorge (forthcoming), The Quality of Credit Ratings: A Two-Sided Market Approach,
Economic Systems.
    Poolsombat, Rattanasuda and Gianluigi Vernasca (2006), Partial Multihoming in Two-Sided
Markets, University of York Discussion Papers in Economics, No. 2006/10.
    Pranger, Robin A., Mark D. Manuszak, Elizabeth K. Kiser, and Ron Borzekowski (2009),
Interchange Fees and Payment Card Networks: Economics, Industry Developments, and Policy
Issues, Working Paper (Federal Reserve Board).
    Raivio, Yrjo and Sakari Luukkainen (2011), Mobile Networks as a Two-Sided Platform –
Case Open Telco, Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research, 6(2): 77-
89.
    Rasch, Alexander (2007), “Platform Competition with Partial Multihoming under
Differentiation: A Note,” Economics Bulletin, 12(7), 1-8.
    Rash, Alexander and Tobias Wenzel (2011), Piracy in a Two-Sided Software Market,
Working Paper (Universitat Dusseldorf).
    Ratliff, James D. and Daniel L. Rubinfeld (2010), Online Advertising: Defining Relevant
Markets, Journal of Competition Law and Economics, 6(3): 653-686.
    Reisinger, Markus (2004), Two-Sided Markets with Negative Externalities, Munich
Discussion Paper No. 2004-27.
    Reisinger, Markus (2011), Unique Equilibrium in Two-Part Tariff Competition between Two-
Sided Platforms, Working Paper (University of Munich).
    Reisinger, Markus (2012), Platform Competition for Advertisers and Users in Media
Markets, International Journal of Industrial Organization, 30(2): 243-252.
    Reisinger, Markus, Ludwig Ressner, and Richard Schmidtke (2009), Two-Sided Markets with
Pecuniary and Participation Externalities, Journal of Industrial Economics, 57(1): 32-57.
    Rochet, Jean-Charles and Jean Tirole (2002), Cooperation among Competitors: Some
Economics of Payment Card Associations, RAND Journal of Economics, 33(4): 549-570.
                                                                                           67


    Rochet, Jean-Charles and Jean Tirole (2003a), An Economic Analysis of the Determination of
Interchange Fees in Payment Card Systems, Review of Network Economics, 2(2): 69-79.
    Rochet, Jean-Charles and Jean Tirole (2003b), Platform Competition in Two-Sided Markets,
Journal of the European Economic Association, 1(4): 990-1029.
    Rochet, Jean-Charles and Jean Tirole (2006a), Externalities and Regulation in Card Payment
Systems, Review of Network Economics, 5(1): 1-14.
    Rochet, Jean-Charles and Jean Tirole (2006b), Two-Sided Markets: A Progress Report,
RAND Journal of Economics, 37(3): 645-667.
    Rochet, Jean-Charles and Jean Tirole, Competition Policy in Two-Sided Markets, with a
Special Emphasis on Payment Cards, in Paolo Buccirossi (2008), Handbook of Antitrust
Economics, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 543-582.
    Rochet, Jean-Charles and Jean Tirole (2008), Tying in Two-Sided Markets and the Honor All
Cards Rule, International Journal of Industrial Organization, 26(6): 1333-1347.
    Rochet, Jean-Charles and Jean Tirole (2011), Must-Take Cards: Merchant Discounts and
Avoided Costs, Journal of the European Economic Association, 9(3): 462-495.
    Rochet, Jean-Charles and Julian Wright (2010), Credit Card Interchange Fees, Journal of
Banking and Finance, 34(8): 1788-1797.
    Roger, Guillaume (2012), Two-Sided Competition with Differentiation, Working Paper
(University of New South Wales).
    Roger, Guillaume and Luis Vasconcelos (2012), Platform Pricing Structure and Moral
Hazard, Working Paper (University of New South Wales and University of Essex).
    Rooney, William H, and David K. Park (2007), The Two-Sided Market Literature Enriches
Traditional Antitrust Analysis, Competition Policy International, 3(1): 211-219.
    Roson, Roberto (2005), Two-Sided Markets: A Tentative Survey, Review of Network
Economics, 4(2), 142-160.
    Roson, Roberto (2006), Equilibrium Size in Network with Indirect Network Externalities: A
Comment, Working Paper (University of Venice).
    Ruhmer, Isasbel (2011), Platform Collusion in Two-Sided Markets, Working Paper
(University of Mannheim).
    Rust, John and George Hall (2003), Middlemen versus Market Makers: A Theory of
Competitive Exchange, Journal of Political Economy, 111(2): 353-403.
    Rysman, Marc (2004), Competition between Networks: A Study of the Market for Yellow
Pages, Review of Economic Studies, 71(2): 483-512.
    Rysman, Marc (2007a), An Empirical Analysis of Payment Card Usage, Journal of Industrial
Economics, 55(1): 1036.
    Rysman, Marc (2007b), The Empirics of Antitrust in Two-Sided Markets, Competition Policy
International, 3(1): 197-209.
    Rysman, Marc (2009), The Economics of Two-Sided Markets, Journal of Economic
                                                                                            68


Perspectives, 23(3): 125-143.
    Rysman, Marc and Julian Wright (2012), The Economics of Payment Cards, Working Paper
(Boston University and National University of Singapore).
    Salim, Claudia (2010), Platform Standards, Collusion, and Quality Incentives, Working
Paper (University of Berlin).
    Schmalensee, Richard (2002), Payment Systems and Interchange Fees, Journal of Industrial
Economics, 50(2): 103-122.
    Schmalensee, Richard (2011), Why is Platform Pricing Generally Highly Skewed? Review of
Network Economics, 10(4): 1-11.
    Schuett, Florian (2010), Network Neutrality: A Survey of the Economic Literature, Review of
Network Economics, 9(2): 1-13.
    Schuh, Scott, Oz Shy, and Joanna Stavins (2010), Who Gains and Who Loses from Credit
Card Payments? Theory and Calibrations, Working Paper (Federal Reserve Bank of Boston and
Consumer Payments Research Center).
    Schwartz, Marius and Daniel R. Vincent (2006), The No Surcharge Rule and Card User
Rebates: Vertical Control by a Payment Network, Review of Network Economics, 5(1): 72-102.
    Seamans, Robert and Feng Zhu (2011), Technology Shocks in Multi-Sided Markets: The
Impact of Craigslist on Local Newspapers, Working Paper (Stern School of Business and
Marshall School of Business).
    Seamans, Robert and Feng Zhu (2012), Market Shocks and Product Positioning in Multi-
Sided Markets: The Impact of Craigslist on Local Newspapers, Working Paper (Stern School of
Business and Marshall School of Business).
    Semeraro, Steven (2007), Credit Card Interchange Fees: Three Decades of Antitrust
Uncertainty, George Mason Law Review, 14(4): 941-1002.
    Sen, Soumya, Roch A. Guerin, and Kartik Hosanagar (2011), Functionality-Rich versus
Minimalist Platforms: A Two-Sided Market Analysis, Computer Communication Review, 41(5).
    Shy, Oz (2011), A Short Survey of Network Economics, Review of Industrial Organization,
38(2): 119-149.
    Shy, Oz and Zhu Wang (2011), Why Do Payment Card Networks Charge Proportional
Fees? American Economic Review, 101(4): 1575-1590.
    Sidak, J. Gregory and Hal J. Singer (2008), Evaluating Market Power with Two-Sided
Demand and Preemptive Offers to Dissipate Monopoly Rent: Lessons for High-Technology
Industries from the Antitrust Division’s Approval of the XM-Sirius Satellite Radio Merger,
Journal of Competition Law and Economics, 4(3): 697-751.
    Sidak, J. Gregory and David J. Tecee (2009), Rewriting the Horizontal Merger Guidelines in
the Name of Dynamic Competition, George Mason Law Review, 16(4): 885-894.
    Small, John and Julian Wright (2002), The Bilateral Negotiation of Interchange Fees in
Payment Systems, Working Paper (NECG and University of Auckland).
                                                                                          69


    Snyder, Chris and Johnathan Zinman (2007), Consumer Homing on Payment Cards: From
Theory to Measurement, Working Paper (Dartmouth College).
    Sokullu, Senay (2011), Nonparametric Analysis of Two-Sided Markets, Working Paper
(University of Bristol).
    Soltani, Houda (2008), Vertical Compatibility in Two-Sided Markets, Working Paper
(ERMES, Universite Pantheon-Assas Paris).
    Song, Minjae (2011), Estimating Platform Market Power in Two-Sided Markets with an
Application to Magazine Advertising, Working Paper (University of Rochester).
    Spulber, Daniel F., Firms and Networks in Two-Sided Markets, in Terry Hendershott (2006),
Handbook of Economics and Information Systems, Volume 1, 137-200.
    Spulber, Daniel F. (2008), Consumer Coordination in the Small and in the Large:
Implications for Antitrust in Markets with Network Effects, Journal of Competition Law and
Economics, 4(2): 207-262.
    Spulber, Daniel F. (2010), Solving the Circular Conundrum: Communication and
Coordination in Internet Markets, Northwestern University Law Review, 104(2): 537-592.
    Stein, Alex (2006), Healthcare Intermediaries, Regulation, 29(4), 20-25.
    Stuehmeier, Torben and Tobias Wenzel (2011), Getting Beer during Commercials: Adverse
Effects of Ad-Avoidance, Information Economics and Policy, 23(1): 98-106.
    Stuehmeier, Torben and Tobias Wenzel (2012), Regulating Advertising in the Presence of
Public Service Broadcasting, Working Paper (Dusseldorf Institute for Competition Economics,
Heinrich-Heine_Universitat Dusseldorf and European University Institute).
    Sun, Mingchun (2006), Dynamic Network Platform Competition in Two-Sided Markets,
Ph.D. Dissertation, Stanford University.
    Sun, Mingchun and Edison Tse (2007a), Sustainable Growth of Payment Card Networks: A
Two-Sided Market Approach, Journal of Business Strategies, 24(1).
    Sun, Mingchun and Edison Tse (2007b), When Does the Winner Take All in Two-Sided
Markets, Review of Network Economics, 6(1): 16-40.
    Sun, Mingchun and Edison Tse (2009), The Resource-Based View of Competitive Advantage
in Two-Sided Markets, Journal of Management Studies, 46(1): 45-64.
    Tag, Joacim (2009), Paying to Remove Advertisements, Information Economics and Policy,
21(4): 245-252.
    Tang, Weijun, Hongmin Chen and Li Xu (2011), The Sequential Platform Competition in the
Two-Sided Market with Cases from the E-Payment Industry, 2009 International Conference on
Machine Learning and Computing, IPCSIT Volume 3 (2011), 392-396.
    Tarantino, Emanuele (2011), Vertical Search Engine Foreclosure, Working Paper
(University of Bologna).
    Toza, Katarzyna (2009), Payment Card Systems as an Example of Two-Sided Markets – A
Challenge for Antitrust Authorities, Working Paper (University of Warsaw).
                                                                                           70


    Tracer, Daniel M. (2011), Overcharge But Don’t Overestimate: Calculating Damages for
Antitrust Injuries in Two-Sided Markets, Cardozo Law Review, 33(2): 807-840.
    Tregouet, Thomas (2007), Two-Sided Platforms in Search Markets, Working Paper
(Iniversite de Cergy-Pontoise).
    Tregouet, Thomas (2012), Integration and Coordination in Two-Sided Markets, Working
Paper (Universite de Cergy-Pontoise).
    Tumpel-Gugerell, Gertrude (2005), Interchange in a Changing Market: Observations from
the Euro Area Perspective, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Proceedings – Payments
Systems Research Conferences, 279-288.
    Tucker, Catherine (2005), Empirically Evaluating Two-Sided Integrated Network Effects:
The Case of Electronic Payments, Working Paper (MIT).
    Tucker, Catherine (2008), Identifying Formal and Informal Influence in Technology
Adoption with Network Externalities, Management Science, 54(12), 2024-2038.
    Tucker, Catherine and Juanjuan Zhang (2010), Growing Two-Sided Networks by Advertising
the User Base: A Field Experiment, Marketing Science, 29(5): 805-814.
    Tuunanen, Virpi Kristina (2011), A Model for Analyzing ICT Intensive Service Innovation in
n-Sided Markets, Proceedings of the 2011 44th Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences.
    Valletti, Tommaso (2006), Mobile Call Termination: A Tale of Two-Sided Markets,
Communications and Strategies, 61: 61-77.
    Van Cayseele, Patrick and Jo Reynaerts (2011), Complementary Platforms, Review of
Network Economics, 10(1): 1-31.
    Van Cayseele, Patrick and Stijn Vanormelingen (2009), Prices and Network Effects in Two-
Sided Markets: The Belgian Newspaper Industry, Working Paper (Katholieke Universiteit
Leuven).
    Van Raalte, Chris and Harry Webers (1998), Spatial Competition with Intermediated
Matching, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 34(3): 477-488.
    Vannini, Stefano (2008), Bargaining and Two-Sided Markets: The Case of Global
Distribution Systems (GDS) in Travelport’s Acquisition of Worldspan, Competition Policy
Newsletter, No. 2: 43-50.
    Veiga, Andre and E. Glen Weyl (2012), Multidimensional Product Design, Working Paper
(Toulouse School of Economics and University of Chicago).
    Verdier, Marianne (2006), Retail Payment Systems: What Can We Learn from Two-Sided
Markets? Communications and Strategies, 61.
    Verdier, Marianne (2008), Payment Card Systems in Europe: Convergence or
Disappearance? Communications and Strategies, 69: 127-147.
    Verdier, Marianne (2010a), Interchange Fees and Incentives to Invest in the Quality of a
Payment Card System, International Journal of Industrial Organization, 28(5): 539-554.
                                                                                           71


    Verdier, Marianne (2010b), Interchange Fees and Inefficiencies in the Substitution between
Payment Cards and Cash, Working Paper (Universite Paris Ouest Nanteere).
    Verdier, Marianne (2011), Interchange Fees in Payment Card Systems: A Survey of the
Literature, Journal of Economic Surveys, 25(2), 273-297.
    Vicens, Maria Fernanda (2008), Essays in Two-Sided Platforms, Ph.D. Dissertation,
Universidad Carlos III De Madrid.
    Vickers, John (2005), Public Policy and the Invisible Price: Competition Law, Regulation
and the Interchange Fee, Competition Law Journal, 4: 5-16, reprinted in Federal Reserve Bank
of Kansas City, Interchange Fees in Credit and Debit Card Industries: What Role for Public
Authorities?
    Viecens, Maria Fernanda (2009), Pricing Strategies in Two-Sided Platforms: The Role of
Sellers’ Competition, Working Paper (FEDEA).
    Vogelsang, Michael (2010), Dynamics of Two-Sided Internet Markets, International
Economics and Economic Policy, 7(1): 129-145.
    Von Weizsacker, Carl Christian (2009), Antitrust Problems of Four Party Credit Card
Systems, Working Paper.
    Wang, Zhu (2010), Market Structure and Payment Card Pricing: What Drives the
Interchange? International Journal of Industrial Organization, 28(1): 86-98.
    Wang, Zhu and Julian Wright (2012), Ad Valorem Platform Fees and Efficient Price
Discrimination, Economics of Networks eJournal, 4(70).
    Waverman, Leonard (2007), Two-Sided Telecom Markets and the Unintended Consequences
of Business Strategy, Competition Policy International, 3(1): 249-256.
    Weiner, Stuart E. and Julian Wright (2005), Interchange Fees in Various Countries:
Developments and Determinants, Review of Network Economics, 4(4): 290-323.
    Weisman, Dennis L. and Robert B. Kulick (2010), Price Discrimination, Two-Sided Markets,
and Net Neutrality Regulation, Working Paper (Kansas State University and George Washington
University).
    Weyl, E. Glenn (2008a), Double Marginalization in Two-Sided Markets, Working Paper
(University of Chicago).
    Weyl, E. Glenn (2008b), Monopolies in Two-Sided Markets: Comparative Statics and
Identification, Working Paper (University of Chicago).
    Weyl, E. Glenn (2009), Monopoly, Ramsey, and Lindahl in Rochet and Tirole (2003),
Economics Letters, 103(2): 99-100.
    Weyl, E. Glen (2010), A Price Theory of Multi-Sided Platforms, American Economic
Review, 100(4): 1642-1672.
    White, Lawrence J. (2006), Market Definition and Market Power in Payment Card
Networks: Some Comments and Considerations, Review of Network Economics, 5(1): 61-71.
    White, Alexander (2012), Search Engines Left Side Quality versus Right Side Profits,
                                                                                           72


Working Paper. (Tsinghua Unviersity)
    White, Alexander and Kamal Jain (2010), The Attention Economy of Search and Web
Advertisement, Working Paper (Tsinghua University and Microsoft Corporation).
    White, Alexander and E. Glen Weyl (2012), Insulated Platform Competition, Working Paper
(Tsinghua University and University of Chicago).
    Wilbur, Kenneth C. (2008), A Two-Sided, Empirical Model of Television Advertising and
Viewing Markets, Marketing Science, 27(3): 356-378.
    Wotton, John (2007), Are Media Markets Analyzed as Two-Sided Markets? Competition
Policy International, 3(1): 237-247.
    Wright, Julian (2003a), Optimal Payment Card Systems, European Economic Review, 47(4):
587-612.
    Wright, Julian (2003b), Pricing in Debit and Credit Card Schemes, Economic Letters, 80(3):
305-309.
    Wright, Julian (2004a), The Determinants of Optimal Interchange Fees in Payment Systems,
Journal of Industrial Economics, 52(1): 1-26.
    Wright, Julian (2004b), One-Sided Logic in Two-Sided Markets, Review of Network
Economics, 3(1): 44-64.
    Wright, Julian (2010), Why Do Merchants Accept Payment Cards? Review of Network
Economics, 9(3): 1-6.
    Wright, Julian (2012), Why Payment Card Fees Are Biased Against Retailers, Working
Paper (National University of Singapore).
    Xu, Li and Hong-min Chen (2005), Multihoming and Compatibility in Asymmetric Two-
Sided Markets, Working Paper (Shanghai Jiao tong University).
    Yao, Song and Carl F. Mela (2011), A Dynamic Model of Sponsored Search Advertising,
Marketing Science, 30(3): 447-468.
    Zhao, Wugang and Edison Tse (2011), Competition in Search Engine Market, Journal of
Business Strategies, 28(2): 123-150.
    Zhou, Yiyi (2012), Failure to Launch in Two-Sided Markets: A Study of the U.S. Video
Game Market, Working Paper (State University of New York at Sony Brook).
    Zhu, Feng, and Marco Iansiti (2012), Entry into Platform-Based Markets, Strategic
Management Journal, 33: 88-106.
    Zywicki, Todd J. (2010), The Economics of Payment Card Interchange Fees and the Limits
of Regulation, ICLE Financial Regulatory Program White Paper Series.
