                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       THE IMPACT OF SOCIAL NETWORKS ON LABOUR MARKET OUTCOMES:
                     NEW EVIDENCE FROM CAPE BRETON

                                            Adnan Q. Khan
                                            Steven F. Lehrer

                                         Working Paper 18786
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18786


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2013




We wish to thank Charlie Beach, Doug Tattrie and seminar participants at the Income, Inequality and
Immigration: A JDI Conference Honouring Charles M. Beach for helpful comments and suggestions
on earlier drafts. This paper was motivated by several of Beach's recent papers including Abbott and
Beach (2008, 2011) that postulated that the development of labour market connections by new immigrants
may be an underlying factor in the immigrants' increasing earnings profile since landing. Lehrer wishes
to thank SSHRC for research support. We are also extremely gratefully to members of SRDC for answering
numerous questions about the data used in this study. The usual caveat applies. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Adnan Q. Khan and Steven F. Lehrer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Social Networks on Labour Market Outcomes: New Evidence from Cape Breton
Adnan Q. Khan and Steven F. Lehrer
NBER Working Paper No. 18786
February 2013
JEL No. C93,J08,Z18

                                               ABSTRACT

Debates centered on the role of social networks as a determinant of labour market outcomes have a
long history in economics and sociology; however, determining causality remains a challenge. In this
study we use information on random assignment to a unique intervention to identify the impact of
changes in the size of alternative social network measures on subsequent employment at both the individual
and community level. Our results indicate that being assigned to the treatment protocol significantly
increased the size of social networks, particularly weak ties. Nevertheless, these increases did not translate
into improved employment outcomes 18 months following study completion. We do not find any evidence
of treatment effect heterogeneity based on the initial size of one's social network; but those whose
strong ties increased at a higher rate during the experiment were significantly less likely to hold a job
following the experiment. We find that many of these results also hold at the community level among
those who did not directly participate in the intervention. In summary, our results suggest that policies
can successfully influence the size of an individual's social network, but these increases have limited
impacts on long run labour market outcomes with the notable exception of changes in the composition
of individuals who hold jobs.


Adnan Q. Khan
London School of Economics
International Growth Centre
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE, UK
a.q.khan@lse.ac.uk

Steven F. Lehrer
School of Policy Studies
and Department of Economics
Queen's University
Kingston, ON K7L 3N6
CANADA
and NBER
lehrers@post.queensu.ca
1         Introduction
The notion that social networks a¤ect labour market outcomes has been speculated about
in a variety of strands of academic literature, and as popularly expressed by the phrase:
“it’s not what you know but who you know!”. An increasing number of job searchers
are using online social network websites such as LinkedIn to help …nd employment. In
response, a growing number of websites o¤er advice on tactics individuals should employ
on social network websites to access desired employment opportunities. While the idea
that social networks in‡uence a host of labour market activities has a long history,1 few
studies present direct evidence of causal relationships from social networks to employment.
        While substantial theoretical developments have been made on modeling the e¤ects
of social networks on a multitude of individual outcomes (see Jackson (2010, 2008) for
a comprehensive survey of the literature in economics), little empirical evidence from
Canada exists on whether and how social networks a¤ect a variety of labour market out-
comes. Empirical analyses on the e¤ects of social networks have been plagued by various
conceptual and data problems. Many commonly used datasets lack information on the
structure and composition of individuals’social networks. Analyses are further compli-
cated by various endogeneity issues such as the re‡ection problem and selection bias. A
re‡ection problem arises when individual and network members’outcomes are determined
simultaneously, which inherently confounds the measure of network’s in‡uence. Selection
    1
        For instance, Ioannides and Loury (2004) report that between 30 and 60% of jobs are found through
informal social network contacts Bayer et al. (2008), and Topa (2001) present evidence of network-based
job referrals and informational spillovers in the U.S. labour market. Research in this area dates back to
the classic study by Granovetter (1973) who showed the importance of social ties, especially weak ties, in
…nding a job. Granovetter (1995) presents evidence that professional, managerial and technical workers
were much more likely to …nd jobs through weak ties than through strong ones. More recently, Garg and
Telang (2011) present evidence that there is a stronger asssociation between job search outcomes and the
size of weak contacts in online social networks relative to the number of strong ties in these networks.



                                                     2
bias leads to a correlated unobservables problem if people tend to associate with others
based in part on some unobserved group characteristics they favor. In such a case, an ob-
served positive association between an individual’s outcome and those of their associated
network members’may not be causal but rather due to some unknown factors that a¤ect
both social links and individual’s own labour market outcomes. This issue of endogenous
group membership plagues all studies using observational data.
      Researchers typically attempt to overcome the selection bias problem in one of two
ways. Several studies have exploited credible exogenous variations to identify the e¤ects
of social networks on labour market outcomes. For example, Laschever (2009) examined
the subsequent employment outcome of members of military units formed via the U. S.
World War I draft. Beaman (2012) exploits the reallocation of political refugees from the
same country to a particular city, conditional on the refugees not having family members
in the United States to recover estimates of speci…c form of network e¤ects free of selection
bias. This type of approach, however, remains a rarity: researchers most commonly use an
instrumental variables estimator (see Case and Katz (1991) and Apinunmahakul and De-
vlin (2008), among others) to mitigate the correlation between unobservables and network
variables. However, the statistical properties and economic validity of the instrumental
variables chosen are debated.2
      This paper presents some initial evidence on how changes in di¤erent dimensions of
social networks in‡uence labor market activities in a speci…c region in Canada. We make
use of data from the Community Employment Innovation Project (CEIP), an innovative
labour market …eld experiment recently conducted in Cape Breton, Canada. Rather than
proving traditional services to assist in job placement such as counselling services, this
study provided community based employment allowing participants to acquire new skills
and work experience while also developing valuable work-related networks and “social
  2
      Heckman (1997) considers the economic interpretation of instrumental variable estimators in general.




                                                     3
capital”that could lead to greater long-term employment success. The experiment utilized
randomization and because of its design, allows a source of exogenous variation in the
size of participants’social networks, which can be used to identify the impacts of social
networks on subsequent employment.3 Speci…cally, we explore, at the individual level,
whether changes in the size of social networks resulting from being assigned to receive the
CEIP intervention a¤ected employment in the medium to long term.
       In the …nal evaluation report completed by the agency that oversaw the CEIP study,
Guyamarti et al. (2008a, pp. 7) concluded that “it was uncertain, however, whether
CEIP could improve skills and networks and whether this would increase post-program
employment in an economically depressed area”. Our analyses directly address this ques-
tion. Further, we categorize the composition of an individuals’social networks according
to several alternative membership criteria. Categories range from those who could provide
employment advice, to close friends and family members. These distinctions in social net-
work composition will be used to address the ongoing debate over whether weak ties are
more important than strong ties for obtaining employment.4 In addition to collecting data
on program participants and controls, CEIP researchers collected data on nonparticipant
   3
       There are several other studies (e.g. Angelucci and De Giorgi (2009), Du‡o and Saez (2003), and
Miguel and Kremer (2003), among others). that use randomized experiments to identify social interac-
tions. Our goal is to use a non-experimental approach with experimental data to isloate the causal e¤ect
of changes in social networks that arise from the experiment.
    4
      This debate began with Granovetter (1973), who referred to weak ties as a network of acquaintances
who are less likely to be socially involved with one another. While there is no universally accepted
de…nition of weak ties, in general these refer to peripheral friends and random contacts who are not close
in social space. The strength of weak ties remains an open empirical question (e. g. see Tassier (2006)).
Strong ties are established with people who reinforce one’s beliefs and provide support required to endure
life’s challenges, including close friends and relatives. Strong ties may help individuals …nd employment
because they facilitate more frequent contact with the individual, increasing the likelihood of knowing
that an individual is looking for a job, and have a greater motivation to provide job information, than
weak ties.


                                                    4
individuals from CEIP study communities as well as individuals from comparable non-
participating communities. This allows us to additionally explore how the distribution of
social networks changed at the community level as a result of the CEIP intervention. We
broadly examine whether these aggregate changes led to changes in employment levels
and network structures across regions.
    This paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we describe the Community
Employment Innovation Project and the manner in which data was collected from both
study participants and non-participants. In section 3 we introduce the model that guides
our estimation. We demonstrate that random assignment to the program in combination
with our econometric methodology allows us to gain consistent estimates of the impacts of
changes in social networks on labor market activities. Our empirical results are presented
and discussed in section 4. We present strong evidence that, while being assigned to the
program did lead to increases in the size of a variety of social network variables, these
e¤ects did not translate into improved employment outcomes. Further, we …nd that these
results also hold at the community level among those who did not participate in the
CEIP program. Taken together, these results suggest that, while policies can successfully
in‡uence the size of an individual’s social network, particularly in terms of weak ties,
these increases do not a¤ect subsequent labour market outcomes; particularly for those
who experienced larger gains in the size of their strong ties during the experiment. The
concluding section summarizes our …ndings and discusses directions for future research.



2     Data
The data for this study comes from the Community Employment Innovation Project
(CEIP) which was conceived by Human Resources and Social Development Canada (HRSDC)
as a long-term research and demonstration project for testing an alternative form of in-
come transfer payment in economically depressed areas through community involvement.

                                            5
This study was conducted in the Cape Breton Regional Municipality located in the Cana-
dian province of Nova Scotia. The goal of the project was to improve the long-term
well-being of workers in communities experiencing chronically high unemployment, while
simultaneously contributing to the development of those communities themselves. The
program was designed to in‡uence long term outcomes by assisting participants to de-
velop valuable work-related networks and “social capital” that could lead to subsequent
long-term employment success. CEIP was managed by the Social Research and Demon-
stration Corporation (SRDC) and data collection was conducted by Statistics Canada.
While SRDC designed an extensive individual impact study to examine the e¤ect of
CEIP on participants’employment, earnings, and their use of social bene…ts,5 to the best
of our knowledge there has not been an examination of one of the key pathways that was
hypothesized to underlie the causal mechanism.
       The CEIP researchers collected a myriad of longitudinal data sets. In this paper, we
draw upon two datasets described below. First, the individual impact study followed par-
ticipants in the CEIP impact evaluation for 54 months. Those interested in participating
in the study were required to complete an enrolment form consisting of an informed con-
sent. Participants for the experimental study were randomly selected from among welfare
and EI bene…ciaries residing in the Cape Breton Regional Municipality.6 After providing
informed consent, individuals completed a survey that captured baseline measures on in-
   5
       See Gyarmati et al. (2006, 2007, 2008a) for a series of impact evaluations of the CEIP.
   6
       The selection was made from two broad groups - those from the Employment Insurance (EI) pool and
those from the Income Assistance (IA) pool. Selection criteria for the participants re‡ected the rules and
regulations that govern these transfer programs. EI bene…ciaries were randomly selected from a monthly
derivative of the HRDC Bene…ts and Overpayments …le which is used for administering EI claims and
payments. Eligible IA recipients were selected from among IA recipients who expressed an interest in
participating in the project after being noti…ed by the Nova Scotia Department of Community Service
about CEIP and their eligibility to participate in the project. Once selected, individuals were informed
about the project.



                                                    6
dividual and socioeconomic characteristics. The individuals were then randomly assigned
into either the CEIP treatment or control group. Randomization was conducted by Statis-
tics Canada on dedicated random assignment software application, and procedures were
adopted to protect the integrity of the process7
       Individuals assigned to the intervention were o¤ered eligibility for 36 months of com-
munity work in return for foregoing their welfare payments. The participants were paid
at close to the minimum wage for work on projects developed by local project sponsors
and community groups in program communities. All labour costs (as well as some other
resources) of those randomly assigned to the CEIP intervention were covered by HRSDC.
Those assigned were free to work on non-CEIP projects, but were to lose their eligibility
to participate in the program if they were to return to welfare as a major source of income.
The typical participant worked on multiple projects in the social sector during the course
of the project. Finally, it is important to note that, generally, those from the EI pool
have greater links to the labour market, while those from the IA pool have weaker links
to the labour market and greater levels of poverty.8 Participant selection and enrolment
was carried out in the period from June 2001 to June 2002.
   7
       The procedure adopted and the di¤erent checks applied are described in detail in Greenwood et al.
(2003, p.121-123).
   8
     We present summary statistics based on treatment assignment later in this section. While both
participant samples mostly represented disadvantaged populations there is considerable variation along
several dimensions: The Employment Insurance (EI) sample is more likely to be male, at 58 per cent,
while 62 per cent of the Income Assistance (IA) sample is female; the EI sample is typically older, with
an average age of 40, while the IA sample age was 35 at baseline; the EI sample had a higher educational
attainment, with 69 per cent holding a high school diploma compared to 60 per cent of the IA sample;
the household income for most EI sample members was under $30,000 during the 12 months before
enrolment, while the household income of most IA enrollers was less than $20,000 with over half of the
sample reporting income of less than $10,000; the EI sample had a longer work history than IA sample
members at baseline (they were, however, also more likely to be unemployed due to a layo¤, contract
termination, or because their employer moved or closed down).


                                                    7
       All individuals in the impact study were initially surveyed at baseline with follow-up
surveys 18, 40 and 54 months after random assignment.9 This data provides information
on basic demographics (e.g., age, gender, and marital status, education and training),
employment (e.g. including industry and occupation classi…cation, job duration, absences,
pay rate, seasonal or non-seasonal, characteristics of employer, and unionization) and the
sources of personal and household income. Most importantly, a rich set of social network
measures described in detail below were also collected.
       The second source of data is the community e¤ects survey. For this survey, infor-
mation was independently collected from samples drawn from the full population of the
communities under investigation. More speci…cally, random digit dialing was used to con-
tact residents of the six program communities and seven comparison communities were
contacted.10 Comparison communities were based in either Cape Breton or mainland
Nova Scotia and were selected on a high degree of similarity, measured by proximity score
analysis, to program communities.11 It should be noted that a subset of the community
survey sample included those that were involved with the project (CEIP) in some capac-
ity. These individuals are crucial for our identi…cation strategy because their involvement
with the project provides a source of exogenous variation in their social networks. All
   9
       Each survey was staggered over time since induction into the project lasted over many months. The
54 month survey was conducted at least 12 months after the program ended for all participants.
  10
     The CEIP program communities include Dominion, Glace Bay, New Waterford, North Sydney, Syd-
ney Mines and Whitney Pier. The selected (program) communities had to agree to participate in the
project by means of a show of support by the majority of those attending public meetings held in each
community. Their subsequent participation in the CEIP involved multiple steps that led to the hiring of
project participants. Details of the process are given in Gyarmati et al. (2006, 2007, 2008a).
  11
     The process involved the following steps: establishing a list of candidate communities; calculating
pooled statistics for each of the descriptive community characteristics; calculating the squared Euclidean
distance of the normalized Census characteristic variables from every other community; and selecting
the comparison communities and community groupings with the shortest squared Euclidean distances
(Gyarmati et al. 2008a: appendix B).


                                                    8
individuals in the community e¤ects study were surveyed at three points in time, all of
which correspond to the timing of the follow-up surveys in the CEIP experimental study.
      Summary statistics for the data from the individual impact study used in this paper are
presented in Table 1. Each column refers to summary statistics based on treatment status
and survey wave. Comparing the …rst and …fth column we can observe that randomization
was indeed successful since the observed characteristics are balanced across groups.12 As
expected, rapid expansion of employment among treatment group participants is evident
in the summary statistics for wave 2 and some di¤erence in the average number of several
of the social network variables, particularly those re‡ecting weak ties are evident in the
summary statistics for wave 3. Also, on average, members of the sample have very low
levels of education with fewer than 20% of the sample holding either a 2-year college or
university degree.
      Summary statistics for the data from the community study are presented in Table
2. Columns were created based on: 1. whether a community took part in the CEIP
(program communities) and 2. The wave of the survey from which the data was derived.
Program communities received community projects, whereas comparison communities did
not. We found no signi…cant di¤erences over various outcomes of interest between these
groups of communities on non-project related potential instruments. We did, however, …nd
signi…cant di¤erences between these communities on project-related potential instruments
such as social network variables. These di¤erences were especially pronounced in the wave
3 survey. In our study, we consider multiple measures of social networks including: i) the
number of family and friends; ii) the bonding network, the number of persons who can
provide support when the respondent is sick, or can serve as someone the respondent
can talk to when feeling down; iii) the bridge network, proxied by the number of persons
who can loan the respondent $500; and iv) linking contacts, the number of contacts
 12
      Formal evidence of this claim is presented in Guyamarti et al. (2008).




                                                     9
with higher socioeconomic status. Weak ties can be proxied by link and bridge variables
whereas strong ties can be proxied by the bond variable.
    Most of the participants in the community survey were likely to have lived on Cape
Breton for all of their life. In terms of the highest level of education achieved, 56 percent
have completed high school, 9 percent have bachelor degrees, and 3 percent have some
university education. Approximately 23 percent of participants have trade-vocational and
apprenticeship diplomas. Participants’mean annual personal income is $24,000 while par-
ticipants’mean annual household income is $39,000. About 40 percent of individuals have
income levels below the Low-Income Cut-o¤ (LICO) of Statistics Canada. In terms of
income source, roughly 25 percent of individuals receive work pensions, while 24 percent
receive Employment Insurance (EI) or Social Assistance (SA). About 36 percent indi-
viduals are union members on the jobs they held at the baseline survey, while about 11
percent individuals, though not covered by a union, have their wages covered by union
contracts.
    The table also shows that the mean number of family members and friends the respon-
dent sees and talks to are 9.65 and 9.52 respectively. The mean age of the participants
in the estimation sample is 48 years; roughly 42 percent are males and 57 percent are
married or living with a partner. In terms of family status, about 32 percent are single,
without children; 11 percent are single with children; and 57 percent are couples with or
without children. The mean household size is 2.68. The mean number of bonding and
bridging contacts are 24.2 and 4.53 respectively. About 30 percent of the respondents
have linking contacts.



3     Empirical Model
In this study, our primary goal is to present reduced form evidence on whether or not
changes in the size of di¤erent forms of social networks are more e¤ective at increasing

                                             10
labour supply on the extensive margin. As we explain later in this section, our empirical
strategy will allow us to recover consistent estimates of the impact of changes in the size
of social networks and not the levels. Thus, throughout our analyses, we take the network
at the start of the experiment as given,13 and estimate how changes in the size of one’s
social network that occurred during the experiment a¤ected the likelihood an individual
is employed 18 months after the experiment was completed.
       Our selection of evaluating labour market outcomes 18 months after the experiment
was completed is based strictly on convenience, since this corresponds to the point in time
when the …nal survey was conducted. However, in this …nal survey CEIP researchers did
ask respondents a series of retrospective questions on when a job began, as well as also
collected six years of monthly administrative data on IA receipt. As such, it is possible to
evaluate IA outcomes at a monthly basis as well as potentially looking at employment in
between the …nal two surveys, subject to the caveat that retrospective data may contain
measurement error. Evaluating the e¤ectiveness of social networks at other points in
time may be of interest since numerous evaluation studies that examined the impacts of
other active labour market policies including those many governments have introduced
to reduce high levels of unemployment generally …nd that the estimated impacts that are
obtained in the months after these programs are introduced di¤er from those witnessed in
the medium to long term. For example, Lechner et al. (2011) using German data reports
that a speci…c intensive training program which provided skills required for a di¤erent
profession than the one currently held by participants, led to a sustained increase in
employment rates eight years into the post-program period; whereas he also reports that
the e¤ects from other skills training programs in Germany decline over time. As such,
we additionally conduct a preliminary investigation to see if the estimated e¤ects are
sensitive to the timing of the …nal survey.
  13
       There is a large literature that models the formation of social networks and the process by which
information is transmitted or exchanged among members.


                                                    11
       To motivate our empirical analyses, we hypothesize the following channel through
which social networks a¤ect labour market outcomes. As in a traditional labour supply
model, we assume that individuals make decisions on whether to work by maximizing their
utility subject to both a budget and time constraint. Workers face a trade-o¤ between
allocating their time between leisure activities and income generating activities. Social
networks enter the model by a¤ecting the probability an individual can …nd a job. That
is, while searching for employment, the odds that an individual will obtain employment
are in‡uenced by size of the individual’s social network. For example, social contacts may
transmit information on the availability of jobs which might not be well-advertised, or
provide referrals to …rms to mitigate moral hazard. Social networks could also a¤ect other
labour market outcomes such as wage o¤ers by providing the individuals with knowledge
on the degree of their bargaining power.14 An individual will decide to take employment
if Yit ; the latent latent utility di¤erential between working and not working exceeds zero.
       We de…ne Yit to be an indicator variable for individual i that is unity if she is employed
54 months after the start of the experiment. That is, the analyst does not observe Yit
but does see Yit = 1 if person i in period t is employed and Yit = 0 if not. Our primary
estimating equation takes the form


                                 Yit =   0   +   1   SNit   1   +   2 Xit   +   it                      (1)

where       SNit   1   is a measure of how network resources accessed by individual i changed
between the start of the experiment and when interviewed 40 months later. The matrix X
includes numerous demographic control variables and                  it   is a random error term with mean
zero. OLS estimates of equation (1) may yield biased estimates of                      1   since unobserved
  14
       There is substantial theoretical research on the various channels that contacts in the labor market
may be bene…cial. For example, Mortensen and Vishwanath (1994) and Calvo-Armengol and Jackson
(2004,2007) claim they allow workers to more e¤ectively sample a given wage distribution and Holzer
(1988) suggests that they improve search e¢ ciency.


                                                      12
characteristics such as motivation and other non cognitive skills may a¤ect both labour
force participation and the ability to increase the size of one’s social network.
       In our analyses we consider four alternative measures of 4SNit to shed light on the
relative importance of weak versus strong ties. We consider changes between the baseline
survey and the end of the experiment survey in the total number of: i) contacts and
acquaintances; ii) contacts and acquaintances that can provide specialized advice and
help participants …nd a job; iii) contacts that are family members or friends; and iv)
contacts that reside in same community as the respondent. Ex ante, we would expect
that the CEIP intervention would be most likely to a¤ect the total number of contacts
and acquaintances that can help provide specialized advice and can help participants …nd
a job and least likely to in‡uence the total number of contacts that are family members
or friends.
       To overcome the hurdles introduced by the endogeneity of 4SNit ; we consider an in-
strumental variables procedure. The identi…cation strategy of this paper relies on the fact
that the CEIP project introduced a source of exogenous variation in the size of partici-
pants’social networks. It is reasonable to postulate that those assigned to the treatment
intervention may have been in a better position to develop links by meeting potential
contacts, including project sponsors, training organizations and other participants, some
of whom possessed extensive social networks and occupied positions of in‡uence in their
respective communities.15 We hypothesize that the project is likely to have changed bridg-
ing and linking social capital of some individuals by providing them greater opportunities
to form weak ties, or reducing the transaction costs to doing so. Assignment to the CEIP
treatment should have less in‡uence on the size of social capital that constitute strong
ties.
  15
       For paid Program group volunteers, the project also altered their social capital through the succession
of assignments to community-based projects. But these volunteers, if randomly selected in the community
survey, were excluded in order not to confound the e¤ect of networks on employment.



                                                      13
       Thus, our identi…cation relies on the instrument, assignment to the treatment pro-
grams is truly random. Holland (1988) termed this identi…cation strategy as an en-
couragement design, since subjects are randomly selected and encouraged to take the
treatment, but it is the e¤ects of the treatment itself, not the e¤ects of encouragement,
which are of interest. Thus, the selection bias that arises in accepting the treatment is
removed via the instrumental variables analysis, as not all those who are encouraged to
attend comply. Randomization of the instruments is not su¢ cient on its own and for the
instruments to be valid they must a¤ect the outcome only by manipulating the treatment.
       It is important to note that we can not recover the structural parameters of the model
underlying our analysis and we will be estimating reduced form impacts. As our interest
is in the causal e¤ect of social networks, and there is likely treatment e¤ect heterogeneity,
one can interpret the resulting IV estimates as local average treatment e¤ects.16 Since it
is reasonable to assume that there may be heterogeneity in the impacts of changes in the
size of one’s social network on labour market outcomes on the basis of the initial size of
  16
       Structural analyses would require us to consider the complete network structure of individuals, with
data on the number of contacts of various types and a topography of who is linked to whom. Montgomery
(1992) argues that the importance of weak ties can only be understood if one considers the entire network
structure of individuals, subject some of them to an experimental variation, and examine the outcomes.
Jackson (2009) suggests that the “re‡ection problem” de…ned in Manski (1993) can partly be overcome
with more complete observation of the network patterns in a society, so that a given individual’s peers can
be directly observed and need not be inferred from the individual’s own characteristics. It is important
to highlight that we are relying on instruments to introduce variation in the social networks of our
respondents that is exogenous to their current labour market behaviour. Recall, our identi…cation is
coming from the group of respondents whose treatment status (social networks) changes due to the
instruments, in particular the ones re‡ecting their involvement with the project. This interpretation of
the role of the project is in line with Johnson (2003) who …nds that potentially bene…cial (but distant)
connections are often too costly to establish and maintain, and that the project (CEIP) can make such
connections less costly. The project thus helped the participants to build bridging and linking social
networks which, in turn, may have opened up access to subsequent labour market resources.



                                                     14
the experiment, as well as other baseline characteristics, we will also conduct our analyses
based on subsamples de…ned by characteristics measured in the baseline survey.



4        Results
Examining the sample sizes across the bottom row of Table 1, we observe a large pro-
portion of individuals in the baseline sample were not followed up in subsequent cycles.
Further, the rate of follow-up di¤ered between those assigned to the intervention and the
control groups. As such, it is reasonable to have concerns that selective attrition may
bias our estimates of equation (1). To examine whether participants left the experiment
in a non-random manner, we use the procedure developed in Becketti et al. (1988) to test
for attrition due to observables.17 This procedure involves OLS estimation of an equation
using data from the baseline survey. Speci…cally, we are interested in whether treatment
assignment, individual characteristics and social network variables di¤erentially a¤ected
the likelihood of holding a job at baseline. In the estimating equation we allow subse-
quent attritors to have di¤erential e¤ects. The results on an F-test, examining whether
participants who left the CEIP study after the collection of baseline data are system-
atically di¤erent than those who remained in the study in terms of initial behavioral
relationships, determine if we need to account for selection on observables.
       The results of the test for selective attrition are presented in Table 3. The columns
di¤er based on the measure of social network being investigated. In the second row
from the bottom of Table 3 the results from the F-tests of the joint signi…cance of these
interaction terms are presented. For each social network measure we are unable to reject
the hypothesis that the coe¢ cient vector is signi…cantly di¤erent for attritors from non-
attritors. As such, there is no evidence to suggest that attrition patterns di¤ered between
  17
       This test was also used in Ding and Lehrer (2010) who additionally provide a more intuitive expla-
nation of the procedure.


                                                    15
groups, allowing us to con…dently treat all missing data as being random. As can be
observed in Table 3, it is interesting to note that both males and those with higher levels
of education were less likely to hold a job at the baseline survey.
    Instrumental variable estimates of equation (1) are presented in Table 4. With the
exception of the last column examining the change in the number of contacts residing in
the same community, all social network variables are negatively related to holding a job
18 months following the experiment completion. However, none of the impacts of changes
in social network variables are statistically signi…cant. Controlling for other factors, we
observe that individuals from the EI sample and those with higher levels of education
are now associated with holding a job. For comparison, OLS estimates of equation (1)
that treat the changes in the social network variables as being exogenous are presented in
Table 5. Notice that all of the social network variables are positively related to holding
a job 18 months following the CEIP experiment. However, only the e¤ect of the changes
in the number of contacts who can help …nd a job is statistically signi…cant at the 10%
level.
    To assess the suitability of being randomly assigned to the CEIP treatment as an
instrument for the change in each measure of social network, we consider a simple OLS
regression of the …rst stage regression and run an F-test for the joint signi…cance of the
instrument. The results for each of the respective social network measures are presented
in Table 6. The coe¢ cients on all of the explanatory variables in the …rst stage regression
including the instruments are reasonable in sign and magnitude. The instruments are
statistically signi…cant predictors of changes in the number of members in one’s network
that can help …nd jobs and the number of acquaintances, and the F-statistics on its
signi…cance is respectively above current cuto¤s (i.e. Staiger and Stock (1997)) for weak
instruments. Not surprisingly, assignment to the CEIP did not signi…cantly a¤ect the
number of contacts who were friends and families or who lived in the same community as
the respondent. Since the reliability of our estimates depends directly on the validity of

                                            16
our instrument, the low F-statistic for these measures is a concern, since it may indicate
weak identi…cation.18
       To examine whether changes in the size of social network measures heterogeneously
impacted the likelihood of having a job for individuals with di¤erent education levels, ini-
tial size of the social network and gender, we replicated the above analyses on subsamples
de…ned by these criteria. We found the …rst stage relationships between both changes in
the number of acquaintances and changes in the number of contacts who can help …nd
jobs were strongest for both females and those with education levels above the secondary
school.19 For all other subsamples based on observed criteria we did not witness a het-
erogenous relationship. However, while the …rst stage relationships were quite strong for
these subsamples, Table 7 demonstrates there were no changes in either the instrumental
variable (top panel) or OLS (bottom panel) estimates of equation (1) for either subsample.
Most striking is the pattern observed for females in which the OLS estimates indicate a
statistically signi…cant positive relationship with having a job, whereas the IV estimates
are statistically insigni…cant.
       We next examined the robustness of our results to measuring labour market outcomes
at di¤erent points in time. The time-varying pattern of the estimated impacts of the CEIP
intervention appear to decline slightly on a gradual basis from months 41 to 54.20 These
  18
       Weak identi…cation could result in i) the IV estimates being inconsistent and biased towards the OLS
estimates, and ii) the test statistics for inference are inaccurate. We attempted to correct the statistical
inference problem using the Moreira (2003) conditional approach to construct tests of coe¢ cients based
on the conditional distributions of nonpivotal statistics. If the instruments have low strength then the
con…dence intervals should increase relative to those based on standard asymptotic theory. We …nd
that the length of the 95% con…dence interval increased by roughly 30% for both of these change in
network variables, a small margin which increases our con…dence in the validity of the instrument. These
diagnostics suggest that it is unlikely that the estimates for these two network variables are due to a poor
instrument.
  19
     For space considerations, these results are available from the authors upon request.
  20
     For space considerations, results are available from the authors upon request.


                                                     17
results are consistent with those reported by Card and Hyslop (2009) who examined a
di¤erent Canadian program that provided a high-powered earnings subsidy for long-term
welfare recipients who resided in areas around Vancouver, British Columbia and southern
New Brunswick. These authors …nd that the earnings subsidy signi…cantly increased
full time employment and lowered welfare participation in the short-run but that these
e¤ects declined over time and six years post-program the e¤ects became negligible. Yet,
additional evaluation is required to determine if the magnitude and statistical signi…cance
of the e¤ects from the CEIP program would change as even more post program data is
made available.
   Finally, we considered direct estimation of the reduced form of the instrumental vari-
ables model estimated in Table 4. That is, we estimate


                             Yit =   0   +   1 T reati   +   2 Xit   +   it             (2)

where T reati is an indicator if an individual was assigned to the CEIP treatment group.
Thus, OLS estimates     1   can be interpreted as an intent to treat parameter, providing
us with the causal e¤ect of being assigned to the CEIP treatment. This equation is
estimated using the full 54-month sample as well as subsamples de…ned on the basis of
predetermined characteristics. The results for a subset of these outcomes are presented
in Table 8. Note that, as shown in the …rst column, assignment to the CEIP treatment
does not signi…cantly increase the likelihood of holding a job for the full sample. However,
there are three subsamples in which we observe that assignment to the CEIP treatment
signi…cantly lowered the odds of being employed. These subsamples include: i) those
with degrees above the secondary level; ii) those who experienced larger changes in the
size of their social networks based on the number of friends and family members; and iii)
those who experienced larger changes in the size of their social networks based on the
number of individuals living in the same community. The last two results are suggestive


                                                 18
evidence that increases in the size of strong ties do not boost labour market outcomes.
Interestingly, the results reported in Table 8, in conjunction with those presented in Table
6, suggest that, while the size of these types of social networks were not directly a¤ected
by the experiment itself, changes in social network size does impact the probability of
…nding stable employment.
   Taken together, the results in this subsection suggest that increasing the size of weak
ties in one’s social network is indeed possible for policymakers. These increases are larger
for those with more education and females. However, these increases in the social network
variables do not boost the likelihood of holding a job 18 months later. These results di¤er
from conclusions in the …nal SRDC evaluation (Guyamarti et al. 2008a, pp. 7) such as: "It
was uncertain, however, whether CEIP could improve skills and networks and whether this
would increase post-program employment in an economically depressed area". While we
did not …nd signi…cant post-program impacts on the employment of individual program
participants, we now consider whether the CEIP program had impacts on the broader
labour market.


4.1    Community Level Analysis

The …nal question we examine is whether the CEIP program had long term impacts on
the size of social networks and levels of employment variables across communities in Nova
Scotia. Using data from the CEIP community sample we estimate the following equation:


                           4Yit =   0   +   1 CEIPit   +   2 Xit   + "it                (3)

where CEIPit is an indicator if an individual lives in one of the communities where the
CEIP program took place, Xit is a vector of individual characteristics and "it is a random
disturbance term with mean zero. Since the control and CEIP communities were selected
on the basis of observed characteristics, we assume that selection on observables holds and


                                              19
use OLS to estimate equation (3). We are interested in determining whether estimates
of     1   are signi…cantly di¤erent from zero. The outcomes we consider include alternative
measures of change in the size of social networks and four measures of employment as
outcome variables. We conduct the analyses with the full CEIP community survey sample
and the results are robust to the exclusion of the subset of individuals who also were
participating in the CEIP experiment. In total, there are 46 sample members who were
assigned to the CEIP treatment and 23 individuals who were in the CEIP control group.21
       Estimates of     1   from equation (3) are presented in Table 9. Each row of the table
corresponds to a di¤erent outcome variable. The community level results indicate that
the CEIP program did indeed increase the size of a few speci…c types of social network
measures across communities. There are large and signi…cant increases in the number
of both linking and bridging contacts as well as a marginally signi…cant increase in the
number of contacts who can help …nd a job. All of these measures correspond to weak
ties. In contrast, the size of bonding networks which correspond to strong ties did not
increase nor did the overall network size in a di¤erent manner across the community types.
Even those not involved in the community made new connections, indicating that all of
the increases in social networks exhibited during the time the programs were instituted
within the community were through weak ties.
       At the same time, the results in table 9 also indicate that there were no aggregate
changes in many of the employment outcomes across communities. The percentage of
  21
       It is worth repeating that the distinction between these communities lies in the fact that, whereas
program communities received community projects, comparison communities did not. However, those who
were involved with CEIP in any capacity, whether as participants or in other paid or unpaid capacities,
could belong to any community. Therefore, though we …nd a greater proportion of respondents from the
program communities connected in some way to the CEIP, we do …nd a signi…cant number of respondents
from the comparison communities as well with some connection to the CEIP. In fact, there is a greater
proportion of respondents from the comparison communities who have non-paid involvement with the
CEIP than there is from the program communities.


                                                     20
the sample holding a full time job and an hourly salary did not signi…cantly di¤er across
the community types. In fact, from baseline to 18 months post-experimental completion,
CEIP communities exhibited slight decreases in the percentage of individuals holding part
time jobs and the number of hours worked per week. On average, compared to baseline
measures, CEIP community members worked roughly 1.5 hours less per week 18 months
following study completion, compared to members of the comparison communities. Recall
that the statistics displayed in table 2 indicated that these di¤erences in hours worked, but
not in wage rates, were also observed in the …rst wave data, meaning the CEIP intervention
did not seem to a¤ect these outcomes three years after intervention commencement. While
these results appear disappointing, they should not be surprising. The additional salaries
individuals earned on CEIP jobs, relative to transfer payments, were both temporary and
small. Accordingly, any multiplier e¤ects that would occur through consumption channels
are unlikely to a¤ect employment levels.
       Last, we did investigate whether there were di¤erences in the characteristics of those
employed in CEIP program and comparison communities using multivariate regressions
that conditioned for all of the covariates in X from equation (3) as well as social network
variables. We did …nd several signi…cant di¤erences during the …rst survey (F=2.09, Prob
> F = 0.0067) and second survey (F= 3.28, Prob > F = 0.0000) but by the last survey
there was no signi…cant link between the 16 explanatory variables and community status
(F=1.20, Prob > F = 0.2628). While suggestive, this evidence continues to reinforce
the …nding from the CEIP individual impact study that this intervention only served to
change who was holding a job post-experiment.22
  22
       We speculate that a fraction of the estimated e¤ects of social network variables commonly found in
empirical analyses may be capturing the impacts of non-cognitive skills that are rewarded in workplaces
that employ team production.




                                                    21
5        Conclusion
This paper uses data from the Community Employment Innovation Project (CEIP) to
estimate how changes in the size of social network a¤ect employment 18 months following
the CEIP intervention. Our results provide evidence that access to the CEIP program
led to gains in the size of the number of weak ties, particularly for women and those who
completed education beyond secondary school. However, these changes in social network
size did not translate into improved post-experiment employment outcomes. Within the
labour market, we do observe small but signi…cant changes in the composition of workers
who held jobs 18 months after study completion. Individuals assigned to the CEIP treat-
ment were signi…cantly less likely to …nd employment if they either: i) experienced larger
gains in the size of their strong ties during the experiment; or ii) held a degree above
the secondary school level. As such, the long term impacts of the CEIP study can be
simply summarized as follows: the program did not change the size of the pie, but rather
changed who got the slices.23 While notions that increasing social capital and reducing
social exclusion lead to economic prosperity pervade many disciplines, this analysis sug-
gests that other avenues such as economic growth or job creation remain the best solution
to reducing poverty.
       Our analyses at the community level reinforce these …ndings. Community level analy-
ses indicate that measures of alternative types of social networks do increase at a faster
rate in program communities relative to comparison communities. However, we did not
observe aggregate changes in the number of individuals employed across communities.
At best, policy changes along the CEIP dimension likely only have distributional conse-
quences regarding who is employed locally in the long-run.
       Recent reforms to Canada’s EI system appear to have been developed on the premise
  23
       These results are similar to …ndings from other labour market policy experiments conducted in other
countries such as Crépon et al (2012) who term this as displacement e¤ects.



                                                     22
that a di¤erent dimension of social capital, namely regional attachment, in‡uences labour
market prospects. That is, individuals who have strong preferences for living in a given
community decrease their mobility, thereby increasing unemployment. The CEIP data
may be able to shed light on the extent to which local preferences in‡uence the likelihood
of being unemployed since the data contains many measures of the number of years one has
both lived on Cape Breton Island and the number of contacts on the island. In addition,
we wish to explore whether social networks have a signi…cant impact on individuals’
subsequent welfare participation. Contacts in one’s social network may provide more
information about welfare eligibility than job availability, since there is no crowding out
of economic opportunity. Finally, the degree to which di¤erent forms of information ‡ow
in social networks remain largely understudied despite the relevance of this area of inquiry.
Information ‡ow can a¤ect individual behavior towards welfare participation through two
important channels: information and norms. This presents an agenda for future research.




                                             23
References
 [1] Abbott, Michael, and Charles M. Beach (2008), “Immigrant Earnings Distributions
     and Earnings Mobility in Canada: Evidence for the 1982 Landing Cohort from IMDB
     Micro Data,”Canadian Labour Market and Skills Researcher Network Working Paper
     13.
 [2] Abbott, Michael, and Charles M. Beach (2011), “Immigrant Earnings Di¤erences
     across Admission Categories and Landing Cohorts in Canada,” Canadian Labour
     Market and Skills Researcher Network Working Paper 81.
 [3] Angelucci, Manuela, and Giacomo De Giorgi (2009), “Indirect E¤ects of an Aid Pro-
     gram: How do Cash Transfers A¤ect Ineligibles’Consumption?," American Economic
     Review 99(1), 486-508.
 [4] Angrist, Joshua D., Guido W. Imbens, and Donald B. Rubin (1996), “Identi…cation
     of Causal E¤ects Using Instrumental Variables,”Journal of the American Statistical
     Association 91(434), 444-55.
 [5] Apinunmahakul, Amornrat and Rose Anne Devlin (2008), “Social Networks and
     Private Philanthropy,”Journal of Public Economics 92(1-2), 309-328.
 [6] Bayer, Patrick, Stephen L Ross and Giorgio Topa (2008), “Place of Work and Place
     of Residence: Informal Hiring Networks and Labour Market Outcomes,” Journal of
     Political Economy 116(6), 1150-1196.
 [7] Beaman, Lori, (2012), “Social Networks and the Dynamics of Labour Market Out-
     comes: Evidence from Refugees Resettled in the U.S,” Review of Economic Studies
     79(1), 128-161.
 [8] Becketti, Sean, William Gould, Lee Lillard and Finis Welch (1998), “The Panel
     Study of Income Dynamics after Fourteen Years: An Evaluation,” Journal of Labor
     Economics 6(4), 472-492.
 [9] Calvo-Armengol, Antoni, and Matthew Jackson (2004), “The E¤ects of Social Net-
     works on Employment and Inequality,”American Economic Review 94(3), 426-454.
[10] Calvo-Armengol, Antoni, and Matthew Jackson (2007), “Networks in Labor Mar-
     kets: Wage and Employment Dynamics and Inequality,”Journal of Economic Theory
     132(1), 27-46.
[11] Card, David and Dean R. Hyslop (2009), “The Dynamic E¤ects of an Earnings
     Subsidy for Long-Term Welfare Recipients: Evidence from the Self Su¢ ciency Project
     Applicant Experiment,”Journal of Econometrics 153(1), 1-20.

                                          24
[12] Case, Anne, and Lawrence Katz (1991), “The Company You Keep: The E¤ects of
     Family and Neighborhood on Disadvantaged Youths,” NBER Working Paper No.
     3705.

[13] Crépon, Bruno, Esther Du‡o, Marc Gurgand, Roland Rathelot and Philippe Zamora
     (2012), “Do Labor Market Policies Have Displacement E¤ects? Evidence from a
     Clustered Randomized Experiment,”NBER Working Paper No. 18597.

[14] Datcher, Linda, (1982), “E¤ects of Community and Family Background on Achieve-
     ment,”Review of Economics and Statistics 64(1), 32–41.

[15] Ding, Weili and Steven F Lehrer (2010), “Estimating Treatment E¤ects from Con-
     taminated Multiperiod Education Experiments: The Dynamic Impacts of Class Size
     Reductions,”The Review of Economics and Statistics 92(1), 31-42.

[16] Du‡o, Esther and Emmanuel Saez (2003), “The Role of Information and Social In-
     teractions in Retirement Plan Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment,”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(3), 815-842.

[17] Garg, Rajiv and Rahul Telang (2011), “To Be or Not To Be Linked on LinkedIn.com:
     Job Search Using Online Social Networks,”mimeo, Carnegie Mellon University.

[18] Granovetter, Mark S. (1973), “The Strength of Weak Ties,” American Journal of
     Sociology,”78(6), 1360-1380.

[19] Granovetter, Mark S. (1995), Getting a Job: A Study of Contacts and Careers, Cam-
     bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

[20] Greenwood, John, Claudia Nicholson, David Gyarmati, Darrell Kyte, Melanie MacIn-
     nis, Reuben Ford (2003), “The Community Employment Innovation Project: Design
     and implementation,” Ottawa: Social Research and Demonstration Corporation.

[21] Gyarmati, David, Shawn de Raaf, Claudia Nicholson Darrell Kyte and Melanie
     MacInnis (2006), “Community Employment Innovation Project (CEIP) – Testing
     a Community-Based Jobs Strategy for the Unemployed: Early Impacts of CEIP,”
     Ottawa, ON: Social Research and Demonstration Corporation.

[22] Gyarmati, David, Shawn de Raaf, Claudia Nicholson, Boris Palameta, Taylor Shek-
     Wai Hui and Melanie MacInnis (2007), “Community Employment Innovation Project
     (CEIP) – Improving Skills, Networks, and Livelihoods through Community-Based
     Work: Three-Year Impacts of CEIP,”Ottawa, ON: Social Research and Demonstra-
     tion Corporation.


                                         25
[23] Gyarmati, David, Shawn de Raaf, Boris Palameta, Claudia Nicholson and Taylor
     Shek-Wai Hui (2008a), “Community Employment Innovation Project (CEIP) – En-
     couraging Work and Supporting Communities: Final Results of CEIP,”Ottawa, ON:
     Social Research and Demonstration Corporation.

[24] Gyarmati, David, Shawn de Raaf, Boris Palameta, Claudia Nicholson, Taylor Shek-
     Wai Hui, Darrell Kyte and Melanie MacInnis (2008b), “Community Employment
     Innovation Project (CEIP) – Engaging Communities in Support of Local Develop-
     ment: Measuring the E¤ects of the Community Employment Innovation Project on
     Communities,”Ottawa, ON: Social Research and Demonstration Corporation.

[25] Heckman, James J. (1997), “Instrumental Variables: A Study of Implicit Behavioral
     Assumptions in One Widely Used Estimator,” Journal of Human Resources 32(3),
     441-462.

[26] Holland, Paul W. (1988), “Causal Inference, Path Analysis, and Recursive Structural
     Equations Models,”Sociological Methodology 18, 449-484.

[27] Holzer, Harry (1988), “Search Method Use by Unemployed Youth,”Journal of Labor
     Economics 6(1), 1-20.

[28] Ioannides, Yannis and Linda Datcher Loury (2004), “Job Information Networks,
     Neighborhood E¤ects and Inequality,” Journal of Economic Literature 42(4), 1056-
     1093.

[29] Jackson, Matthew O. (2008), Social and Economic Networks, Princeton University
     Press.

[30] Jackson, Matthew O. (2010), “An Overview of Social Networks and Economic Appli-
     cations,”in the The Handbook of Social Economics, edited by J. Benhabib, A. Bisin,
     and M.O. Jackson, North Holland Press.

[31] Laschever, Ron (2009), “The Doughboys Network: Social interactions and Labor
     Market Outcomes of World War I Veterans,” mimeo, University of Illinois, Urbana-
     Champain.

[32] Lechner, Michael, Ruth Miquel and Conny Wunsch (2011), “Long-Run E¤ects of
     Public Sector Sponsored Training in West Germany,” Journal of the European Eco-
     nomic Association 9(4), 742–784.

[33] Manski, Charles F. (1993), “Identi…cation of Endogenous Social E¤ects: The Re‡ec-
     tion Problem,”Review of Economic Studies 60(3), 531-542.


                                          26
[34] Miguel, Edward and Michael Kremer (2003), "Worms: Identifying Impacts on Edu-
     cation and Health in the Presence of Treatment Externalities,”Econometrica 72(1),
     159-217.

[35] Montgomery, James D. (1991), “Social Networks and Labor-Market Outcomes: To-
     ward an Economic Analysis,”American Economic Review 81(5), 1408–1418.

[36] Montgomery, James D. (1992), “Job Search and Network Composition: Implications
     of the Strength of Weak Ties Hypothesis,”American Sociological Review 57(3), 586–
     596.

[37] Mortensen, Dale and Tara Vishwanath (1994), “Personal Contacts and Earnings: It
     is Who you Know!,”Labour Economics 1(2), 187-201.

[38] Staiger, Douglas, Stock, James H. (1997), “Instrumental Variables Regression with
     Weak Instruments,”Econometrica 65(3), 557–586.

[39] Tassier, Troy (2006), “Labor Market Implications of Weak Ties,”Southern Economic
     Journal 72(3), 704–719.

[40] Topa, Giorgio (2001), “Social Interactions, Local Spillovers, and Unemployment,”
     Review of Economic Studies 68(2), 261-295.




                                         27
          Table 1: Summary Statistics on Individuals from the CEIP Experimental Dataset
Variable                                                    Treatment Group                                  Control Group
                                              Wave 1      Wave 2      Wave 3     Wave 4    Wave 1     Wave 2           Wave 3      Wave 4
Holds a job                                     .1834       .8501      .4132      .4791     .1717      .4604            .4852       .5036
                                               (.3873)     (.3573)    (.4928)      (.5)    (.3774)    (.4988)          (.5002)     (.5004)
Number of contacts that can help find a job    6.6045       9.698     11.8809    9.3746    6.7517     9.8493           10.2682     8.2332
                                              (6.3192) (7.6888) (12.5964) (10.2605)       (6.5463)   (9.8832)         (11.9707)   (8.5255)
Number of contacts family and friends            8.623   10.2794    11.303    10.438    8.5373         9.9045         10.8579        9.875
                                                (8.759)  (8.7469) (10.4786) (10.23)    (7.1162)       (8.0668)       (10.5321)     (9.0037)
Number of contacts that are acquaintances       1.5562    1.6714    2.6442    1.5122    1.8507         1.8799          2.0474        1.319
                                               (2.8443) (4.2954) (6.3517) (3.8766) (3.2964)           (5.9908)        (5.9809)     (2.9679)
Number of contacts in same community as         7.1104    7.8721     9.284    7.1825    6.8944         7.2925          9.1048       7.0579
respondent                                     (9.4029) (8.1458) (10.4105) (8.1714) (7.7253)          (7.3939)        (9.9673)      (7.701)
Holds a university degree                        .0423      .041     .0399     .0484     .0291           .032           .0295        .0289
                                                (.2013)   (.1985)   (.196)   (.2148)    (.1681)        (.1762)         (.1692)      (.1678)
Respondent is single                              .358     .3437     .3287     .3088     .3474          .3232            .329        .3056
                                                (.4797)   (.4753)  (.4701)   (.4624)    (.4765)         (.468)         (.4702)      (.4611)
Respondent is divorced                           .1783      .181     .1782     .1836     .1982          .1966           .1899        .1917
                                                 (.383)   (.3853)   (.383)   (.3875)    (.3989)        (.3978)         (.3925)       (.394)
Respondent is male                               .5363     .5262     .5238     .5159     .4954          .4619           .4419        .4448
                                                 (.499)   (.4997)  (.4998)   (.5002)    (.5003)        (.4989)          (.497)      (.4974)
Respondent source of sample is ei (vs. ia)       .6592     .6648     .6774     .7028     .6592          .6524            .671        .6835
                                                (.4743)   (.4724)  (.4678)   (.4574)    (.4743)        (.4766)         (.4702)      (.4655)
Respondent has high school diploma               .2606     .2578     .2662     .2492     .2927          .2997           .3148        .3043
                                                (.4392)   (.4377)  (.4423)   (.4329)    (.4553)        (.4585)         (.4648)      (.4605)
Respondent has college diploma                   .1136     .1089     .1121     .1135     .1466          .1448           .1489        .1555
                                                (.3175)   (.3117)  (.3158)   (.3175)     (.354)        (.3522)         (.3563)      (.3627)
Respondent lived at current address yrs.       12.9841    13.255   13.3746   13.7851   12.3342         12.532         12.8404      13.1917
                                              (13.6296) (13.6367) (13.727) (13.9568) (13.0661)       (12.9349)       (13.1559)     (13.335)
Years lived on Cape Breton Island              34.9076   35.3426   35.6692   35.7958   34.4523         35.281         34.8383      35.5655
                                              (12.9816) (13.0418) (13.0484) (13.4166) (13.1209)      (12.6446)       (12.8966)    (12.9163)
Number of relatives living in Cape Breton        .9841     .9829     .9815    .9815      .9574          .9677           .9653         .969
                                                (.1253)   (.1296)   (.135)   (.1348)    (.2021)         (.177)         (.1831)      (.1735)
Observations                                       757       707      651       599        757            656             611          553
          Note: Standard deviations in parentheses

                                                                             28
Table 2: Summary Statistics on Individuals from the CEIP Community Survey

Variable                       Wave 1 IN       Wave 2 IN         Wave 3 IN   Wave 1 OUT   Wave 2 OUT   Wave 3 OUT
Total bonding contacts         23.324          21.368            20.618      25.437       22.548       22.400
                               (24.974)        (21.878)          (20.771)    (30.778)     (23.979)     (23.946)
Total bridging contacts        4.202           4.087             4.245       5.008        4.613        4.581
                               (6.041)         (6.036)           (6.508)     (9.146)      (6.834)      (7.003)
Has linking contact            .328            .396              .415        .351         .380         .422
                               (.469)          (.489)            (.493)      (.477)       (.486)       (.494)
Total contacts family and      18.850          17.701            17.260      19.434       19.072       17.454
friends                        (17.782)        (16.322)          (16.004)    (17.960)     (18.079)     (15.708)
Total contacts can help find   27.565          25.567            24.727      30.377       27.154       26.807
jobs (bond+bridge)             (28.505)        (25.692)          (24.107)    (36.941)     (28.458)     (28.779)
Gross hourly wage              12.811          13.933            16.037      12.933       14.109       15.454
                               (6.914)         (7.813)           (19.967)    (7.596)      (8.021)      (7.241)
Usual working hours of the     38.040          38.578            39.166      41.149       40.833       41.099
main/last job                  (13.948)        (12.870)          (13.096)    (14.723)     (13.814)     (14.153)
Estimated age of respondent    48.409          49.924            52.006      48.139       49.635       51.756
                               (16.631)        (15.403)          (14.750)    (16.808)     (15.59)      (14.738)
Respondent is Males            .419            .406              .395        .418         .428         .411
                               (.493)          (.491)            (.489)      (.493)       (.495)       (.492)
Respondent passed high         .550            .567              .572        .565         .559         .574
school                         (.498)          (.496)            (.495)      (.496)       (.497)       (.495)
Respondent has a bachelor's    .083            .090              .095        .100         .117         .116
degree                         (.276)          (.286)            (.294)      (.300)       (.321)       (.32)
Respondent has some            .024            .027              .030        .040         .041         .048
university education           (.153)          (.163)            (.170)      (.197)       (.198)       (.213)
Resides by themselves          .317            .285              .282        .321         .293         .276
                               (.465)          (.452)            (.45)       (.467)       (.455)       (.447)
Receiving pension in past 12   .292            .308              .341        .259         .264         .301
months                         (.455)          (.462)            (.474)      (.438)       (.441)       (.459)
Receiving EI/SA in past 12     .255            .253              .237        .280         .276         .255
months                         (.436)          (.435)            (.425)      (.449)       (.447)       (.436)
Observations                   4395            3307              2736        3016         1952         1590
Note: Standard Deviations in Parentheses.




                                                                   29
       Table 3: Do Subsequent Attritors Differ in Their Initial Behavioural Relationships on Holding a Job?
Network variable               Number of            Number of contacts Number of contacts            Number of contacts
included in the               contacts that can     - Acquaintances       that are friends and       in same community
specification                 help find a job                             family
Impact of the Network                -0.001                 -0.002                   0.001                   -0.002
variable                             (0.003)               (0.006)                  (0.003)                  (0.003)
Age at baseline survey                0.014                  0.014                   0.014                    0.012
                                     (0.012)               (0.012)                  (0.012)                  (0.012)
Age at baseline squared               -0.019                -0.019                  -0.020                   -0.017
                                     (0.015)               (0.015)                  (0.015)                  (0.015)
Respondent is Male                    -0.103                -0.106                  -0.103                   -0.109
                                   (0.047)**             (0.048)**                (0.048)**                (0.049)**
Respondent source of                  0.059                  0.055                   0.048                    0.054
sample is ei                         (0.044)               (0.045)                  (0.045)                  (0.045)
Respondent has high                  -0.017                 -0.015                  -0.021                   -0.020
school diploma                       (0.029)               (0.030)                  (0.029)                  (0.029)
Respondent has college                0.064                  0.066                   0.060                    0.064
diploma                              (0.073)               (0.074)                  (0.074)                  (0.074)
Respondent: has a                    -0.223                 -0.220                  -0.223                   -0.221
university degree                 (0.047)***            (0.049)***               (0.048)***               (0.047)***
Respondent has a                     -0.081                 -0.082                  -0.084                   -0.081
diploma                             (0.045)*              (0.045)*                 (0.046)*                 (0.047)*
Attrition Indicator                    0.135                 0.113                   0.155                    0.112
                                     (0.288)               (0.289)                  (0.296)                  (0.296)
Attrition * Age at                   -0.008                 -0.007                  -0.008                   -0.007
baseline survey                      (0.014)               (0.015)                  (0.015)                  (0.015)
Attrition * Age at                    0.009                  0.008                   0.010                    0.008
baseline squared                     (0.018)               (0.018)                  (0.018)                  (0.018)
Attrition * Respondent               -0.042                 -0.034                  -0.048                   -0.036
is Male                              (0.054)               (0.054)                  (0.055)                  (0.055)
Attrition * Resp.                    -0.035                 -0.037                  -0.031                   -0.033
source of sample is ei               (0.081)               (0.082)                  (0.082)                  (0.081)
Attrition * Resp. has                 0.066                  0.063                   0.073                    0.068
high school diploma                  (0.049)               (0.050)                  (0.050)                  (0.051)
Attrition * Resp. has                 0.199                  0.195                   0.201                    0.198
college diploma                    (0.078)**             (0.079)**                (0.080)**                (0.078)**
Attrition * has a                    -0.005                 -0.002                  -0.003                   -0.007
university degree                    (0.064)               (0.065)                  (0.065)                  (0.064)
Attrition * Resp. has a              -0.133                 -0.132                  -0.131                   -0.126
diploma                             (0.070)*              (0.070)*                 (0.071)*                 (0.071)*
Attrition * network                   0.001                  0.007                  -0.002                    0.002
variable                             (0.003)               (0.007)                  (0.003)                  (0.003)
F-Test for selective                   1.51                  1.53                     1.48                     1.58
attrition                            [0.114]               [0.108]                  [0.124]                  [0.091]
Observations                           1433                  1403                    1404                     1424
R-squared                               0.05                  0.05                    0.05                     0.05
       Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses and Prob > F in []. Specification also include household
       structure, family income and interactions with the attrition indicator. ***, ** and * respectively denote
       statistically different from zero at the 1%, 5% and 10% confidence levels.


                                                          30
Table 4: Instrumental Variables of Factors Explaining Holding a Job 18 Months Post
Experiment

Specification->                                     1          2            3            4
Explanatory variable↓
Change in number of contacts that can         -0.019
help find a job                               (0.029)
Change in number of contacts -                              -0.015
Acquaintances                                               (0.040)
Change in number of contacts that are                                    -0.063
friends and family                                                       (0.223)
Change in number of contacts in same                                                   0.042
community                                                                             (0.164)
Age at baseline survey                         0.038         0.040         0.051       0.035
                                            (0.012)***    (0.011)***     (0.030)*     (0.031)
Age at baseline squared                       -0.065         -0.065       -0.086      -0.055
                                            (0.016)***    (0.014)***      (0.066)     (0.051)
Respondent is Male                             0.057         0.023         0.104      -0.035
                                              (0.060)       (0.036)       (0.290)     (0.234)
Respondent source of sample is ei              0.207         0.165         0.169       0.142
                                            (0.052)***     (0.075)**      (0.106)     (0.181)
Respondent has high school diploma            -0.118         -0.110       -0.165      -0.103
                                             (0.066)*      (0.048)**      (0.249)     (0.092)
Respondent has college diploma                -0.002         0.023        -0.053       0.068
                                              (0.080)       (0.055)       (0.353)     (0.124)
Respondent: has a university degree            0.151         0.123         0.009       0.029
                                             (0.087)*       (0.081)       (0.459)     (0.439)
Respondent has a diploma                      -0.062         -0.045       -0.092       0.006
                                              (0.078)       (0.052)       (0.265)     (0.116)
Single                                        -0.047         -0.019       -0.069       0.002
                                              (0.086)       (0.052)       (0.278)     (0.071)
Divorced                                       0.045         0.023        -0.052       0.032
                                              (0.056)       (0.051)       (0.256)     (0.071)
Does Not have children                         0.036         0.020         0.061       0.056
                                              (0.042)       (0.048)       (0.095)     (0.072)
Constant                                       0.016         -0.099        0.019      -0.185
                                              (0.359)       (0.273)       (1.027)     (0.336)
Observations                                    987           963           971         983

Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Specification also include indicators for household
structure and family income. ***, ** and * respectively denote statistically different from zero
at the 1%, 5% and 10% confidence levels.




                                               31
Table 5 OLS Estimates of Factors Explaining Having a Job 18 Months Following the CEIP
Experiment

Specification->                      1                  2                3                  4
Explanatory variable↓
Change in number of                0.0023
contacts that can help find a    (0.0012)*
job
Change in number of                                   0.0010
contacts - Acquaintances                             (0.0025)
Change in number of                                                    0.0008
contacts that are friends and                                         (0.0014)
family
Change in number of                                                                        0.0010
contacts in same community                                                                (0.0011)
Age at baseline survey                0.037             0.040           0.043               0.042
                                 (0.010)***         (0.011)***      (0.011)***          (0.010)***
Age at baseline squared             -0.060             -0.065          -0.068              -0.066
                                 (0.013)***         (0.013)***      (0.013)***          (0.013)***
Respondent is Male                   0.028              0.022           0.026               0.020
                                    (0.034)            (0.035)         (0.035)             (0.034)
Respondent source of                  0.195             0.189           0.182               0.184
sample is ei                     (0.043)***         (0.044)***      (0.044)***          (0.044)***
Respondent has high school          -0.090             -0.104          -0.104              -0.088
diploma                           (0.043)**          (0.044)**       (0.044)**           (0.044)**
Respondent has college                0.040             0.031           0.041               0.045
diploma                             (0.050)            (0.050)         (0.051)             (0.050)
Respondent: has a university          0.131             0.125           0.135               0.135
degree                             (0.076)*           (0.075)*        (0.076)*            (0.075)*
Respondent has a diploma            -0.022             -0.034          -0.026              -0.016
                                    (0.042)            (0.043)         (0.043)             (0.042)
Single                              -0.005             -0.013          -0.002               0.005
                                    (0.045)            (0.047)         (0.046)             (0.046)
Divorced                              0.025             0.014           0.012               0.031
                                    (0.046)            (0.046)         (0.047)             (0.046)
Does not have children                0.046             0.033           0.038               0.045
                                    (0.035)            (0.036)         (0.035)             (0.035)
Constant                             -0.144            -0.153          -0.221              -0.207
                                    (0.213)            (0.216)         (0.217)             (0.213)
Observations                           987               963             971                 983
R-squared                             0.11              0.11            0.11                0.11

Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Specification also include indicators for household
structure and family income. ***, ** and * respectively denote statistically different from zero
at the 1%, 5% and 10% confidence levels.


                                               32
Table 6: Estimates from the First Stage Regression Explaining Changes in the Size of Social
Network Variables during the course of the Experiment

Dependent                Change in the      Change in the     Change in the        Change in the
variable in the first   number of           number of         number of            number of
stage equation          contacts that can   contacts -        contacts that are    contacts in same
                        help find a job     Acquaintances     friends and family   community as
                                                                                   respondent
Assigned to CEIP               1.704             0.854              0.111                -0.203
treatment                   (0.740)**          (0.412)**           (0.709)               (0.764)
Age at baseline                0.234             0.057              0.151                 0.229
survey                        (0.241)           (0.163)            (0.238)               (0.269)
Age at baseline               -0.453             -0.115            -0.319                -0.364
squared                      (0.275)*           (0.200)            (0.285)               (0.342)
Respondent is                  0.822             -0.091             1.334                 1.709
Male                          (0.898)           (0.533)            (0.861)              (0.930)*
Respondent                    -1.776             -1.688             0.245                 1.138
source of sample is           (1.157)         (0.637)***           (1.111)               (1.138)
ei
Respondent has                0.921             -0.093             -0.494                0.656
high school                  (2.521)            (0.651)            (1.104)              (1.215)
diploma
Respondent has               -1.861              -0.400            -1.800               -0.962
college diploma             (1.129)*            (0.670)            (1.151)              (1.282)
Respondent: has a            -1.685              0.198             -1.787                2.193
university degree            (1.389)            (1.434)            (1.475)              (1.645)
Respondent has a              0.652              -0.628            -1.218               -0.788
diploma                      (1.004)            (0.640)            (1.091)              (1.215)
Single                       -0.856              -0.332            -1.017                0.057
                             (0.707)            (0.769)            (1.239)              (1.156)
Divorced                      1.150              0.372             -0.916                0.354
                             (1.102)            (0.757)            (1.104)              (1.199)
Does not have                 0.626              -0.829             0.009               -0.655
children                     (1.085)           (0.395)**           (0.765)              (0.966)
Constant                      2.280              1.438              2.767               -1.808
                             (6.049)            (3.655)            (5.287)              (5.202)
R-squared                      0.02               0.04              0.02                 0.02

Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Specification also include indicators for household
structure and family income. ***, ** and * respectively denote statistically different from zero
at the 1%, 5% and 10% confidence levels.




                                                33
Table 7: IV and OLS Estimates Explaining Holding a Job 18 Months Post Experiment on Subsamples
Subsamples->                                        FEMALES ONLY              DIPLOMA HOLDERS ONLY
Explanatory variable↓
                               INSTRUMENTAL VARIALES ESTIMATES
Change in number of contacts that               -0.001                            -0.021
can help find a job                             (0.015)                           (0.015)
Change in number of contacts –                                     0.002                        -0.027
Acquaintances                                                     (0.028)                       (0.024)
Age at baseline survey                           0.057             0.040           0.043         0.056
                                             (0.015)***        (0.011)***      (0.017)***     (0.020)***
Age at baseline squared                          -0.085           -0.065          -0.075        -0.091
                                             (0.020)***        (0.014)***      (0.021)***     (0.024)***
Respondent is Male                                 N/A              N/A            0.018        -0.020
                                                                                  (0.053)       (0.054)
Respondent source of sample is ei                 0.208            0.187           0.134         0.105
                                             (0.069)***        (0.058)***        (0.072)*       (0.069)
Respondent has high school diploma               -0.133           -0.127            N/A           N/A
                                              (0.057)**         (0.060)**
Respondent has college diploma                   -0.031           -0.020            N/A           N/A
                                                (0.067)           (0.068)
Respondent: has a university degree              0.126             0.132            N/A           N/A
                                                (0.089)           (0.090)
Respondent has a diploma                         -0.024           -0.009            N/A           N/A
                                                (0.063)           (0.065)
                              ORDINARY LEAST SQUARES ESTIMATES
Change in number of contacts that                0.004                             0.001
can help find a job                           (0.002)**                           (0.002)
Change in number of contacts –                                    0.0068                        -0.001
Acquaintances                                                    (0.004)*                       (0.004)
Age at baseline survey                           0.055             0.058           0.040         0.044
                                             (0.015)***        (0.015)***       (0.016)**     (0.016)***
Age at baseline squared                          -0.083           -0.087          -0.070        -0.075
                                             (0.019)***        (0.019)***      (0.019)***     (0.019)***
Respondent is Male                                                                 0.029         0.005
                                                                                  (0.050)       (0.051)
Respondent source of sample is ei                 0.196            0.189           0.115         0.122
                                             (0.057)***        (0.058)***        (0.065)*      (0.065)*
Respondent has high school diploma               -0.133           -0.130            N/A           N/A
                                              (0.057)**         (0.058)**
Respondent has college diploma                   -0.029           -0.022            N/A           N/A
                                                (0.068)           (0.069)
Respondent: has a university degree              0.121             0.129            N/A           N/A
                                                (0.091)           (0.090)
Respondent has a diploma                         -0.026           -0.011            N/A           N/A
                                                (0.064)           (0.065)
Observations                                       519              513             489           478
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Specification also the same covariates as in tables 3 and 4.
***
    , ** and * respectively denote statistically different from 0 at the 1%, 5% and 10% confidence levels.


                                                   34
Table 8: OLS Estimates of the Reduced Form Model of Holding a Job 18 Months Post CEIP Experiment
Sample                      Full Sample     Females         Males Only      Low             Have a          Change in        Change in     Change in          Change in
                                            Only                            Education       Diploma         Number of        Number of     Number of          Number of
                                                                                                            Contacts         Contacts      Contacts           Contacts
                                                                                                            who Help         Acquaintance Family and          Same
                                                                                                            with Jobs                      Friends            Community
Program participant             -0.031           -0.028          -0.047           0.012          -0.073          -0.032         -0.040          -0.069             -0.045
                                (0.029)         (0.039)         (0.043)         (0.041)         (0.041)*        (0.035)        (0.049)        (0.037)*            (0.037)
Age of respondent                 0.036           0.062           0.013           0.034           0.030           0.032          0.013           0.036              0.032
                             (0.010)***      (0.014)***         (0.014)        (0.014)**       (0.015)**     (0.012)***        (0.018)      (0.013)***          (0.013)**
Age at baseline squared          -0.058          -0.091          -0.029          -0.052          -0.056          -0.054         -0.033          -0.055             -0.050
                             (0.012)***      (0.017)***        (0.018)*       (0.017)***      (0.018)***     (0.015)***        (0.022)      (0.016)***         (0.016)***
Male                             0.024                                            0.031           0.018           0.002         -0.034           0.014              0.005
                                (0.032)                                         (0.044)          (0.046)        (0.037)        (0.053)         (0.040)            (0.040)
Source of sample is ei           0.161            0.151           0.151           0.216           0.094           0.130          0.110           0.155              0.157
                             (0.041)***      (0.054)***       (0.063)**       (0.056)***         (0.060)     (0.050)***        (0.068)      (0.052)***         (0.053)***
Respondent has high             -0.095           -0.136          -0.046          -0.090                          -0.070         -0.028          -0.069             -0.092
school diploma                (0.041)**       (0.055)**         (0.065)        (0.043)**                        (0.050)        (0.070)         (0.054)           (0.053)*
Respondent has college           0.040           -0.006           0.093                          -0.067           0.055          0.155           0.037              0.019
diploma                         (0.050)         (0.064)         (0.083)                          (0.079)        (0.058)       (0.088)*         (0.062)            (0.062)
Respondent has a                 0.101            0.119          -0.066                                           0.078          0.168           0.058              0.071
university degree               (0.076)         (0.085)         (0.177)                                         (0.094)        (0.118)         (0.106)            (0.097)
Respondent has a a              -0.025           -0.024          -0.005                          -0.121          -0.021          0.062          -0.004             -0.062
diploma                         (0.039)         (0.059)         (0.054)                          (0.076)        (0.047)        (0.067)         (0.051)            (0.050)
Respondent is single             -0.029          -0.010          -0.015           0.009          -0.069          -0.029         -0.090          -0.023             -0.021
                                (0.042)         (0.060)         (0.063)         (0.061)          (0.060)        (0.051)        (0.070)         (0.054)            (0.055)
Respondent is divorced            0.006           0.043          -0.042          -0.011           0.020           0.017          0.038           0.084              0.054
                                (0.044)         (0.057)         (0.072)         (0.062)          (0.061)        (0.051)        (0.073)         (0.058)            (0.058)
Respondent Does not              0.057            0.144          -0.032          -0.017           0.119           0.059          0.094           0.055              0.059
have Kids                      (0.033)*      (0.047)***         (0.050)         (0.047)        (0.046)**        (0.039)       (0.053)*         (0.043)            (0.042)
Constant                         -0.054          -0.548           0.445          -0.144           0.270           0.038          0.358          -0.093             -0.038
                                (0.203)        (0.280)*         (0.302)         (0.274)          (0.313)        (0.247)        (0.367)         (0.262)            (0.264)
Observations                      1146             594             552             567             579             813            399             702                705
R-squared                          0.10            0.14            0.09            0.10            0.11            0.10           0.14            0.09               0.09
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Specifications also include indicators for household income. . ***, ** and * respectively denote statistically
different from zero at the 1%, 5% and 10% confidence levels.

                                                                            35
Table 9: OLS Estimates of the Impact of Residing in a CEIP Community on Network and Labour Market Variables
                            Change in        Change in       Change in      Change in        Change in       Gross            Usual           Holds a full    Holds a part
                            number of        number of       number of      Number of        Number of       hourly wage working              time job        time job
                            bond             bridge          links          Contacts         Contacts                         hours in the
                            contacts         contacts        contacts       Family and       who Help                         job
                                                                            Friends          with Jobs
Lives in a CEIP                  1.271             0.744           0.040         0.697            2.030           0.741           -1.695           -0.013        -0.039
community                       (1.024)       (0.207)***        (0.019)*       (0.464)          (1.067)*        (0.683)          (0.966)          (0.018)      (0.014)**
Age of respondent                -0.291           -0.104          -0.005         0.218           -0.368           0.665            0.851            0.003         0.004
                                (0.170)          (0.077)        (0.003)*       (0.146)           (0.251)       (0.226)**       (0.122) ***        (0.003)      (0.002)**
Age of respondent                0.003             0.001           0.000        -0.002            0.004          -0.006           -0.010           -0.000        -0.000
squared                        (0.002)*         (0.001)*         (0.000)       (0.001)          (0.002)*       (0.003)**       (0.001) ***     (0.000)***      (0.000)**
Respondent is Male               -4.067           -0.548           0.014        -1.956           -4.525           4.144            8.566            0.017         0.058
                             (0.726)***          (0.356)         (0.019)      (0.812)**       (1.062)***      (0.905)***       (0.717)***         (0.015)     (0.009)***
Passed high school               0.146            -0.114           0.011        -0.853            1.242           3.253           -0.301            0.154         0.002
                                (0.877)          (0.126)         (0.017)       (0.510)           (1.299)      (0.342)***         (1.063)       (0.015)***       (0.007)
Received a bachelor's            0.698             0.482           0.030        -1.564            2.546         11.291            -0.273            0.191         0.011
degree                          (1.067)          (0.389)         (0.027)       (0.976)           (1.942)       (4.050)**         (1.448)       (0.023)***       (0.016)
Received some                   -2.481             0.262           0.027        -0.886            0.292           8.803            1.651            0.213         0.024
university education            (2.365)          (0.506)         (0.048)       (1.847)           (2.868)      (2.371)***         (1.557)       (0.052)***       (0.027)
Has 1 child                      2.828             0.323          -0.055         0.297            3.327          -0.446           -0.336            0.038        -0.008
                              (1.076)**          (0.499)       (0.020)**       (1.178)          (1.749)*        (0.729)          (0.896)         (0.018)*       (0.011)
Has 2 kids                        0.493            0.797          -0.011        -1.334            0.949          -0.819           -0.640            0.048        -0.009
                                (1.546)         (0.399)*         (0.022)       (0.993)           (1.735)        (0.845)          (0.735)        (0.018)**       (0.008)
Receiving pension in            -1.595            -1.708          -0.014        -0.057           -3.149           2.602           -4.214           -0.333        -0.042
past 12 months                  (1.227)       (0.444)***         (0.035)       (0.956)          (1.667)*        (3.831)        (0.957)***      (0.021)***     (0.011)***
Receiving EI/SA in past         -0.152            -0.058          -0.012         0.675           -0.476          -1.393            1.337           -0.137        -0.033
12 months                       (0.807)          (0.216)         (0.013)       (0.579)           (1.261)      (0.456)***         (0.930)       (0.020)***     (0.011)***
Constant                          3.252            0.910           0.230        -5.472            2.404          -5.148          20.443             0.628        -0.025
                                (5.260)          (1.798)      (0.057)***       (3.794)           (6.794)        (4.604)        (3.097)***      (0.087)***       (0.052)
Observations                      3198             3268            4304          3508             2949            1496             2537             4304          4304
R-squared                          0.01             0.01            0.01          0.01             0.01            0.06             0.13             0.34          0.04
Note: Robust standard errors clustered at the community level in the parentheses. Specifications also include indicators for family type, indicators if the
respondent has 3 kids or 4 kids or more. . ***, ** and * respectively denote statistically different from zero at the 1%, 5% and 10% confidence levels.



                                                                            36
