NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BIRTHDAYS, SCHOOLING, AND CRIME:
NEW EVIDENCE ON THE DROPOUT-CRIME NEXUS
Philip J. Cook
Songman Kang
Working Paper 18791
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18791

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013

We thank Peter Arcidiacono, Ken Dodge, V. Joseph Hotz, Jens Ludwig, Hugh Macartney, Justin McCrary,
Seth Sanders, and Chris Timmins as well as participants at the 2012 Association for Public Policy
and Management Conference for helpful comments. This research was supported with funds from
Duke University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Philip J. Cook and Songman Kang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Birthdays, Schooling, and Crime: New Evidence on the Dropout-Crime Nexus
Philip J. Cook and Songman Kang
NBER Working Paper No. 18791
February 2013
JEL No. I21,K42
ABSTRACT
Based on administrative data for five cohorts of public school children in North Carolina, we demonstrate
that those born just after the cut date for starting school are likely to outperform those born just before
in reading and math in middle school, and are less likely to be involved in juvenile delinquency. On
the other hand, those born after the cut date are more likely to drop out of high school before graduation
and commit a felony offense by age 19. We also present suggestive evidence that the higher dropout
rate is due to the fact that youths born after the cut date have longer exposure to the legal possibility
of dropping out. The “crime” and “dropout” differences are strong but somewhat muted by the fact
that youths born just before the cut date are substantially more likely to be held back in school. We
document considerable heterogeneity in educational and criminal outcomes by sex, race and other
indicators of socioeconomic disadvantage.

Philip J. Cook
Sanford School of Public Policy
Duke University
215 Sanford Building
Durham, NC 27708-0245
and NBER
pcook@duke.edu
Songman Kang
Sanford School of Public Policy
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
sk92@duke.edu.

1. Introduction
Laws governing school attendance have a well-documented effect on educational attainment, and
hence may plausibly influence involvement in criminal activity. Under a standard economic
model of crime (Becker 1968; Ehrlich 1973), education increases the stock of human capital and
hence creates higher earnings potential from legitimate work, but has less effect on the rewards
to criminal activity. Since work and crime are to some extent substitutes, participation in
criminal activity would tend to decline as the relative payoff to legitimate activities increases.
Education may also influence individual choices through other channels, including the makeup
of the peer group. Association with peers who are attending school (rather than dropouts) may
have a positive influence to the extent that they, relatively speaking, tend to value success in licit
activities or to lack crime-specific skills.
Convicts as a group have less education than their peers, and high-school dropouts are greatly
over represented among criminals (Harlow 2003; Raphael and Sills 2008; Lochner 2011). Recent
empirical evidence offers support for a causal interpretation of this association. Particularly
strong evidence derives from reforms in compulsory schooling laws in the United States, Great
Britain, and Sweden: extensions of the mandatory schooling age in these countries resulted in an
increase in educational attainment and reduction in lifetime involvement in criminal activity
(Lochner and Moretti 2004; Anderson 2009; Hjalmarsson, Holmlund and Lindquist 2011;
Machin, Marie and Vujic 2011; Clay, Lingwall, and Stephens 2012).1
We take another approach to the same end in this paper. We use as a source of variation in the
probability of dropout the interaction between the child’s birthdate and the minimum schoolentry age. A series of articles beginning with Angrist and Krueger (1991) have analyzed the
effects of birth date on academic achievement, graduation, earnings, and other outcomes. This
literature focuses on state laws specifying the age at which a child may begin kindergarten. In
North Carolina, for example, until recently the law specified that a child had to be at least 5 years

1

Relatedly, Jacob and Lefgren (2003) and Luallen (2006) find that there are immediate crime
effects of being in school, namely that juvenile involvement in property crime is reduced during
school days, while violent crime rates are increased.
2

old on or before October 16th to be eligible to enter kindergarten.2 The result is that a child born
on October 17th could not start until a year after a child born on October 16th. This type of
discontinuity can provide the empirical basis for a strong quasi-experimental analysis of the
effects of age on school careers. Unsurprisingly, the children who are required to delay entry
into school tend to perform better than their younger grade-level peers. On the other hand, there
is some evidence that students who start school late due to their birth date are less likely to
complete high school. A simple explanation is that they have greater exposure to the legal
opportunity to drop out. In North Carolina, where the school leaving age is just 16, a youth who
was born on October 17th and went through school on time would have 31 months of “exposure”
to the possibility of dropping out before graduation, whereas a youth born a day earlier would
have just 19 months. For students with a relatively weak commitment to school, the extra year
of exposure may spell the difference between graduating and dropping out.
Our analyses are based on rich administrative data from the North Carolina public school system
and other state agencies. In addition to detailed data on enrollment and academic performance,
the data set includes items from the youth’s birth certificate, juvenile delinquency and adult
criminal records. Using the regression discontinuity (RD) framework (Thistlethwaite and
Campbell 1960), we compare educational and criminal outcomes of children born just before and
after the school entry cutoff date. Given that individual characteristics associated with
educational and criminal outcomes are balanced at the cutoff date, the differences in outcomes
provide estimates of the causal effect of school entry eligibility on education and crime. The
data set is large and of high quality – for example, exact birth dates and data on demographic
characteristics are taken directly from the birth certificates, while education and crime data are
taken from administrative records rather than self-report.
Our study contributes to the existing literature by replicating and extending findings on the effect
of entry age on academic performance, grade retention, and dropout. Unlike earlier contributions
to this literature, which for the most part employ Decennial Census Data, our data set tracks
individual students. Our approach here is to treat the entry eligibility in the spirit of “intention to
treat” in an experiment, thus avoiding the potential confounding effect of the endogenous choice

2

The law was revised in 2009, now requiring that a child had to reach age 5 on or before August 31st to be
eligible to enter kindergarten.
3

by parents or school officials to hold back a child. Our results are therefore not relevant to
evaluating "academic redshirting," in which parents delay sending their children to school
hoping that greater maturity will help them better succeed in school. Although we briefly
explore the extent to which individuals’ criminal outcomes are influenced by variation in school
entry timing (the “treatment on the treated” effect), our main objective is to estimate the causal
effect of providing one group of students school entry eligibility nearly a year earlier than
another group of comparable students. Given that parents do not exercise precise control over
children's birthdates near the cutoff date, our identifying variation in school entry eligibility at
the cutoff date may be "as good as randomized" (Lee and Lemieux 2010).
Our results provide strong evidence that older youths continue to perform relatively well in
middle school, and confirm that they nonetheless are more likely to depart school before
graduation. A breakdown by sex and race indicates considerable heterogeneity in these results.
In particular, we find large differences in the likelihood of being “on time” – males born just
before the cutoff are more likely than females to be held back either by parents or school
officials, with the result that the discontinuity in the grade level configuration at October 17th is
smaller for males and declines from one year to the next. The result is to mute the effect of the
“experimental” intervention to the extent that for males the birthdate ends up causing little
difference in exposure to the dropout option. That explains our finding that females are much
more likely to drop out of high school if born after the cutoff date, whereas there is little
difference in dropout rates for males. The effects are also heterogeneous with respect to sociodemographic characteristics. We find strong eligibility effects on high school dropout among
groups of children traditionally considered disadvantaged—those who were born out of wedlock
and whose mothers had less than high school education at the time of birth.
We go on to present new empirical evidence on school-entry eligibility and crime, finding that
youths born just after the cutoff have a significantly lower likelihood of criminal activity
between age 13 and 15 (as measured by delinquent complaints), but a higher likelihood of
committing a serious adult crime (as measured by felony conviction for crimes committed by age
19). Combined with our finding of a higher dropout rate for those born after the cutoff date, it is
reasonable to conclude that high school dropout enhances the risk of committing serious crimes.

4

That inference is strengthened by the fact that the elevated crime rate for the delayed-entry group
is concentrated at age 19, by which time most youths are no longer in school.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief review of the relevant
literature. Section 3 describes the institutional background and data used. Sections 4 and 5
introduce our empirical strategy and present the main results. Section 6 discusses the validity
and robustness of our empirical strategy and findings. Section 7 explores the link between the
time “exposure” to legal dropout and the probability of dropping out. Section 8 concludes.
2. Literature Review
Other things equal, older students do better in the classroom. Older students are likely to be more
mature than their classmates, and hence better prepared for the challenges of learning new
material and managing relationships with other students and adults. The positive link between
students' relative age and academic achievement has been documented in a number of recent
papers (Bedard and Dhuey 2006; Datar 2006; Puhani and Weber 2007; McEwan and Shapiro
2008; Elder and Lubotsky 2009; Black, Devereux and Salvanes 2011; Clay, Lingwall, and
Stephens 2012).
If this early advantage is reinforced over time through positive-feedback processes, including
enjoyment of school, the positive regard of teachers, and academic tracking, then it may persist
and even expand over time. The possibility that the early advantage of being old for grade may
have persistent impacts on students' educational experiences has convinced some parents to
delay enrolling their children for a year. This practice of "academic redshirting" has gained
popularity in recent years, and is considered an important aspect of the "lengthening of
childhood" (Deming and Dynarski 2008). It is more common for boys than girls, and for whites
than African Americans.
On the other hand, the early academic advantage associated with the extra year of age may
dissipate in later years if positive feedback processes are not strong and the maturity gap
associated with an extra year of age diminishes. Indeed, Elder and Lubotsky (2009) find
evidence that the relative age effect on academic achievement is present in the beginning of
kindergarten, but that the disparity in reading and math test scores between older and younger

5

students mostly disappears by the time students reach grade 8. By contrast, Bedard and Dhuey
(2006) find that relative age effects on math and science test scores remain large in grade 8.
In spite of the advantages associated with relative maturity on academic achievement, there is a
real possibility that late entry to school may adversely affect individuals' life outcomes.
Research shows that students relatively old for their grade are less likely to complete high
school. Under the compulsory schooling laws of the states, students are eligible to leave school
after reaching a threshold age, ranging from 16 to 18, and students who are old for their grade
have a longer period during which they can legally drop out prior to graduation. Angrist and
Krueger (1991) were the first to document this negative relationship between students'
educational attainment and relative age of entry. They used national Decennial Census data
which included quarter of birth and self-reported educational attainment; those born in the fourth
quarter had slightly more schooling than those born in the first quarter, which (together with a
claim that those born in the fourth quarter could typically start school earlier than those born in
the subsequent first quarter) they treated as the result of the school-entry date. The authors
report that those born in the fourth quarter also had relatively high earnings while in their 40s,
suggesting a positive return to education.
The Angrist-Krueger study, while seminal, was based on available data which did not include
exact birth dates. In contrast, two recent studies were able to utilize more detailed data. Dobkin
and Ferreira (2010) examine outcomes for American children born just before and after the
school entry cutoff date. They utilized detailed Decennial Census data for residents of California
and Texas; using a regression-discontinuity design and exact birthdate, they demonstrated that
students whose birthdate allowed them to start school relatively early were more likely to
graduate, but were also more likely to be retained in grade; remarkably, the authors find no
evidence that the age at which children enter school affects job market outcomes. This null
result, because it is based on superior data, is probably more trustworthy than the positive result
of Angrist and Krueger.
McCrary and Royer (2011) adopt a similar approach to investigating the relative age effect for
females. They use the Natality Detail Files for Texas and California, finding that birthdate
relative to the cutoff date for entry had no effect on subsequent childbearing (up through age 24).
However, they used the “schooling” item on the birth certificates to demonstrate that women
6

who started school later (born after the cutoff) tended to have less education at the time they had
their first child. They found little effect on infant health. The surprising conclusion from the
McCrary and Royer study, as well as the Dobkin and Ferreria study, is that while the birthdate
does have a causal effect on completed schooling, it has little or no effect on outcomes often
associated with schooling – wages, fertility, and healthy pregnancies.
In contrast, policy interventions that increase the length of compulsory schooling have
unambiguously positive findings. Reforms of this sort have strong, positive effects on
individuals' outcomes in mortality (Lleras-Muney 2005), earnings (Oreopoulos 2006; Clay,
Lingwall, and Stephens 2012) and, of particular interest here, crime (Lochner and Moretti 2004;
Anderson 2009; Hjalmarsson, Holmlund and Lindquist 2011; Machin, Marie and Vujic 2011).
To our knowledge, our paper presents the first empirical evidence that the variation in
educational attainment induced by the minimum age requirement for school entry has
consequences for crime. Our identifying variation, namely, whether students were born just
before or after the school entry cutoff, yields estimates that can be interpreted as causal effects of
being offered school entry eligibility nearly a year earlier than a comparable control group. Our
analyses complement existing research on the effect of changing the length of compulsory
schooling on crime, but the interventions are different in important respects. First, an increase in
the school-leaving age not only influences the probability of dropout for any one student, but
also affects the composition of the student body attending high school, which may have
important consequences on labor market conditions for the affected cohorts. In contrast, our
“experiment” holds constant the composition of the student body and focuses on the relative age
of individual students who are all subject to comparable labor market conditions and criminal
justice environment. Furthermore, an increase in the school-leaving age keeps youths in school
for an additional year of their adolescence, a time when youths are gaining autonomy and
presented with a variety of temptations. In contrast, the entry cutoff does not directly affect
whether youths spend, say, their 17th year in school.
3. Institutional Framework and Data Description
3.1. Minimum Age Requirement for School Entry in North Carolina

7

The compulsory schooling law in North Carolina specifies the minimum age of enrollment in
public kindergarten.3 While the law has been recently amended, prior to the 2009 school year a
child in North Carolina became eligible to enter kindergarten only if he reached the age of five
by October 16 in the relevant year. Thus the children born in September 1987 were eligible to
enter school a year earlier than those born in November 1987, who were in turn slated to enter
school at the same time as children born in September 1988.
The actual distribution of students across grades is complicated by other features of law and
practice. First, state law allows private kindergarten programs to establish their own policies
regarding the minimum age at which children are eligible to enter.4 A child who started at age 4
in a private kindergarten could then transfer to the public school system and be placed in first
grade a year later. Second, the minimum age requirement for school entry does not apply to
students who attended kindergarten from a different state in accordance with the rules of that
state before moving to the North Carolina public school system. Lastly, although all public
school systems in North Carolina have to offer kindergarten, kindergarten attendance is not
required.5 Children may skip kindergarten and enter school in first grade, which is not subject to
the minimum age requirement as in the kindergarten entry. However, the age distribution
observed among public school students in various grade levels, presented in more detail below,
demonstrates that the number of students placed in grade levels higher than predicted by their
birthdates is extremely small.
A more substantial qualification to our results is that some parents choose to delay their child’s
enrollment in school by a year, and other students are retained in primary school for an extra year
by school officials. The prevalence of such delays is particularly large among children born just
before the cutoff date. Thus, our findings are best interpreted as intention-to-treat (ITT) effects,
namely, the effect on educational and criminal outcomes of receiving school entry eligibility
nearly a year earlier than a comparable control group, rather than the effect of actually entering
school a year earlier. However, for certain subgroups of students with low rates of academic
3

North Carolina General Statutes 115C-364.
In case of movement from non-public schools to public schools after the kindergarten year,
principals in public schools have the authority to place students in appropriate grade levels.
5
Public school laws in North Carolina only require students to attend school from the ages of
seven to sixteen.
4

8

redshirting and grade retention, the ITT estimates can be close approximations to the effects of
school entry timing. We explore this issue further when examining potential heterogeneity in the
school eligibility effects across different demographic groups with varying degrees of academic
redshirting.
3.2.Data Description
Our main data source is individual-level administrative data from the North Carolina public
school system, provided by the North Carolina Education Research Data Center (NCERDC).
The student-level data from the NCERDC cover all students enrolled in the North Carolina
public school system, and contain detailed information on students' schooling from grades 3 to
12. Our measure of academic achievement comes from students' performance on state-wide
End-of-Grade (EOG) reading and math tests that are administered from grades 3 to 8, which all
students are required to take. Students' test performance across years can be tracked by unique
individual identifiers assigned by the NCERDC. EOG test records specify the grade in which
they were administered; we identify students who take the EOG tests for a given grade level
more than once as grade repeaters. Enrollment data in North Carolina public school system
between grade levels between 3 and 12 are also available from the NCERDC “masterfile”.
A potential difficulty in following students' academic progress over time is the movement of
students between the public school system and private schools in North Carolina, or migration to
and from other states. If the group of students leaving or entering the North Carolina public
school system is systematically different from those initially enrolled and staying in the system
in characteristics related to their academic performance, it is not straightforward to track and
understand students' academic progress over time. For instance, in comparing academic
performance of students born before and after the school entry cutoff date, if students who were
born just after the cutoff date and score high on EOGs are more likely to leave for private
schools, the difference in academic achievement between those born before and after the cutoff
who remain in the public schools will diminish over time even if the true effect of school entry
eligibility remains constant. Alternatively, comparison of educational experience at the cutoff
date over time may be obscured by the influx of new students into the public school system. For
example, students entering North Carolina public schools after kindergarten years may include
disproportionately many children from immigrant households with limited English proficiency.
9

To avoid these potential complications, we restrict our main analyses to students who were born
in North Carolina and enrolled in the North Carolina public school system for five consecutive
years between ages 11 and 15.6 This choice is further motivated by the data availability and the
compulsory schooling laws in North Carolina allowing students to leave school at age 16.7
We determine students' in-state birth status from North Carolina birth certificate data, which are
merged with the educational data via the NCERDC individual identifiers. The birth certificate
data also provide information on the exact date of birth, a key identifying variation in our
empirical analyses below.8 In addition, the birth certificate data contains other key demographic
attributes measured at the time of birth, such as gender, mother's race, parents' marital status,
mother's education attainment and age level, and birth weight. Our analyses focus on students
born within 120 days of school entry cutoff dates. The 120-day window covers students born
between June 19 of the given year and February 14 of the following year.9 Since the EOG tests
are administered in late May to early June, students from a given birth cohort (e.g., those born
within 120 days of the school entry cutoff date in 1987) are of the same age when taking the
EOG tests, which makes it straightforward to construct and interpret some of our outcome
measures, such as grade level distribution at a given age level. In our regression analyses,
several alternatives for time windows around the cutoff date are considered. We compare
educational and criminal outcomes of students born within 10 days, 30 days and 60 days of the
cutoff date and find comparable results. (See Section 6.)

6

We also exclude students enrolled in charter schools from our analysis.

7

We also ran alternative analyses based on 1) all North Carolina public school students enrolled in the
North Carolina public school system between ages 11 and 15 (regardless of their birthplace) and 2) those
who were born in North Carolina and moved into or out of the public school system between ages 13 and
15. Results are available on request from the authors.

8

The EOG test score files from the NCERDC data also contain students' date of birth, but
aggregated up to each calendar month. For example, all students who were born in October 1987
are assigned October 15, 1987 as their birthdates. Since the school entry cutoff date in North
Carolina we use is in the middle of a calendar month (October 17), the EOG test score files does
not allow us to distinguish students born just before and after the cutoff date.
9
The birth-certificate data linked with students' educational data is available from 1987-2007.
The 1987-1988 cohorts are chosen so that academic outcomes from earlier years (e.g., grade
level in age 11) and longer-term life outcomes (e.g., criminal between age 17 and 19) can both be
examined from the same cohorts. Similarly, due to data availability, the 1991-1993 cohorts are
the only cohorts whose academic outcomes and juvenile delinquency patterns can be both
examined.
10

We use the following measures of students' educational experience: students' EOG reading and
math test score percentiles in grades 6 through 8, grade retention between ages 11 and 15, grade
at age 11 and age 15, and school enrollment 4 years after grade 8. A student’s grade at a
particular age is determined from the EOG test-score files. Students who took the EOG for the
same grade in two consecutive years are designated as “repeaters.” We do not have direct
information on high school graduation for our sample of students, but for the earlier cohort we
do know whether they persisted in public school. In particular, we consider whether students
remain enrolled in North Carolina public schools 4 years after 8th grade (henceforth, ``Year 12'').
Year 12 is equivalent to grade 12 if they did not repeat grades between grades 8 and 12.
Students who transfer out of state or to a private school after age 15 are, unfortunately,
indistinguishable from dropouts by this measure. It is also true that some students who are
enrolled in Year 12 never graduate. The net effect is that Year 12 enrollment appears to
overstate the graduation rate: Year 12 enrollment for our sample is 79 percent, while the official
4-year high school graduation rate in North Carolina during School Year 2007-2008 was 70
percent.
Table 1 presents descriptive statistics of our sample. The first two columns correspond to
students born within 120 days (first column) and 60 days (second column) of the school entry
cutoff date in 1987 and 1988, and the next two columns provide comparable information for
students born in 1991, 1992 and 1993. As will be made clear below, the 120 day-window will be
used for our graphical analyses, and the 60-day window for our regression analyses.10 Due to the
data availability issue, some of the covariates and outcome measures are available for either
1987-1988 or 1991-1993 cohorts only. In particular, Year 12 enrollment and adult criminal
conviction measures are available for 1987-1988 cohorts only, while free-and-reduced-pricelunch eligibility and juvenile-delinquency data are available for 1991-1993 cohorts only.
There is little difference in the observable characteristics across sample cohorts (1987-1988 vs.
1991-1993). A number of demographic characteristics taken from birth certificates are similar:
sex (about 50-50), race (30 percent black), mother’s age and education at birth (10 percent below
10

To be more specific, given our choice of a 60-day bandwidth, our local linear regression
attributes zero weights to data points outside the 60-day window from the cutoff date. Thus, data
points that are exactly 60 days away from the cutoff date also carry zero weight in the regression
analysis.
11

18, and 12 percent who were older but had not graduated from high school) and birth weight (7
percent small enough to be problematic by the conventional cut point of 2500 grams).
Consistent with the change in family structure over time, however, the share of births to unwed
mothers is noticeably higher among 1991-1993 cohorts than 1987-1988 cohorts (33 percent vs.
26 percent). For the 1991-1993 cohorts, we also have information on students’ free/reduced
price lunch eligibility at age 11, obtained from their EOG test records, and find that 44 percent
were eligible.
The EOG reading and math test score percentiles, normalized with respect to all students who
take the tests in a given grade level for a given school year, are close to 50 across all three grade
levels considered. This finding suggests that our sample of North Carolina natives is comparable
with the general North Carolina public school student population in terms of academic
performance in middle years. Finally, we consider students' grade retention and Year 12 school
enrollment. The rate of grade retention between ages 11 and 15 is 8 percent for 1987-1988
cohorts and 5 percent for 1991-1993 cohorts. Among 1987-1988 cohorts, 79 percent of students
remain enrolled in school in Year 12, which is to say four years after they were enrolled in 8th
grade.
[Table 1]
Our measures of criminal activity are based on the official juvenile complaint11 and adult-felonyconviction data in North Carolina, provided by the North Carolina Department of Juvenile
Justice and Delinquency Prevention (NCDJJDP) and North Carolina Department of Corrections
(NCDOC) respectively. We examine whether individuals receive a juvenile complaint between
ages 13 and 15 and whether they are convicted of a serious crime committed between ages 17
and 19.12 The incidence of juvenile complaints between ages 13 and 15 in our 1991-1993
sample is 9 percent, and that of convictions for adult criminal activity between ages 17 and 19 is

11

A complaint filed by a law enforcement officer, teacher or citizen against a youth suspected of
committing a crime/delinquency is the first step of the juvenile justice system. After evaluating
the complaint and evidence, a NCDJJDP counselor determines whether the case should go to
court and makes referral to other resources if necessary.
12
The choice of crime outcome measures is driven by data availability. For example, for the
1987 (1988) cohort, we can only observe their conviction outcomes between ages 17 and 20
(ages 16 and 19).
12

6 percent. While the official complaint and felony conviction records are reliable indicators of
involvement in crime, they are far from comprehensive. For example, for a youth to be
convicted of a serious crime requires that the crime is known to the police and results in an
arrest, and that the resulting case works its way through the court system to conviction at the
felony level. It is fair to say that our indicator tends to signal the high end of the crimeinvolvement spectrum.
4. Empirical Strategy
Our empirical strategy exploits the sharp discontinuity in grade level configuration between
children born before and after the school entry cutoff date in North Carolina. Figure 1 illustrates
the extent of this grade level variation among sample students born within 120 days of the cutoff
date in 1987. Each panel shows the age at which students take the EOG tests and the
corresponding grade level distribution, computed separately for students born before and after
the cutoff date. For example, our 1987 cohort was 11 years old when taking their EOG tests in
School Year 1998-1999; 75 percent of students born before the cutoff were enrolled in grade 6,
while more than 90 percent of those born after were in grade 5. Similarly large differences in
grade level configuration between students born before and after the cutoff date are also
observed in subsequent years, as shown.
[Figure 1]
The grade level variation at the cutoff date enables an estimate of the causal effects of school
entry eligibility on children's subsequent educational and criminal outcomes. Given that other
characteristics associated with these outcomes remain comparable and continuous at the cutoff
date, the outcomes of children born just before the cutoff provide reasonable estimates of the
counterfactual outcomes of those born just after the cutoff had they been eligible to enter school
a year earlier. This interpretation of regression discontinuity estimates using the potential
outcomes framework is formalized in Hahn, Todd and Van der Klaauw (2001). Moreover, as
long as individuals do not have precise control over their children's birthdates, the variation in
school entry eligibility can be considered as good as randomized near the cutoff date (Lee and
Lemieux 2010). Below, we formally introduce our regression specification and describe our
estimation procedure in more detail.
13

4.1.Regression Specification
The discontinuity in educational and criminal outcomes at the cutoff date can be estimated by
imposing a global parametric structure, e.g., the following equation with quadratic polynomials:
Yi = α1Di + α2Ri + α3DiRi + α4

+ α5Di

+ Xiβ + εi,

(1)

where Di is a binary indicator equal to 1 if student i was born after the cutoff date of October 16,
and Ri represents the distance between student i's birthday and the cutoff date. For example, Ri is
equal to 0 for a student born on October 16, 5 for a student born on October 21 and -5 for a
student born on October 11. DiRi is an interaction term between the distance from the cutoff date
and a post-cutoff birthday indicator. A squared term of Ri and its interaction with Di are also
included in the specification. Xi is a vector of observable characteristics which may be associated
with the outcomes of interest, and includes information on gender, race, out-of-wedlock birth,
mother's educational attainment and age at the time of birth, and birth weight. εi represents
idiosyncratic errors at the individual level. Each birth date has several hundred observations; we
cluster standard errors at the birthday level.
Alternatively, we can use the local-linear-regression technique which estimates the discontinuity
non-parametrically, assigning more weight to data points closer to the cutoff date than points
further away. Local-linear-regression estimates can be obtained by solving the following
method-of-moment specification:
min ∑

α
,

where

α

α

,

(2)

represents a weighting kernel function with bandwidth h. We use the following

triangular kernel in our analyses, as it is known to be optimal for local-linear regression at the
boundary (Fan and Gijbels 1992):
,

=1–

|

|

1| |

1.

The vector of individual covariates X is included in the specification to improve the precision as
follows:
min ∑

α

α

α

β

,
14

(3)

We ran the regression analyses using both global parametric specification (Equation (1)) and
local linear regression (Equation (3)), and obtained very similar results. For brevity, we only
report point estimates obtained from local linear regression, which has attractive bias properties
(Fan and Gijbels 1992). In our graphical illustration of the discontinuities at the cutoff date,
however, we depict raw data points with lines showing local linear smoother and quadratic fits,
which should correspond to the estimation results from the local linear regression and global
parametric approach, respectively.
From Equation (3), it is clear that the local linear regression estimates are affected by the choices
of the kernel and bandwidth. The consensus in the technical literature is that the choice of the
kernel has little impact on the estimates, but the choice of bandwidth is more influential. In the
absence of the widely accepted rule of bandwidth choice in local linear regression estimation, we
have tried a number of alternative bandwidth choices in our regression analyses.13 In an
empirical setting similar to ours, McCrary and Royer (2011) use bandwidths of 50 and 70 days
when comparing women born before and after the school entry cutoff date in California and
Texas. Alternatively, the “Rule-of-Thumb’ bandwidth choice method proposed by Fan and
Gijbels (1992) suggests bandwidths between 7 and 26 days for our outcomes of interest. We
first present our main results using a 60-day bandwidth, similar to the bandwidth choice made by
McCrary and Royer (2011). In Section 6, we describe in more detail the optimal bandwidth for
our data, and examine the robustness of our findings across alternative bandwidth choices.
5. Results
We begin by demonstrating that the minimum entry age created a sharp discontinuity in the
grade level around October 17th. The grade level distribution at age 11 is depicted in Figure 2.
The horizontal axis corresponds to students' birth dates relative to the school entry cutoff date
(day 0 = October 17). Dots represent grade levels in which students were enrolled when taking
the End-of-Grade tests at age 11. Solid curves correspond to local linear smoother based on a
triangle kernel and 60-day bandwidth, and dashed curves represent quadratic fits.
[Figure 2]

15

The discontinuity is clear: those who were born just before the cutoff average 0.6 grade level
higher than those born just after. That the difference is less than a full year indicates that a large
share of students born before the cutoff date either entered kindergarten after their eligibility year
or repeated a grade prior to age 11.
Table 2 presents point estimates of the grade level discontinuity at the cutoff date. Panel (A)
corresponds to the estimates from 1987-1988 cohorts and Panel (B) corresponds to 1991-1993
cohorts. The first column presents estimates from a baseline specification in which grade level at
age 11 is regressed on an indicator of birth date after the cutoff (D), the birthdate (R), their
interaction (DR) and a constant (Equation (2)). Consistent with the graphical evidence, we find a
sizable discontinuity at the cutoff date in the grade levels at age 11. The second column shows
estimates from a specification that includes additional individual covariates (Equation (3)). In
support of the assumption that the timing of birth near the cutoff date is independent of sociodemographic characteristics, we find little change on the key coefficient estimates, but a
considerable increase in explanatory power and some improvement in estimate precision. The
results for the covariates are of some interest in their own right: in particular, they indicate that
blacks and women are relatively likely to have reached this stage “on time,” other things equal.
(As discussed below, blacks as a group are actually more likely to be held back at every stage;
that effect is reversed in this regression due to confounding effect of several of the covariates.)
Results from the 1991-93 cohorts, presented in the next two columns, tell a similar story. The
grade-level variation at age 11 is again close to 0.6, and the estimate changes little when
additional covariates are introduced to the specification, including free/reduced price lunch
eligibility at age 11.
The lower panel of Table 2 reports results for all the same regressions but for grade level at age
15. The discontinuity in the grade level is somewhat smaller, reflecting the differential retention
rates between younger and older students.
[Table 2]
Next, we consider the discontinuity in students’ academic achievement levels at the cutoff date.
Figures 3 and 4 show the distribution of the test score percentiles from EOG reading and math
tests from grades 6, 7, and 8. As above, solid and dashed curves represent local linear smoother
16

and quadratic fits, respectively. Children born just after the cutoff are likely to score higher in
both reading (Figure 3) and math (Figure 4) across all three grade levels. Table 3 presents local
linear regression estimates of the reading achievement percentile discontinuity at the cutoff date.
The first three columns present estimates from the 1987-1988 cohorts, and correspond to the
EOG reading achievement in grades 6, 7, and 8. For brevity, we only report estimates from an
extended specification that controls for additional individual characteristics. However, the
discontinuity estimates obtained from a baseline specification (Equation (2)) and an extended
specification (Equation (3)) are very similar. We find that individuals born just after the cutoff
score substantially higher on EOG reading tests across Grades 6-8. The next three columns show
the corresponding estimates obtained from 1991-1993 cohorts. The discontinuity in the reading
percentile at the cutoff is similar to those obtained from the 1987-1988 cohort. Estimates from
both samples show that the magnitude of the discontinuity decreases over time, yet remains
significantly large across all three grade levels. To put this number into perspective, the
magnitude of the post-cutoff coefficient (D) is approximately 75 percent of that on out-ofwedlock birth, and more than twice as large as that on underweight birth. Note that our results
are consonant with those reported by Bedard and Dhuey (2006), who also find a persistent
advantage in math test scores through middle school.
[Figures 3 and 4, and Table 3]
Promotion and Persistence
To a considerable extent, the school entry eligibility age influences whether 1) students
successfully advance through the grade levels on time between ages 11 and 15 and 2) students
remain enrolled in school in Year 11 and 12 (which we define as three or four years after grade 8
respectively). Students born before the cutoff date are relatively likely to be held back. Figure 5
demonstrates this phenomenon by showing the likelihood of repeating a grade between ages 11
and 15. Moreover, Figure 6 shows that students born after the cutoff are more likely to leave
school before graduation. The North Carolina compulsory schooling law allows students to drop
out from school at age 16. A student born just after the cutoff will be exposed to the legal
possibility of dropping out prior to graduation for almost a year longer than a student born just
before, assuming neither has been delayed. Table 4 presents the corresponding regression
estimates. Among both 1987-1988 and 1991-1993 cohorts, students born just after the cutoff
17

date are 6 percentage points less likely to repeat a grade between ages 11 and 15. On the other
hand, we find a 4 percentage point drop in the Year 12 enrollment at the cutoff from the 19871988 cohorts. Table 4 also presents the results for Year 11, defined as enrollment three years
following 8th grade. It is of interest that the effect of a post-cutoff birthday is only half as large
for this outcome, suggesting that the “extra” dropouts are concentrated in that fourth year – as
would be expected by the exposure hypothesis.
Again, coefficients on the individual covariates take expected signs. Children who were born out
of wedlock, whose mothers were underage or had low education attainment, and who had low
birth weight are significantly more likely to repeat grades and are less likely to remain enrolled
in high school before graduation. Free/reduced price lunch eligibility is a significant and
positive predictor of grade retention outcome among 1991-1993 cohorts. We take a closer look
at the potential heterogeneity in educational experience and the magnitude of the discontinuity at
the cutoff date across different demographic groups below.
[Table 4 and Figures 5 and 6]
Juvenile Delinquency and Adult Crime
Our main objective is to explore how the differences in educational experience, driven by the
variation in the timing of birth with respect to the school entry cutoff date, influence individuals’
risks in delinquency and crime. For this purpose, we examine the following measures: 1)
juvenile delinquency committed between ages 13 and 15, measured by the NCDJJDP complaint
records, and 2) adult crime, defined by committing a crime while aged 17, 18, or 19, that results
in a felony conviction.
Consider Table 5, which presents the estimation results on juvenile delinquency obtained from
the 1991-1993 cohorts. The first column shows that, on average, children born just after the
cutoff are 3 percentage points less likely to be involved in juvenile delinquency between ages 13
and 15. The next three columns break down the juvenile delinquency outcome by age level. We
find a statistically significant drop at the cutoff date in delinquent complaints at ages 14 and 15.
It is noteworthy that the discontinuity at the cutoff remains large even after many of the key
individual characteristics are controlled for. Specifically, the magnitude of the discontinuity in

18

total juvenile delinquency, a 3 percentage point drop, is similar to the coefficients on out-ofwedlock births and having a underage mother (4 percentage point each).
The distribution of juvenile complaint rates around the cutoff date closely resembles that of
measures of academic achievement examined earlier. Importantly, we find that children born
just after the cutoff date not only outperform those born just before in academic achievement and
grade progress, but also are less likely to be involved in juvenile delinquency. One potential
explanation is that children who do well in the classroom are likely to enjoy school more and
hence resist the temptation to play truant with delinquent friends. Alternatively, those with little
success in schoolwork may anticipate low potential earnings from legitimate labor market, where
academic success and educational attainment are much valued, and instead “invest” more on
building crime capital.
[Table 5]
Adult criminal participation may be influenced by academic success and persistence, which in
our results push in opposite directions.14 On the one hand, we find that children born just after
the cutoff date show higher academic achievement and lower risks of juvenile delinquency,
which are associated with low likelihoods of committing a crime as adults. On the other hand,
they are also more likely to drop out, which has adverse impact on their subsequent risk of
criminal activity. The sign and magnitude of the discontinuity in the adult criminal risks at the
cutoff should then depend on the magnitudes of these two opposing factors.
Table 6 reports estimation results for adult crime committed between ages 17 and 19. The first
column shows that children born just after the cutoff are 0.9 percentage points more likely to
commit a crime between ages 17 and 19. The discontinuity in the crime outcome at the cutoff
date is marginally significant and relatively small. However, the increase in adult crime at the
cutoff is particularly noteworthy, given that those born just after had significantly lower rates of
juvenile delinquency (Table 5). A likely explanation is that the adverse effect of high school
dropout on crime is large enough to outweigh the crime-reducing effects of early academic
advantage and low juvenile delinquency. Indeed, the fact that the eligibility effect on crime
14

In North Carolina, individuals who commit a crime at or above age 16, which coincides with
the minimum school leaving age in the state, are tried as adults.
19

between 17 and 19 is concentrated in the crime committed at age 19 (fourth column) suggests
that high school dropout, most of which take place before age 19, may be an important
mechanism through which the variation in school entry eligibility influences adult crime.
[Table 6]
Table 7 presents descriptive statistics which reiterate the potential causal link between high
school completion and adult crime. Consider the first column. Among our main estimating
sample, i.e., those born within 60 days of the school entry cutoff date in 1987 and 1988, 95% of
students remain enrolled in school at age 16 and 89% at age 17. Nearly 80% of them are either
enrolled in school at age 18 or reach 12th grade. The next three columns correspond to the school
enrollment rates of individuals who commit crime at age 17, 18, and 19. The distribution of
enrollment rates across these groups is consistent with the causal effect of high school dropout
on crime; the rate of school enrollment at age 17 is noticeably lower among individuals who
commit crime at age 18 and 19 (70%). Similarly, those who commit crime at age 17 have the
lowest rate of enrollment at age 16 enrollment rate (82%).
[Table 7]
As a matter of curiosity, we also analyzed the teenage birthrate for females in our sample, and
found that the school entry age had no discernible effect. That finding accords with McCrary
and Royer’s (2011) finding on the likelihood of giving birth by age 24; they found that age of
school entry age had no effect on the birth rate, although it did affect the educational attainment
at the time of birth.
Heterogeneity across Demographic Groups
It turns out that there are large differences by race and sex when it comes to school careers.
Females are more likely to be on schedule -- placed in the grade level predicted by their birthdate
-- than males, and for both sexes whites are more likely on schedule than blacks. The largest
drop in the on-time rate is for black males, where it declines from 75% at age 11 to just 61% at

20

age 15 (the last year before legal drop out).15 Figure 7 depicts the pattern during these years for
the four race-sex groups.
[Figure 7]
The RD results for the four race-sex groups are summarized in the first four columns of Table 8.
The top panel corresponds to estimates from the 1987-1988 cohorts and the bottom panel to the
1991-1993 cohorts. Sample means specific to each demographic groups are presented in square
brackets. Some of the outcome measures, such as Year 12 enrollment, juvenile delinquency and
adult crime, are available only from either 1987-1988 or 1991-1993 samples. On the other hand,
estimation results on grade retention and on-time progress at age 15 are available for both
cohorts and virtually identical across the two samples.
[Table 8]
For all four groups, the younger students are more likely to be retained in grade at least once
between 11 and 15. The largest effect by far is for black males, where the “extra” retentions
amount to 12% of the total. For white women, the effect is only about 3%. The RD results for
grade progress at age 15 demonstrate the remarkable extent to which retention erases the
discontinuity created by school entry age. At age 15, the white males born after the cut date are
52 to 55 percentage points more likely to be on time (other things equal); for black males the
difference is 30 to 32 percentage points. The average grade level for white males is just 0.3
years higher for the group born just before the cutoff. Perhaps as a result, the likelihood of
reaching Year 12 (rather than dropping out) is not much different for males born on either side of
the cut point. For females, the difference is 6 to 8 percentage points, a significant effect both
statistically and substantively. Considering criminal outcomes, we find a significant drop in the
rates of juvenile delinquency at the cutoff for all four race-sex groups, but the effects on adult
crime are smaller. The coefficients on crime committed at age 19 are, however, positive for all
four groups.

15

Dobkin and Ferreira (2010, p. 52) report that in Texas and California blacks are less likely to
be held back than whites. The contradiction with our results may be due to the fact that they are
using the self-report data on grade from the Census, rather than administrative data.
21

In Table 9, we restrict our analyses to three demographic groups traditionally considered to be
disadvantaged: children born to unwed mothers, or whose mothers had less than high school
education, and children who were eligible for free/reduced price lunch program at age 11. All
three groups have higher rates of grade retention, high school dropout, juvenile delinquency and
adult crime committed than the overall population, making them highly policy-relevant groups.
Within these subgroups, we find that the RD effects on grade retention, high school dropout,
juvenile delinquency and adult crime are much larger than those obtained from the general
population. We again find the estimates from two samples closely resemble each other.
[Table 9]
Validity
An attractive property of the regression-discontinuity framework is that, as long as individuals do
not have precise control over the running variable, which assigns individuals to a treatment or
control group, the variation in the treatment is "as good as randomized in a neighborhood around
the discontinuity threshold" (Lee and Lemieux 2010). The prevalence of academic redshirting
indicates that some parents prefer to have their children enter school older rather than younger.
But, since children who were born just before the cutoff can readily delay school entry for a year,
there is little incentive for parents to manipulate children's birthdates near the cutoff date. A
related possibility is that age eligibility for entering a public kindergarten may influence parents’
decision to send their children to private schools instead of public school. For example, our RD
estimates will be muted if wealthier parents are more likely to send their children to private
kindergarten when born just after the cutoff dates and then keep them there from age 11 to 15.
(Recall that if they are in private school during that period, they will not be included in our
sample.)
Figures 8 and 9 present birth frequencies, measured by the number of births recorded in the state
birth certificate, and the rate of sample attrition, defined by the number of individuals in our
estimating sample divided by the overall birth frequency, averaged across the five cohorts we
consider. In the top panel, we observe some evidence of seasonal effects on the birth frequency,
but no noticeable discontinuity at the cutoff date. More importantly, there is little evidence of
discontinuity in the rate of sample attrition around the cutoff date (bottom panel). These figures
22

suggest that our variation in school entry eligibility is unlikely to be obscured by a systematic
manipulation of the timing of birth or use of private schools relative to the cutoff date.
[Figures 8 and 9]
Another way to examine the validity of our research design is to compare the individuals'
observed characteristics across the cutoff date. If the variation in individuals' timing of birth
near the cutoff date is effectively random, we should expect that individuals on both sides of the
cutoff date are similar in their observable characteristics. Indeed, the continuity of individual
covariates at the discontinuity threshold is considered a key identifying assumption of a valid
regression discontinuity design (Hahn, Todd and van der Klaauw 2001). This assumption also
enables a clear interpretation of regression discontinuity estimates in the potential outcomes
framework. If individuals born just before and after the cutoff date closely resemble each other
in all relevant characteristics except their school entry eligibility, educational and criminal
outcomes of children born just after the cutoff provide a natural counterfactual for children born
just before the cutoff date. We test for the continuity of observable characteristics at the cutoff
using our preferred regression specification (3) and report the results in Table 10. The
estimation results show that the discontinuity at the cutoff is small and insignificant for all
covariates considered, for both 1987-1988 and 1991-1993 samples.
[Table 10]
Robustness
It is easy to see from Equation (2) that our RD estimates are sensitive to the choice of bandwidth.
Allowing a larger bandwidth enables us to employ more observations in the analyses, which
would improve the precision of the estimates. On the other hand, if the bandwidth is overly
wide, local linear approximation may not be a good fit for the data in hand. The optimal
bandwidth choice should then depend on the sample size and the extent to which the sample
distribution is approximated by a linear function near the cutoff point. Although researchers
have proposed various techniques for optimal bandwidth choice in recent years (Fan and Gijbels
1996; Ludwig and Miller 2007; Imbens and Lemieux 2008; Imbens and Kalyanaraman 2012),
there does not appear to be a clear consensus. Therefore, to examine the degree to which our
estimates are sensitive to the choice of bandwidth, we replicate the regression analyses with
23

alternative choices of bandwidths, ranging from 10 days to 60 days. The bandwidth of 10 days is
motivated by the “Rule-of-Thumb” (ROT) method proposed by Fan and Gijbels (1996), where
the optimal bandwidth depends on the fourth-order global polynomial fit of the data points and
its curvature near the cutoff point. Appendix Table A.1 reports the list of the ROT results for the
selected outcome measures.
Table 11 presents estimation results. Shown in each column are the discontinuities in outcome
measures at the cutoff date based on the given bandwidth choice. Although the magnitudes
differ across bandwidth choices, the discontinuities in educational experience and criminal risks
mostly remain large and significant. It is unlikely that our findings are mainly driven by a
particular choice of bandwidth.
[Table 11]
6. Exposure to Legal Dropout, High School Attainment and Crime
One potential explanation for the lower rate of high school attainment for children born after the
cutoff date, in spite of their earlier academic advantage on standardized tests and grade retention,
is that children who are relatively old for their grades have a longer time window during which
they are eligible to drop out from high school. For instance, in North Carolina where students
may leave school at age 16 or above, children who were born on the cutoff date and did not delay
school entry or repeat grades have approximately 19 months between their 16th birthday and
high school graduation, compared to 31 months for children born the day after the cutoff.
The RD analysis reported above is in the spirit of the “intention to treat” approach, recognizing
that the “treatment” is greatly attenuated by high rates of grade retention for the younger group.
To estimate the “effect of the treatment on the treated” in this case, we re-estimate the Year 12
and crime RD equations for the subsample that stayed on time at least through age 11, and hence
were fully exposed to the “treatment.” The problem, of course, is that for this selected sample,
the treatment is not orthogonal to student characteristics. In particular, we expect that the
younger students are more “selected” -- mature and academically gifted (relative to their peer
group) -- than is true for the older students. Our usual covariates may not fully account for this

24

difference. Our new estimate adds the students' standardized EOG reading score from age 11 to
control for the academic disparity between pre- and post-cutoff students.16
Table 12 presents the estimation results. Consider the first three columns, which pertain to the
1987-1988 cohorts. When comparing the outcomes of students who entered school and
experienced on-time progress to the appropriate grade level, we find strong discontinuities in the
Year 12 enrollment and criminal conviction at the cutoff date (first and second columns).
Among on-timers, children who were born just after the cutoff date are more than 10 percentage
points less likely to remain enrolled in school in Year 12 and about 1 percentage point more
likely to become felons, even after the academic disparity is controlled for. When these
estimates are compared with the “ITT” estimates obtained from the full sample (third column),
the Year 12 effects appear over twice as large for the “on time” sample as for the full sample.
The crime coefficients obtained from the on-timers are also about 20% larger than the
corresponding ITT estimate.
[Table 12]
On the other hand, when considering the juvenile delinquency outcome from the 1991-1993
cohorts, we find little difference across on-timers and full sample. This finding should not be
surprising, as the difference in exposure to legal dropout opportunity should only influence
individuals’ high school dropout and adult crime outcomes, but not criminal involvement taking
place before school-leaving age. Moreover, given that the “on-time” and “ITT” estimates
closely resemble each other, regardless of whether the age-11 EOG reading score is controlled
for, the potential complication due to selection may not be that severe in practice.
Lastly, it may be worthwhile to compare our estimates on high school persistence with previous
research. Using empirical frameworks similar to ours, Dobkin and Ferreira (2010) report
16

We standard-normalize the EOG reading score with respect to the score distribution from a
given school year, instead of a given school year and grade level. For example, when
constructing the standardized EOG reading score at age 11 for the 1987 cohort, we normalize
students’ test scores to mean 0 and variance 1, with respect to all EOG reading scores from
grades 3 to 8, recorded in School Year 1988-1999. This across-grade normalization process is
made possible by a unique feature of the NC EOG tests, in which its "developmentally-scaled
scores are intended to be interpreted much like measurements of height in inches" (Pommerich et
al., 1993; North Carolina State Board of Public Instruction 1996), enabling researchers to
compare test scores across different grades.
25

individuals who were born just after the school entry cutoff date in California (Texas) are 0.6
(0.8) percentage points more likely to complete 12th grade. McCrary and Royer (2011)’s
analyses on female samples in California and Texas find that mothers who were born just after
the cutoff date in California have fewer years of schooling completed than those born just before,
by 0.14 in California and 0.24 in Texas. Our finding of a 4 percentage point difference in Year
12 enrollment is much higher. We offer two plausible explanations for this discrepancy. First,
the higher school leaving age in California and Texas attenuates the differences in the length of
exposure to legal dropout opportunities between students born before and after the cutoff date.
While North Carolina students born just before and after the cutoff date have 19 and 31 months
between their school leaving age (16) and high school graduation, the corresponding numbers are
0 and 7 months for California and Texas students, where the minimum school leaving age is 18.
Second, our measure of educational attainment is directly obtained from administrative records
in North Carolina public school system, and thus may contain more accurate information than
self-reported education attainment data used by Dobkin and Ferreira (2010) and McCrary and
Royer (2011).
7. Conclusion
In this paper, we exploit the discontinuity in school entry age created by a legal minimum age
requirement to investigate the effects of relative age at entry on the relationship between
schooling and crime. Utilizing administrative data on birth, school, and crime from the North
Carolina Education Research Data Center, we find that youths born after the cutoff age are
typically older than their classmates and tend to do better in school: their end-of-grade test
scores are higher in middle school, and they are less likely to be retained in grade between ages
11 and 15. They have lower rates of delinquency between ages 13 and 15. On the other hand,
the delayed-entry group is also more likely to drop out and be convicted of serious crimes
committed by age 19. These effects are quite heterogeneous by sex, race, and other indicators of
socioeconomic disadvantage. In particular, the tendency to “redshirt” students or retain them in
grade is stronger for males than females, which mutes the “dropout” effect for that group by
shrinking the age gap. We also find sizable discontinuities in educational and criminal outcomes
at the cutoff from children who were born to unwed mothers, whose mothers had low education
attainment and who were eligible for reduced/free price lunch.
26

This paper is the first to document an effect of relative age at school entry on crime involvement.
Other recent assessments have found little or no effect of relative age on other outcomes,
including fertility and earnings, despite the finding that school entry age affects school
achievement and the likelihood of dropout.
Our findings on how relative age affects school achievement and dropout are of interest in
themselves. Compared to two comparable recent studies, we find much larger effects on grade
retention and dropout, and are able to clarify the extent of heterogeneity by race and sex. Our
data set is exceptionally strong in several respects: we are able to track individuals in a cohort
from birth through school and then crime up through age 19, and measure school outcomes from
administrative data.17

17

McCrary and Royer (2011) take education data from the Natality Detail File, which is to say
birth certificates, where the education data are self-reported. Dobkin and Ferreira (2010) utilize
the Decennial Census files, and there to the education data are self-reported.
27

References
Anderson, D. Mark. 2012. “In School and Out of Trouble? The Minimum Dropout Age and
Juvenile Crime.” Working Paper, Montana State University
Angrist, Joshua D., and Alan B. Krueger. 1991. “Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect
Schooling and Earnings?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(4): 979–1014.
Becker, Gary S. 1968. "Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach." Journal of Political
Economy, 76 (2): 169-217.
Bedard, Kelly, and Elizabeth Dhuey. 2006. ‘‘The Persistence of Early Maturity: International
Evidence of Long-Run Age Effects.’’ Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(4):1437–72.
Black, Sandra, Paul Devereux, and Kjell Salvanes. 2011. “Too Young to Leave the Nest? The
Effects of School Starting Age.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(2): 455-467.
Clay, Karen, Jeff Lingwall, Melvin Stephens, Jr. (2012) Do Schooling Laws Matter? Evidence
from the Introduction of Compulsory Attendance Laws in the United States NBER Working
Paper No 18477.

Datar, Ashlesha. 2006. ‘‘Does Delaying Kindergarten Entrance Give Children a Head Start?’’
Economics of Education Review, 25(1):43–62.
Deming, David, and Susan Dynarski. 2008. "The Lengthening of Childhood." Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 22(3): 71-92.
Dobkin, Carlos and Fernando Ferreira. 2010. “Do School Entry Laws Affect Educational
Attainment and Labor Market Outcomes?” Economics of Education Review, 29(1): 40-54.
Elder, Todd E. and Darren H. Lubotsky. 2009. “Kindergarten Entrance Age and Children’s
Achievement: Impacts of State Policies, Family Background, and Peers.” Journal of Human
Resources 44(3): 641-683.
Fan, Jianqing and Irene Gijbels. 1992. “Variable Bandwidth and Local Linear Regression
Smoothers.” Annals of Statistics 20:2008-2036.
Hahn, Jinyong, Petra Todd, and Wilbert Van der Klaauw. 2001. “Identification and Estimation
of Treatment Effects with a Regression-Discontinuity Design.” Econometrica, 69: 201–209.
Harlow, Caroline W. 2003. “Education and Correctional Populations.” Bureau of Justice
Statistics Special Report. Washington, DC.
Hjalmarsson, Randi. 2008. “Criminal Justice Involvement and High School Completion.”
Journal of Urban Economics, 63(2):613-30.
28

Hjalmarsson, Randi, Helena Holmlund, and Matthew J. Lindquis. 2012. “The Effect of
Education on Criminal Convictions and Incarceration: Causal Evidence from Micro-data.”
Working Paper, Stockholm University.
Imbens, Guido and Karthik Kalyanaraman. 2012. “Optimal Bandwidth Choice for the
Regression Discontinuity Estimator.” Review of Economic Studies, 79: 933-959.
Imbens, Guido and Thomas Lemieux. 2008. “Regression Discontinuity Designs: A Guide to
Practice.” Journal of Econometrics, 142: 615–635.
Jacob, Bryan A. and Lars Lefgren. 2003. “Are Idle Hands the Devil’s Workshop? Incapacitation,
Concentration, and Juvenile Crime.” American Economic Review, 93: 1560-1577.
Lee, David S., and Thomas Lemieux. 2010. "Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics."
Journal of Economic Literature, 48(2): 281–355.
Lleras-Muney, Adriana. 2005. “The Relationship between Education and Adult Mortality in the
United States.” Review of Economic Studies, 72: 189-221.
Lochner, Lance. 2004. "Education, Work, and Crime: A Human Capital Approach."
International Economic Review, 45(3): 811-43.
Lochner, Lance and Enrico Moretti. 2004. “The Effect of Education on Crime: Evidence from
Prison Inmates, Arrests and Self-Reports.” American Economic Review, 94(1): 155-189.
Luallen, Jeremy. 2006. “Schools’ out…forever: A Study of Juvenile Crime, At-risk Youths and
Teacher Strikes.” Journal of Urban Economics, 59: 75-103.
Ludwig, Jens, and Douglas L. Miller. 2007. “Does Head Start Improve Children’s Life Chances?
Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Design.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1):
159–208.
Machin, Stephen, Olivier Marie and Suncica Vujic. 2011. “The Crime Reducing Effect of
Education.” Economic Journal, 121:463-484.
McCrary, Justin and Heather Royer. 2011. “The Effect of Maternal Education on Fertility and
Infant Health: Evidence from School Entry Policies Using Exact Date of Birth.” American
Economic Review 101(1): 158-195.
McEwan, Patrick and Joseph Shapiro. 2008. “The Benefits of Delayed Primary School
Enrollment: Discontinuity Estimates using Exact Birth Dates.” Journal of Human Resources,
43(1): 1-29.

29

North Carolina State Board of Education. 1996. “End of Grade Tests, Technical Report #1.”
Raleigh, NC.
Oreopoulos, Philip. 2007. “Do Dropouts Drop Out Too Soon? Wealth, Health and Happiness
from Compulsory Schooling.” Journal of Public Economics, 91: 2213-2229.
Pommerich, Mary, Kathleen Billeaud, Valerie Williams, and David Thissen. 1993. “User’s
Guide for the North Carolina End of Grade Tests.” L.L. Thurston Psychometric Laboratory,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Puhani, Patrick A. and Andrea M. Weber. 2005. “Does the Early Bird Catch the Worm?
Instrumental Variable Estimates of Educational Effects of Age at School Entry in Germany.”
IZA Discussion Paper.
Raphael, Steven and Melissa Sills (2008) “Urban crime, race and the criminal justice system in
the United States” In Companion to Urban Economics, edited by Daniel P. McMillen and
Richard Arnott, 515-35, New York: Blackwell Publishing.
Thistlethwaite, Donald L. and Donald T. Campbell. 1960. “Regression-Discontinuity Analysis:
An Alternative to the ex post facto Experiment," Journal of Educational Psychology, 51 (6): 309317.

30

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
Cohort:
1987-1988
1991-1993
Samples born within X Days of Cutoff Date: 120 Days 60 Days 120 Days 60 Days
Male
49.0%
49.3%
48.6%
48.7%
Black
30.6%
30.3%
32.0%
31.9%
Unwed mother
26.0%
25.8%
33.2%
33.0%
Born to Teenage Mother
10.3%
10.1%
10.5%
10.6%
Mother's Education < High School
12.5%
12.5%
11.7%
11.7%
Birth Weight < 2500 grams
7.3%
7.2%
7.7%
7.7%
Free/Reduced Price Lunch , Age 11
43.8%
43.6%
Grade Level, Age 11
5.3
5.3
5.3
5.3
Grade Level, Age 15
9.3
9.2
9.3
9.2
Grade 6 Reading Percentile
49.2
49.4
50.0
50.3
Grade 7 Reading Percentile
48.4
48.6
49.8
50.0
Grade 8 Reading Percentile
48.5
48.7
49.4
49.6
Grade 6 Math Percentile
50.1
50.3
50.8
51.0
Grade 7 Math Percentile
49.7
50.0
50.7
50.8
Grade 8 Math Percentile
49.5
49.6
51.4
51.5
Grade Retention, Age 11-15
8.4%
8.1%
5.6%
5.4%
School Enrollment, 3 Years after Grade 8
89.4%
89.3%
School Enrollment, 4 Years after Grade 8
79.0%
78.8%
Juvenile Delinquency Age 13-15
9.0%
8.8%
Criminal Conviction, Age 17-19
5.7%
5.8%
Obs.
69572
35213
110244
55318
Note: Sample is composed of students born around the school entry cutoff dates in 1987-1988 and 19911993. Each cohort is defined by students born between June 19 of the given year and February 14 of the
following year (120 days before and after the cutoff date of October 17 (= Day 0), respectively). The
sample is further restricted to students 1) who attended NC public schools between age 11 and 15, 2)
whose NC birth certificate information is available.

31

Table 2: Effect of School Entry Eligibility on Grade Level Configuration
Outcome: Grade Level at
Age 11
(A) 1987-1988 Cohort
D
-0.578*** -0.579***
(0.013)
(0.012)
R (x100)
-0.403*** -0.397***
(0.042)
(0.039)
DR (x100)
0.303*** 0.299***
(0.045)
(0.042)
Male
-0.122***
(0.011)
Black
0.039***
(0.009)
Unwed Mother
-0.062***
(0.006)
Teenage Mother
-0.051***
(0.009)
Mother's Ed. < HS
-0.108***
(0.008)
Low Birthweight
-0.076***
(0.011)
Constant
5.559*** 5.651***
(0.012)
(0.013)
R-squared
0.408
0.430
Obs.
34,560
34,560
(B) 1991-1993 Cohort
D
-0.567*** -0.567***
(0.013)
(0.012)
R (x100)
-0.327*** -0.322***
(0.038)
(0.034)
DR (x100)
0.221*** 0.219***
(0.042)
(0.039)
Male
-0.124***
(0.008)
Black
0.052***
(0.007)
Unwed Mother
-0.047***
(0.007)
Teenage Mother
-0.054***
(0.009)
Mother's Ed. < HS
-0.133***
(0.008)

Age 15
-0.520*** -0.521***
(0.013)
(0.012)
-0.374*** -0.369***
(0.041)
(0.037)
0.289*** 0.295***
(0.045)
(0.042)
-0.171***
(0.013)
-0.009
(0.009)
-0.103***
(0.008)
-0.093***
(0.011)
-0.195***
(0.011)
-0.089***
(0.013)
9.450*** 9.607***
(0.012)
(0.015)
0.291
0.339
34,560
34,560
-0.511*** -0.510***
(0.013)
(0.011)
-0.309*** -0.304***
(0.038)
(0.033)
0.197*** 0.194***
(0.043)
(0.038)
-0.158***
(0.010)
0.036***
(0.007)
-0.068***
(0.007)
-0.072***
(0.010)
-0.171***
(0.009)
32

Low Birthweight
Free/Reduced Lunch
Constant
R-squared
Obs.

5.522***
(0.011)
0.342
54,416

-0.084***
(0.011)
-0.113***
(0.006)
5.652***
(0.011)
0.379
54,416

9.444***
(0.011)
0.274
54,416

-0.084***
(0.011)
-0.148***
(0.006)
9.619***
(0.013)
0.337
54,416

Note: First and third columns correspond to a baseline specification in which the outcome measure, grade
level at age 11 or 15, is regressed on birthdays (R), post-cutoff indicator (D) and its interaction term (DR).
Second and fourth columns correspond to an extended specification in which additional individual
covariates are included. Panel (A) reports estimates obtained from 1987 and 1988 cohorts, and Panel (B)
estimates from the 1991-1993 cohorts. Coefficients and standard errors on R and DR are multiplied by
100. Robust standard errors clustered at the birthday level are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1. All specifications include cohort-fixed effects.

33

Table 3: Effect of School Entry Eligibility on EOG Reading Achievement
Cohort:
Outcome:

1987-1988

1991-1993

EOG Reading Percentile
Grade 6
Grade 7
Grade 8

EOG Reading Percentile
Grade 6
Grade 7
Grade 8

D

6.250***
6.001***
4.708***
5.487***
4.700***
4.178***
(0.615)
(0.592)
(0.512)
(0.450)
(0.503)
(0.580)
R
-0.021
-0.010
-0.005
0.017*
0.017
0.016
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.012)
(0.010)
(0.011)
(0.010)
DR
0.017
-0.007
0.001
-0.032**
-0.033**
-0.024
(0.020)
(0.019)
(0.017)
(0.014)
(0.016)
(0.018)
Male
-4.504*** -4.066*** -3.903*** -4.837*** -4.760*** -3.653***
(0.323)
(0.285)
(0.292)
(0.237)
(0.257)
(0.231)
Black
-17.244*** -17.779*** -18.310*** -13.507*** -12.582*** -13.047***
(0.418)
(0.393)
(0.433)
(0.347)
(0.339)
(0.314)
Unwed Mother
-7.924*** -7.503*** -7.485*** -4.969*** -5.440*** -5.599***
(0.475)
(0.430)
(0.501)
(0.325)
(0.316)
(0.317)
Teenage Mother
-7.824*** -8.103*** -8.082*** -5.010*** -5.043*** -5.050***
(0.537)
(0.489)
(0.536)
(0.430)
(0.435)
(0.420)
Mother's Ed. < HS -15.952*** -16.116*** -15.858*** -10.540*** -11.181*** -10.580***
(0.504)
(0.529)
(0.497)
(0.345)
(0.345)
(0.327)
Low Birthweight
-2.786*** -2.183*** -2.525*** -1.366***
-1.058**
-0.633
(0.681)
(0.707)
(0.686)
(0.495)
(0.409)
(0.414)
Free/Reduced Lunch
-12.653*** -12.313*** -12.845***
(0.208)
(0.261)
(0.268)
Constant
58.981*** 58.461*** 58.723*** 63.071*** 63.022*** 62.257***
(0.471)
(0.498)
(0.431)
(0.444)
(0.420)
(0.442)
R-squared
0.198
0.199
0.204
0.245
0.233
0.240
Obs.
34,560
34,560
34,560
54,416
54,416
54,416

Note: Each column corresponds to an extended specification in which the outcome measure, EOG reading
percentiles, are regressed on birthdays (R), post-cutoff indicator (D) and its interaction term (DR), as well
as other individual covariates. First three columns correspond to estimates obtained from 1987 and 1988
cohorts, and the next three correspond to 1991, 1992 and 1993 cohorts. Robust standard errors clustered
at the birthday level are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All specifications include
cohort-fixed effects.

34

Table 4: Effect of School Entry Eligibility on Grade Retention and High School Attainment
Cohort:
Outcome:

1987-1988
1991-1993
Grade Retention Enrollment Enrollment Grade Retention
Age 11-15
Year 11
Year 12
Age 11-15
D
-5.712***
-2.386*** -4.448***
-5.588***
(0.482)
(0.781)
(0.773)
(0.400)
R
-0.026*
0.011
-0.030*
-0.018
(0.014)
(0.019)
(0.018)
(0.012)
DR
0.004
-0.003
0.014
0.022*
(0.017)
(0.026)
(0.026)
(0.013)
Male
4.800***
-2.336*** -3.328***
3.519***
(0.388)
(0.367)
(0.494)
(0.296)
Black
4.753***
4.062***
7.056***
1.609***
(0.495)
(0.547)
(0.706)
(0.317)
Unwed Mother
4.134***
-5.572*** -8.127***
2.084***
(0.571)
(0.639)
(0.795)
(0.367)
Teenage Mother
4.181***
-8.098*** -11.145***
1.916***
(0.630)
(0.986)
(1.082)
(0.482)
Mother's Ed. < HS
8.477***
-14.366*** -17.471***
4.080***
(0.735)
(0.761)
(0.792)
(0.460)
Low Birthweight
1.217**
-1.322*
0.211
0.013
(0.613)
(0.733)
(0.935)
(0.445)
Free/Reduced Lunch
3.578***
(0.325)
Constant
4.332***
94.435*** 88.078***
3.270***
(0.546)
(0.643)
(0.793)
(0.477)
R-squared
0.053
0.039
0.045
0.048
Obs.
34,560
34,560
34,560
54,416
Note: Each column corresponds to an extended specification in which outcome measures are regressed on
birthdays (R), post-cutoff indicator (D) and its interaction term (DR), as well as other individual
covariates. First three columns correspond to estimates obtained from 1987 and 1988 cohorts, and the last
column corresponds to 1991, 1992 and 1993 cohorts. Robust standard errors clustered at the birthday
level are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All specifications include cohort-fixed effects.

35

Table 5: Effect of School Entry Eligibility on Juvenile Delinquency
Cohort:
Outcome:
D

Age 13-15
-2.803***
(0.571)
R
0.028*
(0.015)
DR
-0.001
(0.019)
Male
4.581***
(0.304)
Black
1.002***
(0.353)
Unwed Mother
3.994***
(0.453)
Teenage Mother
3.686***
(0.732)
Mother's Ed. < HS
6.217***
(0.592)
Low Birthweight
-1.191**
(0.568)
Free/Reduced Lunch 6.641***
(0.379)
Constant
2.855***
(0.488)
R-squared
0.049
Obs.
54,416

1991-1993
Age 13
Age 14
Age 15
-0.443
-1.474*** -1.774***
(0.316)
(0.394)
(0.394)
0.006
0.020**
0.016
(0.009)
(0.010)
(0.010)
-0.001
-0.006
0.006
(0.010)
(0.013)
(0.013)
1.454*** 2.297*** 2.650***
(0.152)
(0.163)
(0.226)
0.422*
0.194
0.907***
(0.229)
(0.229)
(0.273)
1.399*** 1.916*** 2.485***
(0.239)
(0.301)
(0.314)
0.855** 1.376*** 2.393***
(0.349)
(0.421)
(0.519)
2.167*** 3.407*** 2.810***
(0.345)
(0.412)
(0.428)
-0.189
-0.354
-1.062***
(0.355)
(0.369)
(0.390)
1.807*** 3.073*** 3.671***
(0.171)
(0.234)
(0.292)
0.245
1.052*** 1.577***
(0.266)
(0.307)
(0.342)
0.016
0.024
0.028
54,416
54,416
54,416

Note: Each column corresponds to an extended specification, in which juvenile delinquency outcome for
a given age level is regressed on birthdays (R), post-cutoff indicator (D) and its interaction term (DR), as
well as other individual covariates. Robust standard errors clustered at the birthday level are in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All specifications include cohort-fixed effects.

36

Table 6: Effect of School Entry Eligibility on Adult Criminal Conviction
Cohort:
Outcome: Crime Committed at Age 17-19
D
0.851*
(0.469)
R
-0.016
(0.010)
DR
0.013
(0.015)
Male
6.634***
(0.291)
Black
2.596***
(0.397)
Unwed Mother
4.303***
(0.442)
Teenage Mother
2.906***
(0.561)
Mother's Ed. < HS
3.955***
(0.497)
Low Birthweight
-0.508
(0.586)
Free/Reduced Lunch
-0.865**
(0.393)
Constant
0.039
Obs.
34,560

1987-1988
Age 17
Age 18
-0.033
-0.174
(0.288)
(0.313)
-0.000
0.001
(0.006)
(0.009)
0.006
0.010
(0.010)
(0.011)
2.566*** 3.394***
(0.177)
(0.210)
0.973*** 1.334***
(0.257)
(0.270)
1.789*** 2.014***
(0.292)
(0.287)
1.309*** 1.512***
(0.406)
(0.423)
1.281*** 2.308***
(0.273)
(0.392)
-0.217
-0.500
(0.318)
(0.353)
-0.312
-0.584**
(0.214)
(0.290)
0.017
0.022
34,560
34,560

Age 19
0.849**
(0.339)
-0.017**
(0.008)
0.010
(0.012)
3.172***
(0.192)
1.036***
(0.270)
1.875***
(0.292)
1.134***
(0.408)
1.454***
(0.289)
-0.266
(0.406)
-0.526*
(0.281)
0.016
34,560

Note: Each column corresponds to an extended specification, in which adult crime outcome for a given
age level is regressed on birthdays (R), post-cutoff indicator (D) and its interaction term (DR), as well as
other individual covariates. Robust standard errors clustered at the birthday level are in parentheses. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All specifications include cohort-fixed effects.

37

Table 7: School Enrollment and Crime
Aggregate Crime at Age 17 Crime at Age 18 Crime at Age 19
Enrollment, Age 16
94.6%
81.8%
84.5%
84.7%
Enrollment, Age 17
88.6%
67.2%
69.4%
70.4%
Enrollment, Age 18 or Grade 12
78.9%
40.3%
50.2%
51.7%
Obs.
35,213
714
914
952
Note: First column corresponds to our main sample who were born within 60 days of the school entry
cutoff date in 1987 and 1988. The next three columns correspond to the individuals who committed
felony offenses in ages 17, 18 and 19. Each entry represents the rate of enrollment for a given age/grade
level.

38

Table 8: Effect of School Entry Eligibility, by Race and Sex
White Male White Female Black Male Black Female
(A) 1987-1988 Cohort
Grade Retention, Age 11-15

Grade Level, Age 15

On-time Progress, Age 15

School Enrollment, Year 12

Crime, Age 17-19

Crime, Age 17

Crime, Age 18

Crime, Age 19

Obs.
(B) 1991-1993 Cohort
Grade Retention, Age 11-15

Grade Level, Age 15

On-time Progress, Age 15

Juvenile Offense, Age 13-15

Juvenile Offense, Age 13

-5.527***
(1.117)
[7.776]
-0.330***
(0.021)
[9.183]
55.206***
(91.791)
[68.207]
-1.349
(1.315)
[77.227]
0.741
(0.860)
[6.633]
-0.247
(0.583)
[2.353]
-0.182
(0.599)
[2.933]
0.846
(0.589)
[3.206]

-3.090***
(0.732)
[4.191]
-0.634***
(0.020)
[9.342]
27.339***
(1.807)
[82.179]
-7.732***
(1.213)
[79.313]
0.133
(0.533)
[1.953]
-0.145
(0.240)
[0.585]
0.231
(0.324)
[0.714]
0.147
(0.368)
[0.912]

-11.574***
(1.927)
[16.835]
-0.534***
(0.028)
[9.088]
29.887***
(1.954)
[62.192]
-2.286
(2.653)
[76.766]
3.052
(2.142)
[14.675]
1.099
(1.357)
[5.571]
-0.941
(1.565)
[7.226]
1.651
(1.386)
[6.803]

-6.701***
(1.710)
[9.249]
-0.664***
(0.031)
[9.256]
18.149***
(2.421)
[75.100]
-6.451***
(1.883)
[83.261]
0.817
(1.270)
[4.117]
-0.321
(0.711)
[1.269]
0.461
(0.784)
[1.578]
1.271**
(0.616)
[1.705]

11,729

11,621

4,954

5,514

-5.520***
(0.696)
[5.301]
-0.373***
(0.018)
[9.179]
51.747***
(1.290)
[67.384]
-3.018***
(0.690)
[8.563]
-1.019***

-2.995***
(0.464)
[2.699]
-0.606***
(0.013)
[9.329]
29.262***
(1.202)
[80.156]
-1.913***
(0.717)
[4.911]
-0.344

-11.071***
(1.254)
[11.362]
-0.509***
(0.029)
[9.082]
31.807***
(2.214)
[59.731]
-4.805**
(2.029)
[16.467]
-0.574

-6.429***
(1.304)
[5.464]
-0.583***
(0.022)
[9.242]
20.791***
(1.784)
[72.109]
-2.027
(1.616)
[10.009]
0.209

39

Juvenile Offense, Age 14

Juvenile Offense, Age 15

Obs.

(0.369)
[2.101]
-1.064**
(0.481)
[3.804]
-1.906***
(0.604)
[4.635]

(0.324)
[1.137]
-1.097**
(0.430)
[2.042]
-1.276***
(0.473)
[2.687]

(0.975)
[4.923]
-2.643**
(1.300)
[7.360]
-3.076*
(1.560)
[9.895]

(0.816)
[2.628]
-1.322*
(0.723)
[4.000]
-1.212
(1.248)
[5.618]

17562

18121

8247

9132

Note: Each entry refers to the RD estimate obtained for the given outcome (rows) and subgroup (column).
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Robust standard errors clustered at the birthday level are in parentheses.
Sample means are reported in square bracket. All regression specifications include birthdays (R), postcutoff indicator (D), interaction term (DR), other individual covariates and cohort-fixed effects.

40

Table 9: Effect of School Entry Eligibility, by Demographic Characteristics
Unwed Mother Mother's Ed. < HS Free/Red. Lunch
(A) 1987-1988 Cohort
Grade Retention, Age 11-15

Grade Level, Age 15

On-time Progress, Age 15

School Enrollment, Year 12

Crime, Age 17-19

Crime, Age 17

Crime, Age 18

Crime, Age 19

Obs.
(B) 1991-1993 Cohort
Grade Retention, Age 11-15

Grade Level, Age 15

On-time Progress, Age 15

Juvenile Offense, Age 13-15

Juvenile Offense, Age 13

-9.368***
(1.316)
[13.956]
-0.546***
(0.022)
[9.118]
30.107***
(1.679)
[64.628]
-5.133**
(2.094)
[72.603]
3.002***
(1.095)
[10.529]
0.753
(0.690)
[4.043]
0.089
(0.752)
[4.839]
2.129***
(0.750)
[4.760]

-11.818***
(2.086)
[15.181]
-0.412***
(0.031)
[9.058]
41.871***
(3.278)
[60.401]
-5.944**
(2.338)
[63.810]
3.267**
(1.382)
[10.123]
0.854
(0.811)
[3.156]
0.46
(1.265)
[4.515]
2.500***
(0.901)
[3.985]

8928

4341

-9.049***
(1.039)
[8.774]
-0.521***
(0.016)
[9.123]
32.440***
(1.023)
[63.716]
-3.728**
(1.710)
[14.530]
-0.927

-9.748***
(1.516)
[9.998]
-0.437***
(0.022)
[9.029]
41.894***
(1.855)
[56.826]
-4.979**
(2.076)
[16.234]
-0.406
41

-8.621***
(0.757)
[8.665]
-0.507***
(0.014)
[9.108]
34.833***
(1.237)
[62.728]
-3.986***
(1.200)
[14.400]
-0.573

Juvenile Offense, Age 14

Juvenile Offense, Age 15

Obs.

(0.877)
[4.067]
-2.271**
(0.987)
[6.396]
-2.009*
(1.043)
[8.490]

(1.136)
[4.834]
-3.882***
(1.363)
[7.558]
-3.215**
(1.351)
[8.629]

(0.652)
[3.993]
-2.088***
(0.772)
[6.355]
-2.458***
(0.873)
[8.189]

17,997

6,351

23,715

Note: Each entry refers to the RD estimate obtained for the given outcome (rows) and subgroup (column).
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Robust standard errors clustered at the birthday level are in parentheses.
Sample means are reported in square bracket. All regression specifications include birthdays (R), postcutoff indicator (D), interaction term (DR), other individual covariates and cohort-fixed effects.

42

Table 10: Continuity of Covariates at the Cutoff
Male

Black

Unwed
Mother

Teenage
Mother

Mother's
Ed. < HS

(A) 1987-1988 Cohorts
D
-0.029
0.701
0.014
0.013
0.119
(1.259)
(0.985)
(1.146)
(0.768)
(0.749)
Constant
49.553*** 28.232*** 24.468*** 9.876*** 12.472***
(0.989)
(0.585)
(0.632)
(0.490)
(0.639)
R-squared
0.000
0.001
0.001
0.000
0.000
Obs.
34,560
34,560
34,560
34,560
34,560
(B) 1991-1993 Cohorts
D
-1.257
0.819
0.716
0.661
0.358
(1.027)
(1.036)
(1.068)
(0.637)
(0.763)
Constant
49.058*** 31.213*** 32.240*** 10.303*** 11.833***
(0.837)
(0.859)
(0.815)
(0.502)
(0.637)
R-squared
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
Obs.
54,416
54,416
54,416
54,416
54,416

Low
Free/Red.
Birthweight Lunch
-0.846
(0.694)
8.197***
(0.538)
0.000
34,560
-0.280
(0.413)
7.642***
(0.306)
0.000
54,416

0.734
(1.084)
43.634***
(0.930)
0.000
54,416

Note: Presented in each column is the discontinuity estimate of the given variable at the cutoff date, as
well as the constant term and R-squared. Results from the 1987-1988 cohorts (Panel A) and 1991-1993
cohorts (Panel B) are reported separately. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Robust standard errors
clustered at the birthday level are in parentheses. All regression specifications include birthdays (R),
post-cutoff indicator (D), their interaction term (DR) and cohort-fixed effects.

43

Table 11: Robustness to Bandwidth Choices
Bandwidth =
(A) 1987-1988 Cohorts
Grade 6 Reading Percentile
Grade 7 Reading Percentile
Grade 8 Reading Percentile
Grade Retention, Age 11-15
School Enrollment, Year 12
Crime, Age 17-19
Crime, Age 17
Crime, Age 18
Crime, Age 19
Obs.
(B) 1991-1993 Cohorts
Grade 6 Reading Percentile

10

30

60

6.128*** 5.971*** 6.250***
(1.500)
(0.772)
(0.615)
7.524*** 5.915*** 6.001***
(1.609)
(0.846)
(0.592)
4.806*** 4.438*** 4.708***
(1.412)
(0.668)
(0.512)
-4.066*** -4.575*** -5.712***
(0.626)
(0.567)
(0.482)
-1.824* -3.521*** -4.448***
(0.984)
(0.961)
(0.773)
1.221
0.853
0.851*
(0.787)
(0.526)
(0.469)
-0.218
-0.420
-0.067
(0.513)
(0.344)
(0.286)
0.482
-0.089
-0.201
(0.823)
(0.418)
(0.312)
0.622
1.032**
0.817**
(0.593)
(0.437)
(0.341)
5,329
17,051
34,560

3.732*** 4.797*** 5.487***
(0.751)
(0.559)
(0.450)
Grade 7 Reading Percentile
3.234*** 4.187*** 4.700***
(0.730)
(0.637)
(0.503)
Grade 8 Reading Percentile
2.520*** 3.522*** 4.178***
(0.813)
(0.745)
(0.580)
Grade Retention, Age 11-15 -4.118*** -4.977*** -5.588***
(0.467)
(0.437)
(0.400)
Juvenile Offense, Age 13-15
0.052
-2.321*** -2.803***
(1.014)
(0.845)
(0.571)
Juvenile Offense, Age 13
-0.124
-0.534
-0.443
(0.494)
(0.425)
(0.316)
Juvenile Offense, Age 14
-0.292
-1.342** -1.474***
(0.813)
(0.593)
(0.394)
Juvenile Offense, Age 15
0.435
-1.434** -1.774***
(0.538)
(0.548)
(0.394)
Obs.
8,579
26,922
54,416
Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Robust standard errors clustered at the birthday level are in
parentheses. Each entry refers to the discontinuity estimate obtained for the given outcome (rows) and
44

bandwidth (column). All regression specifications include birthdays (R), post-cutoff indicator (D) and its
interaction term (DR), as well as other individual covariates and cohort-fixed effects.

45

Table 12: Exposure to Legal Dropout, High School Attainment and Crime
Cohort:
Sample:
Enrollment, Year 12
Crime, Age 17-19

1987-1988
"On-time"
Full
-10.377*** -10.136*** -4.448***
(0.771)
(0.755)
(0.773)
1.046**
1.035**
0.851*
(0.506)
(0.501)
(0.469)

Delinquency, Age 13-15
Reading Score, Age 11
Obs.

No
27,486

Yes
27,486

No
34,560

1991-1993
"On-time"

Full

-2.366*** -2.509*** -2.803***
(0.687)
(0.674)
(0.571)
No
Yes
No
41,188
41,188
54,418

Note: Each entry refers to the discontinuity estimate obtained for the given outcome (rows), birth cohort
(columns) and sample group (columns). Full sample refers to those born in North Carolina and attended
its public schools between ages 11 and 15 (See Tables 4, 5, and 6). “On-time” sample restricts the main
sample to those who were placed in the predicted grade level at age 11. Robust standard errors clustered
at the birthday level are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All regression specifications
include birthdays (R), post-cutoff indicator (D) and its interaction term (DR), as well as other individual
covariates and cohort-fixed effects.

46

Figure 1: Grade Level Distribution across Age Levels, 1987 Cohort

Before Cutoff

After Cutoff
0
Grade at Age 11 = 4

5,000

10,000

15,000

Grade at Age 11 = 5

20,000

Grade at Age 11 = 6

Before Cutoff

After Cutoff
0
Grade at Age 13 = 6

5,000

10,000

15,000

Grade at Age 13 = 7

20,000

Grade at Age 13 = 8

Before Cutoff

After Cutoff
0
Grade at Age 15 = 8

5,000

10,000

15,000

Grade at Age 15 = 9

20,000

Grade at Age 15 = 10

Note: Figure is based on cohorts of students who were born in North Carolina within 120 days of the
school entry cutoff date in 1987 (October 17) and attended NC public schools between age 11 and 15.

47

4.8

5

Grade Level at Age 11
5.2
5.4
5.6

5.8

Figure 2: Grade Level Distribution at Age 11, 1987-1988 Cohort

-100

-50
0
50
Date of Birth Relative to Cutoff Date

100

Note: Figure is based on cohorts of students born around the school entry cutoff dates in 1987 and 1988.
Each cohort is defined by students born between June 19 of the given year and February 14 of the
following year (120 days before and after the cutoff date of October 17 (= Day 0), respectively). The
sample is further restricted to students 1) who attended NC public schools between age 11 and 15, 2)
whose NC birth certificate information is available. N = 69,572. Horizontal axis represents the date of
birth relative to the cutoff date. Dots represent 5-day averages of students’ grade level at age 11. Solid
curves represent local linear smoother using a triangle kernel and 60-day bandwidth, and dashed curves
represent quadratic fits, computed separately for children born before and after the cutoff date.

48

46

EOG Reading Score Percentile: Grade 6
48
50
52

54

Figure 3: EOG Reading Score Percentiles in Grades 6 through 8, 1987-1988 Cohort

-50
0
50
Date of Birth Relative to Cutoff Date

100

-100

-50
0
50
Date of Birth Relative to Cutoff Date

100

46

EOG Reading Score Percentile: Grade 7
48
50
52

54

-100

49

54
EOG Reading Score Percentile: Grade 8
48
50
52
46

-100

-50
0
50
Date of Birth Relative to Cutoff Date

100

Note: Figure is based on cohorts of students born around the school entry cutoff dates in 1987 and 1988.
Each cohort is defined by students born between June 19 of the given year and February 14 of the
following year (120 days before and after the cutoff date of October 17 (= Day 0), respectively). The
sample is further restricted to students 1) who attended NC public schools between age 11 and 15, 2)
whose NC birth certificate information is available. N = 69,572. Horizontal axis represents the date of
birth relative to the cutoff date. Dots represent the EOG reading score percentile (normalized with respect
to each grade level and test year), averaged over 5-day blocks. Solid curves represent local linear
smoother using a triangle kernel and 60-day bandwidth, and dashed curves represent quadratic fits,
computed separately for children born before and after the cutoff date.

50

EOG Math Score Percentile: Grade 6
48
50
52

54

Figure 4: EOG Math Score Percentiles in Grades 6 through 8, 1987-1988 Cohort

-50
0
50
Date of Birth Relative to Cutoff Date

100

-100

-50
0
50
Date of Birth Relative to Cutoff Date

100

48

EOG Math Score Percentile: Grade 7
50
52

54

-100

51

56
EOG Math Score Percentile: Grade 8
50
52
54
48

-100

-50
0
50
Date of Birth Relative to Cutoff Date

100

Note: Figure is based on cohorts of students born around the school entry cutoff dates in 1987 and 1988.
Each cohort is defined by students born between June 19 of the given year and February 14 of the
following year (120 days before and after the cutoff date of October 17 (= Day 0), respectively). The
sample is further restricted to students 1) who attended NC public schools between age 11 and 15, 2)
whose NC birth certificate information is available. N = 69,572. Horizontal axis represents the date of
birth relative to the cutoff date. Dots represent the EOG math score percentile (normalized with respect to
each grade level and test year), averaged over 5-day blocks. Solid curves represent local linear smoother
using a triangle kernel and 60-day bandwidth, and dashed curves represent quadratic fits, computed
separately for children born before and after the cutoff date.

52

.04

Grade Repetition between Age 11-15
.06
.08
.1
.12

.14

Figure 5: Share of Students Repeating Grades between Age 11-15, 1987-1988 Cohort

-100

-50
0
50
Date of Birth Relative to Cutoff Date

100

Note: Figure is based on cohorts of students born around the school entry cutoff dates in 1987 and 1988.
Each cohort is defined by students born between June 19 of the given year and February 14 of the
following year (120 days before and after the cutoff date of October 17 (= Day 0), respectively). The
sample is further restricted to students 1) who attended NC public schools between age 11 and 15, 2)
whose NC birth certificate information is available. N = 69,572. Horizontal axis represents the date of
birth relative to the cutoff date. Dots represent 5-day averages of the share of students repeating grades
between ages 11 and 15. Solid curves represent local linear smoother using a triangle kernel and 60-day
bandwidth, and dashed curves represent quadratic fits, computed separately for children born before and
after the cutoff date.

53

Share of Students in School 3 Years after Grade 8
.88
.89
.9
.91
.92

Figure 6: Share of Students Enrolled in School in Years 11 and 12, 1987-1988 Cohort

-50
0
50
Date of Birth Relative to Cutoff Date

100

-100

-50
0
50
Date of Birth Relative to Cutoff Date

100

Share of Students in School 4 Years after Grade 8
.74
.76
.78
.8
.82
.84

-100

Note: Figure is based on cohorts of students born around the school entry cutoff dates in 1987 and 1988.
Each cohort is defined by students born between June 19 of the given year and February 14 of the
following year (120 days before and after the cutoff date of October 17 (= Day 0), respectively). The
sample is further restricted to students 1) who attended NC public schools between age 11 and 15, 2)
whose NC birth certificate information is available. N = 69,572. Horizontal axis represents the date of
birth relative to the cutoff date. Dots represent 5-day averages of the share of students who remain
enrolled in NC public school 3 and 4 years after grade 8 (“Year 11” and “Year 12”). Solid curves
represent local linear smoother using a triangle kernel and 60-day bandwidth, and dashed curves represent
quadratic fits, computed separately for children born before and after the cutoff date.
54

Figure 7: Share of Students Placed in the Grade Level Predicted by Their Birthdays, 1987-1988 Cohort
100
90
80
70
60

White Male
White Female

50

Black Male
40

Black Female

30
20
10
0
11

12

13

14

15

Note: Horizontal axis corresponds to the age at which on-time grade progress is measured. Vertical axis
represents the percentage of students placed in the grade level predicted by their birthdays.

55

0

500

N

1000

1500

Figure 8: Birth Frequency and Sample Attrition Rate

-50
0
50
Date of Birth Relative to Cutoff Date

100

-100

-50
0
50
Date of Birth Relative to Cutoff Date

100

0

Rate of Sample Attrition
.25

.5

-100

Note: Horizontal axis represents the date of birth relative to the cutoff date. Dots represent 5-day
averages of birth frequencies and sample attrition rates across five cohorts (1987, 1988, 1991, 1992 and
1993). Solid curves represent local linear smoother using a triangle kernel and 60-day bandwidth, and
dashed curves represent quadratic fits, computed separately for children born before and after the cutoff
date.

56

Table A.1: “Rule-of-Thumb” (ROT) Bandwidth Choices
Cohorts:
Direction:
EOG Reading, Grade 6
EOG Reading, Grade 7
EOG Reading, Grade 8
Grade Retention, Age 11-15
On-time Progress, Age 15
Enrollment, Year 12
Crime, Age 17
Crime, Age 18
Crime, Age 19
Delinquency, Age 13
Delinquency, Age 14
Delinquency, Age 15

1987-1988
Left Right
17
12
10
18
17
12
13
10
13
15
9
13
17
12
14
8
12
9

1991-1993
Left Right
16
14
13
11
18
10
7
13
12
26

8
9
7

24
8
7

Note: The ROT procedure is based on the fourth-order global polynomial approximation. First, we
regress each outcome of interest (rows) on the fourth-order polynomial of birthdays. Then, the ROT
bandwidth is equal to
kernel,

∑

, where C = 3.438 is a constant for the triangular

is the estimated standard error of the regression, R is the range of the assignment variable, and

is the second-derivative of the fourth-order polynomial. This process is done
separately on the left and right sides of the cutoff point. See Fan and Gjibels (1996) for details.

57

