NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THEORETICAL MODELS OF INEQUALITY TRANSMISSION ACROSS MULTIPLE
GENERATIONS
Gary Solon
Working Paper 18790
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18790

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013

This paper was prepared for the Panel Study of Income Dynamics conference on “Inequality across
Multiple Generations,” held at the University of Michigan in September 2012. I am grateful for helpful
comments from participants at the conference and for generous advice from John Laitner. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Gary Solon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Theoretical Models of Inequality Transmission across Multiple Generations
Gary Solon
NBER Working Paper No. 18790
February 2013
JEL No. J62
ABSTRACT
Existing theoretical models of intergenerational transmission of socioeconomic status have strong
implications for the association of outcomes across multiple generations of a family. These models,
however, are highly stylized and do not encompass many plausible avenues for transmission across
multiple generations. This paper extends existing models to encompass some of these avenues and
draws out empirical implications for the multigenerational persistence of socioeconomic status.

Gary Solon
Department of Economics
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824-1038
and NBER
solon@msu.edu

Theoretical Models of Inequality Transmission across Multiple Generations

The other papers prepared for this conference present empirical evidence on the
persistence of socioeconomic status across more than two generations. In contrast, my paper
theorizes on the subject. It’s a dirty job, but someone ought to do it! My hope is that the
conceptualization provided by a theoretical framework will aid in the interpretation and further
development of empirical research on multigenerational inequality.
Section 1 of this paper reviews existing theoretical models of intergenerational
transmission. It notes an initially surprising (and, I suspect, empirically refutable) implication
about the association between grandparents’ and children’s status conditional on the parents’
status. I will suggest that more realistic predictions can be obtained by extending the existing
theory to encompass several additional ways in which grandparents’ socioeconomic status may
foretell children’s outcomes. In Section 2, I will present three such extensions and discuss the
empirical implications. Section 3 will summarize and discuss the findings.

1. A Review of Existing Theory
My point of departure is a simplified version of the model in Solon (2004), which
adapted the classic model of Becker and Tomes (1979) to rationalize the double-log functional
form of the regression equations typically estimated in empirical studies of intergenerational
income mobility.1 The model begins by assuming that family i contains one parent of generation
t–1 and one child of generation t. The family must allocate the parent’s lifetime earnings y i ,t 1
between the parent’s own consumption C i ,t 1 and investment I i ,t 1 in the child’s human capital.
The resulting budget constraint,

(1)

y i ,t 1  C i ,t 1  I i ,t 1 ,

1

The present paper’s simplification relative to Solon (2004) is that it leaves out taxation and government investment
in children. In Solon (2004), I wished to discuss the effect of public investment in children’s human capital on
intergenerational mobility. In the present paper, including a government role would clutter the model without
affecting the model’s implications for the structure of multigenerational persistence.

1

assumes that the parent cannot borrow against the child’s prospective earnings and does not
bequeath financial assets to the child.2
The technology translating the investment I i ,t 1 into the child’s human capital hit is

(2)

hit   log I i ,t 1  eit

where   0 represents a positive marginal product for human capital investment, the semi-log
functional form imposes decreasing marginal product, and eit denotes the human capital
endowment the child receives regardless of the family’s conscious investment choices. This
endowment includes both inheritance of genetic traits and cultural inheritance, such as the effects
of parental role-modeling. In this section, I follow Becker and Tomes (1979) in assuming that
eit follows the first-order autoregressive process

(3)

eit    ei ,t 1  vit

where vit is a white-noise error term and the heritability coefficient  lies between 0 and 1.
I also assume that the child’s lifetime income y it is determined by the semi-log earnings
function

(4)

log y it    phit

where p is the earnings return to human capital. Substituting equation (2) into equation (4)
yields

(5)

log y it     log I i ,t 1  peit

where   p is the elasticity of the child’s income with respect to investment in the child’s
human capital. I will henceforth refer to  as the “earnings return to human capital investment.”
2

See Becker and Tomes (1986) for an analysis that relaxes this assumption.

2

How does the family decide how much to invest in the child’s human capital? I assume
that the parent divides her or his income y i ,t 1 between own consumption C i ,t 1 and investment
I i ,t 1 in the child’s human capital so as to maximize the Cobb-Douglas utility function

(6)

U i  (1   ) log C i ,t 1   log y it .

The altruism parameter  , which lies between 0 and 1, measures the parent’s taste for y it
relative to C i ,t 1 . If the parent is cognizant of equations (1) through (5) and the variables therein,
this utility function can be rewritten as

(7)

U i  (1   ) log( y i ,t 1  I i ,t 1 )     log I i ,t 1  peit ,

which expresses the objective function in terms of the choice variable I i ,t 1 .
The first-order condition for maximizing this utility function is

(8)

U i / I i ,t 1  (1   ) /( y i ,t 1  I i ,t 1 )   / I i ,t 1  0 .

Solving for the optimal choice of I i ,t 1 yields

(9)

I i ,t 1  { /[1   (1   )]} y i ,t 1 .

This simple result has several intuitive implications. First, higher-income parents use part of
their greater wherewithal to invest more in their children’s human capital. Second, parents’
investment in their children’s human capital is increasing in parental altruism  . Third, parental
investment also is increasing in  , the earnings return to human capital investment. In other
words, parents are more inclined to invest in their children’s human capital when the payoff is
higher.

3

It is now straightforward to proceed to deriving first the implications for the
intergenerational income association between y it and y i ,t 1 , and then the implications for the role
of grandparents. Substituting equation (9) for I i ,t 1 into equation (5) yields the regression
equation

(10)

log y it   *  log y i ,t 1  peit

with intercept  *     log{ /[1   (1   ]} . At first glance, equation (10) looks like the loglinear intergenerational income regression frequently estimated by empirical researchers.
Viewed as the error term, however, peit is not well-behaved. It is correlated with the regressor
log y i ,t 1 because the child’s endowment eit and the parent’s log income log y i ,t 1 both depend

on the parent’s endowment ei ,t 1 .
In fact, equation (10) is a familiar entity in introductory econometrics textbooks. It is the
first-order autoregression of log y it with a serially correlated error term that itself follows a firstorder autoregression, as shown in equation (3). In steady state, in which log y it and log y i ,t 1
have the same variance, the slope coefficient in the population regression of log y it on log y i ,t 1
is equivalent to the correlation between log y it and log y i ,t 1 .

In the present context, this

quantity, which I will denote as  , is the steady-state intergenerational income elasticity. As
shown in Greene (2012, p. 919), this quantity is the sum of the two autoregressive parameters,
the slope coefficient in equation (10) and the serial correlation coefficient in equation (3),
divided by 1 plus their product. Thus, the steady-state intergenerational income elasticity is

(11)

  (   ) /(1   ) .

Equation (11) indicates that the intergenerational income elasticity is positive for both of
two reasons – because  is positive (i.e., richer parents’ greater investment in their children’s
human capital makes their children richer) and because  is positive (i.e., richer parents tend to
have more favorable endowments, which tend to be passed on to their children through genetic

4

and cultural inheritance). Suppose, for example, that   0.3 and   0.2 (or vice versa, as the
symmetry in how  and  enter equation (11) will lead to the same outcome). Then the
intergenerational income elasticity is   (0.3  0.2) /[1  (0.3)(0.2)]  0.47 .
What is most pertinent for this conference, though, is what the model implies about the
role of grandparents. Lagging equation (10) by one generation, multiplying it by the heritability
coefficient  , and subtracting the result from equation (10) yield the second-order
autoregression

(12)

log y it  (1   )(  *  p )  (   ) log y i ,t 1   log y i ,t  2  pv it .

In this regression of the child’s log income on both parental and grandparental log income, the
coefficient of parental log income is positive, but the coefficient of grandparental log income is a
small negative quantity! For example, with   0.3 and   0.2 , the coefficient of parental log
income is 0.5, and the coefficient of grandparental log income is -0.06. This implication of a
negative coefficient for grandparental income, first noted by Becker and Tomes (1979), is
initially surprising, but it does not really mean that an exogenous increase in grandparental
income harms the child’s income. Rather, it reflects a subtle implication of higher grandparental
income conditional on the amount of parental income. If the parent did not earn more despite
the advantages of higher grandparental income, this signals that the parent got a poor draw on
her or his genetic/cultural endowment, and that poor draw tends to be passed on to some extent
to the child.
Intergenerational

mobility

scholars

sometimes

presume

that

intergenerational

autocorrelations decline geometrically – that is, that the correlation between grandparent and
child is the square of the parent-child correlation, that the correlation between great-grandparent
and child is the cube, etc. There is no particular basis for that presumption, and it is contradicted
by the second-order autoregressive structure of equation (12).3 In fact, if the grandparental
coefficient in equation (12) is really negative, the autocorrelations decline more rapidly than
geometrically. For example, with   0.3 ,   0.2 , and hence about a 0.47 correlation between
parent and child log incomes, applying standard results on the autocorrelations implied by a
3

Other analyses that have taken exception to the naïve presumption of geometrically declining autocorrelations
include Eide and Showalter (2000) and Stuhler (2012).

5

second-order autoregressive process (Box, Jenkins, and Reinsel, 1994, p. 60) shows that the
correlation between the grandparent’s and child’s log incomes is about 0.18, somewhat less than
the square of 0.47. And the correlation between the great-grandparent’s and child’s log incomes
is only about 0.06.
But is the model’s prediction of a negative grandparental coefficient in equation (12)
realistic? In principle, the prediction is testable with multigenerational data. Indeed, Behrman
and Taubman (1985) did explicitly test the prediction by estimating an equation like equation
(12) for years of education rather than log income. Various versions of their results show
statistically insignificant coefficient estimates of either sign for grandparental education,4 so
Behrman and Taubman (p. 150) concluded that “Becker’s model is rejected for this data set.” In
truth, however, Behrman and Taubman’s sample size was not large enough to find statistically
significant evidence of a small negative grandparental coefficient even if the model’s prediction
is exactly right.
As exemplified by papers at this conference, however, numerous empirical researchers
are now using various new data sets to re-examine multigenerational associations in
socioeconomic status. Not only are these studies still failing to find evidence of a negative
coefficient for grandparental status; some of them are estimating statistically significant positive
coefficients. Relatedly, some are finding that intergenerational autocorrelations decline more
slowly than at a geometric rate.5
I am not terribly surprised by these findings. The reason I am not surprised is that
existing theoretical models are highly stylized and do not encompass several plausible ways in
which grandparents’ socioeconomic status may foretell children’s outcomes. Here are five
examples.

First, as noted in Robert Mare’s (2011) presidential address to the Population

Association of America, in some families, grandparents as well as parents invest in the children’s
human capital. Second, in families in which the grandparents are actively involved in the
children’s lives, the grandparents are likely to contribute to cultural inheritance. Third, genetic
transmission is really more complicated than the simple first-order autoregression assumed in
4

Warren and Hauser (1997) reported similar results for regressions of child’s education on various measures of
parental and grandparental socioeconomic status. That paper also includes a succinct summary of other
multigenerational empirical studies as of 1997.
5
See Modin and Fritzell (2009), Campbell and Lee (2011), Zeng and Xie (2011), Lindahl et al. (2012), Clark and
Cummins (2012), and Long and Ferrie (2012). A classic early study of multigenerational autocorrelations is Hodge
(1966).

6

equation (3). Recognizing the reasons that manifestations of family genetic traits can “skip a
generation” is another way of opening up the possibility of a positive coefficient for
grandparents’ status. Fourth, discrimination and other types of what George Borjas (1995) has
dubbed “ethnic capital” can generate group effects that would be correlated with the status of
both parents and grandparents. Finally, measurement error could create the appearance of
grandparental effects even when they are not really present. Accordingly, in the next section, I
extend the model of this section to incorporate some of these processes.

2. Extending the Theory to Encompass Additional Avenues of Multigenerational Transmission
Let’s start with the possibility of grandparental investment in children’s human capital. If
the grandparents’ preferences for such investment line up with those of the parents, then the
model of the previous section needs no modification at all. In this case, the grandparent can just
invest in the parent as modeled in Section 1 and trust the parent to “pass it on” in the way that
they mutually prefer.6 On the other hand, if the grandparent would prefer either more or less
investment in the child’s human capital than the parent does, matters are more complicated. For
example, the grandparent’s choice of how much to invest in the child would have to take account
of how the parent’s investment choice would respond to the grandparent’s investment. I would
be happy to see someone work out the equilibrium of that game, but that project might call for a
professional theorist, not an amateur like me.
In contrast, the other avenues of multigenerational transmission mentioned at the end of
Section 1 are so easy to model that even I can do it. First, let’s reconsider the assumption in
equation (3) that the child’s direct genetic and cultural inheritance comes only from the parent.
As noted in Chapter 6 of Becker (1981), the endowment model easily can be generalized by
adding endowment contributions from other relatives to the right side of equation (3). Thus, to
add the possibility of a grandparental contribution (beyond the contribution mediated through the
parent), just extend equation (3) to

(13)

6

eit    1ei ,t 1   2 ei ,t  2  vit

I am grateful to John Laitner for this insight.

7

where 0  2  1  1 . Then it is straightforward to redo all the subsequent math in Section 1
based on equation (13) instead of equation (3).
For purposes of this conference, the most important implication is that equation (12) gets
generalized to

(14)

log y it  (1  1   2 )(  *  p )  (  1 ) log y i ,t 1  ( 2  1 ) log y i ,t  2

  2 log y i ,t 3  pv it .

If 2  0 , equation (14) specializes back to equation (12). But if 2  0 , equation (14) differs
from equation (12) in two notable ways. First, now great-grandparental log income enters with a
negative coefficient, which is even smaller in magnitude than the one that appeared for
grandparental log income in equation (12). Second, the coefficient for grandparental log income
might be positive now because of the incorporation of a grandparental contribution to the child’s
genetic/cultural inheritance. In particular, the grandparental coefficient is positive if 2 / 1   .
Thus, if the advent of new and better multigenerational data demonstrates that the grandparental
coefficient is indeed positive, one possible interpretation will be that grandparental contributions
to genetic or cultural inheritance loom large enough in enough families to dominate the negative
“effect” discussed in Section 1.
A different extension of the model is that various types of “ethnic capital” might cause
the intercept in equation (12) or (14) to differ across subpopulations. In particular, a group with
a lower  (the intercept in the earnings function shown as equation (4)) or a lower altruism
parameter  would have a lower intercept in equation (12) or (14). Suppose, for example, that
racial discrimination in the United States causes African-American families to have a lower
earnings function intercept  and therefore lower intercepts in equations (10), (12), and (14).7
Then a failure to model the between-group difference in intercepts in equation (12) or (14)
amounts to omission of group fixed effects. Applying the usual omitted-variables-bias analysis
shows that, because both parental log income and grandparental log income (as well as greatgrandparental log income in equation (14)) have positive partial correlations with the omitted
7

Indeed, Hertz’s (2005) estimation of equation (10) by race in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics does show a
substantially smaller intercept for African-Americans than for whites.

8

group effect, all the ancestral coefficients are pushed in a positive direction. This would be a
force towards slower-than-geometric decay in multigenerational autocorrelations.8 This suggests
another possible interpretation if new evidence shows positive coefficients for the status of
grandparents or earlier ancestors, especially if substantially positive coefficients appear even for
distant ancestors in an extended version of equation (14). Of course, if within-group sample
sizes are large enough, an obvious way to check the applicability of this interpretation is to
control for group fixed effects in the estimation of regressions like equation (12) or (14).
Finally, even if the grandparental coefficient is not really positive, it might appear to be
because of measurement error. Suppose, for example, that the intergenerational autoregression is
first-order autoregressive, with a 0.5 coefficient for parental status and zero coefficients for
grandparents, great-grandparents, etc. Then the true intergenerational autocorrelations would
decline geometrically: a 0.5 correlation between child and parents, 0.25 between child and
grandparents, 0.125 between child and great-grandparents, etc. But now suppose that each
generation’s status is measured with classical (i.e., purely random) measurement error. And
suppose that the measured variation in each generation consists 80 percent of true variation and
20 percent of measurement noise.

Then each of the measured autocorrelations would be

attenuated by a factor of 0.8. That is, the measured autocorrelations would tend towards 0.4
between child and parents, 0.2 between child and grandparents, 0.1 between child and greatgrandparents, etc.

And because these measured autocorrelations decline more slowly than

geometrically, fitting an autoregression of child’s status on both parental and grandparental
status would result in a positive coefficient estimate for grandparental status. Empirical analysts
of multigenerational inequality therefore need to be alert to the possibility that apparent
multigenerational influences could arise as an artifact of measurement problems.

3. Summary and Discussion
As shown in Section 1, existing theoretical models in the tradition of Becker and Tomes
(1979) predict that a second-order autoregression of child’s socioeconomic status on the status of
both parents and grandparents will involve a small negative coefficient for grandparental status.
Correspondingly, intergenerational autocorrelations should decline at a faster-than-geometric

8

This possibility was previously discussed in Section VI of Becker and Tomes (1979). Footnote 13 in that section
also discusses not-so-fixed group effects that evolve gradually over time.

9

rate. Accumulating empirical evidence, however, suggests that, in at least some times and
places, grandparental coefficients are positive, and autocorrelations decline more slowly than
geometrically. This evidence does not mean that the Becker-Tomes analysis is wrong as far as it
goes; rather, it means that the analysis does not go far enough. In Section 2, I have suggested
several straightforward extensions of the Becker-Tomes analysis that can account for positive
higher-order coefficients in multigenerational autoregressions and for autocorrelations that
decline more slowly than geometrically.
A major virtue of the Becker-Tomes analysis was its demonstration that positive
intergenerational correlations in socioeconomic status can arise from the greater wherewithal of
richer parents to invest in their children’s human capital, from genetic or cultural inheritance, or
from all of the above. Because these different sources of intergenerational status transmission
have similar empirical manifestations, it is difficult to tell them apart. A similar lesson can be
drawn from Section 2 of the present paper. A multitude of different processes can generate
positive higher-order coefficients in multigenerational autoregressions and autocorrelations that
decay more slowly than geometrically. Distinguishing those processes from each other therefore
will be a difficult challenge for scholars investigating multigenerational inequality.

10

References
Becker, Gary S. A Treatise on the Family. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1981.
Becker, Gary S., and Nigel Tomes. “An Equilibrium Theory of the Distribution of Income and
Intergenerational Mobility.” Journal of Political Economy 87 (December 1979), pp. 11531189.
Becker, Gary S., and Nigel Tomes. “Human Capital and the Rise and Fall of Families.” Journal
of Labor Economics 4 (July 1986), pp. S1-S39.
Behrman, Jere, and Paul Taubman. “Intergenerational Earnings Mobility in the United States:
Some Estimates and a Test of Becker’s Intergenerational Endowments Model.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 67 (February 1985), pp. 144-151.
Borjas, George J. “Ethnicity, Neighborhoods, and Human-Capital Externalities.” American
Economic Review 85 (June 1995), pp. 365-390.
Box, George E.P., Gwilym M. Jenkins, and Gregory C. Reinsel. Time Series Analysis:
Forecasting and Control. 3rd edition. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall, 1994.
Campbell, Cameron, and James Z. Lee. “Kinship and the Long-Term Persistence of Inequality
in Liaoning, China, 1749-2005.” Chinese Sociological Review 44 (Fall 2011), pp. 71-103.
Clark, Gregory, and Neil Cummins. “What Is the True Rate of Social Mobility? Surnames and
Social Mobility in England, 1800-2012.” Unpublished manuscript, 2012.
Eide, Eric R., and Mark H. Showalter. “A Note on the Rate of Intergenerational Convergence of
Earnings.” Journal of Population Economics 13 (March 2000), pp. 159-162.
Greene, William H. Econometric Analysis. 7th edition. Upper Saddle River: Prentice Hall,
2012.
Hertz, Tom. “Rags, Riches, and Race: The Intergenerational Economic Mobility of Black and
White Families in the United States.” Chapter 5 in Samuel Bowles, Herbert Gintis, and
Melissa Osborne Groves (eds.), Unequal Chances: Family Background and Economic
Success. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2005.
Hodge, Robert W. “Occupational Mobility as a Probability Process.” Demography 3 (1966), pp.
19-34.
Lindahl, Mikael, Mårten Palme, Sofia Sandgren Massih, and Anna Sjögren. “The
Intergenerational Persistence of Human Capital: An Empirical Analysis of Four
Generations.” IZA Discussion Paper No. 6463, 2012.
11

Long, Jason, and Joseph Ferrie. “Grandfathers Matter(ed): Occupational Mobility across Three
Generations in the U.S. and Britain, 1850-1910.” Unpublished manuscript, 2012.
Mare, Robert D. “A Multigenerational View of Inequality.” Demography 48 (February 2011),
pp. 1-23.
Modin, Bitte, and Johan Fritzell. “The Long Arm of the Family: Are Parental and
Grandparental Earnings Related to Young Men’s Body Mass Index and Cognitive Ability?”
International Journal of Epidemiology 38 (June 2009), pp. 733-744.
Solon, Gary. “A Model of Intergenerational Mobility Variation over Time and Place.” Chapter
2 in Miles Corak (ed.), Generational Income Mobility in North America and Europe.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Stuhler, Jan. “Mobility across Multiple Generations: The Iterated Regression Fallacy.” IZA
Discussion Paper No. 7072, 2012.
Warren, John Robert, and Robert M. Hauser. “Social Stratification across Three Generations:
New Evidence from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study.” American Sociological Review 62
(August 1997), pp. 561-572.
Zeng, Zhen, and Yu Xie. “The Effects of Grandparents on Children’s Schooling: Evidence from
Rural China.” Unpublished manuscript, 2011.

12

