                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     LIMITED PARTNER PERFORMANCE AND THE MATURING OF THE PRIVATE
                           EQUITY INDUSTRY

                                        Berk A. Sensoy
                                         Yingdi Wang
                                      Michael S. Weisbach

                                       Working Paper 18793
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18793


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2013




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Berk A. Sensoy, Yingdi Wang, and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Limited Partner Performance and the Maturing of the Private Equity Industry
Berk A. Sensoy, Yingdi Wang, and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 18793
February 2013
JEL No. G11,G24,G30

                                              ABSTRACT

We evaluate the performance of limited partners’ (LPs) private equity investments over time. Using
a sample of 14,380 investments by 1,852 LPs in 1,250 buyout and venture funds started between 1991
and 2006, we find that the superior performance of endowment investors in the 1991-1998 period,
documented in prior literature, is mostly due to their greater access to the top-performing venture capital
partnerships. In the subsequent 1999-2006 period, endowments no longer outperform, and neither
have greater access to funds that are likely to restrict access nor make better investment selections
than other types of institutional investors. We discuss how these results are consistent with the general
maturing of the industry, as private equity has transitioned from a niche, poorly understood area to
a ubiquitous part of institutional investors’ portfolios.


Berk A. Sensoy                                       Michael S. Weisbach
Ohio State University                                Department of Finance
2100 Neil Ave.                                       Fisher College of Business
Columbus, OH 43210                                   Ohio State University
sensoy_4@fisher.osu.edu                              2100 Neil Ave.
                                                     Columbus, OH 43210
Yingdi Wang                                          and NBER
Department of Finance,                               weisbach.2@osu.edu
Mihaylo College of Business
California State University, Fullerton
Fullerton, CA 92834
yingdiwang@fullerton.edu
1. Introduction

      The private equity industry has experienced dramatic changes in the last 30 years. Because of

high returns on early investments, the industry has grown enormously, both in terms of assets

under management and its overall importance in the economy. As illustrated in Figure 1, total

fundraising by buyout and venture funds has increased from approximately $6.7 billion in 1990

to over $261.9 billion just before the financial crisis in 2008, the vast majority of which comes

from institutional investors.1 Rather than a niche alternative, private equity has become a

mainstay of institutional investment portfolios.

      The performance of institutions’ private equity investments sheds light on a fundamental

question in delegated asset management: Why do some investors, or classes of investors, have

systematically different performance over time? Historically, practitioners have claimed that the

best private equity partnerships have not increased fund sizes or fees to market-clearing levels.

Instead they have rationed access to their funds to favored investors, most notably prestigious

educational and other nonprofit endowments. Further, industry observers (e.g. Swensen, 2000)

have historically argued that endowments are much better equipped to assess and evaluate

emerging alternative investments, such as private equity, that are relatively unfamiliar and in

which asymmetric information problems are especially severe. Lerner, Schoar and Wongsunwai

(2007) document that improved access as well as experience of investing in the private equity

sector led endowments to outperform other institutional investors substantially during the 1990s.

      However, private equity is no longer an emerging, unfamiliar asset class, and the distribution

of private equity fund returns has also changed over time. In particular, venture capital returns

fell dramatically in the technology bust of the early 2000s, and the boom of the late 1990s has



1
    The numbers are estimated by summing up fund size by year in Preqin.


                                                         1
not repeated. Against this backdrop of a maturing industry, it is unclear whether the unusually

good performance of endowments has continued.

   In this paper, we evaluate the relative performance of different types of private equity

investors over time. Using a sample of 14,380 limited partner (LP) investments in 1,250 buyout

and venture funds raised between 1991 and 2006, we first confirm Lerner et al.’s (2007) finding

that endowments substantially outperform other types of investors on their investments in funds

raised between 1991 and 1998. In our sample, endowments earn an average IRR of 13.38% on

private equity investments made during this period, the highest of all LP types. The performance

gap is driven entirely by endowments’ investments in the venture industry, which benefited most

from the 1990s technology boom. However, when we examine funds raised in the subsequent

eight-year period, between 1999 and 2006, endowments no longer outperform other types of

limited partners. In this later period, there are no statistically or economically significant

differences in returns across types of LPs.

   Our evidence suggests that during the 1991-1998 period, the main source of endowments’

unusually good performance was their superior access to the best venture funds. Compared to

other types of institutions, endowments were more likely to invest in older partnerships, which

not only were more likely to restrict access but also earned higher returns. They also were more

likely to invest in the later funds of a venture capital partnership when those funds grew in size

compared to the prior fund size more slowly than predicted from the prior fund’s performance.

Funds with such abnormally low growth were especially likely to be restricting access, and

performed better over this period.

   In the later 1999-2006 period, endowments are much less still more likely to invest in older

partnerships, but much less so than in the earlier period. They are no longer more likely to invest




                                                2
in slowly growing funds. Further, the performance advantages of both of these types of funds

largely dissipate over time.

   The endowment advantage in skill or sophistication in selecting investments has also

declined over time. Lerner et al. (2007) propose that a way to evaluate the skill of private equity

investors is to measure the quality of the reinvestment decisions of investors. Since investors in

a private equity fund are usually given the option of reinvesting in a partnership’s next fund,

their decisions of whether to reinvest capital in this new fund reflect their skill at assessing the

skill of the fund’s general partners rather than any differences in access to the funds.

   Like Lerner et al., we find that during the 1991-1998 period, endowments’ reinvested funds

outperformed funds in which they chose not to reinvest (an average IRR of 37.8% for reinvested

funds compared to 24.6% for funds they chose not to reinvest), and the difference is larger than

for most other LP types. Yet, with an average IRR of 24.6%, even those funds in which

endowments chose not to reinvest outperformed the funds in which other types of LPs

reinvested. This is especially true for investments in venture capital. The venture capital funds in

which endowments reinvested in 1991-1998 earned a 62.6% IRR on average, compared to 59.1%

for funds in which they did not reinvest. During the more recent 1999-2006 period, endowments’

reinvested funds still outperform those in which they did not reinvest, but by a much smaller

margin. Other types of LPs see similar differences in returns to reinvested and not reinvested

funds. In short, in the later period, the reinvestment decisions of endowments are not

economically or statistically unusual relative to other institutional investors.

   Another way to analyze the quality of investment decisions independent of differences in

access is to examine investments in a partnership’s very first fund. Such funds are unlikely to

restrict access because they lack a track record and compete with established partnerships for




                                                  3
capital. We find no evidence that endowments show superior ability to select among first-time

funds, in any time period.

   Overall, our findings suggest that endowments enjoyed an embarrassment of riches in the

1991-1998 period in terms of their access to the best private equity, especially venture, groups.

Since then, their access, investment decisions, and ultimate performance have been unremarkable

compared to other types of LPs. These results are consistent with DaRin and Phalippou’s (2012)

survey of LPs, which reveals few if any differences between the organizational approach to PE

investing of endowments and that of other LP types.

   The disappearance of abnormal performance by endowments is consistent with changes in

the economics underlying the private equity industry. In the industry’s early years, high returns

to buyout were earned in part by purchasing mismanaged companies and improving their

operations (Kaplan (1989)), and investments in high-tech companies in the 1990s were an

important driver of venture capital returns. The large recent capital inflows into the sector

suggest that whatever “low-hanging fruit” existed previously should naturally dissipate. Indeed,

venture performance has never recovered from the technology crash of 2000-2002, and while

recent buyout returns have not declined from the earlier period, they no longer appear to be

attributable to operating gains (see Robinson and Sensoy (2011), Harris et al. (2012), and Guo et

al. (2011), as well as our results below). Also consistent with increasing commoditization of the

industry, the dispersion of returns across different private equity groups has shrunk dramatically

over time. Consequently, it is likely that as the industry matured and became more competitive,

the relationships between general partners and investors in their funds changed as well. If

limited access reflects rents being distributed to limited partners, then as the rents decline over




                                                4
time, it is natural to expect a concurrent decline in rationing access to limited partner stakes and

in the dispersion of limited partner returns.

     The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 describes the historical

importance of access to private equity funds. Section 3 discusses the sample. Sections 4 presents

the industry changes that we observe. Sections 5 and 6 present our empirical results on changing

LP returns and the role of investment selection and access, while Section 7 concludes.



2.      Access to Private Equity Funds

     Private equity firms are usually limited partnerships, structured to facilitate investments that

would not be financed by traditional sources of capital. A private equity partnership typically

serves as the general partner (GP) in a particular fund, and raises funds from limited partners

(LPs), who are usually large institutional investors. The funds then use that money to provide

venture capital to start up firms, or to facilitate a change in control through a leveraged buyout. If

a fund earns sufficient returns for its investors, the private equity partnership will usually attempt

to raise subsequent funds; both the partnership’s ability to raise a subsequent follow-on fund and

the size of such a fund are highly related empirically to the performance of the original fund (see

Kaplan and Schoar (2005) and Chung et al. (2012)).

     The ability to raise larger funds subsequent to earning high returns from preceding funds

likely comes from LPs updating their assessments of a partnership’s ability, which increases

investors’ expectations of fund performance (see Berk and Green (2004) and Chung et al.

(2012)). In other words, good performance leads to an increase in demand for stakes in follow

on funds. Yet, because of diminishing returns to investments and the scarcity of partners’ time,

the most successful general partners, especially in venture capital funds, sometimes limit the




                                                  5
quantity of capital they will take in a particular fund. As documented by Kaplan and Scholar

(2005), top performing funds do not grow as rapidly as they could if they maximized capital

under management. These partnerships sometimes do raise their fees in response to good

performance, but not sufficiently to equate the demand for their funds with the amount of capital

they are willing to accept.2 The combination of high demand for funds from successful

partnerships and lack of growth in these funds can lead to limited access. As a result, LPs often

claim that the top-performing funds are all highly oversubscribed, and GPs with high returns can

often choose their investors (see Hochberg et al. (2012)).

    If GPs are restricting access to their funds, they are charging fees lower than the level at

which demand for their fund equals the quantity of capital they wish to raise. Since charging

fees lower than the market-clearing level has monetary costs to the GPs, there must be some

offsetting benefit that they receive. One possible benefit is that restricting access gives GPs

control over who their investors are. Keating (2006) surveys General Partners and finds that they

claim to prefer knowledgeable, long-term investors who will invest in future funds as well as the

current one. Given that GPs place value on a long-term relationship with investors, LPs’

portfolio strategies can in turn be affected by concern about being able to invest in future funds.

For example David Swensen, the head of the Yale endowment and perhaps the most well-known

and successful investor in private equity, explicitly follows a policy of reinvesting in partnerships

to maximize Yale’s access to their future funds (see Lerner and Leamon (2011)).

    While practitioners commonly discuss the way in which private equity partnerships limit

capital in their funds, there are no estimates documenting the way limited access works in

practice. Since it is in the interest of GPs to appear relatively exclusive, it is possible that

2
 Gompers and Lerner (1999) document that carried interest profit shares are higher for older and larger GPs.
However, the majority of private equity funds have carried interest of 20% and management fees between 1.5% and
2.5%.


                                                       6
statements from practitioners are exaggerated. An additional contribution of our work is to

provide evidence on the existence of limited access, the sectors and time periods in which it

appears to have been present, and the implications of limited access for returns.



3. Sample of LP Investments in Private Equity Funds

3.1.    Sample construction

    To study Limited Partners’ private equity investments, we construct a list of LPs and their

investments using data obtained from two sources: VentureXpert and Capital IQ. While neither

source contains a complete list of all LPs in a given fund, each does contain an extensive list of

LPs.3 VentureXpert provides LPs’ investments and commitment data dating back to 1969.

Capital IQ has detailed information, including investor identity, on more than 18,000 private

equity firms. We identify 8,120 investments made by 1,236 LPs from VentureXpert and 24,479

investments made by 2,028 LPs from Capital IQ.

    To be consistent with Lerner et al. (2007) and to minimize potential problems from

incomplete coverage, our analysis only considers LPs’ private equity investments in the two

most common types of funds after 1990: buyout and venture. Fund-level performance data are

collected from Preqin, which contains performance information for 5,200 individual funds, and

which claims to cover 76% of all North American private equity funds ever raised, 63% of

European funds, and 46% of funds from Asia and the rest of the world. Because we want to

analyze LPs’ investment returns, we drop funds without IRR or vintage year information, and

also drop funds raised after 2006 to minimize any potential bias coming from unrealized

investments of funds. If a private equity firm raised multiple funds of the same type in a given


3
  Unfortunately, the data on the dollar amount of each LP’s investment is not available for the majority of the
investments.


                                                      7
year, we aggregate all funds in that year and compute a size-weighted IRR. This process leads to

a sample containing 14,380 investments from 1,852 unique LPs in 1,250 unique buyout and

venture funds between 1991 and 2006. Of the 14,380 LP investments, 10,219 are unique to

Capital IQ and 818 are unique to VentureXpert; 3,343 are included in both databases.

   We divide the full sample into two eight-year periods, the Lerner et al. (2007) sample period,

1991-1998, and the subsequent seven years,1999-2006, because we are interested in knowing

how the relationship between GPs and LPs changed over time. The 1991-1998 subperiod

contains 3,685 investments by 996 unique LPs in 412 unique funds. The 1999-2006 subperiod

contains 10,695 investments made by 1,533 LPs in 838 funds.

   We divide LPs into eight categories: Public pension funds, Corporate pension funds,

Endowments, Advisors, Insurance companies, Banks/Finance companies, Investment firms, and

Others. Public pension funds and Corporate pension funds are pension funds provided by the

public and private sector, respectively. Endowments are private and public university

endowments as well as foundations. Advisors are investment advisors and consulting firms.

Insurance companies include any firm with a primary business in insurance. Banks/Finance

companies include all banks and bank-affiliated investment arms. Investment firms include

private equity firms, investment companies, and hedge fund sponsors. LPs not included in the

previous seven classes are classified as Others.

   Table 1 presents summary statistics on the characteristics of each class of Limited Partner in

our sample. Public pension funds make the most investments per LP, with each LP making 32.44

investments, followed by endowments (16.56 investments per LP) and investment firms (16.29

investments per LP). All classes of LP have more investments in the second half of the sample




                                                   8
period than in the first half; this increase reflects the high growth of the private equity industry as

well as more comprehensive data coverage over time.

   In addition to differing in the quantity of investments made, classes of LPs also differ in the

proportion of investments in the first fund raised by a private equity firm. Over the full sample

period, endowments have the lowest percentage of their investments in a GP’s first fund, while

insurance companies and banks invest most often in those funds. This pattern is driven by LPs’

investments in both venture and buyout funds in the first half of the sample period. From 1999 to

2006, there is little difference between endowments’ investments in GPs’ first funds and those of

other investors.



3.2.   Performance of Different LP Classes of Investors

   Table 2 documents characteristics of the private equity funds by class of investor. Funds in

which endowments invest have the highest average IRR over the entire sample period; over the

full (1991-2006) period, their funds’ IRR is 13.38%, and the highest for any other class is

11.09% (Insurance Companies). However, when we break down the IRR by subperiods, there

are sharp differences in performance over time. Consistent with Lerner et al. (2007),

endowments’ investments in private equity did remarkably well in the 1991-1998 period, with an

average IRR of 35.74%, which is substantially higher than the next highest class, Investment

firms (IRR of 25.78%), and the average fund in the sample (23.67%). In contrast, in the latter

1999-2006 period, endowments actually have the worst performance of any class of investors,

with a 5.83% IRR, compared to a 6.26% IRR for the next lowest class of investors (Corporate

Pension Funds), and 7.9% for the average fund in the sample.




                                                  9
     When we split up the investments between venture and buyout, there are stark differences in

performance, both across investor types and over time. Endowments earned a spectacular

63.82% return on their venture capital investments during the 1991-1998 period. However,

endowments’ venture capital returns between 1999 and 2006, like those for most investors, were

negative. Buyout returns for endowments were typical of most classes of investors, being slightly

below average in both periods (11.81% compared to a 12.07% average during 1991-1998 and

10.05% compared to a 10.79% average during 1999-2006).



4.      Changes in the Industry

     Recent work has shown that private equity fund returns have changed since the 1990s (see

Robinson and Sensoy (2011) and Harris et al. (2012)). Venture capital performance, both in

absolute terms and relative to public markets, has declined substantially. Buyout performance

has been more or less flat in both absolute and relative terms. In addition, the cross-sectional

dispersion of fund returns has decreased.       These patterns point to a maturing and general

commoditization of the industry. Below, we present statistics from our data consistent with these

trends observed in prior work.



4.1. Changes in Fund Sizes and Returns

     Panel A of Table 3 presents the mean, median, first quartile, and third quartile values of size

and returns of funds in our sample. Results are further broken down by fund type. The funds are

evenly split between venture and buyout; out of the 1,250 funds, 629 are venture funds and 621

are buyout funds. The number of funds, the number of investors in a fund, and fund size all

increase over time, consistent with a rapid growth of the industry. The total number of funds and




                                                 10
fund size both double in the second subperiod, and the average (median) number of investors in a

fund increases from 8.94 (6) in the first period to 12.76 (8) in the second period. These patterns

hold for both venture and buyout funds. As the industry becomes larger in the second subperiod,

and due to the technology bust of the early 2000s, venture fund returns decrease, while buyout

returns are similar in the two sub-periods.

    A decline in average returns can come from two sources: there could be substantially lower

returns for a few funds, or there could be an industry-wide drop. Our results support the latter

explanation, since the dispersion of venture capital returns is also lower in the 1999-2006 sub-

period. Panel B of Table 3 shows the standard deviation of IRRs of different fund types in the

two sub-periods. The full sample shows a drop in standard deviation of returns from 1991-1998

to 1999-2006. This decrease is driven entirely by venture funds. In addition, separating funds

by GP experience shows that more mature venture funds experience an even larger drop in return

dispersion. Therefore, the combined evidence in Table 3 indicates that the returns of the venture

industry have decreased, and that the late period has few exceptionally good performers.

   We find that the positive correlation between GP experience and performance drops from the

first to the second subperiod as well. Table 4 shows regression results of IRR on fund sequence

number. Consistent with Kaplan and Schoar (2005), we find a positive relationship between

fund sequence and returns in the 1991-1998 subperiod, suggesting that returns increase with GP

experience. Moreover, first-time funds have lower returns. As in Kaplan and Schoar (2005),

these results are driven by venture funds. However, between 1999 and 2006, venture capital

fund performance is no longer related to GP experience. Buyout GP experience is statistically

significantly positively related to fund performance in this later period, but the coefficient is




                                               11
economically small and in fact smaller than the statistically insignificant coefficient in the earlier

period.



4.2 Implications

    The changes in returns, capital flows, and investor participation in the private equity industry

are likely to have altered the manner in which private equity firms operate, and their

relationships with LPs. In particular, to the extent that rationed access to top-performing venture

groups was a key reason for the outperformance of endowment portfolios in the 1990s, the

results presented above suggest this is unlikely to have continued. Fewer, if any, recent venture

funds have experienced the enormous success of those raised in the early to mid 1990s. Later

sequence funds no longer outperform, calling into question the value of access to these funds. At

a deeper level, if access reflects rents distributed to LPs by successful GPs, we should observe a

decline in the importance of access. We explore the potential changes in the following sections.



5. Limited Partner Returns and Reinvestment Decisions

5.1.      Returns to different types of LPs over time

    We estimate multivariate equations predicting the returns on a particular LP investment. We

first estimate the equation using just indicator variables for the type of investor, as well as fund

type indicator variables and vintage year fixed effects. Because the same fund enters the

equation multiple times whenever there is more than one investor who holds the fund in our

sample, we cluster by fund when calculating standard errors.4




4
 Here and in every other table in which we report standard errors clustered by fund, results are similar if we instead
cluster by vintage year, by LP, or double cluster by fund and vintage year or by LP and vintage year.


                                                          12
   We report estimates of this base equation for the full sample in Column 1 of Panel A of Table

5. The coefficient on endowments is a statistically significant 2.6, which implies that

endowments’ private equity investments outperformed the omitted group (public pension funds)

by 2.6 percentage points of IRR on average over the entire sample period. No other LP type

performs significantly (at the 5% level) differently than the omitted group. To guage the

statistical and economic significance of endowment performance compared to the performance

of all other LPs, the bottom of the table reports results where the investor type indicator variables

are collapsed to two types of investor: endowments and non-endowments. The results indicate

that the funds in which endowments invest outperform those of non-endowments by a highly

significant 3.10 percentage points of IRR over the full sample period.

   In Column 2, we repeat these analyses adding additional controls. We add the log of LP

experience (measured by the number of private equity investments in the sample prior to the time

of the investment), the log of the fund’s size, and fixed effects for the LP’s country of origin to

the equation. The results comparing endowments to non-endowments are virtually identical to

those in Column 1. The significantly positive coefficient the log of LP Experience implies that

more “experience” investing in private equity funds is associated with better performance. This

result can be interpreted in two ways: First, experience by itself could lead Limited Partners to

have better information and skill so that they make better investment decisions, and second,

having invested in the early funds of successful GPs could allow the Limited Partners improved

access to the subsequent funds of these GPs.

   Columns 3 and 4, we re-estimate the equations in Columns 1 and 2, focusing only on

investments in funds with vintage years between 1991-1998, the period of Lerner et al.’s (2007)

sample. In Columns 5 and 6, we do the same focusing only on investments in funds with vintage




                                                 13
years between 1999-2006. Scanning across the columns reveals two main facts. The

outperformance of endowments is entirely concentrated in the 1991-1998 period, and disappears

in the later 1999-2006 period. In fact, no LP type systematically outperforms in the later period.

Similarly, the importance of LP experience to returns in the overall period is driven entirely by

the 1991-1998 subperiod as well. One explanation for this result is that LPs in general become

more experienced over time, differences in experience matter less.

   Panels B and C of Table 5 repeat the analysis for venture and buyout LP investments

separately. The main takeaway is that the results discussed above for all investments are driven

by venture investments. In the buyout industry, endowments do not outperform in either the

earlier or the more recent time period.

   We next investigate why endowments outperformed in funds raised between 1991-1998, and

why this outperformance has not continued among funds raised in 1999-2006.



5.2.   LPs’ reinvestment decisions

   A possible source of superior endowment performance is through better investment selection.

Endowments receive information about GPs while investing in their funds; potentially they could

use this information to make more informed investment decisions, particularly when deciding

whether to invest in new funds from partnerships with which they have invested in the past.

Accordingly, Lerner et al. (2007) suggest that one way to measure an investor’s skill is to

examine the quality of their reinvestment decisions. LPs are normally given the option of

investing the subsequent funds of the partnerships in which they invest. Therefore, it is unlikely

that there is differential access affecting funds’ reinvestment decisions.




                                                 14
   When faced with a reinvestment decision, an LP has observed the quality of the GP’s

decision-making while managing the initial fund. Since we can observe the returns of both the

funds in which LPs chose to reinvest, as well as the returns of the funds in which the LP chose

not to reinvest (“abandoned” funds), we can gauge the quality of the LP’s decision-making by

comparing the returns on these two groups of funds. Lerner et al. (2007) show that in their 1991-

1998 sample, funds in which endowments reinvest do substantially better than the ones they

abandon, while other types of investors are not nearly as good as picking investments as

endowments are.

   We present evidence on reinvestment decisions in Table 6. Panel A presents results for the

full sample of investments, Panel B for venture capital funds and Panel C buyout funds. Each

Panel is broken down by investments over the entire time period, and for investments in the

1991-1998 and 1999-2006 subperiods. We divide each class of LPs’ investments by those for

which the LP invested in the follow-on fund, and those for which the LP chose not to invest in

the follow-on fund. If a fund has no follow-on fund, it is dropped from the sample.

   Panel A of Table 6 compares reinvested and abandoned funds for venture and buyout funds

taken together. In the full sample as well as in each sub-period, for each type of investor (except

“Others”), follow-on funds in which LPs choose to reinvest perform better than those in which

they choose not to reinvest. In some but far from all cases, the IRR of the current funds for

which the LP reinvested is statistically significantly higher than the funds for which they did not

reinvest. These results suggest that as a whole, LPs use information in the returns of the original

funds, as well as the private information they receive as investors in the fund (e.g. through

periodic reports from the GPs), to make reinvestment decisions that have substantially higher

returns than a “random reinvestment” rule would have had.




                                                15
   Panel A of Table 6 also shows that endowments appear relatively better than other types of

LPs at reinvestment decisions in the 1991-1998 period, consistent with Lerner et al. (2007).

Endowments’ reinvested funds outperformed funds in which they chose not to reinvest (an

average IRR of 37.8% for reinvested funds compared to 24.6% for funds they chose not to

reinvest), and the difference is larger than for most other LP types. Yet, with an average IRR of

24.6%, even those funds in which endowments chose not to reinvest outperformed the funds in

which other types of LPs reinvested on average. The Panel also shows that during the more

recent 1999-2006 period, endowments’ reinvested funds still outperform those in which they did

not reinvest, but by a much smaller margin. Other types of LPs see similar differences in returns

to reinvested and not reinvested funds. In short, in the later period, the reinvestment decisions of

endowments are not economically or statistically unusual relative to other institutional investors.

   These results by themselves are consistent with superior investment skill among endowments

in the 1991-1998 period. However, the results in Panels B and C of Table 6, which break the

results down by venture and buyout LP investments, cast some doubt on the view that

endowments had superior selection skill even in the 1991-1998 period. Panel B shows that

venture funds in which endowments reinvest in the 1991-1998 period perform exceptionally

well, with a 62.6% average IRR. However, the funds in which they choose not to reinvest

perform almost as well, with a 59.2% average IRR. Moreover, Panel B also shows that an IRR

of 59.2% is a higher average performance than that of any of the venture capital funds in which

other types of LP could reinvest, whether or not these other LP types choose to reinvest.

   Rather than reflecting investment skill, these results on endowments’ reinvestment decisions

suggest that endowments in the early 1990s were in the position of choosing between

investments in the very best venture groups, and did so only slightly better than randomly. The




                                                16
evidence suggests that regardless of their skill at reinvestment decisions, simply having been

invested with these top venture partnerships led to endowments’ superior returns relative to other

classes in the 1991-1998 period. The venture groups managing the funds for which endowments

earned these very high returns are all well-known firms with reputations for limiting access

(Kleiner-Perkins, Sequoia, Benchmark, etc.). Presumably, if other types of investors could have

invested with these partnerships, many of them would have done so.

     Panel C of Table 6 shows that endowments similarly appear to make better reinvestment

decisions in their buyout investments than do other types of LPs in the 1991-1998 period. This is

primarily due to abandoning funds that turn out to do poorly; endowments do not perform better

on their reinvested funds than do other types of LPs, consistent with our evidence in Table 4 that

endowments do not systematically outperform other LPs in their buyout investments.

     Panels B and C of Table 6 echo the message of Panel A: Whatever superior reinvestment

decisions endowments may have made relative to other investors in the 1991-1998 period, there

is no evidence that this continues to the 1999-2006 period.



6.      The Importance of Access to Limited Partner Returns

     The evidence presented on LPs’ returns and reinvestment decisions is consistent with

endowments’ success being driven by their early investments with exceptional General Partners,

which provides them access to the partnerships’ later funds. In this section, we provide tests of

the importance of access in driving LPs’ returns. Because access is not observable, our tests

involve comparing funds that are likely to have limited access to those in which it is likely that

all investors can invest if they choose.




                                               17
6.1      First-Time vs. More Mature Funds

      One way to distinguish between access-based and skill-based explanations for differences in

returns is to consider first-time funds separately. Compared to funds from experienced

partnerships, first-time funds tend to perform worse (at least in the 1991-1998 period), and they

are generally considered extremely difficult to raise (see Lerner, Hardymon, and Leamon

(2011)). Therefore, it is unlikely that allocations to a first-time fund are rationed. The skill-based

explanation then suggests that endowments and more experienced investors should outperform

other investors when investing in first time, as well as higher sequence funds. Alternatively, it is

possible that endowments’ superior performance could occur if they were able to invest in funds

from more experienced partnerships, which performed better than first-time funds.

      We first estimate the likelihood that a particular LP invests in a first-time fund. Limited

partners tend to be averse to investing in first time funds, so a higher proportion of investments

in more established funds is likely to reflect better access. We estimate equations that predict

whether a particular investment is in a first-time fund as a function of LP type, LP experience,

fund size and type, vintage year, and country of LP origin. Because this dependent variable is

dichotomous, we estimate the equation by Probit models.

      We report estimates of this equation on the entire sample and subsamples split by both time

period and type of fund in Table 7. The top part of the Table reports results for all LP types

separately, while the bottom of the table reports otherwise identical specifications in which the

LP type indicators are collapsed to a single indicator for endowments vs. non-endowments

(analogous to Table 5). For brevity, we omit the coefficients on the control variables when

reporting these latter specifications.




                                                 18
   The main message of Table 7 is that endowments are statistically and economically less

likely to invest in first-time funds than are non-endowments, especially in the 1991-1998 period.

In the 1999-2006 period, this remains true only for buyout funds. Taking both fund types

together, the magnitude of the difference between endowments and non-endowments decreases

by about two-thirds over time. In the 1991-1998 period, endowments are 14.5% less likely to

invest in first-time funds, but only 5.2% less likely in the 1999-2006 period. Table 7 also shows

that experienced LPs (regardless of type) are less likely to invest in first-time funds, with the gap

again shrinking dramatically over time.

   Overall, these results suggest that to the extent endowments and experienced LPs enjoyed an

advantage in access to more experienced partnerships (and hence less need to invest in first-time

funds) in the 1991-1998 period, this advantage has attenuated substantially over time.

   To test whether endowments, though less likely to invest in first-time funds, make better

investment decisions when they do compared to other types of investors, we compare the returns

of different classes of investors for funds of different sequence numbers. Table 8 presents

estimates of equations that predict the returns of a particular fund, broken down by both time

period and whether the fund was a first-time fund. In the 1991-1998 period, endowments

outperform other classes of investors substantially in their investments in later-sequence funds,

with a 10 percentage-point difference compared to the omitted class (public pension funds). In

contrast for first-time funds, the difference between endowments and other classes of investors is

smaller (about 4 percentage points) and not statistically significantly different from zero.

  These results suggest that the superior returns to endowments were driven by their

investments in experienced funds during the 1991-1998 period. Of course, superior performance

in experienced funds can in principle be driven both by access to the top funds and by skill at




                                                 19
selecting good funds. We cannot rule out, therefore, that endowments’ superior performance in

experienced funds over 1991-1998 was due in part (or even in large part) to selection skill, even

though they display no such skill in selecting among first-time funds. Even if so, however, Table

8 also shows that there is not a difference in endowments’ performance compared to other LPs in

any funds (first-time or experienced) in the 1999-2006 period. Overall, these results are

consistent with the view that the access to the experienced venture capital partnerships that did

so well during the 1990s’ technology boom was the primary driver of endowments’ superior

performance in the 1990s.

6.2      Returns to investments in funds that are likely to be restricting access

      We now turn to an alternative test of access in which we account for a broader implication of

limiting access. Limited access to funds occurs when private equity partnerships choose to limit

the amount of capital they raise for a particular fund, and to ration capital to LPs of their

choosing, rather than to raise fees to the point where they can just raise the amount of capital

they desire for the fund. As a consequence, some investors are left out of the fund.

      Theoretically, a fund will have limited access when its size does not grow sufficiently to

justify the demand for its products. Empirically, we cannot estimate demand separately from

supply but we can estimate the extent to which funds are likely to have limited access by

measuring which ones grew less than what is predicted from an econometric model of fund

growth. We rely on a model similar to ones in the literature to calculate expected growth rates of

private equity funds (see Chung et al. (2012)).

      We estimate the following model:

              (                     )                                                      (1)




                                                  20
    The major factors affecting future fund size are the returns of the current fund and also

macroeconomic factors related to the state of the overall economy and the private equity

industry. Therefore we include the IRR of the partnership’s prior fund in the equation, and

include vintage year fixed effects to control for macroeconomic factors. We estimate this

equation separately for buyout and venture capital funds.

    Since Equation (1) predicts the expected size of the fund, its residuals represent departures

from expected size. Therefore, any firm that has a negative residual has a negative “abnormal

growth”. We estimate equations that predict whether a particular LP’s investment is in a fund

with negative abnormal growth, using as a sample all investments with sequence number higher

than 1 so that we can calculate abnormal growth for that fund. The idea is that funds that have

negative abnormal growth are more likely to have limited access to their funds, so that the

estimated equation will provide insight into which types of investors are more likely to invest in

a fund with limited access.

    Table 9 presents estimates of these equations, for the all types of funds in Columns 1-3, for

venture funds in Columns 4-6, and for buyout funds in Columns 7-9. The estimates indicate that

endowments are more likely than other LP types to invest in venture funds with negative

abnormal growth in the 1991-1998 period, but not in the 1999-2006 period.5 There is no

difference in the propensity of different LP types to invest in negative-abnormal-growth buyout

funds. This finding is consistent with the results reported above suggesting that endowments’

access to the extremely successful venture capital funds in the 1991-1998 period is the primary

driver of their superior performance.




5
 We also find that endowments are more likely to invest in funds in the lowest quartile of abnormal growth than
other LP types.


                                                        21
       While funds that have negative abnormal growth are likely to have limited access for

investors, it is unclear whether such limited access actually leads to better future performance.

In principle, the reason to limit capital in a fund is to be able to undertake fewer but higher

quality investments and to allow the fund’s GPs to have sufficient time and energy to be able to

manage them well. This argument predicts that funds that accept less capital than they otherwise

could have raised, could have superior performance than otherwise identical funds that did not

limit their size. However, it is also possible that investment quality is unaffected by fund growth

rates; for this reason, we consider the issue empirically.

       To test this hypothesis, we examine whether abnormal growth of a fund is related to its

performance.6 Table 10 contains estimates of equations predicting fund returns as a function of

abnormal growth. Panel A includes the residuals from our estimates of Equation (1) into the

equation directly and Panel B includes a dummy variable that equals 1 if there is negative

abnormal growth. The unit of observation in this sample is the fund, not the LP stake as in most

prior tables, and we include all funds for which we could calculate an abnormal growth.

       The estimated equations in Table 10 indicate that there is clear association between abnormal

growth and fund returns. The residual on growth is negatively related to subsequent returns,

while the dummy variable indicating whether there is negative abnormal growth has a positive

impact.       By far the largest effect is for venture funds during the 1991-1998 period. The

coefficient of -27.5 on abnormal growth in the equation for venture funds in this period (Column

5) is negative and substantially larger in magnitude than the corresponding coefficient in the

comparable equation for any other subsample. Similarly, the coefficient of 43.8 on the dummy

variable that indicates if there is negative abnormal growth is substantially larger for the venture

funds in the 1991-1998 period than for any other subsample. Economically it implies that,
6
    See Chung (2012) for a related test.


                                                  22
measured by IRR, venture funds that had negative abnormal growth outperformed otherwise

similar venture funds during this period by 35 percentage points.

   This finding suggests that negative abnormal growth, which likely reflects limited access to a

fund, is associated with unusually good performance, especially in venture capital funds during

the 1991-1998 period. It is consistent with the argument that there were extremely high returns

to having access to the top venture funds during this period, and that the exceptional performance

of endowments at this time can be explained by their access to these funds.



6.3 Implications

   Discussions of investing in private equity often revolve around the notion of a long-term

relationship between private equity fund managers and their investors. By establishing a long-

term relationship, the investors gain access to GPs’ future funds. Well-known investors have had

the investment strategy of investing with high quality partnerships, and investing in all of their

funds so as to assure access in the future. Practitioners often claim that such access to the best

funds allows investors in private equity to achieve higher returns than would otherwise be

possible.

   Our results from endowments’ investments in first-time funds and growth-constrained funds

are consistent with access being an important factor in private equity investing in the 1991-1998

period. However, the maturing of the industry has been accompanied by declines in returns and

the dispersion of returns, especially in venture capital. In addition, all LPs have gained

experience from investing. In light of these changes, our findings for the 1999-2006 period

suggest that the importance of access has also declined over time, consistent with the notion that




                                               23
the industry has changed from a niche, poorly understood industry, into a standardized and

important part of most institutional portfolios.



7. Conclusion

   Since the modification of the “Prudent Man” rule in 1978 that allowed institutional investors

to allocate part of their portfolios to alternative assets, the private equity industry has changed

substantially. In 1980, the largest fund raised was the Golder-Thoma $60 million dollar fund

that invested in many different kinds of deals, including both venture capital and buyouts. At the

time, institutional investors were somewhat skeptical of the industry, GPs, LPs and portfolio

firms were experimenting with different contractual structures, and indeed “private equity” itself

was not an accepted term. By the time of the 2008 Financial Crisis, individual funds of over $20

billion were being raised, funds became specialized in particular types of investments so that

“renewable energy” or “infrastructure” funds were commonplace, contracts have become

standardized, and private equity has become an accepted part of the financial world in which

most major business schools teach courses, and is even a topic for debate in presidential

campaigns.

   It is natural that such maturing of an industry can lead to changes in the fundamental

relationships between participants. In the private equity industry, the major participants are the

Limited Partners, the General Partners, and the portfolio companies. In this paper we explore the

relationship between Limited Partners and General Partners by focusing on access to funds, and

the way in which it has changed over recent years. An overarching hypothesis is that the

fundamental changes brought on by the maturing of the private equity industry have changed the

nature of relationship between Limited Partners and General Partners in private equity.



                                                   24
   We examine this hypothesis empirically with special attention to the unusually good

performance earned by endowments documented by Lerner et al. (2007). To do so, we gather a

sample of 1,852 LPs’ stakes in 1,250 buyout and venture funds between 1991 and 2006, which is

substantially larger than any previous sample of LP stakes. We start by showing changes in

returns brought on by the maturing of the industry. Consistent with prior work, we find an

industry-wide decline in returns and a decline in the relationship between GP experience and

return. These results are driven by changes in venture funds.

   We also confirm the Lerner et al. (2007) finding that endowments outperform other investor

classes during the 1991-1998 period. We argue that this unusually good performance was likely

due to endowments’ access to the best funds during this period, rather than superior skill at

picking funds, for three reasons.

   First, the superior performance demonstrated during 1991-1998 did not continue

subsequently; during the 1999-2006 period endowments’ performance in their private equity

investments was very similar to that of other investor classes. The unusual performance was

limited to venture funds that benefited from the technology boom of the 1990s, the performance

of endowments’ investments in buyout funds was similar to that of other asset classes.

Presumably, superior skill would have manifested itself in other kinds of funds as well.

   Second, endowments’ reinvestment decisions are not consistently better than that of other

investors, especially over time. In the venture sector during the 1991-1998 bull market, even if

endowments had made random reinvestment decisions, or had only reinvested in the fund

families for which they chose not to invest, they still would have earned close to a 60% IRR on

those investments and outperformed other classes of investors.




                                                25
   Third, even in the 1991-1998 period, endowments did not outperform other investor classes

in their investments of first-time funds, for which access is unlikely to be limited and so

represent a pure test of selection skill. Moreover, direct tests of access using abnormal growth of

fund assets to measure limited access reveal that endowments were more likely to invest in

venture funds with limited access during the 1991-1998 period, and also that these funds

(venture funds with limited access during the 1991-1998 period) had unusually good

performance.

   It is clear that there have been major changes in private equity industry in recent years. We

argue that this maturing has had implications for the relationship between GPs and LPs.

Presumably the huge inflows of capital and commoditization of the industry has lowered the

rents to GPs. If limited access reflected the sharing of these rents, then as these rents decreased

over time, we should expect that the importance of limited access would decrease as well.




                                                26
                                          References


Berk, J., and R. Green. 2004. Mutual Fund Flows and Performance in Rational Markets. Journal
of Political Economy 112:1269–1295.

Chung, J. 2012. Performance Persistence in Private Equity Funds. Working Paper. The Chinese
University of Hong Kong.

Chung, J., B. Sensoy, L. Stern, and M. Weisbach. 2012. Pay for Performance from Future Fund
Flows: The Case of Private Equity. Review of Financial Studies 25: 3259-3304.

DaRin, M. and L. Phalippou. 2012. The benefits of size for private equity investors. Working
paper.

Guo, S., E. Hotchkiss, and W. Song. 2011. Do buyouts (still) create value? The Journal of
Finance 66(2): 479–517.

Hochberg, Y., A. Ljungqvist, and A. Vissing-Jorgensen. 2012. Informational Hold-up and
Performance Persistence in Venture Capital. Working Paper, Northwestern University and New
York University.

Harris, R., T. Jenkinson, S. Kaplan, 2012. Private Equity Performance: What do we Know?
Working Paper, University of Chicago.

Kaplan, S. N., and A. Schoar. 2005. Private Equity Performance: Returns, Persistence, and
Capital Flows. The Journal of Finance 60: 1791–1823.

Keating, D. 2006. GP Confidential. Private Equity International. June 2006: 70-73.

Lerner, J., F. Hardymon, and A. Leamon. 2011. Note on the Private Equity Fundraising Process.
Harvard Business School Case 9-201-042.

Lerner, J. and A. Leamon. 2011. Yale University Investments Office: February 2011. Harvard
Business School Case 9-812-062.

Lerner, J., A. Schoar, and J. Wang. 2008. Secrets of the Academy: The Drivers of University
Endowment Success. Journal of Economic Perspectives 22(3): 207–22.

Lerner, J., A. Schoar, and W. Wongsunwai. 2007. Smart Institutions, Foolish Choices: The
Limited Partner Performance Puzzle. The Journal of Finance, 62: 731-764.

Robinson, D., B. Sensoy, 2011. Cyclicality, Performance Measurement, and Cash Flow
Liquidity in Private Equity. Working Paper.




                                              27
                                      Figure 1. Venture and Buyout Fundraising over Time

The figure shows the amount of venture and buyout funds raised from 1990 to 2008, derived from data listed in Preqin. Bars represent
fundraising by year. The blue portion represents buyout fundraising in millions of dollars. The red portion represents venture
fundraising in millions of dollars.


                                    Buyout and Venture Fundrasing by Year
                                                   ($Mn)
         350,000.00

         300,000.00

         250,000.00

         200,000.00

         150,000.00

         100,000.00

          50,000.00

               0.00
                      1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008

                                                    BO Fundraising    VC Fundraising




                                                                 28
                                                                          Table 1. LP Characteristics

This table shows characteristics of the sample of 1,852 LPs and their 14,380 investments in 1,250 buyout and venture capital funds raised between
1991 and 2006. Statistics are shown for the full sample period as well as the 1991-1998 and 1999-2006 subperiods. Total # of LPs is the total
number of LPs that make at least one investment in a given fund type in a given period. Means are reported for all other variables. LP Experience
is the total number of investments made by an LP prior to the current investment. Investments in Fund 1 is the percentage of an LPs’ investments
in a given fund type in a given period that are investments in the first fund raised by a private equity firm.


Panel A: LP Characteristics
                                  All Funds (Full Sample)                                 All Funds (1991-1998)                             All Funds (1999-2006)

                     Total      Avg # of                    Investments       Total     Avg # of                  Investments   Total     Avg # of                  Investments
                                               LP                                                      LP                                                LP
                     # of     investments                    in Fund 1        # of    investments                  in Fund 1    # of    investments                  in Fund 1
                                            Experience                                              Experience                                        Experience
                     LPs         Per LP                         (%)           LPs        Per LP                       (%)       LPs        Per LP                       (%)
Public pension
                      137       32.44          28.76            20             90        9.09          7.65           38        131       18.44          35.9           14
fund
Corporate
                      89          16           13.96            23             67        5.37          4.33           44         79        8.63         19.04           11
pension fund
Endowments            210       16.56          14.45            17            137        4.58          4.45           28        178        8.72         18.49           12
Advisors              144       13.64          11.62            24             66        3.29          4.07           38        123        5.56         14.01           18
Insurance
                      153        13.3          11.24            28             78        2.99          3.57           47        129         4.5         14.32           18
companies
Banks/Finance
                      381       11.48          9.42             30            173        3.08          3.39           46        334        4.93         11.37           23
companies
Investment firms      387       16.29          13.62            24            188        3.09          2.77           42        338        7.57         16.07           20
Other investors       351        7.46          5.81             26            197         1.6          1.53           36        221        2.59          8.16           16
Overall              1,852      18.33          15.79            23            996         3.7          4.4            39        1533       6.98         19.72           17




                                                                                        29
                             Venture Funds (Full Sample)                           Venture Funds (1991-1998)                            Venture Funds (1999-2006)

                   Total     Avg # of                      Investments   Total     Avg # of                    Investments   Total     Avg # of                     Investments
                                            LP                                                    LP                                                  LP
                   # of    investments                      in Fund 1    # of    investments                    in Fund 1    # of    investments                     in Fund 1
                                         Experience                                            Experience                                          Experience
                   LPs        Per LP                           (%)       LPs        Per LP                         (%)       LPs        Per LP                          (%)
Public pension
                    99       13.69          28.97              20         60        6.43          7.97             39         91       13.55          36.54             14
fund
Corporate
                    66        7.45          12.92              23         41        4.11          4.57             41         61        6.19          16.93             12
pension fund
Endowments         162         8.5          13.24              17         92        3.58          4.38             28        149        5.91          16.68             12
Advisors            90        8.92          12.75              24         30         3.4          5.31             34         78        4.56           15               19
Insurance
                    81        7.27          10.35              27         32        3.23          4.04             44         73        4.36          12.82             18
companies
Banks/Finance
                   222        5.02           8.34              30         75        3.24          3.05             45        207         4.3          9.56              25
companies
Investment firms   262        8.45           11.9              25         94        3.15          2.98             42        240        6.49          13.61             21
Other investors    202        2.44           3.47              27         78        1.74          1.05             35        154        2.29          4.31              19
  Overall          1,184      8.41           14.2              23        502        3.64          4.52             39        1053       5.89          17.15             17


                             Buyout Funds (Full Sample)                             Buyout Funds (1991-1998)                            Buyout Funds (1999-2006)

                   Total     Avg # of                      Investments   Total     Avg # of                    Investments   Total     Avg # of                     Investments
                                            LP                                                    LP                                                  LP
                   # of    investments                      in Fund 1    # of    investments                    in Fund 1    # of    investments                     in Fund 1
                                         Experience                                            Experience                                          Experience
                   LPs        Per LP                           (%)       LPs        Per LP                         (%)       LPs        Per LP                          (%)
Public pension
                   121       21.07          28.66              20         78        6.39          7.5              38        117       12.35          35.61             14
fund
Corporate
                    74       11.48          14.67              23         57        3.85          4.18             46         61        6.14          20.57             10
pension fund
Endowments         155        9.69          15.53              16        107        3.47          4.52             29        133        6.27          20.15             11
Advisors           100        8.82          10.99              25         49        3.21          3.42             41         88        4.82          13.45             18
Insurance
                   114         8.6          11.72              28         62        2.74          3.33             48         93        4.04          15.13             18
companies
Banks/Finance
                   279        8.65          10.04              29        136        2.79          3.52             46        235        4.35          12.55             21
companies
Investment firms   254       10.94          15.05              24        137         2.7          2.63             42        221         6.8          18.24             19
Other investors    210        7.68           7.65              26        139        1.55          1.75             36        110        2.55          12.13             13
  Overall          1,307     12.55          16.84              23        765        3.25          4.34             40        1058       6.05          21.5              16




                                                                                      30
                                                              Table 2. Fund Characteristics

This table shows fund characteristics at the LP level. Fund Sequence is the order in which a fund was raised by a private equity firm. Fund Size is
the fund’s total committed capital. Fund IRR is the fund’s internal rate of return. Reported statistics are the average across all LP investments by a
given LP type in a given fund type in a given period. Endowments vs. non-endowments shows the difference in mean values between endowments
and all non-endowment LP investors. Significance levels are determined by regressing each dependent variable on the endowment dummy, with
standard errors clustered by fund.. ***, **, and * indicate significance level at the 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.


                                               All Funds (Full Sample)                     All Funds (1991-1998)             All Funds (1999-2006)
                                                                                                                                                 Fund
                                        Fund           Fund      Fund Size          Fund          Fund      Fund Size     Fund       Fund
                                                                                                                                                 Size
                                      Sequence       IRR (%)      ($Mn)           Sequence      IRR (%)      ($Mn)      Sequence IRR (%)
                                                                                                                                                ($Mn)
  Public pension fund                   3.71           9.71        3,233            2.42          21.4        922.71      4.14        9.25     2,528.33
  Corporate pension fund                3.25           9.89        1,042            2.01         20.13        785.99      3.91       6.26      1,763.11
  Endowments                            3.94          13.38        2,181            2.83         35.74        671.95      4.39       5.83      1,662.09
  Advisors                              3.21          10.95         901             2.24         24.74        951.94      3.51       8.74      1,842.80
  Insurance companies                   3.11          11.09         813             2.1          21.16        645.70      3.51       9.44      1,479.54
  Banks/Finance companies               2.93           9.04        2,180            2.05         16.22        822.36      3.21       8.88      1,314.65
  Investment firms                      3.33           8.88        3,140            2.25         25.78        738.71      3.57       7.32      1,573.47
  Other investors                       3.06          10.49         890             2.12          19.4        924.32      3.58       7.22      1,545.19
    Overall                              3.4           10.2        1,534            2.31         23.67        807.49      3.78        7.9      1,784.80
    Endowments vs. non-endowments     0.63***        3.74***     -185.85**        0.62***       14.55***    -163.38**   0.72***     -1.43*     -144.25




                                                                             31
                                     Venture Funds (Full Sample)              Venture Funds (1991-1998)         Venture Funds (1999-2006)
                                                                                                                                      Fund
                                    Fund       Fund      Fund Size          Fund       Fund      Fund Size     Fund       Fund
                                                                                                                                      Size
                                  Sequence   IRR (%)      ($Mn)           Sequence   IRR (%)      ($Mn)      Sequence IRR (%)
                                                                                                                                     ($Mn)
Public pension fund                 3.63       8.56         526             2.58      38.72       226.32       4.01        -1.8      589.83
Corporate pension fund              3.41       9.56         512             2.18       37.1       214.35        4         -3.48      602.11
Endowments                          3.54      16.49         525             2.83      63.82       240.99       3.81       -1.89      615.97
Advisors                            3.16       9.67         478             2.36      47.56       200.20       3.4        -1.41      536.25
Insurance companies                 3.2        7.15         386             2.55      32.13       222.68       3.46       -2.19      447.27
Banks/Finance companies             2.79       4.1          391             2.17      29.91       165.52       2.93        -1.4      437.46
Investment firms                    3.27       5.96         490             2.3       46.88       181.44       3.45       -1.29      522.38
Other investors                     2.9        8.36         387             2.2       33.13       190.92       3.14        0.27      463.19
  Overall                           3.29       8.78         478             2.45      44.09       209.38       3.54       -1.58      535.59
  Endowments vs. non-endowments    0.30**    9.40***      57.98**          0.48**    25.18***     40.35**    0.32***      -0.15     91.32***




                                     Buyout Funds (Full Sample)               Buyout Funds (1991-1998)           Buyout Funds (1999-2006)
                                                                                                                                       Fund
                                    Fund       Fund      Fund Size          Fund       Fund      Fund Size     Fund       Fund
                                                                                                                                       Size
                                  Sequence   IRR (%)      ($Mn)           Sequence   IRR (%)      ($Mn)      Sequence IRR (%)
                                                                                                                                      ($Mn)
Public pension fund                 3.74      10.24        2,870            2.34      12.73       1,271.54      4.2        9.42      3,395.09
Corporate pension fund              3.15      10.12        2,055            1.91       9.57       1,141.33     3.84       10.43     2,568.50
Endowments                          4.31      10.57        2,145            2.83      11.81       1,039.34     4.93       10.05     2,608.86
Advisors                            3.23      11.66        2,271            2.18      12.69       1,348.99     3.57       11.33     2,571.50
Insurance companies                 3.05       13.2        1,700            1.87      15.42       866.89       3.54        12.3     2,038.45
Banks/Finance companies              3        11.88        1,655             2        10.91       1,077.23     3.39       12.25     1,876.96
Investment firms                    3.38      11.32        2,195            2.22      11.92       1,104.92     3.68       11.16     2,475.57
Other investors                     3.2       12.17        2,063            2.09      12.94       1,268.85     4.04       11.58     2,665.50
  Overall                           3.48      11.14        2,231            2.23      12.07       1,147.27     3.94       10.79     2,633.88
  Endowments vs. non-endowments   0.95***     -0.64        -98.90          0.70**      -0.31      -126.12    1.13***      -0.84      -28.69




                                                                     32
                                         Table 3. Changes in Fund Characteristics and Performance over Time

The table shows summary statistics of the characteristics and performance of funds in our sample. The full sample period is divided to 1991-1998
and 1999-2006 subperiods, and funds are divided to venture and buyout funds. Panel A reports the number of observations, mean, median, first
quartile (Q1), and third quartile (Q3) values of fund size, returns, and vintage year. Panel B shows the dispersion of fund returns, measured by the
cross-sectional standard deviation of fund IRR (in percent). The sample is further divided to Fund 1, the first fund raised by a private equity firm,
and Fund > 1, subsequent funds.
 Panel A: Fund-level characteristics
                                          All Funds (Full Sample)                         All Funds (1991-1998)                        All Funds (1999-2006)
                                 Obs    Mean     Median       Q1       Q3      Obs   Mean       Median      Q1      Q3      Obs    Mean      Median      Q1      Q3
 # of LPs investing in fund     1,250    11.5       7         3        15      412    8.94         6         3      12      838    12.76        8         3      16
 Vintage year                   1,250   2000      2000       1998     2003     412    1996       1996      1994    1997     838    2002       2002      2000    2005
 IRR (%)                        1,250   11.23     6.30      -4.90     19.10    412    25.61      12.75     2.15    30.70    838    6.14        4.4       -5.2    15
 Fund size ($Mn)                1,250   702.53   287.99     125.00    682.64   412   404.99     169.50     75.50   399.85   838   848.82     354.00    163.00   770.00
 Preceding fund IRR (%)          751    20.31     12.70      1.40     27.00    206    33.87      24.15     11.10   39.00    545    15.19      9.20      -1.70   22.00
 Preceding fund size ($Mn)       751    589.89   235.00     100.00    560.00   206   298.73     135.00     61.48   268.00   545   699.95     300.00    130.00   702.52


                                        Venture Funds (Full Sample)                   Venture Funds (1991-1998)                     Venture Funds (1999-2006)
                                 Obs    Mean     Median       Q1       Q3      Obs   Mean       Median      Q1      Q3      Obs    Mean      Median      Q1      Q3
 # of LPs investing in fund      629      9        10         3        12      201        7        4         2       9      428     10          7         3      14
 Vintage year                    629    2000      2000       1998     2003     201    1996       1996      1994    1997     428   2001.91     2001      2000    2004
 IRR (%)                         629    11.66      1.3      -6.85     12.65    201    36.96       13.5      1.4     48.8    428    -1.76       -2.5      -8.7    5.5
 Fund size ($Mn)                 629    280.3      164        80       320     201   129.06       100       51      170     428   351.33      227.5    111.35    450
 Preceding fund IRR (%)          381     21.1      6.8       -4.4      25      102    42.52      26.18     10.9    47.65    279    13.27       0.7       -7.4    12.4
 Preceding fund size ($Mn)       381     250       150        66       285     102   107.26       81        50      150     279   302.19      190.9      86      400


                                        Buyout Funds (Full Sample)                    Buyout Funds (1991-1998)                       Buyout Funds (1999-2006)
                                 Obs    Mean     Median       Q1       Q3      Obs   Mean       Median      Q1      Q3      Obs    Mean      Median      Q1      Q3
 # of LPs investing in fund      621     14        15         4        19      211     11          8         3      15      410     15         10         4      22
 Vintage year                    621    2000      2000       1997     2004     211    1996       1996      1994    1998     410   2002.65     2003      2000    2005
 IRR (%)                         621    14.79     12.7       4.1       24      211    14.8        12.5      3.1     22.7    410    14.79      12.7       4.2     24.9
                                                                      1188.8
 Fund size ($Mn)                 621    1130.2     500       250               211   667.84       350      165     806.4    410   1368.15    658.78      300    1500
                                                                        8
 Preceding fund IRR (%)          370    19.51      18         9        27.4    104    25.38      22.55      12      34.3    266    17.21      15.45      7.9     25
                                                                                                                                                                1419.0
 Preceding fund size ($Mn)       370    939.89     400      196.71    1000     104   486.52       243      100     525.17   266   1,117.15     500       252
                                                                                                                                                                  8


                                                                                     33
Panel B. Dispersion of returns
                         All Funds                  Venture Funds             Buyout Funds
                    (1)            (2)          (3)              (4)         (5)         (6)
                 1991-1998      1999-2006    1991-1998        1999-2006   1991-1998   1999-2006
Fund 1             47.33             20.58     65.31            15.38       18.03       22.63
Fund > 1           57.54             17.69     74.99            11.63       20.79       20.43

Overall            52.02             18.84     70.11            13.16       19.34       21.3




                                               34
                                   Table 4. The Relationship between GP Experience and Fund Returns

The table relates fund performance (IRR) to the experience of the GP, measured by the (log) sequence number of the fund. Fund 1 dummy equals
one if the fund is a first fund raised by a private equity firm, zero otherwise. All other variables are defined in previous tables. Vintage year fixed
effects are included in all specifications. Results are reported for all funds, as well as separately for venture and buyout funds. For specifications
involving all funds, a fund type fixed effect is also included (not reported). Coefficient estimates and robust standard errors clustered by vintage
year are reported. ***, **, and * indicate significance level at the 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.

Dependent variable: Fund IRR (%)
                                       All Funds (Full Sample)                  All Funds (1991-1998)                   All Funds (1999-2006)
                                    (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)         (9)
 Log fund sequence               3.308**      4.452***                  11.313*** 11.311***                        0.527       1.773**
                                 (1.567)       (1.537)                   (1.893)       (2.715)                    (0.991)       (0.904)
 Log fund size                                 -1.535*      -1.105                      0.004       0.820                     -1.596*** -1.414***
                                               (0.796)     (0.822)                     (2.284)     (2.460)                      (0.510)    (0.503)
 Fund 1 dummy                                             -4.144**                                -7.654**                                  -1.912
                                                           (1.667)                                 (3.855)                                 (1.252)
 Fund type fixed effects           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes            Yes           Yes        Yes
 Vintage year fixed effects        Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes            Yes           Yes        Yes
 Number of observations           1,250         1,250        1,250         412           412         412            838           838        838
 Adjusted R2                       0.118      0.119        0.117          0.069        0.066        0.058          0.238        0.244        0.243

                                    Venture Funds (Full Sample)              Venture Funds (1991-1998)               Venture Funds (1999-2006)
                                    (1)          (2)         (3)            (4)         (5)          (6)            (7)         (8)           (9)
 Log fund sequence               6.315**     6.554**                    24.006*** 22.329***                        0.395       1.306
                                 (3.204)      (3.225)                    (5.192)      (8.648)                     (1.137)     (1.121)
 Log fund size                                 -0.356       0.178                      2.441        4.520                    -1.369**     -1.185**
                                              (1.912)      (1.911)                    (7.436)      (6.754)                    (0.596)      (0.591)
 Fund 1 dummy                                             -6.725**                               -18.22***                                  -0.846
                                                           (3.248)                                 (6.580)                                 (1.321)
 Vintage year fixed effects        Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes
 Number of observations            629          629          629           201          201          201            428         428          428
 Adjusted R2                       0.199      0.198        0.196          0.050        0.046        0.036          0.035        0.043        0.041



                                                                           35
                                Buyout Funds (Full Sample)         Buyout Funds (1991-1998)           Buyout Funds (1999-2006)
                               (1)          (2)          (3)      (4)         (5)          (6)      (7)          (8)         (9)
Log fund sequence             1.327      2.749**                 2.919       3.926                 0.759      2.315**
                             (1.286)      (1.112)               (3.424)     (3.353)               (1.299)     (0.953)
Log fund size                           -1.746*** -1.474**                -1.654*** -1.263**                  -1.754*      -1.608
                                          (0.661)     (0.683)               (0.433)     (0.528)               (1.063)     (1.038)
Fund 1 dummy                                           -2.650                            -1.077                           -3.465*
                                                      (1.814)                           (3.799)                           (1.942)
Vintage year fixed effects     Yes          Yes          Yes      Yes         Yes          Yes      Yes         Yes         Yes
Number of observations         621          621          621      211         211          211      410         410         410
Adjusted R2                   0.204        0.211        0.209    0.146       0.151        0.140    0.222       0.227       0.229




                                                                36
                      Table 5. Investment Performance by LP Type and Period

The table shows regression results of LPs’ investment performance for the full sample period and two
subsample periods from 1991-1998 and 199-2006. The dependent variable in all columns is fund IRR.
Eight indicator variables are used to identify investments made by different LP types. Each indicator
variable takes on the value of one for observations consisting of investments in funds by the
corresponding investor type, and zero otherwise. Public pension funds is the omitted reference group in
all regressions. Log LP experience is the log of the total number of LPs’ investments prior to the current
fund. Log fund size is the natural logarithm of the fund’s size in millions of dollars. All specifications
include vintage year fixed effects. Columns (2), (4), and (6) include LP country fixed effects. Panel A
reports results for all funds, and includes a fund type (buyout or venture) fixed effect. Panels B and C
report results separately for venture and buyout funds, respectively. Endowments vs. non-endowments
reports separate regression results with just the endowment indicator variable and the control variables.
All other non-endowment LPs serve as the reference group. Only the coefficient on the endowment
indicator is reported. Coefficient estimates and standard errors clustered by fund are reported. ***, **,
and * indicate significance level at the 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.


 Dependent variable: Fund IRR(%)
 Panel A: All funds
                                       Full sample               1991-1998                1999-2006
                                     (1)        (2)            (3)        (4)            (5)       (6)
 Endowments                        2.606**    3.017***      9.243***   10.823***       0.125     -0.010
                                   (1.122)    (1.149)        (2.863)    (3.123)        (0.653)   (0.661)
 Corporate pension funds           -2.092*     -1.591        -3.228      -1.303        -0.807    -0.877
                                   (1.071)    (1.027)        (2.605)    (2.441)        (0.584)   (0.615)
 Advisors                           1.109      1.609          3.520      6.012*        0.589      0.245
                                   (0.899)    (0.998)        (2.800)    (3.482)        (0.721)   (0.670)
 Insurance companies                -0.417     0.350         -1.574      1.679         0.474      0.063
                                   (1.043)    (1.008)        (2.762)    (2.935)        (0.819)   (0.746)
 Banks/Finance companies           -1.634*     -0.789        -3.553      1.153         0.699     -0.065
                                   (0.913)    (0.779)        (2.370)    (2.434)        (0.747)   (0.610)
 Investment firms                   0.228      0.719          3.049     7.025**        0.791      0.011
                                   (0.717)    (0.874)        (2.449)    (3.510)        (0.545)   (0.556)
 Others                             -1.741     -0.425        -1.359      2.131         0.691      0.657
                                   (1.196)    (1.012)        (2.496)    (2.497)        (0.950)   (0.844)
 Log LP experience                            1.177***                  3.437**                   0.290
                                              (0.386)                   (1.549)                  (0.220)
 Log fund size                                 -0.068                    2.516                   -0.207
                                              (0.694)                   (1.743)                  (0.646)
 Fund type fixed effects             Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes       Yes
 Vintage year fixed effects          Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes       Yes
 LP country fixed effects            No         Yes            No         Yes            No       Yes
 Number of observations             14,380     14,084         3,685      3,609         10,695    10,475
 Adjusted R2                        0.157      0.160          0.154      0.159         0.350      0.361

 Endowments vs. non-endowments     3.096***   3.053***      9.654***    8.954***       -0.337     0.012
                                   (1.119)    (1.070)        (2.875)    (2.722)        (0.561)   (0.535)


                                                      37
Panel B: Venture funds
                                    Full sample              1991-1998             1999-2006
                                  (1)        (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)       (6)
Endowments                      7.179***   7.842***     25.675***   30.172***   0.200     0.311
                                (1.831)    (1.936)       (5.902)     (6.706)    (0.795)   (0.778)
Corporate pension funds          -1.726     -0.689       -1.093       3.464     -1.49*    -1.269
                                (1.985)    (1.904)       (6.182)     (5.660)    (0.808)   (0.836)
Advisors                         2.560      3.968*       10.799     17.098**    -0.188    -0.204
                                (1.884)    (2.251)       (7.809)     (8.557)    (0.799)   (0.790)
Insurance companies              -1.673     0.489        -4.018       2.761     -0.695    -0.192
                                (1.890)    (1.929)       (6.304)     (6.029)    (0.901)   (0.896)
Banks/Finance companies          -1.199     1.315        -7.952       7.940     -0.193    -0.007
                                (1.602)    (1.695)       (7.166)     (7.362)    (0.733)   (0.673)
Investment firms                 2.266*    4.189**       10.404*    23.819***   -0.125    -0.199
                                (1.275)    (1.747)       (5.632)     (7.907)    (0.628)   (0.631)
Others                           0.598      3.203*       -2.024      11.844*    1.317     1.742
                                (1.915)    (1.736)       (6.429)     (6.086)    (1.324)   (1.100)
Log LP experience                          1.513**                   9.477**              0.385
                                           (0.638)                   (3.895)              (0.258)
Log fund size                              2.552**                    8.259               1.152*
                                           (1.162)                   (5.044)              (0.687)
Vintage year fixed effects        Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes
LP country fixed effects          No         Yes           No         Yes         No       Yes
Number of observations           5,713      5,606         1,335       1,312     4,378     4,294
Adjusted R2                      0.302      0.308         0.089       0.113     0.055     0.106

Endowments vs. non-endowments   6.724***   6.125***     24.352***   21.637***    0.343     0.390
                                 (1.734)    (1.669)      (5.801)     (5.535)    (0.688)   (0.646)




                                                   38
Panel C: Buyout funds
                                    Full sample            1991-1998            1999-2006
                                  (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)
Endowments                       -0.232     -0.288      -1.060     -1.200    0.067     0.072
                                (0.779)    (0.750)     (1.629)    (1.575)    (0.871)   (0.843)
Corporate pension funds         -1.535**   -1.613**    -3.130**   -3.210**   -0.765    -0.799
                                (0.665)    (0.674)     (1.267)    (1.313)    (0.744)   (0.737)
Advisors                         1.135      0.572       1.448      0.394     1.027     0.547
                                (0.849)    (0.769)     (1.586)    (1.622)    (1.000)   (0.881)
Insurance companies              1.174      0.574       2.067      1.685     0.767     0.066
                                (1.006)    (0.982)     (2.276)    (2.443)    (1.075)   (0.972)
Banks/Finance companies          -0.108     -0.550      -1.436     -1.132    0.372     -0.310
                                (0.859)    (0.692)     (1.263)    (1.262)    (1.081)   (0.814)
Investment firms                 0.637      -0.082      0.196      -1.162    0.789     0.307
                                (0.598)    (0.614)     (1.107)    (1.328)    (0.705)   (0.681)
Others                           0.058      -0.325      -0.761     -0.913    0.446     -0.204
                                (1.106)    (1.036)     (1.910)    (1.998)    (1.350)   (1.124)
Log LP experience                           -0.035                 -0.204              0.031
                                           (0.250)                (0.590)              (0.267)
Log fund size                               0.079                  0.380               -0.031
                                           (0.669)                (1.122)              (0.803)
Vintage year fixed effects        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
LP country fixed effects          No         Yes         No         Yes        No       Yes
Number of observations           8,667      8,478       2,350      2,297     6,317     6,181
Adjusted R2                      0.343      0.356       0.201      0.202     0.390     0.410

Endowments vs. non-endowments    -0.407     -0.089      -0.662     -0.500     -0.302    0.099
                                (0.691)    (0.658)     (1.482)    (1.403)    (0.763)   (0.724)




                                                  39
                                      Table 6. Returns on Reinvested and Abandoned Funds

The table reports the average returns and size of LPs’ reinvested funds as well as abandoned funds. A fund is considered Reinvested if
if the LP invests in the follow-on fund raised by the same private equity firm (if a follow-on fund is raised) and Abandoned if the LP
does not invest in the follow-on. Column (1) N reports the number of reinvested/abandoned funds by LP type. Columns (2) Current
Fund IRR and (3) Follow-on Fund IRR report the IRR of the current fund (the fund that LP has invested) and Follow-on Fund (which
the LP either reinvests or abandons), respectively. Column (4) Follow-on Fund Size is the total committed capital (from all investors)
in the follow-on fund. Panels A, B, and C show the average returns and size of the all fund, venture funds, and buyout funds that LPs
reinvested/abandoned, respectively. Diff is the difference between reinvested funds and abandoned funds. T-tests are performed to
determine whether the differences are significant. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                                 40
Panel A: All funds
                                                 Full Sample (1991-2006)                                    1991-1998                                 1999-2006
                                         (1)      (2)         (3)            (4)          (5)      (6)           (7)        (8)       (9)      (10)         (11)     (12)
                                                                                                                                                                    Follow-
                                                 Current    Follow-    Follow-on                  Current      Follow-   Follow-on            Current     Follow-
                          Reinvestment                                                                                                                              on Fund
                                          N     Fund IRR    on Fund    Fund Size           N       Fund        on Fund   Fund Size     N     Fund IRR     on Fund
                            Decision                                                                                                                                  Size
                                                  (%)       IRR (%)      ($Mn)                   IRR (%)       IRR (%)     ($Mn)               (%)        IRR (%)
                                                                                                                                                                     ($Mn)

Endowments                Reinvested     1200     25.8       19.64         1226.22        466     42.35         37.78      643.2      734     16.58         8.12    1596.37
                          Abandoned      402     17.76        9.35         1486.35        105     36.93          24.6     972.06      297     11.92         3.96    1668.17
                          Diff                  8.04***    10.29***    -260.13**                  5.42          13.18*   -328.86**            4.66*       4.16***    -71.8
Public pension funds      Reinvested     1804    22.78       17.34         1882.15        667     32.7          24.46      999.6      1137    17.91        13.17    2399.89
                          Abandoned      417     15.23        9.06         2115.4         107     26.83         20.12     686.25      310     11.99         5.25    2608.69
                                                                                                                                                             7.
                          Diff                  7.55***     8.28***        -233.25                5.87*          4.34    313.35***           5.92***                -208.8
                                                                                                                                                           92***
Corporate pension funds   Reinvested     591     26.07       15.76         1328.98        274     35.44         23.18     751.08      317     20.35         9.35    1828.49
                          Abandoned      136     11.28         8           1316.48        50      25.48         14.55     1256.78     86       4.62         4.19    1351.19
                          Diff                  14.79***    7.76***         12.5                  9.96*          8.63     -505.7**           15.73***     5.16***   477.3*
Advisors                  Reinvested     442      27.5       18.93         1476.35        147     39.3          31.53     856.43      295      22.8        12.65    1785.26
                          Abandoned      159     16.65        7.65         1955.75        48      27.06         12.45     1463.95     111     12.93         5.58    2168.42
                          Diff                  10.85***   11.28***        -479.4*               12.24**      19.08***   -607.52**            9.87**      7.07***   -383.16
Insurance companies       Reinvested     412     26.35       18.74         1030.41        167     35.26          25.4     567.02      245     21.72         14.2    1346.27
                          Abandoned      134     19.32        8.3          1498.49        45      31.25          11.7      980.1      89      14.79         6.58    1760.6
                          Diff                   7.03**    10.44***    -468.08**                  4.01         13.7***   -413.08**            6.93*       7.62***   -414.33
Banks/finance companies   Reinvested     1011    23.53       15.48         1179.69        338     32.93          21.7     728.15      673     19.73        12.36    1406.46
                          Abandoned      423     18.12        8.67         1251.06        145     26.82         13.72     1161.57     278     14.51         6.04    1297.73
                          Diff                   5.41**     6.81***        -71.37                 6.11          7.98**   -433.42***           5.22*       6.32***   108.73
Investment firms          Reinvested     1560    22.57        16           1373.58        446     38.83         30.17     721.37      1114    17.33        10.33    1634.7
                          Abandoned      556     18.77        8.15         1408.57        115     38.57         23.18     797.47      441     14.81         4.23    1567.93
                          Diff                    3.8*      7.85***        -34.99                 0.26           6.99      -76.1               2.52        6.1***    66.77
Others                    Reinvested     341     23.13        13.6         1433.48        125     30.71         19.11     873.96      216     19.25        10.41    1757.28
                          Abandoned      316     20.76       13.16         1183.64        192     32.27         19.54     874.77      124      9.15         3.28    1661.89
                          Diff                    2.37        0.44         249.84                 -1.56         -0.43      -0.81             10.1***      7.13***    95.39
Overall                   Reinvested     7361     24.1       17.05         1433.72        2630    36.3           27.5     787.05      4731    18.51        11.24    1793.22
                          Abandoned      2543    17.58        9.17         1516.65        807     31.26         18.58     967.54      1736    12.64         4.79    1771.91
                          Diff                  6.52***     7.88***        -82.93                5.04***       8.92***   -180.49***          5.87***      6.45***    21.31



                                                                                     41
Panel B: Venture capital funds
                                                   Full Sample (1991-2006)                                    1991-1998                                1998-2006
                                           (1)      (2)         (3)            (4)           (5)     (6)            (7)       (8)      (9)      (10)         (11)       (12)
                                                                                                                            Follow-                                   Follow-
                                                   Current   Follow-     Follow-on                  Current      Follow-                       Current     Follow-
                            Reinvestment                                                                                    on Fund                                   on Fund
                                            N     Fund IRR   on Fund     Fund Size           N     Fund IRR      on Fund                N     Fund IRR     on Fund
                              Decision                                                                                        Size                                      Size
                                                    (%)      IRR (%)       ($Mn)                     (%)         IRR (%)                        (%)        IRR (%)
                                                                                                                             ($Mn)                                     ($Mn)

Endowments                  Reinvested     532     32.64       24.55         464.75          220    57.09          62.62     254.57    312     16.15         -2.3      612.96
                            Abandoned      223     21.05       8.54          626.92          37     60.56          59.16     191.72    186     14.08        -1.52      713.49
                            Diff                  11.59***   16.01***    -162.17***                -3.47***      3.46***    62.85***          2.07***      -0.78***    -100.53
Public pension funds        Reinvested     550     28.04       17.13         494.68          218     44.3          43.84     230.39    332     18.62         -0.4      668.23
                            Abandoned      169     15.94       8.06          606.49          38     37.65          39.91     135.67    131     10.38        -1.17      743.07
                            Diff                  12.1***    9.07***     -111.81**                 6.65***       3.930***   94.72**           8.24***      0.77***     -74.84
Corporate pension funds     Reinvested     238     33.15       17.25         462.15          106    48.95          42.27     222.79    132     23.04        -2.84      654.36
                            Abandoned      62      10.62       6.68           554.2          13     52.23          38.62     196.38    49       3.38         -1.8      649.13
                            Diff                  22.53***   10.57**          -92.05               -3.28***      3.65***    26.41**           19.66***     -1.04***     5.23
Advisors                    Reinvested     152     38.24       22.4          475.73          54     55.19          60.14     203.9     98      29.54         1.6       625.52
                            Abandoned      62      14.49       -0.15         565.05          10     23.38          16.49     114.64    52      13.68        -3.34      651.67
                            Diff                  23.75**    22.55***         -89.32               31.81***      43.65***   89.26**           15.86***     4.94***     -26.15
Insurance companies         Reinvested     150     28.17       17.29         345.62          68     35.41          38.7      191.71    82      22.91        -0.47      473.24
                            Abandoned      46      23.62       -0.03         470.81          11     70.06          6.77      275.95    35      15.88        -2.17      532.05
                            Diff                    4.55     17.32***        -125.19*               -34.65       31.93***   -84.24**            7.03       1.7***      -58.81
Banks/finance companies     Reinvested     341     27.32       11.65         357.02          102     42.2          38.96     172.3     239     21.49        -0.01      435.86
                            Abandoned      175     17.74       3.22          537.59          36     47.73          25.4      160.38    139     12.83        -2.52      635.29
                            Diff                   9.58*     8.43***     -180.57***                -5.53**       13.56***   11.92***           8.66**      2.51***     -199.43
Investment firms            Reinvested     676     24.94       13.51         474.45          181    53.47          51.18     183.79    495     16.47        -0.27      580.73
                            Abandoned      300     16.99       4.72          570.72          44     58.89          44.98     145.22    256     12.21         -2.2      643.85
                            Diff                   7.95**    8.79***     -96.27***                 -5.42**        6.2***     38.57             4.26**      1.93***     -63.12
Others                      Reinvested     147     25.07       11.08         337.52          48     35.51          30.9      177.05    99      20.08         1.47      415.32
                            Abandoned      142     21.57       14.3          460.21          70     42.69          30.19     168.95    72       9.77        -1.14      743.37
                            Diff                    3.5        -3.22     -122.69**                  -7.18          0.71       8.1              10.31*        2.61      -328.05
Overall                     Reinvested     2786    29.04       16.99         447.08          997    48.81          48.56     213.87    1789    19.12        -0.61      577.04
                            Abandoned      1179    18.04       6.52          563.19          259    49.11          36.5      165.92    920     11.93        -1.92      675.02
                            Diff                   11***     10.47***    -116.11***                  -0.3        12.06***   47.95***          7.19***      1.31***    -97.98***

                                                                                        42
Panel C: Buyout funds
                                                 Full Sample (1991-2006)                                  1991-1998                                  1998-2006
                                         (1)      (2)        (3)            (4)          (5)      (6)           (7)       (8)       (9)      (10)         (11)       (12)

                                                 Current   Follow-    Follow-on                  Current     Follow-   Follow-on            Current     Follow-   Follow-on
                          Reinvestment
                                          N       Fund     on Fund    Fund Size           N     Fund IRR     on Fund   Fund Size     N     Fund IRR     on Fund   Fund Size
                            Decision
                                                IRR (%)    IRR (%)      ($Mn)                     (%)        IRR (%)     ($Mn)               (%)        IRR (%)     ($Mn)

Endowments                Reinvested     668     20.2       15.73      1832.66           246     27.18         15.57     990.76     422     16.89         15.82    2323.44
                          Abandoned      179     13.64      10.36      2557.05           68      23.81          5.8     1396.66     111      8.45         13.16    3267.91
                          Diff                  6.56***    5.37***    -724.39***                3.37***      9.77***   -405.9***           8.44***      2.66***   -944.47**
Public pension funds      Reinvested     1254    20.38      17.43      2490.69           449      26.5         15.05    1373.07     805     17.61         18.77    3114.06
                          Abandoned      248     14.72       9.74      3143.65           69      19.93         9.22      989.46     179     13.18         9.94     3974.04
                          Diff                  5.66***    7.69***    -652.96***                6.57***      5.83***   383.61**            4.43***      8.83***   -859.98**
Corporate pension funds   Reinvested     353     20.79      14.76      1913.42           168     24.84         11.14    1084.41     185     18.41         18.05    2666.25
                          Abandoned      74      11.83       9.11      1955.15           37      18.35         6.09     1629.36     37       6.25         12.12    2280.94
                          Diff                  8.96***    5.65**          -41.73               6.49***      5.05***    -544.95            12.16***     5.93***     385.31
Advisors                  Reinvested     290     21.45      17.11      2000.81           93      27.37         14.91    1235.31     197     19.43         18.15    2362.18
                          Abandoned      97      17.93      12.63      2844.65           38      27.55         11.38    1819.03     59      12.27         13.44    3505.22
                          Diff                   3.52      4.48**     -843.84**                 -0.18***     3.53***   -583.72***           7.16**      4.71***   -1143.04**
Insurance companies       Reinvested     262     25.26      19.57      1422.47           99      35.13         16.26     824.8      163     21.13         21.57    1785.47
                          Abandoned      88      17.28      12.65      2035.69           34      23.49         13.3     1207.91     54      14.12         12.25    2556.88
                          Diff                  7.98***    6.92***     -613.22*                 11.64***     2.96***   -383.11**           7.01***      9.32***   -771.41**
Banks/finance companies   Reinvested     670     21.58      17.43      1598.39           236     28.33         14.23     968.4      434     18.81         19.17    1940.97
                          Abandoned      248     18.38      12.51      1754.51           109     21.72         9.86     1492.24     139     16.17         14.59    1960.18
                          Diff                   3.2**     4.92***     -156.12                   6.61**      4.37***   -523.84**           2.64***      4.58***     -19.21
Investment firms          Reinvested     884     20.76      17.91      2061.15           265     28.75         15.82    1088.55     619     18.02         18.8     2477.53
                          Abandoned      256     20.94      12.17      2390.43           71      28.19         9.67     1201.68     185     18.58         13.13    2846.66
                          Diff                   -0.18     5.74***     -329.28                    0.56       6.15***    -113.13             -0.56       5.67***    -369.13
Others                    Reinvested     194     21.81      15.51      2263.94           77      27.69         11.76     1308.4     117     18.66         17.97    2892.79
                          Abandoned      174     20.09      12.22      1774.03           122     27.32         13.43    1279.75     52       8.29         9.39     2933.67
                          Diff                   1.72      3.29**      489.91*                    0.37         -1.67    28.65**            10.37**      8.58***     -40.88
Overall                   Reinvested     4575    21.01      17.09      2034.55           1633    27.63         14.64    1136.99     2942    18.15         18.45    2532.76
                          Abandoned      1364    17.19      11.46      2340.79           548     24.04         10.11     1346.4     816     13.44         12.36    3008.59
                          Diff                  3.82***    5.63***    -306.24***         1085   3.59***      4.53***   -209.41***   2126   4.71***      6.09***   -475.83***

                                                                                    43
                                           Table 7. Probability of Investing in a First-time Fund

Probit models for the probability of an LP type investing in the first fund raised by a private equity firm for all funds, venture capital funds, and
buyout funds. The dependent variable equals one if the investment is a first fund raised by a private equity firm, and zero otherwise. Eight
indicator variables are again used to identify LP type. All variables are defined in previous tables. Marginal effects and robust standard errors
clustered by fund are reported. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                          All Funds                                  Venture Funds                             Buyout Funds
                                 (1)          (2)          (3)             (4)            (5)           (6)          (7)            (8)          (9)
                            Full Sample   1991-1998     1999-2006      Full Sample    1991-1998      1999-2006   Full Sample    1991-1998     1999-2006
 Endowments                  -0.080***     -0.129***    -0.062***       -0.068***      -0.146***      -0.044     -0.086***        -0.099*     -0.074***
                               (0.016)      (0.037)      (0.016)         (0.025)        (0.050)       (0.029)      (0.019)        (0.051)      (0.018)
 Corporate pension funds      -0.033**       0.040      -0.062***        -0.055**        0.016       -0.089***     -0.021          0.038      -0.043***
                               (0.014)      (0.034)      (0.014)         (0.022)        (0.053)       (0.022)      (0.019)        (0.045)      (0.016)
 Advisors                      -0.014       -0.008       -0.017           -0.001        -0.014        -0.000       -0.020          0.013       -0.025
                               (0.015)      (0.040)      (0.014)         (0.027)        (0.064)       (0.028)      (0.018)        (0.053)      (0.016)
 Insurance companies           -0.003        0.062       -0.023           -0.034        -0.039        -0.033       0.017          0.116**      -0.014
                               (0.020)      (0.046)      (0.019)         (0.030)        (0.073)       (0.031)      (0.026)        (0.056)      (0.024)
 Banks/Finance companies       0.023         0.055        0.009           0.029          0.039         0.023       0.018           0.049        0.004
                               (0.017)      (0.037)      (0.017)         (0.027)        (0.064)       (0.028)      (0.022)        (0.048)      (0.021)
 Investment firms              0.009         0.023       -0.001           0.004         -0.002         0.002       0.013           0.033        0.002
                               (0.015)      (0.034)      (0.015)         (0.022)        (0.053)       (0.024)      (0.019)        (0.045)      (0.018)
 Others                      -0.072***      -0.061      -0.078***       -0.073***       -0.035       -0.082***   -0.080***        -0.082*     -0.076***
                               (0.015)      (0.039)      (0.013)         (0.025)        (0.073)       (0.023)      (0.018)        (0.046)      (0.017)
 Log LP experience           -0.057***     -0.093***    -0.045***       -0.055***      -0.093***     -0.046***   -0.058***       -0.097***    -0.043***
                               (0.005)      (0.015)      (0.005)         (0.009)        (0.024)       (0.009)      (0.007)        (0.019)      (0.006)
 Fund type dummies              Yes          Yes          Yes                 -            -             -            -              -            -
 Vintage year dummies           Yes          Yes          Yes              Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes
 LP country dummies             Yes          Yes          Yes              Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes
 Number of observations        14,084        3,609       10,475           5,677          1,364         4,333       8,407           2,245        6,142
 Pseudo R2                     0.138         0.120        0.098           0.119          0.120         0.096       0.178           0.172        0.112

 Endowments vs. non-
                             -0.076***     -0.143***    -0.052***       -0.060***      -0.146***      -0.033     -0.083***       -0.116***    -0.067***
 endowments
                               (0.013)      (0.031)      (0.014)         (0.021)        (0.043)       (0.025)      (0.016)        (0.042)      (0.016)




                                                                         44
                             Table 8. Returns on LPs’ Investments in First-Time Funds and Higher Sequence Funds
The table shows how LPs’ returns vary with fund sequence. Column Fund 1 indicates investments in the first fund raised by a PE firm. Column
Fund Sequence > 1 represents investments in funds that are not the first ones raised by a PE firm. All results are clustered by fund. Coefficient
estimates and robust standard errors are reported. The dependent variable is the fund IRR. All variables are defined in previous tables. ***, **, and
* indicate significance level at the 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.
                                                    Full Sample                                          1991-1998                                             1991-1998
                                     Fund 1                 Fund Sequence > 1            Fund 1                 Fund Sequence > 1              Fund 1                  Fund Sequence > 1
                               (1)            (2)            (3)         (4)       (5)            (6)            (7)          (8)       (9)             (10)               (11)    (12)
 Endowments                   2.261       1.809            2.333*      2.651**   4.491         3.867         10.092***     9.749***    1.524        0.946              -0.388     -0.296
                             (2.200)     (2.069)           (1.193)     (1.189)   (3.770)       (3.385)         (3.500)      (2.877)   (1.773)       (1.724)           (0.719)     (0.682)
 Corporate pension funds      -0.820      -0.737           -2.210**    -1.708    -0.466        1.354           -5.448       -1.580    -2.522       -4.099**            -0.763     -0.667
                             (2.902)     (2.864)           (1.117)     (1.067)   (4.362)       (3.972)         (3.434)      (2.306)   (1.746)       (1.849)           (0.630)     (0.613)
 Advisors                     0.849       1.106             1.313      1.889*    -0.593        1.910           6.268        6.677*     2.344        0.101              0.357       0.441
                             (1.837)     (2.156)           (1.012)     (1.117)   (3.696)       (3.886)         (3.868)      (3.474)   (1.717)       (1.688)           (0.808)     (0.700)
 Insurance companies          0.999       0.525             -0.589      0.118    1.530         3.521           -5.042       -0.155     1.065        -2.750             0.386       0.357
                             (2.444)     (2.434)           (1.144)     (1.105)   (4.304)       (3.849)         (3.523)      (2.878)   (2.397)       (2.203)           (0.839)     (0.757)
 Banks/Finance companies      0.219       -0.401           -1.986**    -1.080    -0.823        2.323          -6.191**      -2.267     1.992        -1.471             0.043       0.163
                             (1.894)     (1.988)           (0.938)     (0.747)   (3.425)       (3.483)         (2.877)      (1.718)   (2.007)       (1.685)           (0.751)     (0.625)
 Investment firms             1.905       2.077             -0.049      0.435    1.688         4.217           4.252        4.078     3.161**       0.576              0.102       0.094
                             (1.784)     (2.226)           (0.728)     (0.829)   (4.001)       (4.411)         (2.864)      (2.866)   (1.551)       (1.565)           (0.565)     (0.508)
 Others                       0.929       0.702            -2.144*     -0.576    1.427         1.920           -2.712       2.147      3.290        -1.601             0.402       0.902
                             (2.900)     (2.542)           (1.283)     (1.085)   (4.208)       (3.589)         (3.187)      (2.329)   (2.751)       (1.895)           (0.997)     (0.886)
 Log fund size                            -1.369                       -0.591                  -1.002                       0.864                   -0.441                        -0.679
                                         (1.177)                       (0.924)                 (1.812)                      (2.130)                 (1.271)                       (0.851)

 Log LP experience                        0.916                       1.090***                 2.686                        2.550*                  -0.560                        0.494**
                                         (0.808)                       (0.415)                 (2.083)                      (1.320)                 (0.431)                       (0.217)

 Fund sequence                                                          0.521                                               1.542                                                  0.204
                                                                       (0.337)                                              (0.969)                                               (0.285)

 Fund type fixed effect        Yes            Yes            Yes        Yes       Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes       Yes              Yes                Yes     Yes
 Vintage year fixed effect     Yes            Yes            Yes        Yes       Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes       Yes              Yes                Yes     Yes
 LP country fixed effect       No             Yes            No         Yes        No             Yes            No          Yes        No              Yes                No      Yes
 Number of observations       3,344       3,283            11,036      10,801    1,442         1,414           2,243        2,195      1,902        1,869              8,793       8,606
 Adjusted R2                  0.076       0.094             0.210       0.213    0.042         0.079           0.224        0.221      0.248        0.316              0.387       0.397
 Endowments vs. non-
                              1.587       1.414           2.966***    2.945***   4.164         2.436         10.988***    11.406***   -0.322        1.708              -0.438     -0.339
 endowments
                             (2.435)     (2.006)           (1.145)     (1.106)   (4.487)       (3.615)         (3.319)      (3.210)   (1.244)       (1.198)           (0.606)     (0.563)


                                                                                          45
                        Table 9. The Probability of LPs Investing in a Fund with Negative Abnormal Growth

The table shows the probability of an LP type investing in a fund that did not grow as much as expected given its past return (negative abnormal
growth). Two-stage regressions are used to predict this probability. Stage one predicts abnormal growth by estimating the following model with
vintage year fixed effects. The residual term is the abnormal growth measure. Therefore, a negative residual indicates that the fund did not grow as
much as predicted given the preceding fund return. Coefficient estimates and robust standard errors are reported in Panel A.
                                (                        )                                                           (1)
In stage two, Probit models are used to predict the probability of an LP type investing in a fund with negative abnormal growth. The dependent
variable equals one if the residual term from the stage one regression is negative, and zero otherwise. Preceding fund investment is an indicator
variable that equals one if the LP invested in the preceding fund, and zero otherwise. All other variables are defined in previous tables. Marginal
effects and robust standard errors clustered by fund are reported. ***, **, and * indicate significance level at the 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.




                                                                        46
Dependent variable: Indicator variable for whether the investment is in a fund with negative abnormal growth
                                           All Funds                               Venture Funds                             Buyout Funds
                                 (1)            (2)        (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)          (7)            (8)          (9)
                             Full Sample    1991-1998   1999-2006    Full Sample     1991-1998     1999-2006   Full Sample    1991-1998     1999-2006
 Endowments                    0.050*        0.132***     0.024        0.060*        0.164***        0.019       0.009           0.080       -0.014
                               (0.027)        (0.044)    (0.033)       (0.034)        (0.043)       (0.043)      (0.039)        (0.061)      (0.047)
 Corporate pension funds       -0.013         0.041      -0.032         0.022          0.065         0.007       0.015          0.118**      -0.027
                               (0.023)        (0.045)    (0.026)       (0.035)        (0.049)       (0.042)      (0.027)        (0.052)      (0.030)
 Advisors                      -0.035*        0.006      -0.046*       -0.049          0.047        -0.066      -0.063**        -0.077*     -0.064**
                               (0.021)        (0.048)    (0.024)       (0.039)        (0.062)       (0.045)      (0.025)        (0.045)      (0.029)
 Insurance companies         -0.084***        -0.087    -0.080**       -0.084*         -0.041       -0.102*    -0.101***       -0.106**     -0.100**
                               (0.028)        (0.054)    (0.034)       (0.048)        (0.073)       (0.059)      (0.034)        (0.049)      (0.041)
 Banks/Finance companies      -0.055**        -0.061    -0.056**       -0.032          0.016        -0.031     -0.097***        -0.042      -0.113***
                               (0.022)        (0.042)    (0.025)       (0.033)        (0.051)       (0.037)      (0.025)        (0.043)      (0.028)
 Investment firms              -0.028         0.028      -0.038*       -0.027          0.039        -0.036      -0.051**        -0.008      -0.062**
                               (0.018)        (0.037)    (0.021)       (0.029)        (0.046)       (0.033)      (0.022)        (0.043)      (0.025)
 Others                        0.016          0.032       0.016        -0.022          0.064        -0.041       0.001           0.008        0.017
                               (0.030)        (0.049)    (0.036)       (0.047)        (0.059)       (0.059)      (0.035)        (0.052)      (0.042)

 Log fund size               -0.111***        -0.033    -0.127***     -0.143***        0.016       -0.178***   -0.118***        -0.071      -0.128***
                               (0.026)        (0.056)    (0.030)       (0.044)        (0.071)       (0.050)      (0.030)        (0.054)      (0.035)

 Log LP experience            0.001***       0.006**    0.001***        0.001          0.006         0.001       0.001*          0.003        0.001
                               (0.000)        (0.003)    (0.000)       (0.001)        (0.005)       (0.001)      (0.000)        (0.003)      (0.000)

 Preceding fund investment    0.119***        0.046     0.145***      0.111***        0.088*       0.121***     0.108***         0.031      0.136***
                               (0.021)        (0.039)    (0.025)       (0.033)        (0.046)       (0.040)      (0.028)        (0.049)      (0.032)

 Fund type fixed effect         Yes            Yes        Yes             -              -             -            -              -            -

 Vintage year fixed effect      Yes            Yes        Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes
 LP country fixed effect        Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes             Yes          Yes
 Number of observations        10,823         2,326       8,497         4,322           906          3,434       6,501           1,420        5,063
 Pseudo R2                     0.081          0.041       0.100         0.133          0.149         0.134       0.102           0.042        0.103

 Endowments vs. non-
                              0.064**        0.145***     0.037       0.080***       0.139***        0.050       0.049           0.085        0.037
 endowments
                               (0.025)        (0.045)    (0.030)       (0.030)        (0.040)       (0.037)      (0.036)        (0.062)      (0.042)




                                                                       47
                                             Table 10. Returns of Funds with Negative Abnormal Growth

The table relates fund returns to the extent of abnormal growth in fund size from the partnership’s prior fund The dependent variable in all
columns is fund IRR (in percent). The estimation of abnormal growth is defined in Table 9. Panel A reports results using abnormal growth (the
residuals from equation (1) in Table 9) as the independent variable. Panel B reports results using an indicator variable for negative abnormal
growth as the independent variable. Negative abnormal growth indicator equals one if the residual from equation (1) in Table 8 is negative, and
zero otherwise. All other variables are defined in previous tables. Coefficient estimates and robust standard errors clustered by vintage year are
reported. ***, **, and * indicate significance level at the 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.

 Panel A: Dependent variable: Fund IRR(%)
                                              All Funds                              Venture Funds                             Buyout Funds
                                  (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)            (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)           (9)
                              Full Sample     1991-1998    1999-2006   Full Sample     1991-1998     1999-2006   Full Sample    1991-1998     1999-2006
 Abnormal fund growth          -9.571***      -28.028***   -3.800**      -3.239        -27.478**      -0.355       0.803          0.213        -0.851
                                (3.418)        (6.094)      (1.817)      (2.182)        (11.487)      (0.677)      (1.117)       (1.458)       (0.560)
 Intercept                     34.725***      34.725***    -0.337***   32.163***       32.163***     -8.121***   39.850***      39.744***     9.382***
                                (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.729)       (0.000)
 Vintage year fixed effect        Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes
 Number of observations           751            206         545          381             102          279          370            104          266
 Adjusted R2                     0.160          0.048        0.138       0.250           0.176         0.059       0.247          0.260         0.284


 Panel B: Dependent variable: Fund IRR (%)
                                              All Funds                              Venture Funds                             Buyout Funds
                                  (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)            (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)           (9)
                              Full Sample     1991-1998    1999-2006   Full Sample     1991-1998     1999-2006   Full Sample    1991-1998     1999-2006
 Negative abnormal growth
                               7.154***       20.851***      1.884      10.537**       43.843***       0.657       0.213          -3.928        2.227
 indicator
                                (2.755)        (2.729)      (1.553)      (4.947)        (16.444)      (1.382)      (1.985)       (4.012)       (2.249)
 Intercept                     31.148***      24.299***     -1.166*    24.260***        10.241       -8.059***   39.744***      41.814***     9.243***
                                (1.377)        (1.365)      (0.683)      (3.710)        (15.463)      (1.788)     (10.874)       (9.742)       (2.614)
 Vintage year fixed effect        Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes
 Number of observations           751            206         545          381             102          279          370            104          266
 Adjusted R2                     0.155          0.037        0.131       0.252           0.064         0.072       0.260          0.189         0.288




                                                                           48
