                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE INTERWAR HOUSING CYCLE IN THE LIGHT OF 2001-2011:
                     A COMPARATIVE HISTORICAL APPROACH

                                          Alexander J. Field

                                        Working Paper 18796
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18796


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2013




I am grateful for comments from Michael Bordo, Jean-Jacques Dethier, Price Fishback, Fred Foldvary,
Mason Gaffney, Steven Gjerstad, Leslie Hannah, Eric Hilt, Natacha Postel-Vinay, Gary Richardson,
Ken Snowden, Bill Sundstrom, Richard Sylla, Eugene White, Larry White, Gavin Wright, and other
participants at the NBER Universities Research Conference on Housing, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
September 23-24, 2011, presentations at Columbia University and New York University, October
6-7, 2011, at the London School of Economics, October 12, 2011, at Santa Clara University on November
9, 2011, and at the Business History Conference, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, March 30, 2012. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Alexander J. Field. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Interwar Housing Cycle in the Light of 2001-2011: ¸˛A Comparative Historical Approach
Alexander J. Field
NBER Working Paper No. 18796
February 2013
JEL No. E2,E22,E44,N22,N62

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper examines the interwar housing cycle in comparison to what transpired in the United States
between 2001 and 2011. The 1920s experienced a boom in construction and prolonged retardation
in building in the 1930s, resulting in a swing in residential construction’s share of GDP, and its absolute
volume, that was larger than what has taken place in the 2000s. In contrast, there was relatively little
sustained movement in the real price of housing between 1919 and 1941, and the up and down price
movements were remarkably modest, certainly in comparison with more recent experience. The paper
documents the higher degree of housing leverage in 2001-2011. And it documents a rate of foreclosure
on residential housing post 2006 that is likely higher than during the 1930s. It concludes that balance
sheet problems resulting from a prior residential housing boom pose greater obstacles to recovery
today than they did in the interwar period.


Alexander J. Field
Department of Economics
Santa Clara University
Santa Clara, CA 95053
afield@scu.edu
                  The Interwar Housing Cycle in the Light of 2001-2011:
                           A Comparative Historical Approach




     The financial crisis of 2008-2009 and the Great Recession it precipitated forced, or

should force a major rethinking among macroeconomists about the origin, prevention,

and potential mitigation of such events. One of the conclusions that emerges from a

considered examination of the run up to and the fallout from the event is the limitation of

framing the policy issues solely in terms of whether Chairman Bernanke and the Federal

Reserve System, as well as President Obama and the Congress, did the right thing when

the crisis hit. Most observers believe that the response to the immediate crisis was

correct in the sense that the appropriate remedy, once the seizing up of credit markets

began, was indeed large scale fiscal and monetary stimulus.

     As the Fed reduced short term rates close to the zero lower bound, it almost tripled

the size of its balance sheet, and this ongoing monetary accommodation was augmented

by the Treasury’s Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP, October 2008) and, beginning

in February of 2009, the fiscal stimulus associated with the American Recovery and

Reinvestment Act. The Republican takeover of the House of Representatives in the

November 2010 midterm elections ended prospects for additional fiscal stimulus, at least

from the expenditure side, but the Fed’s expansionary monetary stance continued as it

sustained its expanded balance sheet, purchasing, through its programs of quantitative

easing, longer term securities as some of the troubled assets acquired at the height of the

crisis matured.




                                             2
     Analysis of the appropriate response to the crisis undoubtedly drew inspiration from

the experience of the country during the Great Depression. Two of the key policymakers,

Christina Romer and Ben Bernanke were and are both serious students of the Great

Depression. Bernanke is famous for saying, at a 2002 conference honoring Milton

Friedman on his 90th birthday, “Regarding the Great Depression, you're right, we did it.

We're very sorry…. we won't do it again” (Bernanke 2002). Or to put it slightly more

accurately, we won’t not do it again, since Friedman and Schwartz’s (1963) brief against

the Fed was not their action, but their inaction in the face of bank failures and the

consequent shrinkage in the country’s money supply.

     But this approach to thinking about the lessons of either the Great Recession or the

Great Depression, by focusing only on the policy response once the crisis emerged full

blown, may dissuade us from examining the process whereby balance sheets became

increasingly levered and increasingly risky over time, in other words the process, which

may extend over several years or even decades, whereby an economy can become

increasingly financially fragile. Ignoring this aspect of the run up to the most recent

episode makes it difficult to understand why or how the collapse of an asset price bubble

in housing, and the consequent reduction of spending in an overbuilt sector could have

threatened such catastrophic consequences for the U.S. and world economy. To be sure,

residential construction is an important component of gross private domestic investment,

but it still contributes a small portion of overall planned spending. Even allowing for a

generous multiplier, it is hard to see on the face of it how this relatively small tail could

have had the potential to bring down a much larger economic dog.




                                               3
     The answer, as I think is appreciated more than was true prior to 2008, is the

significance of balance sheets, and in particular the ways in which high leverage in both

the financial and household sectors can generate tight interconnections and the potential

for domino effects (systemic impacts) as well as, in the context of house price declines,

significant wealth and liquidity effects. To focus only on Fed action or inaction once the

crisis hit draws attention away from the multiple acts of legislative and regulatory

commission and omission that can allow financial fragility to grow in the first place. It is

much clearer now that balance sheets, debt, and leverage can make a big difference in

how an economy responds to an asset price and/or spending shock. The financial

fragility of an economy can spell the difference between whether the system shrugs off

the shock or potentially goes into a tailspin.

     If the history of the Great Depression enriched our understanding of and influenced

the policy response to the Great Recession, it is also true that the reverse can and is

happening. In particular, post-mortems on policy issues associated with the Great

Recession should cause us to reexamine the shared beliefs among many (aside from real

business cycle proponents) that the Great Depression was indeed principally caused by

the failure of adequate Federal Reserve response. The thesis that massive monetary

accommodation in the early 1930s could have almost entirely eliminated the output cost

of the Great Depression needs to be reconsidered. Balance sheet considerations were

likely implicated in the slow recovery then as well as now, and might have resulted in

persistent output losses, even in the presence of different monetary policy. In the Great

Recession, the Fed drove short rates close to the zero lower bound, and also engaged, in

sustaining a balance sheet that increased almost by a factor of three, in buying large




                                                 4
amounts of longer term Treasury securities. It is not clear how much more monetary

accommodation could have been applied. And yet, in the (April 27, 2011) Fed release,

unemployment was forecast in 2013, a full five years after the worst months of the crisis,

to still be in the 6.8 to 7.2 percent range (central tendency), with some within the Fed

projecting an unemployment rate of 8.4 percent (Federal Reserve Board, 2011a).

     If massive monetary accommodation did not avoid a very large output loss in 2008-

2013, we must reconsider whether in fact, as conventional wisdom seems to hold,

massive monetary accommodation in 1929-33 would have avoided most of the output

loss associated with those worst years of the Depression. The more recent monetary

accommodation made a difference and without it the cumulative output loss would likely

have been larger. Similarly, more Fed accommodation in the early 1930s would probably

have meant a less severe Depression. The question on the table, however, is whether that

was all that would have been needed to avoid a significant cumulative output loss.

     Carmen Reinhardt and Kenneth Rogoff (2009) provide compelling historical

evidence that recessions associated with financial crises require significantly longer for

recovery than those that don’t. And financial crises involving institutions that are not just

illiquid but effectively insolvent (because of a prior history of poor and/or risky lending,

augmented in some cases by fraud) pose a much more serious policy challenge. We need

to accept the lessons of recent history, and of those documented by Reinhart and Rogoff,

and of Richard Koo’s (2009) analysis of Japan, and the International Monetary Fund’s

2012 survey, and appreciate that highly leveraged balance sheets in the financial,

nonfinancial, and/or household sectors can make a big difference both in the resilience of




                                              5
an economy when faced with an asset price or spending shock, and on the effectiveness

of monetary policy in avoiding a large output loss.1

      But if balance sheet issues hindered recovery in the 1930s, we also need to ask

whether housing was implicated in the same ways and to the same degree as has been

true in the Great Recession. In 2007-2012, bad real estate lending clearly impaired

financial sector balance sheets more than did poorly performing stock market related

loans. Was this true as well in the 1920s? In other words, compared to more recent

experience, and other categories of lending, how much did residential mortgage lending

in the 1920s contribute to weakened bank balance sheets, making them vulnerable in the

1930s to runs, insolvency, and failure? Secondly, at the level of household balance

sheets, was bad residential mortgage debt linked in some direct way to the anomalous

drop in consumer durables spending that marked the initial stages of the economic

downturn in 1929 and 1930 (Temin, 1976)? Or did this have more to do with the loss of

stock market wealth (Mishkin, 1978) or increased burden of consumer loans (Olney,

1999), or an effect running from increased post-crash stock market volatility (Romer,

1990)?

       In this paper I will tred a narrow line, arguing on the one hand that we cannot

understand the onset, depth, and duration of the Great Depression without giving as much

attention to balance sheet issues as we are now giving in the analysis of more recent

events. At the same time I will maintain that the residential housing cycle, and lending

associated with it, played a smaller role in the interwar business cycle compared to what

1
 Chapter 3 of the IMF’s 2012 World Economic Outlook offers an overview of international and to some
extent historical evidence that housing slumps associated with prior run ups in household debt tend to be
more severe and require more time for recovery. Koo (2009) emphasizes how high degrees of leverage
contributed to years of slow economic growth in Japan, although the emphasis in the Japanese case is on
corporate and bank as opposed to household balance sheets.


                                                     6
has been true in the first cycle of the twenty first century. To argue that housing was at

the epicenter of the downturn in 1929-31, as it was in 2007-2009, and as Gjerstad and

Smith (2011) have recently maintained, would require significant changes in what have

become established narratives of the origin of the downturn in the interwar period. That

doesn’t mean the claim is wrong, but rather that it needs to be carefully considered.

      There are many similarities between the Great Depression and Great Recession, not

least of which is that each was preceded by asset price bubbles (boom and bust) in both

equities and real estate. But there were also important differences. The timelines are

roughly inverted.2 In the 1920s a residential real estate boom peaked in 1926, although it

was followed by a boom in apartment building and one in central business construction

that extended into the early 1930s. The stock market boom was particularly strong in

1928 and 1929, and the crash in equity values is often taken as symbolic of the start of

the Great Depression. Although the casual link has been questioned – scholars have

pointed to the fact that industrial production began to decline in the summer of 1929, or

claimed that stock ownership was concentrated among a small portion of the population,3

or that the market recovered considerably in the first four months of 1930, or that big

declines in output and employment didn’t begin until months after the crash – the




2
  Another difference is that net inflows of foreign capital, an important factor in the 2000s, were entirely
absent in the 1920s, when the US, running current account surpluses, was a net capital exporter.
3
  Romer (1990) suggests that less than 2 percent of American households held stock at the time of the
crash, citing Galbraith (1955, p. 78). But the empirical basis for this assertion is questionable. Galbraith
cited a 1934 Senate investigation, in which 29 exchanges reported 1,548,707 customer accounts. Assuming
no more than one account per household, and with approximately 30 million occupied housing units in the
country in 1930, this is closer to 5 percent than 2 per cent. I am grateful to Gavin Wright for drawing my
attention to the unresolved question of how extensive stock ownership was at this time.


                                                     7
October 1929 drop and subsequent downward trajectory retain a central place in

narratives of origin.4

      In the Great Recession, the sequence was roughly reversed. The boom in equities,

particularly Tech based securities, began to collapse in 2000. This was followed,

however, by a major boom in the prices and construction of residential housing, which

peaked in early 2006. A commercial construction boom followed, as had been the case in

the 1920s.5

      But whereas the real economy appears to have largely shrugged off the end of the

residential real estate bubble in 1926, that does not appear to have been the case with the

stock market crash of 1929 and the slow, sickening slide to a trough in 1932, marked as it

was by some of the largest one day percentage increases in stock prices. And whereas

the real economy appears to have largely shrugged off the collapse of the Tech stock

bubble in 2000-2001, that does not appear to have been the case with the real estate

collapse that began in early 2006 and continued at least through early 2012. This

asymmetrical real economy response to asset price deflation is associated with almost

diametrically opposed opportunities for leveraged asset acquisition in housing and

equities during the run ups to the two crises.6



4
  See, e.g. Mishkin, 1978, who emphasized wealth and liquidity effects, Romer, 1990, who argued that
post-1929 stock market volatility adversely affected consumer durables purchases, or Eichengreen and
Mitchener, 2004, p. 190, who reference stock market effects on balance sheets throughout the economy.
5
  The S&P 500 index temporarily exceeded its 2000 peak in 2007, although it remained, in inflation
adjusted terms, about 18 percent below it. In November of 2011 it was, in real terms, still close to 40
percent below its year 2000 high point. The NASDAQ index, which peaked at 5,408 in March of 2000,
remained in inflation adjusted terms, almost 60 percent below its peak.
6
  The asset side wealth effects of the dot.com and real estate busts were of similar magnitude, the decline in
stock values actually somewhat larger. Between December 1999 and September 2002 approximately $10
trillion of stock market value disappeared (Gjerstad and Smith, 2009). By the end of 2011, the housing
crash had erased about $7 trillion dollars of house value (the comparison between these losses does not
factor in the mild inflation that characterized the 2000s). Although the asset side loss from stock market
decline was somewhat larger than that associated with the housing bust, the real economy damage from the


                                                      8
      During the 1920s, mortgages commonly required 50 percent down payments, were

generally nonamortized, and were for relatively short periods (five years or less). In the

case of federally chartered commercial banks, these limits were legally mandated. Other

lenders exercised restraint for some of the same reasons national banks had been

restricted in their ability to lend on housing: real estate had an historical record as a very

risky asset. As the result of innovations in the 1920s by building and loans, then

responsible for more than half of institutional lending on residential housing, it did

become possible in some instances for borrowers to obtain a second mortgage and

thereby, through this mechanism, increase leverage (Snowden, 2010). But not all

building and loans were enthusiastic about the practice – the larger ones opposed it – and

the overall norm remained short mortgages with modest loan to value ratios.

      In stocks, however, the situation was almost exactly the reverse. Particularly in the

early and middle twenties, one could buy stocks for as little as 10 percent down, with the

remainder borrowed. The stock purchaser typically received margin from his broker,

who in turn financed this by securing a brokers’ loan from a bank or, in the late 1920s,

directly from a corporation or private individual. If the stock price declined such that

borrower’s equity fell below an agreed upon minimum (which might be above 0), the

borrower added margin or the lender sold out the position.7



latter was worse, suggesting that a focus on the liability side of balance sheets is the key to understanding
why this was so.
7
  White (1990) argues that credit was not “pushed” on borrowers, but rather “pulled” by speculative fever
in the stock market. His evidence is that under pressure from the Fed, member banks in 1928 and 1929 cut
back on brokers’ loans, this lacuna was, in the presence of very strong demand, quickly filled by private
investors, corporations, and foreign banks. Rates on brokers’ loans rose during 1928 and 1929, along with
the general level of interest rates, as the Fed allowed increases in the face of a rise in the transactions
demand for cash associated with the upsurge in stock trading (Field, 1984). The Fed rationalized these rate
increases, along with member bank restrictions on brokers’ loans, as part of a program that would help
control speculation in the stock market. Rapaport and White (1994) summarize evidence that margins rose
from 10-25 percent in the early to mid-1920s to 40-50 percent in 1928 and especially 1929. Although a


                                                      9
       In 1934, following the worst years of the Great Depression, the Securities and

Exchange Act gave the Federal Reserve authority to set margin requirements on stocks.

Since 1975 these have been fixed, for new purchases by individuals, at 50 percent. When

the tech bubble collapsed, many investors did see their balance sheets shrink.

Nevertheless, because the acquisition of stocks had, to a lesser degree than in the 1920s,

been financed with borrowed money, the collapse of the price bubble had lower potential

to transmit distress to other entities (financial institutions) that, indirectly or directly, held

equities on the left hand (asset) side of their balance sheets.8 The end of the tech boom



brokers’ loan was in principle collateralized, but creditors still bore risk because of the possibility that in
price freefall, a lender might not be able to sell quickly enough to secure his initial investment. Higher
margins partially compensated for this. Rapaport and White also show that the premium on brokers’ time
loans rose relative to Treasury rates, also consistent with the likelihood that lenders had increasing concerns
about a possible crash. There can be little doubt, nevertheless, that through whatever channels, and at
whatever price, credit, widely available, supported the run up in stock purchases and prices, as evidenced
by the close correlation between outstanding brokers’ loans and security prices (White, 1990, figure 4, p.
75). This availability stands in contrast with the opportunities for leveraged acquisition of equities during
the Tech boom of the second half of the 1990s. Thus I cannot completely accept White’s assertion that
“Brokers’ loans did not contribute to the stock market boom” (White 1990, p. 76) or its aftermath.
8
  Mishkin (1978) argued that the stock market decline between 1929 and 1932 affected household demand
through both wealth and liquidity effects. Romer (1990) questioned the empirical significance of the
wealth effect, although she did not directly address the liquidity effect. The wealth effect is relatively easy
to understand. Typical econometric estimates are that a dollar decline in household wealth will reduce
consumption by 4 or 5 cents. The liquidity mechanism is more subtle and complex. It predicts that if
financial liabilities rise, or if the illiquid portion of assets rises (because a greater share of assets are now in
consumer durables or real estate), then demand for new durables and house ownership may decline. The
composition of the household balance sheet, not just net worth, therefore has the potential to influence the
amount and composition of consumption (new house construction is considered part of investment, but has
associated with it the acquisition of many consumer durables). Leveraged acquisition by households of
stocks, as opposed to real estate or consumer durables, was, however, less likely to generate liquidity
effects, because of the nature of brokers’ loan contracts. If prices fell, the borrower could add margin to
retain the position, but in cases of rapid price decline, the more likely outcome was that the lender simply
sold out the position, removing the stock from the asset side of the balance sheet but at the same time
extinguishing the associated liability. The household would experience a loss in wealth, but would not
necessarily be made insolvent. The more damaging effects of leveraged stock acquisitions during the
1920s may be found on bank balance sheets, since banks were the ultimate source of most brokers’ loans,
and when prices fell too rapidly for collateral to be recovered by sale of the securing asset, it was banks that
took the hit in terms of a loan gone bad. Banks had considerable exposure. On December 31, 1929, loans
on securities comprised 39 percent of all member bank loans, more than triple the amount of real estate
loans, and loans on securities remained substantially above real estate loans throughout the worst years of
the Depression (Banking and Monetary Statistics, Table 19, p. 76). Bank creditors (depositors and other
lenders to the bank) did not have collateralized loans that could be extinguished by simply passing the now
devalued asset on to them, but rather obligations due that were fixed in nominal terms. A collapse of stock
prices could therefore more easily contribute to bank as opposed to household insolvency, and did. This


                                                        10
also meant some retardation in the acquisition of IT equipment which, through multiplier

effects, also influenced consumption spending and the retardation of GDP growth. From

a comparative perspective, however, the 2001 recession saw few financial failures and

was of mild severity and duration. Only in the quarterly data (2001:1) do we see a slight

one quarter decline in real GDP (see http://www.bea.gov, NIPA Table 1.1.6).

       In contrast, the collapse of the real estate bubble9 starting in 2006 set in motion

rows of falling dominoes that threatened to bring the U.S. and world economy to its

knees.

       These observations suggest that, contrary to our pre-2008 complacency about how

real estate acquisition is financed, we should have been much more concerned. From the

standpoint of the individual house buyer, the old mantra in real estate was that three

things mattered: location, location, and location. From the standpoint of the threats posed

to the macro economy, one could perhaps alter this to read leverage, leverage, and

leverage. This is a matter of continuing and more general concern. In spite of the

passage of the Dodd-Frank bill in July of 2010, there has to date been little movement to

alter the incentives that even bigger and more interconnected financial institutions have to

make risky bets with borrowed money.10 As a consequence the likelihood that the U.S.


channel was much weaker in the stock crash of the early 2000s, as evidenced by the limited number of
financial institution failures that ensued. One should note however that, in the absence of deposit insurance,
when a bank failed or had to write off bad loans, households suffered, because ultimately households were
either creditors of the bank (as depositors or other lenders) or the owners of its equity. These additional
negative wealth effects could represent a further adverse influence on consumption spending. The
consequences of financial crisis in the early 1930s, in which large number of banks failed, went beyond
these wealth effects, however, since failures disrupted the process of financial intermediation with
persisting deleterious effects.
9
  By a bubble I mean an increase in asset prices unrelated to improvements in fundamentals. It is always
easier to see and say this after the fact, but the unprecedented increase in the ratio of house prices to median
household income in the 2000s could not continue indefinitely.
10
   The failure in November 2011 of Jon Corzine’s firm, MF-Global, was a stark reminder that a newer and
more effective regulatory regime, one less subject to exploitation of loopholes and political manipulation,
remained most definitely a work in progress. Corzine had placed highly leveraged bets (using leverage


                                                      11
economy will face a larger and potentially even more catastrophic financial crisis in the

next fifteen years is probably similar to the likelihood that the Bay Area will experience a

major earthquake in that time period. When that new financial crisis hits, once again the

government and taxpayers will be over the barrel in terms of a choice between allowing a

catastrophic depression or coming up with relief in a magnitude that will likely approach

a third or more of GDP. Unless politics pushes us over a cliff, taxpayer funds will again

be used to bail out financial institutions in one way or another. Indeed, this prospect may

pose as much threat to the long run fiscal solvency of the U.S. government as do the more

frequently talked about needs to increase taxes and control the rise of spending on

medical care or in other areas.

      As we try to parse the lessons from the most recent cycle, there is much to be

learned by going back and reexamining the history of housing during the interwar period.

In particular, it would be useful to understand better why the end of the residential real

estate boom in 1926 appears to have had such a limited adverse effect on the real

economy, as compared to what happened in the 2000s. At the same time, we need to

consider why private sector construction remained so depressed for such a long time

during the 1930s. Twenty years ago I argued that this was principally due to the physical

and legal detritus of premature subdivision in the 1920s (Field 1992), and that in the

postwar period, housing booms have created fewer obstacles to recovery from this


ratios of more than 30 to 1 -- higher than investment banks, somewhat chastened by recent past events,
were then risking) that troubled European sovereign debt would recover. Because of the very slim equity
cushion, it did not take much of a continued slide in the prices of these bonds to push the firm into
bankruptcy. Corzine also took advantage of weakening restrictions on what trading firms could do with
supposedly segregated customers’ accounts (see Burrough, Cohan, and McLean, 2012), and had personally
intervened to help fight back efforts by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission to tighten these. A
footnote of interest to academics: TIAA-CREF was the fifth largest shareholder in MF-Global, and a major
participant in the consortium that lent the firm hundreds of millions of dollars several months prior to its
failure. See http://blogs.wsj.com/deals/2011/10/31/mf-global-bankruptcy-the-biggest-losers/.


                                                    12
source, due to the development of zoning and land use regulation. That is likely to be

true as well for the most recent boom, since land use regulation, unlike that applicable to

financial institutions, was less affected by the deregulatory enthusiasms of the 1980s and

1990s (see also Field 2011, chs. 10 and 11).11

      On the other hand, leverage, debt overhang, and foreclosure played and continue to

play a major role in amplifying the impact of the housing bust in 2006-2011, and

continue to pose obstacles to full economic recovery (Financial Crisis Inquiry

Commission, 2011). An open question historically is how much the debt overhang of the

residential housing boom of the 1920s, as compared to the direct legacy of premature

subdivision, contributed to slow recovery during the 1930s. Looking at the two booms

using a comparative approach can give us some perspective on this.

      What happened in the 2000s was quite different in a number of respects from what

happened in the interwar period. The epicenter of the problems causing the initial

downturn in 2007 was clearly housing, which most argue was not the case in the

Depression (but see Gjerstad and Smith, 2011). And whereas Irving Fisher’s debt

deflation mechanism clearly affected mortgaged housing between 1929 and 1933, the

problems in the sector in the recent episode were caused only marginally by increasing

debt burdens due to deflation. Although Bernanke and other policy makers feared more

severe deflation, in part as a result of their actions the rate of change of the CPI for all


11
  The implications of the failure of construction spending to revive are significant. Throughout the 1920s,
gross investment in equipment, residential structures, and nonresidential structures were each of similar
magnitude. In 1937, both construction categories remained substantially short of equipment investment. I
calculate that had these three categories retained their rough equality with the rates exhibited by equipment
investment, and assuming a multiplier of 1.78, GDP in 1937 would have been $102.2 billion rather than the
actual $91.9 billion. I estimate potential output in that year at $110.9 billion (all magnitudes in 1937
dollars). According to these calculations, therefore, more than half the output gap remaining in 1937 can
be accounted for by the failure of construction to revive. The contribution of the residential housing
shortfall considered alone is about a third. For details, see Field, 2011, p. 271.


                                                     13
urban consumers went negative only in 2009, declining at .37 percent per year, as

compared with 3.8 percent growth in 2008, and returning to positive territory (1.6 percent

ruse) in 2010. This is to be compared with the 8 percent per year deflation that

characterized 1929-33.12

      Bad mortgage debt contributed directly to failures of building and loans, the

provider of the majority of institutionally financed mortgages during the 1920s, and this

bears some relationship to the ways in which housing travails ended up threatening

system-wide damage to the economy by threatening the solvency of financial institutions

in the 2007-2011 period. But the argument (Gjerstad and Smith, 2011) that balance sheet

issues associated with housing were central both to the initial downturn in the Great

Depression and to the slow recovery must overcome the long lag of several years

between when the residential housing boom ended (1926) and the beginning of the

downturn in the real economy in 1929. It must also overcome the relatively small share

of institutional lending on residential housing contributed by commercial banks: a fifth or

less prior to 1937 (Morton, 1956, table C-2, p. 170).

      We have abundant historical evidence that commercial bank failures can pose a

systemic threat to an economy. It is less clear that this would have been so with building

and loans. Such institutions did not issue demand deposits, and so their failure could not

reduce the money supply. Moreover, unlike commercial banks, they did not typically

borrow from or lend to other financial institutions, and thus contributed little to the

interconnections among financial sector balance sheets that can facilitate contagion.



12
  Homeowners in the most recent episode faced increasing real debt burdens, but this was more typically
due to their use of “innovative” financial products such as negative amortization loans with low teaser rates
that subsequently “reset.”.


                                                     14
      On the other hand, there is little doubt that bad real estate lending contributed to the

vulnerability and failure of specific commercial banks, particularly state chartered banks,

which faced fewer constraints on their lending in this area than did their nationally

chartered counterparts. Postel-Vinay (2011) has found, based on longitudinal analysis of

balance sheet data for Chicago area state banks, that real estate lending in the 1920s

influenced which banks were vulnerable to failure in the early 1930s. In particular, as did

Wicker (1980), she disputes the view that bank runs were simply liquidity events inspired

by irrational fear, crises that could have been averted by temporary intervention from the

Fed. She suggests instead that most failed banks were insolvent, and that they were so in

particular because of bad real estate lending. In other words she tells a story – admittedly

one based on the Chicago data alone -- that bears analogues to the 2000s, and is in this

sense supportive of what Gjerstad and Smith are trying to advance.

       Indeed, it sometimes seems that wherever and whenever one digs into the failure of

a commercial bank during the Depression, the words “bad real estate lending” are almost

sure to follow. This is true for the famous case of the Bank of the United States (see

Lucia, 1985; O’Brien, 1992; Trescott, 1992), although loans on stock, in particular loans

to affiliates and others to support holding the bank’s own stock, were also implicated in

its failure.13 Bad real estate loans were also prominent in the collapse of the Bain group

of banks in Chicago in June 1931, which spread to the Forman banks (Guglielmo, 2011,

p. 35). A third case in point is the failure of the Tennessee based banking empire of

Caldwell and Company, which figures prominently in the Gjerstad and Smith narrative.




13
  Temin (1976, p. 92) also attributed the failure of the Bank of the United States, to bad loans, particularly
real estate loans.


                                                      15
Wicker (1980) attributed the failure of Caldwell and 120 other banks to poor loans and

investments made in the 1920s (1980, p. 572). ).

     Still, categories such as “real estate lending”, or “urban mortgages” include loans

not only on residential housing, but also on commercial and industrial property; the focus

here is mainly on the comparative contribution of the residential housing cycle to

recession/depression. Caldwell’s problems, for example, appear to have been largely in

commercial real estate and municipal investment complementary to it rather than strictly

residential lending (Tennessee Encyclopedia, 2011).

     Wicker saw his interpretation as supporting Friedman and Schwartz (1963) in what

was then an ongoing debate with Temin (1976). But Wicker’s analysis is really quite

inconsistent with the narrative Friedman and Schwartz advanced. Friedman and Schwartz

downplayed the extent to which failing banks were insolvent as a result of a prior history

of risky or poorly selected loans and investments, emphasizing instead that the banking

panics were almost entirely liquidity events. This is particularly evident in their

characterization of the failure of the Bank of the United States, which they considered a

solvent bank, attributing the fact that it was not rescued in part to anti-Semitism.

Friedman and Schwartz mention, although they do not pursue further, the possibility that

“the great surge in bank failures that characterized the first banking crisis after October

1930 may … have resulted from poor loans and investments made in the twenties”

(Temin, 1976, p. 85, and Friedman and Schwartz, 1963, p. 355).

     As does Wicker, Guglielmo (2011) links poor lending in the 1920s to vulnerability

in the 1930s, attributing a weakening of Illinois state bank portfolios to the drying up of

opportunities to make short term commercial loans – as many corporations shifted from




                                             16
debt to equity financing. To make up for lost business, he suggests, banks shifted into

loans backed by real estate or stock. Although such loans may have been viewed as safe

at the time they were made, they turned out, ex post, to be quite risky. Unlike

commercial loans, neither category was discountable at the Fed. In the case of real estate,

the relatively low loan to value ratios of 1920s loans did not end up protecting bank

collateral as effectively as may have appeared to have been the case when they were

originated, largely due to the perhaps unexpectedly high cost of foreclosure. Similarly,

loans on stock (e.g., brokers loans), although championed in the 1920s as almost as liquid

as cash, turned out not always to be so when the free fall of equity prices made it

impossible to sell out fast enough to recover collateral. And, of course, unconstrained by

Glass-Steagall, commercial banks were exposed because they could take large positions

in equities, holding them either for their own account or for subsequent sale to

investors.14

       There is therefore considerable evidence linking bad lending in the 1920s,

including bad real estate lending, to financial institution vulnerability in the 1930s,

suggesting that failures, which were already high in the 1920s and rose much further in

the 1930s, were not pure liquidity events but often involved institutions driven to

insolvency by a prior history of risky lending. This suggests strong parallels with the

2000s, and would again seem to provide support for the Gjerstad/Smith position. While

acknowledging the importance of this dynamic in understanding the interwar cycle, I will

nevertheless continue to make the case that the residential housing cycle in the 1920s was

not the epicenter of the Great Depression in the way it so clearly has been for the Great

14
  Thus bank exposure to equities could be found both in the loans and in the investments portions of their
balance sheets. In contrast, for reasons discussed in the text, the exposure of commercial banks to real
estate was more limited. This was particularly the case for federally chartered banks.


                                                    17
Recession. Particularly for federally chartered banks, lending on stocks was considerably

more important than lending on real estate (see footnote 9). To the degree that real estate

lending was implicated in bank failures in the 1920s, and it was considerable, the loans

involved were farm mortgages, rather than loans on residential real estate per se (Alston,

Grove, and Wheelock, 1994).

      It is indeed tempting to conclude that the 1920s were like the 2000s, and that the

foundations for the Depression were established in housing in the 1920s. To some degree

this was no doubt true. As I have previously argued, premature subdivision in the 1920s

posed legal and infrastructural impediments to the revival of house construction in the

1930s (Field, 1992). But the financial groundwork differed in important ways. In the

earlier period a smaller fraction of houses was mortgaged, and loan to value ratios were

lower – in other words the sector was much less levered. Bad real estate loans adversely

affected building and loan societies (forerunners of savings and loans), but their failures

had little systemic impact. In spite of the role that poor real estate (and in general poor

and in some cases fraudulent) lending played in notable bank failures in the 1930s, the

fact remains that commercial bank holdings of institutional mortgages on one to four

family houses never rose above 20 percent of the total until 1937 (Morton, 1956, table C-

2).

      Because of a history of wild real estate booms and busts prior to the Civil War, the

National Banking Act (1864) tightly restricted the loans national banks could make on

land or housing. Although these prohibitions were weakened in the face of competition

from state chartered institutions, total lending on mortgages by federally chartered

commercial banks remained very low until the second decade of the twentieth century.




                                              18
On June 4, 1913, real estate loans accounted for just .7 percent of national bank assets

(Behrens, 1952, p. 16).

       Loosening began with the Federal Reserve Act (1913), which for the first time

allowed loans on farmland with loan to value not to exceed 50 percent and a period of

time not to exceed five years, provided such loans in the aggregate did not exceed 25

percent of bank capital and surplus or a third of time deposits. 1916 legislation went

somewhat further, freeing national banks to lend on nonfarm real estate for a period of

time not to exceed one year, again with a maximum 50 percent loan to value. The one

year restriction was serious: prior to the McFadden Act, many commercial bank

mortgage loans were effectively demand loans after the first year. The McFadden Act

(1927) increased the allowable term on nonfarm mortgages to 5 years with the total

amount of such loans not to exceed 50 percent of time deposits. In most cases

commercial banks could not lend across state lines, and indeed were restricted to lending

on real estate within 100 miles of the bank’s principal place of business.

     State chartered banks did not face the same restrictions in the 1920s, perhaps one

reason their failure rates were so much higher in the 1930s. Still, even with more liberal

real estate lending on the part of state banks, total commercial bank lending as a fraction

of institutional lending on one to four family houses did not rise above 20 percent until

1937. The rise at that point was partly the result of an amendment to the Federal Reserve

Act in 1935 that allowed national banks to make ten year loans, with up to 60 percent

loan to value, if the loan was sufficiently amortized to reduce principal by at least 40

percent within ten years. This was part of a coordinated program of mortgage

liberalization advanced during the New Deal, reflected in the establishment of the Federal




                                             19
Housing Authority in 1934 and the Federal National Mortgage Association in 1938.

These legislative and policy initiatives led ultimately to the thirty year fully amortized

fixed rate instrument that became common after the Second World War.

     Finally, although mortgage backed securities appeared in the 1920s, their

development was much less advanced than became the case in the 2000s (White, 2009,

figure 14). During the 1920s they were largely limited to pools of mortgages on

apartments or other commercial properties, as opposed to first mortgages on owner

occupied houses. (Goetzmann and Newman, 2010). Robert J. Gordon has noted that

more skyscrapers higher than 250 feet tall were built in New York between 1922 and

1931 than in any ten year period before or since. Securitization and other innovations

played a significant role in financing this capital formation, and the balance sheet

consequences, in terms of the duration of the interwar cycle, remain to be investigated.

But this dynamic is distinct from what we normally understand as the residential housing

cycle, and is not the central focus of this paper.

     Turning now from financial sector to household sector balance sheets, we can

consider other channels through which asset price deflation might have contributed to the

propagation of the Great Depression. In the presence of a central bank with an

asymmetric commitment to price stability, and thus in the presence of deflation, even the

moderate (relative to the 2000s) expansion of debt in housing that took place during the

1920s could have contributed, through the debt deflation mechanism, to declines in

demand, particularly for durables and houses themselves. Mishkin’s breakdown of the

household balance sheet during the Depression shows mortgage liabilities increasing in

real terms from $29.6 billion in 1929 to $33.6 billion in 1930 to $36.9 billion in 1931 to




                                              20
$40.5 billion in 1932. He shows security loans jumping in real terms from $16.4 billion

in 1929 to $21.6 billion in 1930, before falling off to $17.4 billion in 1931 and $12.4

billion in 1932. Consumer credit liabilities (for automobiles for example) increase from

$10.1 billion in 1929 to $12 billion in 1930 to $12.3 billion in 1931 to $11.3 billion in

1932 (Mishkin, 1978, p. 921; all figures in 1958 dollars). These numbers suggest that the

biggest negative shock coming from the liabilities side of the household balance sheet

between 1929 and 1930 was the increase in the real value of security loans: $5.2 billion.

The increase in the real value of real estate liabilities, $4 billion, was about a fourth less.

The stock of real estate debt, however, was larger than securities and consumer credit

debt combined, and persisted at high, and in the case of real estate lending rising levels

much longer (in part perhaps because of less adequate resolution mechanisms).

      Mishkin’s data suggest that the liability side wealth effects on consumption

emanating from stock market acquisition in the 1920s were stronger than those from real

estate debt in producing the initial shocks that led to the downturn in the economy

between 1929 and 1930. However, there are unresolved issues about the data underlying

his analysis of equities. Mishkin’s table A-1 gives as the source for the stock market loan

data column 4 of table L-25 in Goldmsith, (1955, vol. 1. p. 410). That table shows

nominal commercial bank loans for purchasing or acquiring securities to have fallen from

$8.278 billion in 1929 to $7.251 billion in 1930 (these are listed in the table as end of

year values).15 That is what one would have expected to have happened if, in the

presence of rapid price declines, lenders sold out the positions of their leveraged


15
  Banking and Monetary Statistics (Table 19, p. 76) shows end of year member bank loans on securities
falling from $10.148 billion in 1929 to $9.439 billion in 1930, although the average level of brokers loans
was higher in 1930 than in 1929. Even a generous allowance for deflation cannot generate the increase in
real value of loans on securities reported by Mishkin.


                                                     21
borrowers, thus extinguishing the loans. The only circumstance in which we might have

expected nominal loans to have increased is if, in the face of collapsing stock values,

many borrowers met their margin calls and even acquired new stock on margin in the

expectation that price declines represented a buying opportunity. This is possible,

especially given that most of the largest one day price increases in the market took place

between 1929 and 1932. But it seems on the face of it much less likely than the first

scenario, which would be consistent with the numbers in Goldsmith.

     The problem with reconciling these numbers with Mishkin (1978) is that there is

much too little deflation between 1929 and 1930 to turn these nominal decreases into real

increases, let alone real increases of the magnitude reported in his table 2. The stock

market crash may have adversely affected spending in such areas as consumer durables

because of a reduction in stock market values or because of the influence of volatility on

perceived uncertainty, as emphasized by Romer. It appears questionable, however, at the

household level, whether the balance sheet effects of declining stock values on the asset

side was reinforced by a rising real value of stock market loans on the liabilities side. As

footnote 9 suggests, however, the situation differed for banks, which faced substantial

exposure due to their loans on securities.

     Between 1929 and 1933 the wealth effects of declines in the values of equities were

considerably more serious than were those associated with declines in the value of real

estate. On the asset side of the household sector balance sheet, corporate stocks in 1929

were worth more than real estate ($128.8 billion vs. $109.7 billion), a situation no longer

the case in 1933 ($50.9 billion vs $81.7 billion) (data are nominal and are from Woolf

and Marley, 1989, table 15.A.1, p. 817). Stocks fell in value more than real estate, and




                                             22
much more than consumer prices, and so the asset side wealth effect was quite large.

Wolff and Marley give a 1929 value of total equities held of $235.4 billion. That

includes unincorporated business equity, trust fund equity, insurance and pension equity,

as well as corporate stock ($128.8 billion). The Dow Jones index fell 89 percent nominal

and 60 percent real between its peak in August of 1929 and trough in July of 1932,

although it recovered somewhat in 1933. Using the data from Woolf and Marley,

limiting ourselves to corporate stock, and assuming 30 percent goods and service price

deflation between 1929 and 1933, we have stock values dropping 60 percent nominal and

44 percent real between the two years, for a loss in wealth of $57 billion in 1929 dollars.

Using the Goldsmith numbers from table L-25, we have stock market borrowing

dropping from $8.278 billion to $3.078 billion (nominal). Again, assuming 30 percent

deflation, we have stock market liabilities declining 63 percent nominal and 47 percent

real, for a decline of $4.4 billion in 1929 dollars. Considering the effects of declines of

both stock market assets and liabilities between 1929 and 1933, we have a negative net

wealth effect of $52.6 billion.

     In real estate, the locus of the balance sheet effects differed, and overall impact on

net worth was much smaller. If we accept Shiller’s numbers (see below) the price of

houses fell, but only along with the general deflation, so real values were largely

unaffected, and therefore the asset side wealth effects in the aggregate were on average

negligible. Woolf and Marley (1989, table 15.A) show nominal housing values dropping

from $109.7 billion to $81.7 billion between 1929 and 1933, a decline of 25 percent.

Shiller has nominal prices dropping 30 percent over those years. If we make allowance




                                             23
for a modest increase in the number of structures over that four year period, these

estimates are broadly consistent.

      On the other hand, the interactions of real estate debt and deflation clearly became

very important in 1931 and 1932, so the negative wealth effect on the liability side was

significant. Woolf and Marley (1989) have nominal mortgage debt falling from $16.6

billion in 1929 to $13.3 billion in 1933. Again assuming an approximately 30 percent

decline in goods and services prices over the four year period, this means real mortgage

debt rose from $16.9 billion in 1929 to $19 billion in 1933, a 14 percent increase, a total

of $2.1 billion in 1929 prices. Since we are assuming essentially no effect in inflation

adjusted terms on the asset side of the balance sheet this is the total deflationary impact

from real estate. Even if Woolf and Marley are off by a factor of two or three, and the

rise in real estate liabilities is closer to what Mishkin reports, it is clear that the stock

market effects on household balance sheets in the first four years of the Depression were

much larger than those emanating from real estate – probably an order of magnitude

larger. Declines in stock prices also had much greater potential than real estate price

decline to wreak havoc on the balance sheets of federally chartered commercial banks.

      To summarize, from the stock market, we have for the household sector very large

negative wealth effects from the assets side, only modestly counteracted by the reduction

in liabilities from the closing out of margined positions. In the case of real estate, we

have little if any effect on the asset side from change in real housing values, along with a

negative wealth effect of an increase in mortgage liabilities through the debt deflation

mechanism. The relatively modest impact on household balance sheets from the real

estate sector over the worst years of the Great Depression, in comparison with the impact




                                                24
of stock market decline, contrasts sharply with the respective impacts from these two

asset classes during the 2006-2011 period. In the latter period, not only, as I will show,

were the housing price declines, both nominal and real, comparatively larger, but so too

was the impact of the rising nominal and real value of mortgage liabilities.

     Note that, with respect to real estate, debt deflation had conflicting effects on

lending institutions’ balance sheets. To the degree that households managed to remain

current on their nominally fixed mortgage payments, deflation benefited lenders, because

the real value of debt repayment went up. Indeed, bond interest was the one category of

income to capital that increased in real terms between 1929 and 1933 (Field, 2011, p.

269). Similarly, declines in short rates should, ceteris paribus, have increased the value

of the higher interest longer term mortgages. But to the degree that deflation drove

borrowers to default, lenders were harmed. When real estate borrowers defaulted, of

course, this may have been attributable to loss of income as the consequence of

unemployment, by rises in the real burden of payments due to the debt deflation

mechanism, or because the loan was of poor quality in the first place – and likely would

not have continued to perform even in the absence of deflation or increases in the

unemployment rate.

     The most recent housing cycle has been marked by a sharp decline in both the

nominal and real value of housing. In contrast, although housing prices dropped in the

early 1930s, they did so only in line with the general deflation. Unlike the 2000s,

however, goods and service price deflation raised the real burden of nominally fixed

mortgage payments, which did contribute to foreclosure.




                                             25
        The wave of foreclosures in the 2000s, on the other hand, required neither deflation

nor falling income to precipitate it. Falling (indeed, no longer rising) nominal house

prices combined with high loan to value and “innovative” financing instruments such as

negative amortization loans with teaser initial rates were enough to get many

homeowners into very serious trouble. Because average loan to values were so much

lower as were nominal price declines, the phenomenon of underwater homes (loan

balances greater than house values), endemic today (2011), was less common during the

Depression (see footnote 18, but see also Guglielmo, 2011, p. 13, who asserts the

contrary, although without evidence). It was much more the case, particularly after 1929,

hat people got into trouble not because housing prices had fallen per se, but because

income had fallen as the result of other causes, combined with the effects of deflation in

raising the burden of mortgage payments fixed in nominal terms. In a number of

respects, therefore, the precipitators of foreclosure differed substantially in the two

cycles.

Shiller’s Series

        As part of the research for his book Irrational Exuberance (2006), Robert Shiller

assembled series on real and nominal house prices going back to 1890. His source for

nominal house prices for 1890-1933 is Grebler, Blank and Winnick (1956), whose data

were based on a survey of homeowners in 22 cities who were asked to report the value of

their house in 1934 and what they originally paid for it and when. Since the index tracks

prices for the same housing units at different times, it is not subject to the compositional

bias that can bedevil comparisons of median house prices over time (see Shiller, 2006, p.

234).




                                              26
     Shiller’s data for 1934-41 are based on advertised home prices in newspapers in

five cities: Chicago, Los Angeles, New Orleans, New York, and Washington D.C.. His

students collected about thirty house prices for each city for each year, except that the

Washington data are based on a median price series from Fisher (1951). Data for those

years may therefore be partially affected by the upward bias characteristic of median

sales price data, which can in part reflect improvements in house quality. Given the

relatively low level of house construction during the 1930s, however, the bias is probably

small. Shiller uses the Consumer Price Index to deflate nominal house values both pre-

and post- 1934 to get a series on real house prices, which appear in his book as part of

figure 2.1.

     For most readers of the second edition of Irrational Exuberance (the first dealt only

with the stock market boom), the principal takeaway from the long time series on real

housing prices was the strikingly dramatic run up in real estate prices between 2000 and

2006. In percentage terms the increase in the real price of a house (approximately 60

percent between 2000:1 and 2006:1) was larger during this period than during any

comparable period going back to 1890. The increase in house prices following the

Second World War (measuring from 1944 to 1953) came close in percentage terms, but it

took place over a larger number of years and, in contrast with the 2000-2006 period, the

new higher level of real house prices was sustained for half a century.

      As Shiller has updated his numbers (Shiller, 2012), they have revealed a staggering

fall in the value of an asset that conventional wisdom held should and could never decline

nationally. According to his quarterly data, nominal prices through 2012:1 declined 34

percent from their peak in 2006:2. The economy also experienced mild inflation over




                                             27
this period. Data on real housing values indicate that they declined 42 percent over the

period 2006:1 through 2011:4, and monthly data for the beginning of 2012 indicate that

they continue to decline.. In a 2005 interview with New York Times correspondent

David Leonhardt, Shiller predicted house prices could fall 40 percent in inflation adjusted

terms (Leonhardt, 2005). Because of the mechanics of simple percent calculations, the

60 percent increase followed by 42 percent decrease in real housing prices, actually left

the index in 2011:4 below where it had been in 1998:4, thirteen years ealier.

     That kind of loss is what investors are taught they must be prepared to take if they

are to enjoy the upside potential of assets such as stocks. But it is not what individuals

expected from housing, certainly in the postwar period. The expectation that houses

would hold and possibly increase their value helped justify and reinforce institutional

changes that allowed lower down payments (higher leverage) in house purchases starting

in the 1930s. New norms and mechanisms of housing finance originating in the 1930s

established an institutional regime that helped real house prices remain basically stable

for fifty years, from the early 1950s through 2001. Boomlets marked the last part of the

1970s and, associated with the Savings and Loan Crisis, 1988 through 1990. But in both

cases the price rises, which look modest compared to what we’ve recently experienced,

quickly subsided.

     Looking at Shiller’s entire series since 1890, it is clear that the degree of house

price decline between 2006 and 2012 in the United States does have precedent. But if we

study the series closely we discover something else which is quite remarkable: no such

decline took place during the interwar years. It is true, according to Shiller’s index data,

that a house purchaser buying at the peak in 1907 and selling in the trough of 1921 would




                                             28
have experienced a 40 percent decline in real value, similar to that experienced since

2006. And a house purchaser buying at the peak in 1894 and selling at the trough in 1921

would have lost 47 percent of the value of the house in real terms. Both 1893 and 1907

are associated with financial panics that ended NBER business cycle expansions. Indeed,

the ending of the 1907 crisis benefited from the intervention of J.P. Morgan (Friedman

and Schwartz, 1963, p. 160), and set in train forces that would lead to the creation of the

Federal Reserve System in 1913. These house price losses, however, would have been

experienced over twenty-seven and fifteen year holding periods, not a five year period.

     In contrast with evidence of large declines in the real price of housing prior to the

1920s, or in 2006-12, what is striking for a student of the interwar period is the relative

tameness of price movements during the 1920s and 1930s. There was indeed a real estate

boom during the 1920s, one whose details have been seared into the memories of

economic historians by the lurid descriptions of it contained in J.K. Galbraith’s The Great

Crash (1955). In terms of overall construction activity, there were, as noted, actually

three consecutive booms, a boom in single family residences that peaked in 1926, an

apartment building boom that peaked a year later, and a central business building boom

that extended into the early 1930s (because of semicompleted projects such as the Empire

State building). And, looking at residential prices, there was appreciation and

depreciation prior to and following the construction peak. But the magnitudes of these

price swings, compared with 2001-2012, are mild.




                                             29
                                                       Figure 1

                                 Nominal House Price Index, United States, 1919-41
                                                   2000=100.0
 7




 6




 5




 4




 3




 2




 1




 0
     1919 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924 1925 1926 1927 1928 1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939 1940 1941




 Source: Shiller 2011, Housing data, available at http://www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/data.htm.

     Let’s look first at nominal prices (figure 1). We can see house prices increasing from

1919 through a peak in 1925, then declining to about the 1919 level in 1930 and then

continuing to fall along with the general deflation in the economy before beginning to

increase again in 1934.

       The relative tameness of house price movements in the interwar period is even more

apparent when we look at real price movements (figure 2). Comparing figure 2 with

figure 1, one can see that the main effect of moving to a real index is to moderate the

decline evident in the early 1930s. As for the 1920s, after 1922, the nominal and real

indexes move very closely with each other, because the CPI was basically stable between

1922 and 1929.




                                                           30
       Examining the real house price series one cannot help but be struck by the almost

complete absence of a 2001-2012 style price bubble and collapse. True, if you had been

able to buy a national portfolio of real estate in 1921 and managed to sell in 1925, you

would have enjoyed a 19 percent real gain, and if you bought in 1932 and sold in 1940,

you would have gained 19.6 percent real. With 50 percent down you could have walked

away with gains of almost 40 percent. But this is chump change compared to what real

estate speculators actually made in the United States between 2002 and 2006. Looking at

this graph, one almost feels we need Greg Clark to tell us provocatively that “nothing

happened.” Clark is famous for arguing that, at least with respect to the standard of

living, nothing happened in 800 years of British economic growth, let alone 100,000

years of world economic history prior to 1800.

                                                        Figure 2
                                     Real House Price Index, United States, 1919-41

 90


 80


 70


 60


 50


 40


 30


 20


 10


  0
      1919 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924 1925 1926 1927 1928 1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939 1940 1941




 Source: Shiller 2011, Housing data, available at http://www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/data.htm.




                                                           31
      That’s of course, a little bit of an exaggeration, as it was in Clark’s case. There’s

actually a slight upward trend in real housing prices, comparing the 1930s with the

1920s, which might or might not be due to the change in the data source post 1934. Of

course even if the decline in real house prices between 1925 and 1932 was only 12.6

percent (as compared with a real decline of 42 percent between 2006 and the end of

2011), the nominal decline in the context of mortgages with fixed nominal interest

payments still had the potential to contribute to debt deflation and persisting problems

with debt overhang and contagion in the 1930s.

      As already mentioned, I argue that the difficulties construction had in recovering in

the 1930s had more to do with the legacy of premature subdivision (see Field 1992) than

with debt overhang from real estate. This view is strengthened by looking at the interwar

housing cycle in the light of 2001-2012. Assuming house prices bottomed out in 2011:4

the 2006-2011 peak to trough decline in real housing prices of 42 percent was more than

triple the 1925-1932 decline in percentage points. And, as I will show below, housing

was much more highly leveraged in the more recent episode, which enabled it to pose

more of a systemic threat.

Critiques of Shiller’s Series

      Eugene White (2009) has raised doubts about the reliability of Shiller’s series for

the 1920s and the first years of the 1930s, arguing that the data disguise the true

magnitude of the house price boom and bust in the interwar period. White finds the

series too volatile in the early years (his standard for too volatile is not specified),

indicative of small sample problems, but also suggests that the series is biased downward

because it does not include the price movements of houses bought at the peak and




                                               32
subsequently abandoned or foreclosed upon. That is, such houses would not have shown

up in Grebler, Blank, and Winnick’s 1934 survey. He notes however that the size of the

possible bias is “difficult to assess in the absence of sufficient additional national or

regional data” (White, 2009, p.9).

     Price Fishback et al (2011) are also implicitly critical of Shiller’s series and the

1934 survey that underlies it. In a paper in the Review of Financial Studies, they report

data derived from the census on the ratio of the value of owner occupied housing in 1930

to the value of mortgaged owner occupied housing in 1920 for 272 large cities in the

United States (Fishback et. al., 2011, p. 1784). They find that the average ratio was 1.45,

meaning that nominal prices in 1930 were 45 percent higher in 1930 than they had been

in 1920. In contrast, the Grebler, Blank, and Winnick data show nominal house prices

lower in 1930 by about 7 percent than in 1920.

     How can this be? Are the data Shiller relies on for this period that bad? One

possible explanation for the discrepancy is that the Fishback et al census data compares

all owner occupied houses in 1930 with mortgaged occupied houses in 1920. In a

footnote the authors acknowledge limitations of the 1920 data: “There was a 1920

mortgage census that collected information only on the value of mortgaged homes and

was limited in the scope of cities for which it reported information” (Fishback et al, 2011,

p. 1794). But it is hard to know if this introduces a bias, and if so in which direction.

     An issue of greater concern is one which which Shiller has emphasized consistently.

It has to do with changes in the composition of the housing stock and the necessity of

comparing the prices of similar housing units through time. If houses over time become

newer, bigger, or in other respects better, then comparisons of changes in median house




                                              33
prices will not accurately reflect what is going on with respect to quality adjusted prices.

Careful attempts to correct for changes in the composition and characteristics of housing

inform the construction of the widely referenced indexes which in part bear his name. As

the methodology section for the currently produced S&P/Case-Shiller indexes states,


           The indices measure changes in housing market prices given a constant level
     of quality. Changes in the types and sizes of houses or changes in the physical
     characteristics of houses are specifically excluded from the calculations to avoid
     incorrectly affecting the index value.


     That is one reason Shiller found the Grebler Blank and Winnick survey appealing: it

asked people what their house was currently worth and what they paid for it and when.

The comparisons were over time for the same housing units.

     The Case-Shiller Indexes are based on repeat sales of similar houses. In other

words they rely on comparisons over time of prices of individual houses that have sold at

least twice. The index is constructed by sampling recent real estate transactions and then

searching prior transaction records to create matched sales pairs for individual houses.

As the document describing the methodology states, “The main variable used for index

calculation is the price change between two arms-length sales of the same single-family

home” (Standard and Poors, 2009, p. 6). All repeat sales pairs are candidates for

inclusion, but non-arms length transactions, such as those between family members, are

excluded, as are transactions in which the property type is changed, for example, when a

property is converted to a condominium. Statistical techniques are used to reduce the

weighting of outlier transactions that are likely not truly to be matched pairs because, for

example, maintenance has been neglected or the house have been extensively remodeled.




                                             34
     The Grebler, Blank, and Winnick index is not as sophisticated as the currently

constructed Case-Shiller indexes, but is more consistent with their methodology than are

the comparisons reported by Fishback et al. The 1934 survey yields approximate

matched pairs because it asked people the current value of their house and what they

originally paid for it and when.

     There are a number of reasons why the comparisons Fishback et al make between

1930 and 1920 census data may depart substantially from what would be yielded by

matched pair reports of the same houses sold in 1920 and 1930. The most important is

that the housing stock was different in 1930, since a large fraction of it was newly

constructed. Over the years 1920 -1929 inclusive, over 7 million new private permanent

non-farm housing unit were built (Grebler, Blank, and Winnick, 1956, Table B-1, p. 332).

The 1930 census reported 23.2 million occupied nonfarm housing units. Since few of the

units built in the 1920s would have been abandoned, unoccupied, or torn down in 1930,

we can conclude that at least 30 percent of the units in 1930 simply weren’t there in 1920.

Moreover, although few of the newly built units would have vanished, been torn down, or

been unoccupied in 1930, some of the units whose prices had been reported in the 1920

census of mortgaged units were, by 1930, abandoned, torn down, or unoccupied, and they

were likely to have been older, more decrepit units. The 1920 census reported about 17.6

million occupied housing units, and the 1930 census 23.2 million, an increase of 5.6

million. Since there were roughly 7 million units constructed, we can infer that about 1.4

million units fall into the category of present in 1920 but absent in 1930.

      Because the 1930 enumeration included 7 million newly built generally higher

quality houses not present in 1920, and because it did not include approximately 1.4




                                             35
million generally lower quality units that had been in the enumeration in 1920, the 1930 –

1920 comparison reported by Fishback et al is likely to give a misleading picture of

quality adjusted house price change between 1920 and 1930.

     Another reason to have some faith in the Grebler, Blank, and Winnick series is that

other data are consistent with the picture they paint. Fisher (1951, p. 55. Table 7), for

example, looked at a sample of 3 percent of Home Owners Loan Corporation (HOLC)

mortgage loans in the states of New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut. The underlying

data included appraisal values for those refinancing loans in 1933 and 1934 and purchase

prices in 1925 and 1927. These are for the same houses, and thus the data approximate

the repeat sales data that underlie the current Case-Shiller indexes. Median prices in

Fisher’s sample decline 31 percent between 1925 and 1933-34. Grebler, Blank, and

Winnick report approximately the same percentage decline in their 22 city sample over

these years. In the Fisher sample homes purchased in 1926 and 1927 had a decline of

26.9 percent nominal to 1933-34. Using the Grebler, Blank and Winnick series for a

similar calculation yields a 25.2 percent decline.

     Another regional series is the National Housing Agency’s compilation of monthly

price data for Washington DC from 1918 through 1948, which was based on asking

prices for houses listed for sale in newspapers. The annual average for 1930 is 13.5

percent higher than for 1920 (see Historical Statistics, Series Dc 828), compared with

Fishback et al’s 45 percent increase and Grebler, Blank, and Winnick’s 7 percent decline.

The Fisher numbers are not inconsistent with the Grebler, Blank, and Winnick series,

given the fact that the housing stock in 1930 was newer and possibly of better quality and

that these are not and do not approximate matched sales.




                                             36
     Fishback et al also compare housing prices reported in the 1940 census with those

reported in the 1930s census, and find them in nominal terms to be 48.6 percent lower,

Shiller has them than about 5 percent lower. The issue of changes in the composition of

the stock is less important in the 1930s than the 1920s, since many fewer units were

constructed than had been true in the 1920s. The number of occupied non-farm housing

units increased just 19 percent during the 1930s (4.4 million), as opposed to the 30

percent jump during the 1920s. The number of housing starts in the years 1930 through

1939 inclusive, however, totaled only 2.586 million (Grebler, Blank and WInnick, 1956,

Table B-1). This means, since the number of occupied units rose 4.4 million, that

approximately 1.8 million units abandoned or unoccupied at the time of the 1930 census

were now again in use. We can infer that there were lower value units (after all, they had

been abandoned during the boom time so the 1920s) and their reintroduction into the

occupied housing stock may be one of the reasons the Fishback et al data show such a

sharp drop in reported values between 1930 and 1940.

     All of this discussion speaks to the merits of the matched sale methodology

pioneered and championed by Case-Shiller. It’s not that Fishback et al are wrong. It’s

just that there calculations may not accurately reflect changes in quality adjusted house

prices, and therefore do not necessarily cast doubt on the reliability of Grebler, Blank,

and Winnick as an index of house prices for the 1920-1933 period.

     Both nominal and real prices matter in thinking about the impact of housing price

fluctuations on the real economy. In an institutional environment characterized by fixed

nominal debt obligations, nominal prices matter, because their decline can decrease the

value of owner’s equity. When both house prices and goods and service prices are




                                             37
declining (as was true between 1929 and 1933), the real burden of debt repayment can go

up if mortgage payments are fixed in nominal terms. But not all homeowners had a

mortgage. Indeed, the majority did not. If we are interested in possible wealth effects of

consumption caused by declines in housing equity, real prices matter. If you own your

house free and clear, or have a small mortgage on it, and it drops in value 30 percent, but

so does the CPI, it should not affect your behavior much.



      All of the decline in real house prices in the interwar period had already taken place

by 1929, with no apparent ill effects on the economy. Real housing prices were actually

higher in 1933 than they had been in 1929. In order for the magnitude of the decline in

real house prices in the interwar period to approach what has taken place since 2006,

either the 1929 figure suggested by Shiller/ Grebler, Blank and Winnick would have to be

40 percent too low or the 1933 figure 40 percent too high, or there is some combination

of too low earlier and too high later yielding biases in the nominal data sufficient to

disguise a 40 percent drop in the real price. This seems unlikely. I think instead we need

to be receptive to what the data are trying to tell us, and that is that the real price decline

in the most recent cycle has been far greater in magnitude – the collapse has been more

severe - than what took place during the interwar years.

Construction

      There are of course at least two dimensions to a housing boom – price and quantity

– and so one might expect from the more modest price movements between 1919 and

1941 that the boom and collapse of construction was also more moderate in the interwar

period than it was in the 2000s. And one would be quite wrong. From a construction




                                               38
standpoint the interwar boom was in fact the greatest in terms of the fluctuations of

construction activity, both in absolute terms and as a proportion of GDP, that the U.S.

economy has ever experienced. In 1924, 1925, 1926, and 1927, residential housing

construction comprised more than 5 percent of GDP (over 6 percent in 1925), a figure

not exceeded until the most recent boom.16 In the 2001-2005 boom, the share of

residential construction rose from 4.6 percent in 2000 to 6.2 percent in 2005 (the year that

housing prices peaked nationally) before falling to 3.4 percent in 2008 and 2.5 percent in

2009. By 2011:1 it had declined further to 2.2 percent (NIPA Table 1.1.5).

                                                             Figure 3
                                         Residential Construction, United States, 1919-41
                                                    Millions of 1957-59 dollars

     18000


     16000


     14000


     12000


     10000


     8000


     6000


     4000


     2000


        0
             1919 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924 1925 1926 1927 1928 1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939 1940 1941


Source: Historical Statistics, Millennial Edition, Series Dc262.



16
   See Historical Statistics, series Dc256 for construction and Ca213 (Balke-Gordon) for GNP, which yields
a residential construction share of 5.8 percent for 1924, 6.0 percent for 1925, 5.7 percent for 1926, and 5.3
percent for 1927. Kendrick’s GNP estimates (series Ca188) are very similar. Both Balke/Gordon and
Kendrick are intended conceptually to be comparable to the Bureau of Economic Analysis estimates
published from 1929 onwards. Using Kuznets Variant 1 for the denominator (series Ca184) puts
residential construction’s share at 6.2 percent for 1924, 6.4 percent for 1925, 6.1 percent for 1926, and 5.7
percent for 1927.


                                                                39
      In comparison, by 1929 the housing construction share of GDP had fallen to 3.9

percent and by 1933 to 1 percent of a greatly reduced GDP (http://www.bea.gov, NIPA

Table 1.15). So in terms of GDP shares, housing construction went from 6 percent to 1

percent of GDP between 1925 and 1933, and from 6.2 percent to 2.2 percent from 2005

to 2011. If we look at the absolute decline in inflation adjusted residential construction,

the drop is even more dramatic in the interwar period, as figure 3 indicates. 1926 to 1933

witnessed an 89 percent decline in real construction activity.

      In comparison, assuming that the housing construction cycle has now bottomed out

(I am writing in November of 2011), we see a peak to trough decline of 57 percent in real

construction activity between 2006 and 2011. From the standpoint of construction

activity, the 1920s boom and bust was proportionately larger. Yet the price movements

associated with that housing cycle were more modest.

      The absence of big real house price movements in the interwar period means that

the mechanisms whereby housing contributed to recession/depression were different in

the two cycles. In the 1930s, the collapse of construction spending and its weak recovery

contributed to a slow revival in private sector aggregate demand primarily through

standard multiplier mechanisms. Since the collapse of the building boom was associated

with modest movements in the real price of housing, however, the impact of the housing

bust on household balance sheets was also more modest. In comparison with the wealth

and liquidity effects on consumption of collapsing stock prices, the influence of the end

of the housing boom on consumption expenditures through this mechanism was weaker,

at least initially.




                                             40
      Between 2006 and 2011, in contrast, the collapse of the housing boom was

associated with an approximately $7 trillion hit to household balance sheets. To get a

sense of how large this is, consider that the flow of U.S. GDP flow in 2011 was running

at about $15 trillion per year. This decline in home equity was the result of a pincer

movement: nominal mortgage debt continued to increase through 2007 and then declined

only modestly, while nominal house prices fell sharply. The consequence was a big

reduction in household real estate wealth. Given the uneven distribution of mortgage debt

this pushed millions of homeowners underwater, in the sense that they owed more than

their homes were worth. The 2006-2008 American Community Survey showed that of

approximately 75.4 million owner occupied U.S. housing units, 51.4 million had a

mortgage (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2011, series B25087). Of these, more than one in

four were underwater in May of 2011. Even though there were tens, indeed hundreds of

thousands of foreclosures during the Depression, the phenomenon during the most recent

episode has been more widespread and more severe in its consequences particularly if we

try and restrict our attention to residential housing, as opposed to the farm foreclosure

problem. During the Depression the problem was not typically that people owed more

on the house than it was worth.17 The problem was simply that they couldn’t make the

mortgage payments, in part because their nominal income had fallen, and in part because

the drop in goods and service prices had increased the real burden of their mortgage

payments.




17
  Since loan to value ratios rarely exceeded 50 percent in the 1920s, and the average nominal price decline
between 1929 and 1933 appears to have been about 30 percent, simple arithmetic tells us that the
phenomenon of “underwater” houses, or negative equity, with the outstanding loan value exceeding the
house value, must have been infrequent in comparison to what has been the case in the post 2005 period.


                                                    41
                                                    Figure 4
                        Index of Real Residential Construction, United States, 2000-2010

 120




 100




  80




  60




  40




  20




   0
        2000     2001     2002      2003      2004      2005      2006      2007      2008   2009   2010




       Source: http://www.bea.gov, NIPA Table 1.1.3.

       Case, Quigley and Shiller (2005) estimate that a 10 percent decline in household

wealth has somewhere between a .4 and a 1.1 percent effect on consumption (although

see Calomiris, Longhofer and Miles (2009) for a more skeptical view of the size of this

coefficient). Whatever the number we agree on, we are dealing here with a drop in

owner’s equity of more than 50 percent, from $13.1 trillion in 2005 to $6.3 trillion in

2010. Nothing comparable happened with respect to real estate wealth in the interwar

period. In contrast, the contractionary effect of lower construction expenditures was

relatively more significant during the interwar housing boom.

       Why were the price movements and wealth effects so much more muted during the

interwar period than in 2001-2011? The most compelling answer is simply that

residential housing was less leveraged in the 1920s than it became in the 2000s.




                                                      42
Mortgage “innovations” such as option ARMs, no documentation loans, and no money

down loans magnified the upward price movements during the boom, as they did the

downward movements in the bust. These institutional innovations helped upend an

institutional equilibrium that, by and large, had kept real house prices relatively stable for

half a century.

     Another way to look at this question is to ask why housing leverage was so low in

the 1920s when, as evidenced by the stock market, the financial system was clearly

capable of financing highly leveraged asset acquisition. Why was it that mortgage lenders

in the 1920s were so stingy with down payment and maturity terms? Again, common

terms were fifty percent down, five year mortgage with a balloon payment at the end. It

is true that innovations pioneered by small building and loan societies enabled some

borrowers to take a second mortgage and thus borrow a larger share of the house value

(Snowden, 2010). But these innovations were opposed by larger building and loan

societies, and overall, especially in comparison with the 2000s, the overall picture is one

of conservatism (White, 2009, p. 26 reaches a similar conclusion).

     One might argue, and indeed it was argued in the 1930s that the typical loan

contract from the 1920s was in fact risky to lenders (Morton, 1956). It was the heavy and

perhaps unanticipated costs of foreclosure that made it so (see Ghent, 2010, p. 11).

Given the experience with the foreclosure process that had by then manifested itself, one

can perhaps understand the argument from an ex post standpoint. But if foreclosure had

been costless, requiring a fifty percent down payment surely would have given

considerable protection to the lender, who always of course had the option of rolling the

balloon loan over. It is had to see how, absent the large transactions costs associated with




                                             43
foreclosure, an 80 percent thirty year loan, even one fully amortized, was, on the face of

it, less risky for the lender than a 50 percent 5 year non-amortized loan.

      There was in fact a large percentage increase in mortgage lending in the first half of

the 1920s. But that increase was from a modest base, and considering loan to value ratios

and other metrics, it is fair to say that lending on residential real estate, in comparison to

what transpired in the 2000s, remained conservative.18

      This conservatism was in part because legislation governing lending by national

banks mandated higher down payments. And even though state chartered commercial

banks and building and loans were not so constrained, the prior history of land and real

estate speculation, in which lending standards had been at times lax, leading to

sometimes extreme cycles of boom and bust in house prices prior to the 1920s, which lay

behind the National Banking Act restrictions, acted as something of a deterrent on

lending by institutions that were not constrained.

      White (2009) has argued that conservatism in the 1920s was reinforced by the

absence of a Too Big to Fail expectation, although it is not clear that the major players in

the residential mortgage market (building and loans, mutual savings banks, insurance

companies) could have had this expectation even had the government/Fed announced a

willingness to rescue systematically important instsituions. For a financial institution to

be systemically important it must have liabilities serving as assets for other institutions,

so that if it fails its creditor financial institutions are threatened as well, or like a

commercial bank, have demand deposits as liabilities, so that collapse reduces the means

of payment (money supply).

18
   Whether the same can be said for loans on commercial and CBD structures remains an open question.
See Postel-Vinay (2011) for evidence on the role bad real estate loans played in failures of Chicago area
state banks.


                                                    44
     To be sure, by the last years of the 1920s, there was plenty of excess in real estate

lending. Declines in lending standards (see Saulnier, 1956), self-dealing, fraud, all of this

was evident in absolute terms. But not in comparison with what took place between 2001

and 2008. My suggestion is that decades of experience of real estate in the nineteenth

and early twentieth centuries had persuaded lenders – and legislators -- that real estate

was a very risky asset, by no means certain or even expected to appreciate, and one for

which lenders should take moderate and short lived stakes, and ensure that borrowers had

plenty of skin in the game.

     An implication of this is that although the failure of housing construction to revive

during the 1930s helps explain the duration of the depression, balance sheet aspects of

housing sector finance are today more important in obstructing recovery than was true in

the Great Depression. As has been noted, there are several distinct mechanisms whereby

housing can affect a downturn. A decline in construction can, amplified by multiplier

effects, lead directly to a decline in equilibrium output, associated with drops in both

consumption and gross private domestic investment. In the 1920s the decline in

residential construction was, from an aggregate demand perspective, compensated for by

the apartment building boom followed by CBD construction which extended into the

1930s. Strong exports helped as well. But when construction went south big time in the

1930s, this mechanism became very important in accounting for the prolonged downturn

and the failure to recover.

     A second depression-inducing housing related mechanism involves borrowers on

real estate who can’t service their mortgages, become delinquent, and eventually face

foreclosure. As they struggle to meet their mortgage obligations, non-housing




                                             45
consumption is adversely impacted. Foreclosures were an important feature of the early

1930s (see Wheelock, 2008), but they weren’t primarily produced by the cessation of

increases and then actual declines in house prices, which was the main driver after 2006.

Rather, during the early years of the 1930s, it was declines in income (among those

unemployed, for example), that had their source elsewhere, that predisposed to

foreclosure. Of course as deflation set in during the early 1930s, the real value of debt

service obligations fixed in nominal terms did increase, aggravating the pressure on

borrowers in difficult positions. Because of lower leverage, however, shorter average

durations of mortgages, and a smaller fraction of the housing stock encumbered by loans,

bad mortgage debt from housing did not play as significant a role in transmitting a

financial shock to lending institutions as was the case in 2007-2009.

Foreclosures

     There was indeed a serious foreclosure problem during the Great Depression, but it

was more specifically a farm foreclosure problem, rather than one associated with

housing per se. Two decades of farm prosperity came to an end at the conclusion of the

World War I, and farm incomes and land values declined steadily during the 1920s, a

major factor in bank failures during that decade (Alston, Grove, and Wheelock, 1994;

Field, 1992, 2001). The precipitous decline in agricultural commodity prices between

1929 and 1933 made a fragile situation worse, and attempts to foreclose led to actual or

threatened violence and multiple state level foreclosure moratoria.

     Foreclosures on residential housing during the 1930s, although a very real and

painful phenomenon, were, however, proportionately less common than has been true in

the years since 2006. To make the case for this, we begin with interwar data for non-




                                             46
farm housing units, over three fourths of the occupied housing units in 1930, for which

the statistical information is less ambiguous. The number of foreclosures for non-farm

occupied housing units, 68,100 in 1926, rose to 134,900 by 1929, and peaked in 1933 at

252,400, before gradually subsiding to 58,559 by 1941 (Historical Statistics, Millennial

edition, Series Dc1255). The 1930 census reported 23,235,982 occupied nonfarm

housing units (Historical Statistics, Millennial edition, Series Dc697-698). Using the

1930 occupied housing number as a denominator, and the peak 1933 foreclosure number

as numerator, we can conclude that 1.08 percent of the non-farm occupied housing stock

was foreclosed upon in the worst year of the Depression. This number is probably biased

slightly upwards because we have not attempted to correct for the possible growth in

occupied housing units between 1930 and 1933.

         In contrast, RealtyTrac (2011) reported that in 2010, 2,871,891 housing units in the

United States experienced a foreclosure filing.19 This represented 2.23 percent of all U.S.

housing units; the total of about 130 million in 2010 includes seasonal units as well as

occupied all year units and those that were vacant. Note that the 1933 calculation has

occupied units in the denominator. If the calculation were comparable to that made for

2010, the denominator would include vacant and seasonal units as well, and the

foreclosure rate would be lower.

         The fact that more than twice the proportion of all housing units were foreclosed

upon in 2010 as compared with the proportion of non-farm units foreclosed upon in 1933

is indicative of the higher fraction of the housing stock encumbered by a mortgage, the

substantially higher degree of leverage, and the much greater decline in real housing

prices that have marked the more recent cycle.
19
     The data on filings include notices of default, scheduled auctions, and REO (real estate owned) property.


                                                       47
     The data for the 1930s in the above calculations are of course for the nonfarm

housing sector. Adding in data on farm occupied housing units will increase our estimate

of the rate for all occupied units. The 1930 census shows that there were about a third as

many occupied farm housing units (6,668,881) as there were non-farm units (there were

29,904,663 total units, so farm housing units were about a quarter of the total). The rate

of foreclosure on farm housing would have had to have been substantially higher than on

nonfarm housing to yield a foreclosure rate on the entire occupied housing stock

approaching that experienced in 2010. I calculate that 424,473 farm housing foreclosures

– 6.2 percent - or one of every 16 farm housing units would have had to have been

foreclosed upon in 1933 in order to make the overall foreclosure rate on residential

housing equal to what it was in 2010.

     The rate of foreclosure on farm housing is inextricably entangled with the rate of

foreclosures on farms, and these are not exactly the same. They are, nevertheless,

closely related, and we do have some data on the latter. Alston (1983, p. 886) reports that

in 1933, the worst year of the Depression, over 200,000 farms were foreclosed – 3.88

percent of all farm units. This is significantly below the 6.2 percent rate that would have

been needed to equate the overall 1933 foreclosure rate to that experienced in 2010.

Since a number of states passed laws instituting moratoria on farm foreclosures, it is

possible that in their absence, we would have had foreclosure rates at that level.

     Citing Federal Reserve Board data, Alston, Grove, and Wheelock (1994, p. 415)

indicate that 42 percent of owner occupied farms had a mortgage in 1930. Parker (2005,

p. 57), reviewing early research by Galbraith, reports that half of all farm mortgages were

in default by 1933. This suggests that approximately a fifth of owner occupied farms




                                             48
were potentially vulnerable to foreclosure during the worst year of the depression. In

comparing foreclosure rates on residential housing in the 2000s with those in the 1930s, a

difficulty thus arises: how should we treat a foreclosure or potential foreclosure on a

farm property that also includes a residential housing unit? Since roughly a quarter of all

residential housing units were on farms the issue can be neither dismissed nor easily

resolved.

     Some conclusions can however be stated without qualification. If we restrict our

attention to nonfarm residential housing units, or to actual foreclosures on all residential

units (considering a foreclosure on a farm as equivalent to a foreclosure on a farm

housing unit) the foreclosure rates in 2010 were unambiguously higher than those during

the worst year of the Depression. These higher foreclosure rates were, moreover,

generated in an environment in which the unemployment rate did not break 10 percent (as

opposed to 25 percent in 1933), which gives us additional appreciation for how fragile

the housing finance situation had become by 2006.

      In the 1930s, and under the aegis of the Federal Housing Authority, institutional

changes ushered in an era of higher leverage in housing than had prevailed in the 1920s.

These changes were associated with a one time permanent upward movement in real

housing prices in the years immediately after the war. Because of organizational and

procedural controls on the quality of lending, however, this rise was sustained, leading to

a half century of relative stability in real housing prices, from the early 1950s through

2001. Prior to the twenty-first century, this was disrupted at the national level only by

boomlets in the late 1970s and again during the S and L fueled 1988-1990 period, but

each of these subsided relatively quickly.




                                             49
     Beginning in the 1980s under President Reagan and gathering steam under

President Clinton in the 1990s, financial deregulation and changes in the financial

services industry destroyed the previous institutional equilibrium. Out of this witches

brew (much more than simply the low interest rates of the early 2000s, on which it is

often blamed), emerged the housing boom and the near catastrophic financial meltdown

that followed.

     Figures 5 and 6 illustrate dramatically the very different degrees of housing

leverage in the interwar cycle as compared with 2001-2011. Figure 5 shows the nominal

value of the net housing stock along with the nominal value of residential mortgage debt

from 1926 through 1941. The debt to asset ratio never rose above 25 percent during

these years (see figure 7), starting at 10.9 percent in 1925, ending at 12.5 percent in 1941,

and peaking in 1932 at 22.6 percent under the influence of temporarily declining nominal

house prices, and a relatively stable nominal debt burden. It is certainly true that in

homeowners 1932 were stressed. But the degree of leverage is dwarfed by what

transpired in the first decade of the twenty first century. The debt to asset ratio was at

over 40 percent during the run up to the housing price explosion, and then jumped to over

60 percent starting in 2006 in the face of rapidly declining house prices and a nominal

debt burden that continued to increase through 2007 and then fell off only slightly. It has

remained at that level through 2011.




                                             50
                                                                Figure 5
                                     Nominal Housing Value and Mortgage Debt, United States, 1925-41

                               160



                               140



                               120



                               100
         Billions of Dollars




                                                                                                Nominal Value of Net Housing Stock
                                80
                                                                                                Mortgage Debt (Nominal)


                                60



                                40



                                20



                                0
                                   25

                                   26

                                   27

                                   28

                                   29

                                   30

                                   31

                                   32

                                   33

                                   34

                                   35

                                   36

                                   37

                                   38

                                   39

                                   40

                                   41
                                19

                                19

                                19

                                19

                                19

                                19

                                19

                                19

                                19

                                19

                                19

                                19

                                19

                                19

                                19

                                19

                                19
      Sources: Nominal Value of Net Housing Stock: http://www.bea.gov, Fixed Asset Table 1.1,
accessed June 6, 2011; Nominal Value of Mortgage debt on residential structures: Historical Statistics,
Millennial Edition, sum of series Dc916-922.




                                                           51
                                                                         Figure 6
                                         Nominal Value of Housing Stock and Mortgage Debt, United States, 1995-2010

                        25000




                        20000
  Billions of dollars




                        15000

                                                                                                                  Nominal Value of Housing Stock
                                                                                                                  Nominal Value of Mortgage Debt

                        10000




                         5000




                           0
                                1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010




Sources: http://www.bea.gov, Fixed Asset Table 1.1; Historical Statistics, Millennial Edition, Series
Dc916-922; http://www.federalreserve.gov, Flow of Funds accounts, table B-100, lines 4 and 33.




                                                                                 52
                                                      Figure 7
                        Debt to Asset Ratios in Housing, United States, 1925-1941 and 1995-2010

  0.700




  0.600




  0.500




  0.400
                                                                                                   1925-1941
                                                                                                   1995-2010
  0.300




  0.200




  0.100




  0.000
            1   2   3      4    5    6    7     8    9    10   11   12   13   14    15   16   17


Sources: http://www.bea.gov, Fixed Asset Table 1.1; Historical Statistics, Millennial Edition, Series
Dc916-922; http://www.federalreserve.gov, Flow of Funds accounts, table B-100, lines 4 and 33.



      The comparative trends in housing debt to asset ratios, comparing 1925-41 with

19995-2010 are illustrated in figure 7.

Conclusion

          Using a comparative historical approach, this paper has identified several important

differences in the housing sector’s characteristics and contributions to macroeconomic

instability in the interwar period as compared with 2001-2011. First, in terms of

fluctuations in residential construction activity, and whether measured in absolute terms

or as a share of GDP, the interwar housing cycle was more severe than 2001-2011. But it

was less severe in terms of fluctuations in the real price of housing and their impact on

household and banking institution balance sheets. Finally, housing was much less

levered in the 1920s than was true in the run up to the most recent crisis.



                                                         53
     The paper argues that the second and third of these differences are related. During

the 1920s, a prior historical experience of housing booms and busts had disciplined

lenders to treat housing as a very risky asset, and made them at least initially unwilling to

lend liberally on it, with the standard for “liberalism” being what transpired between

2001 and 2008. Although these inhibitions, which had been reinforced by legislation and

government regulation, weakened as the decade of the 1920s proceeded, the overall

outcome was still a housing sector that was much less leveraged than in 2001-2011. In

contrast, between 2001 and 2006 institutional restraints on lending that had for the most

part obtained for half a century broke down under the banner of deregulation,

“innovative” ways to finance housing, and shoddy and sometimes fraudulent work by

mortgage appraisers, originators, securitizers, and ratings agencies.

     This analysis has important implications. The impact of the collapse in construction

spending in the 1930s was felt particularly strongly through its effect on real gross private

domestic investment, and, through multiplier mechanisms, indirectly on consumption. In

the housing bust of the 2000s, this mechanism was weaker. On the other hand, the

relative stability of housing values in the interwar period meant that the effect of the end

of the boom on household consumption through a direct wealth effect was weaker,

certainly in comparison to the effect of the collapse of stock prices.

     In contrast, in 2001-2011, with an almost $7 trillion drop in house values, this effect

was stronger. And because of the much higher degree of leverage in 2001-2011, the

problems of debt overhang and underwater homeowners have been more severe than was

true in the interwar period. Moreover, because of the interconnections between high

leverage in households and highly leveraged and interconnected financial institutions, the




                                             54
ability of a prior real estate lending boom to pose a systemic threat to U.S. and world

financial institutions was higher in the first decade of the twenty-first century than was

true in the interwar period. The mechanisms and interconnections that allowed this to in

the 2000s are well documented in the final report of the Financial Crisis Inquiry

Commission (2011).

     Compared to what happened in the 1920s, postwar subdivisions were more

efficiently designed for an automobile age, and, because of the integration of the

subdivider/developer function there was much less of a post-boom problem of

subdivisions with a few houses built here and there. Subdivisions in the postwar period

tended to be opened in sections, with a new one not opening until the previous one had

been built out. This was not true in the 1920s. As bad as things may have been after the

S and L bubble or the most recent upswing, they were worse in this respect during the

interwar period. That is, the physical legacy of premature and partially completed

subdivisions in the 1920s posed a greater hindrance to the recovery of construction in the

1930s than has been true in postwar cycles. True, some overbuilt subdivisions from the

2000s, left vacant and allowed to deteriorate, may ultimately have to be bulldozed. But

the physical legacies of postwar housing booms, including the most recent one, pose less

of an obstacle to long term recovery than was true during the interwar period.

      On the other hand, the financial legacies pose a more serious threat to economy

wide recovery today than was true during the Depression. That is because housing was

much less leveraged in the 1920s than was true in the 2000s. In the more recent episode,

more houses had mortgages, loan to value ratios were much higher on average, and




                                             55
securitization has meant that there were many more avenues for contagion from

household to financial institution balance sheets.

        When New Deal reformers set their minds to mitigating the likelihood of a

recurrence of the Great Depression, they addressed housing, but placed more emphasis on

the travails of the stock market. They insisted on separating commercial and investment

banking.20 During the 1920s housing boom, commercial banking had been involved to

only a limited degree in housing finance, and although investment banking activities did

include placements of some mortgage backed securities, these tended to be for the

purposes of financing commercial and other nonresidential structures (Goetzmann and

Newmann, 2010). The insistence on separating commercial from investment banking

(Glass-Steagall) was motivated by what were perceived as improper or imprudent

commercial bank lending on stocks, not real estate. The Securities Act of 1933 and the

Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 mandated new transparency in security issues and

corporate reporting in the hopes of mitigating the magnitude and impacts of subsequent

booms and busts in the market for equities.

      New Deal legislation, including acts establishing the Home Owners’ Loan

Corporation (1933), the Federal Housing Administration (1934), and the Federal National

Mortgage Association (1938) did address issues in the housing sector. While these

organizations aimed at alleviating depression era problems, their mandates do not suggest

that housing and its financing per se was perceived as a locus of the origins of the

20
   Investment banking profits, among other sources derive from commissions earned marketing new bond
and stock issues to retail customers, advice provided to potential merger candidates, and income from
trading on the bank’s own account (proprietary trading). There is abundant evidence that proprietary
trading by depository institutions was implicated in the 2008 financial crisis, and some evidence that its
frequency, and the share of profits from this source, increased prior to the crisis (see “Obama to Propose
Limits on Risks Taken by Banks,” by Jackie Calmes and Louis Uchitelle, New York Times January 20,
2010; Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, 2011). The Volker rule is intended to prohibit proprietary
trading by commercial banks..


                                                    56
economic downturn. The HOLC engaged in remedial intervention, and indeed stopped

making new loans after 1935. The FHA pioneered in establishing the viability of the 30

year fixed term fully amortized mortgage, and promulgating better designs for residential

subdivisions, and the Federal National Mortgage Association, chartered in 1938,

established a secondary market for home mortgages. These changes helped usher in a

half century of relative stability in real house prices.

      But these changes in the institutional mechanisms of residential finance were not

primarily oriented towards mitigating a systemic risk that lending on real estate was

perceived as having generated during the 1920s. Remedial efforts to mitigate such risk

concentrated much more on the stock market, focusing on the purchase, sale, and

financing of equities, with the twin objectives of increasing transparency and limiting

leverage. Unlike real estate, which declined in nominal terms by 30 percent but in real

terms hardly at all, the 89 percent nominal (60 percent real) decline in the Dow Jones

index reflected a drop in the value of the highly levered stock market that had more

severe consequences.21 Indeed, while the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 was

tightening margin requirements on stock purchases, amendments to the Federal Reserve

Act in 1935 loosened margin requirements in terms of the ability of federally chartered

national banks to lend on real estate. And while those amendments relaxed constraints on

lending by banks on real estate, perhaps the most famous legislation of the New Deal era,

the Glass-Steagall Act (1933-1999), drastically restricted the ability of commercial banks

to take positions in equities. This emphasis on the market for stocks rather than real

estate as ground zero for the unfolding Great Depression stands in sharp contrast to the

21
  As Eichengreen and Mitchener observed, “…the Great Crash bequeathed a legacy of problems for banks,
corporations and households, which had assumed heavy debt loads and packed their portfolios full of now
poorly performing assets” (2004, p. 190).


                                                  57
diagnoses of the locus of the onset of the 2008-2009 financial crisis and economic

recession. The differential legislative attention during the New Deal is consistent with the

narrative developed in this paper.

     There is broad consensus that the 2007-2011 financial crisis and recession

originated in U.S. housing markets, and that it was precipitated by imprudent real estate

loans, enabled by lax regulation and indefensible behavior by ratings agencies and

facilitated by innovations in mortgage products and derivatives, particularly credit default

swaps and tranched mortgage backed securities. There is as well much evidence that, for

both the interwar period and the 2000s, the quantity and quality of credit extended during

the boom created obstacles to recovery that prolonged depression/recession.

     But history never repeats itself exactly. Although no doubt contributory, bad

residential housing lending in the interwar period did not play as central a role in

blocking recovery as it does today. The legacies of the explosion of mortgage debt

between 2001 and 2007 and the 40 percent drop in real house prices between 2006 and

2011 included impaired household balance sheets, effectively insolvent financial

institutions, and extensive, lengthy, and drawn out foreclosure processes. These legacies

are likely to exercise a persistent retardative effect on the macroeconomy, the result of

which will be a large cumulative output loss, exceeding that associated with the 1982

recession.




                                             58
                                     BIBLIOGRAPHY



Alston, Lee J. 1983. “Farm Foreclosures in the United States During the Interwar

     Period.” Journal of Economic History 43 (December): 885-903.

Alston, Lee J., Wayne A. Grove and David Wheelock. 1994. “Why do Banks Fail?

     Evidence from the 1920s.” Explorations in Economic History 31: 409-31.

Behrens, Carl Frederick.1952. Commercial Bank Activities in Urban Mortgage

     Financing. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bernanke, Ben. 2002. Speech given at birthday party for Milton Friedman. Avaiable at

     http://www.federalreserve.gov/BOARDDOCS/SPEECHES/2002/20021108/default.

     htm.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Board. 1943. Banking and Monetary

     Statistics, 1914-1941. Washington, D.C: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve

     System.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Board. 2011a. April 27 release. Available at

     http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/fomcprojtabl20110427.p

     df

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Board. 2011b. Flow of Funds Accounts.

     Available at http://www.federalreserve.gov .

Burrough, Bryan, William D. Cohan, and Bethany McClean. 2012. “Jon Corzine’s

     Riskiest Business.” Vanity Fair (February): 94-153.




                                           59
Calomiris, Charles W. and Joseph R. Mason. 1997. “Contagion and Bank Failures

     During the Great Depression: The June 1932 Chicago Banking Panic” American

     Economic Review 87 (December).

Calomiris, Charles W. and Joseph R. Mason. 2003 “Fundamentals, Panics, and Bank

     Distress During the Depression” American Economic Review 93:5 (December).

Calomiris, Charles, Stanley Longhofer, William Miles. 2009. “The (Mythical?) Housing

     Wealth Effect.” NBER Working paper No. w15075 (June).

Carter, Susan et al. 2006. Historical Statistics of the United States: Millennial Edition.

     Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Case, Karl E, John Quiqley and Robert Shiller. 2005. “Comparing Wealth Effects:The

     Stock Market vs. The Housing Market.” Advances in Macroeconomics 5.

     Available at http://www.bepress.com/bejm.

Clark, Gregory. 2007. A Farewell to Alms: A Brief Economic History of the World.

     Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Eichengreen, Barry, and Kris J. Mitchener. 2004. “The Great Depression as a Credit

       Boom Gone Wrong.” Research in Economic History 22: 183–237.

Field, Alexander J. 1984. “Asset Exchanges and the Transactions Demand for Money,

     1919-1929.” American Economic Review 74 (March):43-59.

Field, Alexander J. 1992b. “Uncontrolled Land Development and the Duration of the

     Depression in the United States.” Journal of Economic History 52 (December):

     785-805.

Field, Alexander J. 2001. “Bankruptcy, Debt, and the Macroeconomy.” Research in

      Economic History 20: 99-133.




                                             60
Field, Alexander J. 2011. A Great Leap Forward: 1930s Depression and U.S. Economic

      Growth. New Haven: Yale University Press.

Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission. 2011. Final Report of The National Commission on

     The Causes Of The Financial And Economic Crisis In The United States.

     Washington: Government Printing Office.

Fishback, Price V., Alfonso Flores-Lagunes, William C. Horrace, Shawn Kantor, and

       Jaret Treber. 2011. “The Influence of the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation on

       Housing Markets during the 1930s.” Review of Financial Studies 24: 1782-1813.

Fisher, Ernest M. 1951. Urban Real Estate Markets: Characteristics and Financing. New

       York: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Fisher, Irving. 1933. “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions.” Econometrica

       1: 337-57.

Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz. 1963. A Monetary History of the United States,

       1867-1960. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Galbraith, John Kenneth. 1955. The Great Crash 1929. Boston: Houhgton Mifflin.

Ghent, Andra C. 2010. “Residential Mortgage Renegotiation during the Great

       Depression.” Working Paper, Baruch College, CUNY.

Gjerstad, Steven and Vernon L. Smith. 2009. “From Bubble to Depression.” Wall Street

       Journal (April 9), available at

       http://online.wsj.com/article/SB123897612802791281.html.

Gjerstad, Steven and Vernon L. Smith. 2012. Prosperity and Recession: U.S. Economic

       Cycles and Consumption Cycles during the Past Century. New York: Cambridge

       University Press (forthcoming).




                                         61
Goetzmann, William N. and Frank Newman. 2010. “Securitization in the 1920’s.” NBER

       Working Paper w15650 (January).

Goldsmith, Raymond. 1955. A Study of Saving in the United States. 3 vols. Princeton:

       Princeton University Press.

Grebler, Leo, David M. Blank and Louis Winnick. 1956. Capital Formation in

       Residential Real Estate: Trends and Prospects. Princeton: Princeton Universitty

       Press.

Guglielmo, Mark. 2011. “Illinois Bank Failures during the Great Depression..” Working

       paper, University of Chicago (undated).

International Monetary Fund. 2012. “Dealing with Household Debt” in World Economic

       Outlook, 2012, ch. 3. Available at

       http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2012/01/index.htm.

Koo, Richard. 2009. The Holy Grail of Macroeconomics, Revised Edition: Lessons from

       Japans Great Recession. New York: Norton.

Leonhardt, David. 2005. “Be Warned: Mr. Bubble’s Worried Again.” New York Times,

       August 21. Available at

       http://www.nytimes.com/2005/08/21/business/yourmoney/21real.html?pagewante

       d=1

Lucia, Joseph L. 1985. “The Failure of the Bank of United States: A Reappraisal”

       Explorations in Economic History 22: 402-416.

Minsky, Hyman. 1964. “Longer Waves in Financial Relations; Financial Factors in the

       More Severe Depressions.” American Economic Review 54 (May): 324-335.

Minsky, Hyman. 1975. John Maynard Keynes. New York: Columbia University Press.




                                            62
Minsky, Hyman, 1986. Stabilizing an Unstable Economy. New Haven: Yale University

       Press.

Mishkin, Frederic S. 1978. “The Household Balance Sheet and the Great Depression.”

     Journal of Economic History 38 (December): 918-937.

Morton, J. E. 1956. Urban Mortgage Lending: Comparative Markets and Experience.

     Princeton: Princeton University Press.

O’Brien, Anthony Patrick. 1992. “The Failure of the Bank of United States: A Defense of

     Joseph Lucia." Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 24 (August): 374-84.

Olney, Martha L. 1999. “Avoiding Default: The Role of Credit in the Consumption

     Collapse of 1930.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (February): 319-335.

Parker, Richard. 2005. John Kenneth Galbraith: His Life, His Politics, His Economics.

     New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

Postel-Vinay, Natacha. 2011. “From a “Normal Recession” to the “Great Depression.”

     Finding the Turning Point in Chicago Bank Portfolios.” London School of

     Economics Working Paper #151/11 (March).

Rapaport, Peter and Eugene N. White. 1994. “Was the Crash of 1929 Expected?”

     American Economic Review 84 (March): 271-281.

RealtyTrak. 2011. “Record 29 Million US Properties Receive Foreclosure Filings in

     2010.” Available at http://www.realtytrac.com/content/press-releases/record-29-

     million-us-properties-receive-foreclosure-filings-in-2010-despite-30-month-low-in-

     december-6309.

Reinhart, Carmen and Kenneth Rogoff. 2009. This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of

     Financial Folly. Princeton: Princeton University Press.




                                           63
Romer, Christina D. 1990. “The Great Crash and the Onset of the Great Depression.”

     Quarterly Journal of Economics 105: 597-624.

Standard and Poors. 2009. “S&P/Case-Shiller Home Price Index Methodology.”

     Available at http://www.standardandpoors.com/ .

Saulnier, Raymond J. 1956. Urban Mortgage Lending. Princeton: Princeton University

     Press.

Shiller, Robert. 2006. Irrational Exuberance, second edition. New York: Crown

     Publishers.

Shiller, Robert. 2011. Housing Data. Available at

     http://www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/data.htm

Snowden, Kenneth. 2010. “The Anatomy of a Residential Mortgage Crisis: A Look Back

     to the 1930s.” NBER Working Paper 16244.

Temin, Peter. 1976. Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression? New York:

     Norton.

Tennessee Encyclopdia. 2011. s.v. “Caldwell and Company.” Available at

     http://tennesseeencyclopedia.net/entry.php?rec=171; accessed October 31, 2011.

Trescott, Paul B. 1992. “The Failure of the Bank of the United States: A Rejoinder to

     Anthony Patrick O’Brien.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 24 (August):

     385-389.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2011. Fixed Asset Tables.

     Available at http://www.bea.gov.

U.S. Department of Commerce, 2011, National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA).

     Available at http://www.bea.gov.




                                           64
U.S. Department of Labor. 2011. Consumer Price Index – all Urban Consumers.

     Available at http://www.bls.gov.

Wheelock, David. 2008. “The Federal Response to Home Mortgage Distress: Lessons

     from the Great Depression.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review

     (May/June): 90: 133-48.

White, Eugene. 1990. “The Stock Market Boom and the Crash of 1929 Revisited.”

     Journal of Economic Perspectives 4 (Spring): 67-83.

White, Eugene N. “Lessons from the Great American Real Estate Boom and Bust of the

     1920s." NBER Working Paper 15573, December 2009.

Wicker, Elmus. 1980. “A Reconsideration of the Causes of the Banking Panic of 1930.’

     Journal of Economic History 40 (September): 571-583.

Woolf, Edward N. and Marcia Marley. 1989. “Long Term Trends in U.S. Wealth

     Inequality: Methodological Issues and Results,” in Robert E. Lipsey and Helen

     Stone Tice, eds., The Measurement of Saving, Investment, and Wealth. Chicago:

     University of Chicago Press, pp. 765-844.




                                          65
