                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               MONETARY POLICY AND RATIONAL ASSET PRICE BUBBLES

                                                 Jordi Galí

                                          Working Paper 18806
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w18806


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       February 2013




I have benefited from comments by three anonymous referees, Marty Eichenbaum, Pierre-Olivier
Gourinchas, Seppo Honkapohja, Paolo Pesenti and participants at the CREI Workshop on Asset Prices
and the Business Cycle, the EABCN Conference on Fiscal and Monetary Policy in the Aftermath of
the Financial Crisis, the ECB International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, the NBER Summer
Institute and seminars at CREI-UPF, CEMFI, UAB, and the Riksbank. I am grateful to Alain Schlaepfer
and Jagdish Tripathy for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

The author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research. Further information
is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18806.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Jordi Galí. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Monetary Policy and Rational Asset Price Bubbles
Jordi Galí
NBER Working Paper No. 18806
February 2013
JEL No. E44,E52

                                              ABSTRACT

I examine the impact of alternative monetary policy rules on a rational asset price bubble, through
the lens of an overlapping generations model with nominal rigidities. A systematic increase in interest
rates in response to a growing bubble is shown to enhance the fluctuations in the latter, through its
positive effect on bubble growth. The optimal monetary policy seeks to strike a balance between stabilization
of the bubble and stabilization of aggregate demand. The paper's main findings call into question the
theoretical foundations of the case for "leaning against the wind" monetary policies.


Jordi Galí
Centre de Recerca en Economia Internacional (CREI)
Ramon Trias Fargas 25
08005 Barcelona
SPAIN
and NBER
jgali@crei.cat
    The spectacular rise (and subsequent collapse) of housing prices experi-
enced by several advanced economies over the past decade is generally viewed
as a key factor underlying the global …nancial crisis of 2007-2009, as well as
a clear illustration of the dangers associated with speculative bubbles that
are allowed to go unchecked.
    The role that monetary policy should play in containing such bubbles
has been the subject of a heated debate, well before the start of the recent
crisis. The consensus view among most policy makers in the pre-crisis years
was that central banks should focus on controlling in‡ation and stabilizing
the output gap, and thus ignore asset price developments, unless the latter
are seen as a threat to price or output stability. Asset price bubbles, it
was argued, are di¢ cult –if not outright impossible–to identify or measure;
and even if they could be observed, the interest rate would be too blunt an
instrument to deal with them, for any signi…cant adjustment in the latter
aimed at containing the bubble may cause serious "collateral damage" in the
form of lower prices for assets not a¤ected by the bubble, and a greater risk
of an economic downturn.1
    But that consensus view has not gone unchallenged, with many authors
and policy makers arguing that the achievement of low and stable in‡ation
is not a guarantee of …nancial stability and calling for central banks to pay
special attention to developments in asset markets.2 Since episodes of rapid
asset price in‡ation often lead to a …nancial and economic crisis, it is argued,
central banks should act preemptively in the face of such developments, by
   1
     See, e.g., Bernanke (2002) and Kohn (2006, 2008) for a central banker’s defense of this
view. Bernanke and Gertler (1999, 2001) provide a formal analysis in its support.
   2
     See, e.g., Borio and Lowe (2002) and Cecchetti et al. (2000) for an early exposition of
that view.


                                             1
raising interest rates su¢ ciently to dampen or bring to an end any episodes of
speculative frenzy –a policy often referred to as "leaning against the wind."
This may be desirable –it is argued– even if that intervention leads, as a
byproduct, to a transitory deviation of in‡ation and output from target.
Under this view, the losses associated with those deviations would be more
than o¤set by the avoidance of the potential fallout from a possible future
bursting of the bubble, which may involve a …nancial crisis and the risk of
a consequent episode of de‡ation and stagnation like the one experienced by
Japan after the collapse of its housing bubble in the 90s.3
      Independently of one’s position in the previous debate, it is generally
taken for granted (a) that monetary policy can have an impact on asset price
bubbles and (b) that a tighter monetary policy, in the form of higher short-
term nominal interest rates, may help disin‡ate such bubbles. In the present
paper I argue that such an assumption is not supported by economic theory
and may thus lead to misguided policy advice, at least in the case of bubbles
of the rational type considered here. The reason for this can be summarized
as follows: in contrast with the fundamental component of an asset price,
which is given by a discounted stream of payo¤s, the bubble component has
no payo¤s to discount. The only equilibrium requirement on its size is that
the latter grow at the rate of interest, at least in expectation. As a result, any
increase in the (real) rate engineered by the central bank will tend to increase
the size of the bubble, even though the objective of such an intervention may
have been exactly the opposite. Of course, any decline observed in the asset
price in response to such a tightening of policy is perfectly consistent with
  3
    See Issing (2009), ECB (2010), and Blanchard et al. (2012) for an account of the
gradual evolution of central banks’thinking on this matter as a result of the crisis.


                                         2
the previous result, since the fundamental component will generally drop in
that scenario, possibly more than o¤setting the expected rise in the bubble
component.
       Below I formalize that basic idea by means of a simple asset pricing model,
with an exogenous real interest rate. That framework, while useful to convey
the basic mechanism at work, fails to take into account the bubble’s general
equilibrium e¤ects as well as the possible feedback from the bubble to interest
rates implied by the monetary policy rule in place. That concern motivates
the development of a dynamic general equilibrium model that allows for
the existence of rational asset pricing bubbles and where nominal interest
rates are set by the central bank according to some stylized feedback rule.
The model assumes an overlapping generations structure, as in the classic
work on bubbles by Samuelson (1958) and Tirole (1985). This is in contrast
with the vast majority of recent macro models, which stick to an in…nite-
lived representative consumer paradigm, and in which rational bubbles can
generally be ruled out under standard assumptions.4 Furthermore, and in
contrast with the earlier literature on rational bubbles, the introduction of
nominal rigidities (in the form of prices set in advance) makes room for the
central bank to in‡uence the real interest rate and, through it, the size of the
bubble. While deliberately stylized, such a framework allows me to analyze
rigorously the impact of alternative monetary policy rules on the equilibrium
   4
     See, e.g., Santos and Woodford (1997). An exception to that statement is given
by models with heterogenous in…nitely-lived agents and borrowing constraints. See
Scheinkman and Weiss (1986) and Kocherlakota (1992) for early contributions to that
literature. Miao and Wang (2012) provide a recent example in that tradition, in which the
size of the bubble attached to …rms’stocks a¤ects the dividends generated by the latter,
through the relaxation of …rms’borrowing constraints.



                                           3
dynamics of asset price bubbles. In particular, it makes it possible to assess
the consequences of having a central bank use its interest rate policy to
counteract asset price bubbles in a systematic way, as has been proposed by
a number of authors and commentators.5
       The paper’s main results can be summarized as follows:

         Monetary policy cannot a¤ect the conditions for existence (or non-
         existence) of a bubble, but it can in‡uence its short-run behavior, in-
         cluding the size of its ‡uctuations.

         Contrary to the conventional wisdom a stronger interest rate response
         to bubble ‡uctuations (i.e. a "leaning against the wind policy") may
         raise the volatility of asset prices and of their bubble component.

         The optimal policy must strike a balance between stabilization of cur-
         rent aggregate demand–which calls for a positive interest rate response
         to the bubble–and stabilization of the bubble itself (and hence of fu-
         ture aggregate demand)–which would warrant a negative interest rate
         response to the bubble. If the average size of the bubble is su¢ ciently
         large the latter motive will be dominant, making it optimal for the
         central bank to lower interest rates in the face of a growing bubble.

       The paper is organized as follows. In Section 1 I present a partial equi-
librium model to illustrate the basic idea. Section 2 develops an overlapping
generation model with nominal rigidities, and Section 3 analyzes its equilib-
rium, focusing on the conditions under which the latter may be consistent
   5
    The work of Bernanke and Gertler (1999, 2001) is in a similar spirit. In their frame-
work, however, asset price bubbles are not fully rational, and the optimal policy analysis
not fully microfounded.

                                            4
with the presence of rational bubbles. Section 4 describes the impact on that
equilibrium of monetary policy rules that respond systematically to the size
of the bubble. Section 5 analyzes the optimal central bank response to the
bubble. Section 6 discusses some of the caveats of the analysis. Section 7
concludes.


1         A Partial Equilibrium Example
The basic intuition behind the analysis below can be conveyed by means of a
simple, partial equilibrium asset pricing example. Consider an economy with
risk neutral investors and an exogenous, time-varying (gross) riskless interest
rate Rt . Let Qt denote the price in period t of an in…nite-lived asset, yielding
a dividend stream fDt g. In equilibrium the following di¤erence equation
must hold:
                             Qt Rt = Et fDt+1 + Qt+1 g

        In the absence of further equilibrium constraints, we can decompose the
asset price into two components: a fundamental component, QFt , and a bubble
component, QB  6
            t . Formally,


                                   Qt = QFt + QB
                                               t


where the fundamental component is de…ned by the present value relation
                          (1                 !     )
                           X kQ1
                 QFt = Et           (1=Rt+j ) Dt+k                    (1)
                                   k=1    j=0

    6
    Transversality conditions generally implied by optimizing behavior of in…nite-lived
agents are often used to rule out such a bubble component (see, e.g., Santos and Woodford
(1997)). On the other hand models with an in…nite sequence of …nite-lived agent types,
as the one developed below, lack such transversality conditions.

                                           5
   The bubble component, de…ned as the deviation between the asset price
and its fundamental value, must satisfy:

                              QB           B
                               t Rt = Et fQt+1 g                            (2)

   It is easy to see that, ceteris paribus, an increase in the interest rate
(current or anticipated) will lower QFt , the fundamental value of the asset. On
the other hand, the same increase in the interest rate will raise the expected
growth of the bubble component, given by Et fQB     B
                                              t+1 =Qt g. Note that the

latter corresponds to the bubble’s expected return, which must equate the
interest rate under the risk neutrality assumption made here. Hence, under
the previous logic, any rule that implies a systematic positive response of the
interest rate to the size of the bubble, will tend to amplify the movements
in the latter –an outcome that calls into question the conventional wisdom
about the relation between interest rates and bubbles.
   Changes in interest rates, however, may a¤ect the bubble through a sec-
ond channel: the eventual comovement between the (indeterminate) inno-
vation in the bubble with the surprise component of the interest rate. To
formalize this, it is convenient to log-linearize (2) (evaluated at t   1) and
eliminate the expectational operator to obtain:

                             qtB = qtB 1 + rt   1   +   t


where lower-case letters denote the natural logarithm of the corresponding
variable, and where f t g is a zero mean martingale-di¤erence process, i.e.
Et 1 f t g = 0 for all t: Note that f t g may or may not be related to funda-
mentals, a re‡ection of the inherent indeterminacy of the bubble size. As a
result, the contemporaneous impact of an interest rate increase on the size of

                                        6
the bubble depends on the eventual relation between                              t   and the interest rate
innovation, rt      Et 1 frt g. Thus, assuming a stationary environment, one can
write without any loss of generality:


                                t   =   t   +   r (rt       Et 1 frt g)

where f t g is a zero-mean martingale-di¤erence process orthogonal to interest
rate innovations at all leads and lags, i.e. Ef t rt k g = 0, for k = 0; 1; 2; :::
Note that neither the sign nor the size of                       r,   nor its possible dependence on
the policy regime, are pinned down by the theory. Accordingly, the impact
of an interest rate innovation (or of any other shock) on the bubble is, in
principle, indeterminate.
       In much of what follows I assume that f t g has no systematic relation
to interest rate innovations (i.e.,             r   = 0 in the formulation above).7 While
admittedly arbitrary, this seems a natural benchmark assumption. Note that
in that case a change in the interest rate does not a¤ect the current size of the
bubble, but only its expected growth rate. To illustrate this point formally,
assume that frt g follows an exogenous AR(1) process with autoregressive
coe¢ cient     r   2 [0; 1) and innovation "rt .8 Then, it can be easily checked
that the response of the bubble to a positive interest rate shock at di¤erent
horizons is given by
                                      B                      k
                                    @qt+k   1                r
                                       r
                                          =                       >0
                                     @"t    1                r
   7
     f t g being a "pure" sunspot process, i.e. one orthogonal to fundamentals, can be
viewed as a particular case of that assumption.
   8
     Note that in this case the bubble will follow the process

                           (1       r L)    qtB = "rt   1   + (1        r L) t

where f t g is exogenous relative to the interest rate process.


                                                    7
for k = 0; 1; 2; :::Thus, we see that a persistent (though transitory) increase
in the interest rate does not alter the size of the bubble on impact, but has a
positive e¤ect on its subsequent growth rate, leading to a permanent increase
in its size, given by
                                                B
                                              @qt+k     1
                                          lim       =               >0
                                         k!1 @"rt     1         r

       The previous outcome is clearly at odds with the conventional wisdom
regarding the e¤ects of interest rates on a bubble. Of course, the impact
on the observed asset price may be positive or negative, depending on the
relative size of the bubble and fundamental components. In the long run,
however, the impact on the fundamental dies out, but the permanent positive
e¤ect on the bubble will remain (at least in the partial equilibrium example
above).
       How does the previous analysis change if we assume an arbitrary value
           9
for      r?     The resulting response of the bubble to an interest rate shock is
now given by

                                            B                       k
                                          @qt+k             1       r
                                                =     r +
                                           @"rt             1       r

for k = 0; 1; 2; :::Thus, the initial impact of an interest rate hike on the bubble
is just        r.   If the latter is negative, the rise in the interest rate will dampen
the size of any existing bubble, in a way consistent with the conventional
wisdom. But that negative e¤ect may not be permanent. To see this, note
   9
       In this case the bubble will follow the process

                      (1    r L)   qtB    = "rt 1 + (1      r L)( t +
                                                                             r
                                                                          r "t )
                                                  r                r
                                          =    r "t + (1     r r )"t 1   + (1      r L) t




                                                     8
that the long term e¤ect is given by
                                      B
                                    @qt+k                     1
                                lim       =       r   +
                               k!1 @"rt                   1        r

which will be negative only if        r   <    1=(1           r)   < 0, i.e. only if   r   is su¢ -
ciently negative, relative to the persistence of the interest rate. Otherwise,
the e¤ect of an interest rate increase on the size of the bubble will become
positive sooner or later.

1.1       An Alternative Equilibrium Re…nement

As discussed above, the value of          r   is, in principle, indeterminate. Though

 r     = 0 seems a natural benchmark (nesting the case of a pure sunspot),
other selection criteria may also be plausible. One possible criterion consists
in choosing      r   so that the (percent) impact of an interest rate innovation on
the bubble equals that on the fundamental (which is uniquely determined).
This will be the case if investors happen to coordinate their expectations
around the belief that the two components of an asset price show an identical
response to an interest rate innovation.10 That equilibrium re…nement is, as
far as I know, a novel one, which may be of independent interest in other
applications of the theory of asset bubbles.
       For the simple partial equilibrium model of an in…nitely-lived asset con-
sidered above, the response of the fundamental component to an interest rate
innovation is given by (see Appendix for a derivation):
                                    @qtF              R
                                         =
                                    @"rt          R       r
  10
    Interestingly, that assumption would seem to be consistent with the logic underlying
the conventional wisdom about the e¤ects of monetary policy on asset price bubbles which,
as discussed above, is based on a "fundamentals logic".

                                              9
where R > 1 is the steady state gross real interest rate.11 Thus, under the
equilibrium re…nement considered here we set                    r   =    R=(R   r ).   Accord-
ingly, the response of the bubble component to an interest rate shock would
be given by:
                                  B                                 k
                                @qt+k          R           1        r
                                      =                +
                                 @"rt      R       r       1        r
       In the long run, the interest rate increase has a permanent positive e¤ect
on the bubble, given by
                              B
                            @qt+k              r (R        1)
                          lim     =                                     >0
                         k!1 @"rt   (R             r )(1        r)

       Thus, we see that under the re…nement proposed here the e¤ect of an
interest rate increase on the size of the bubble is negative only over a …nite
horizon, eventually turning positive.

       The simple partial equilibrium example above has illustrated how the re-
lation between monetary policy and asset price bubbles can be potentially
at odds with the conventional wisdom, which invariably points to an interest
rate increase as the natural way to disin‡ate a growing bubble. More pre-
cisely, the previous analysis makes clear that any case for "leaning against
the wind" policies must be based on a systematic negative relation between
interest rate and bubble innovations (i.e., a negative value for coe¢ cient                r ).

Since neither the sign nor the size of the that relation is pinned down by eco-
nomic theory, such a case would rest on extremely fragile grounds, at least
under the assumptions made here.
  11
     Note that for the fundamental price of an asset that yields positive (stationary) div-
idends over an in…nite horizon to be well de…ned (…nite) we require that R > 1, i.e. the
(net) interest rate must be positive in the steady state. As discussed below, that condition
is inconsistent with the existence of a bubble in general equilibrium. In the present section
I ignore these general equilibrium constraints.

                                             10
    Of course, one might argue that the partial equilibrium nature of the pre-
vious example may be misleading in that regard, by not taking into account
the existence of aggregate constraints that may impose limits on the size of
the bubble and hence on its survival. Furthermore, the type of policy inter-
vention considered (i.e. an exogenous change in the real rate) is arguably less
relevant for the issue at hand than a policy rule that describes the systematic
response of the interest rate to movements in the size of the bubble. The
remainder of the paper seeks to address those potential criticisms by pro-
viding an example of possible failure of the conventional wisdom regarding
the e¤ects of "leaning against the wind" policies that is grounded on a gen-
eral equilibrium setting, and in which the central bank follows a well de…ned
interest rate rule allowing for a systematic response to asset price bubbles.


2     Asset Price Bubbles in an OLG Model with
      Nominal Rigidities
I develop a highly stylized overlapping generations model without capital and
where labor is supplied inelastically as a laboratory for the analysis of the im-
pact of monetary policy on asset pricing bubbles. In equilibrium, aggregate
employment and output are constant. The assumptions of monopolistic com-
petition and price setting in advance, however, imply that monetary policy
is not neutral. In particular, by in‡uencing the path of the real interest rate,
the central bank can a¤ect asset prices (including those of bubbly assets)
and, as a result, the distribution of consumption across cohorts and welfare.




                                       11
2.1       Consumers

Each individual lives for two periods. Individuals born in period t seek to
maximize expected utility

                                log C1;t + Et flog C2;t+1 g

                  R1                1        1                  R1                 1        1
where C1;t          0
                        C1;t (i)1       di       and C2;t+1      0
                                                                     C2;t+1 (i)1       di       are
the bundles consumed when young and old, respectively. Note that, in each
period, there is a continuum of di¤erentiated goods available, each produced
by a di¤erent …rm, and with a constant elasticity of substitution given by
 . Henceforth I assume              > 1. Goods (and the …rms producing them) are
indexed by i 2 [0; 1]. The size of each cohort is constant and normalized to
unity.
       Each individual is endowed with the "know-how" to produce a di¤erenti-
ated good, and with that purpose he sets up a new …rm. That …rm becomes
productive only after one period (i.e. when its owner is old) and only for
one period, generating a pro…t which accrues to its owner.12 Each individual
is also endowed at birth with                2 [0; 1) units of an intrinsically worthless
asset (a "bubble"), whose price is QB
                                    tjt                 0 (with the non-negativity con-
straint being guaranteed by free disposal). A market is assumed to exist
where such bubbly assets, introduced by both current and previous cohorts,
can be traded.13 Each period, a fraction                 of each vintage of bubbly assets
  12
     This is just a convenient device to avoid having in…nitely-lived …rms, whose market
value would not be bounded under the conditions that make it possible for a bubble to
exist in the present model.
  13
     In an earlier version of the paper, the bubble was attached to the stock of …rms, which
could be traded beyond their (productive) life, thus becoming a pure bubble. The current
formulation simpli…es the notation considerably, without a¤ecting any of the results.


                                                  12
is assumed to lose its value (e.g. they are physically destroyed). The lat-
ter assumption implies that the total amount of bubbly assets outstanding
remains constant and equal to one.
    Each young individual sells his labor services inelastically, for a (real)
wage Wt . He consumes C1;t and purchases two types of assets: (i) one-period
nominally riskless discount bonds yielding a nominal return it and (ii) a
variety of bubbly assets, introduced by both current and previous cohorts.
    Accordingly, the budget constraint for the young at time t is given by:
                Z
                                             ZtM X B
                     1                                    1
                         Pt (i)C1;t (i)                       B
                                        di +    +     Qtjt k Ztjt              k   = Wt + QB
                                                                                           tjt
                 0             Pt            Pt   k=0

                     R1                    1
                                               1

where Pt                 0
                             Pt (i)1 di            is the aggregate price index, ZtM is the value
                                    B
of one-period bonds purchased, and Ztjt                           k   denotes the quantity purchased
of the bubbly asset introduced by cohort born in period t                                        k, and whose
current price is QB
                  tjt k , for k = 0; 1; 2; :::

    When old, the individual consumes all his wealth, which includes the
dividends generated by his …rm, the payo¤ from his maturing bond holdings,
and the proceeds from the sale of his bubbly assets. Formally,
   Z    1                                                                               X
                                                                                        1
            Pt+1 (i)C2;t+1 (i)            Z M (1 + it )
                               di = Dt+1 + t            + (1                        )         QB        B
                                                                                               t+1jt k Ztjt   k
    0             Pt+1                       Pt+1                                       k=0

    The optimal allocation of expenditures across goods yields the familiar
demand functions:
                                                         Pt (i)
                                          C1;t (i) =                    C1;t                                      (3)
                                                          Pt
                                                        Pt+1 (i)
                                   C2;t+1 (i) =                          C2;t+1                                   (4)
                                                         Pt+1


                                                        13
                                          R1   Pt (i)C1;t (i)                   R1   Pt+1 (i)C2;t+1 (i)
for all i 2 [0; 1], which in turn imply   0          Pt
                                                              di   = C1;t and   0          Pt+1
                                                                                                        di   =
C2;t+1 .
    The remaining optimality conditions associated with the consumer’s prob-
lem take the following form:

                                                C1;t            Pt
                     1 = (1 + it )Et                                                               (5)
                                               C2;t+1          Pt+1

                                                    C1;t
                   QB
                    tjt   k   = (1   ) Et                          QB
                                                                    t+1jt   k                      (6)
                                                   C2;t+1
for k = 0; 1; 2; ::: Equation (5) is a standard Euler equation linking consump-
tion growth to the real interest rate. Equation (6) shows that the market
value of the bubbly asset re‡ects investors’ expectations of the (properly
discounted) price at which it can be sold in the future.
    Finally, and for future reference, I de…ne the (gross) real interest rate as

                                                        Pt
                                Rt   (1 + it )Et
                                                       Pt+1

2.2        Firms

Each individual, endowed with the "know-how" to produce a di¤erentiated
good, sets up a …rm that becomes productive after one period (i.e., when its
founder is old). When productive, the …rm operates under the technology:

                                     Yt (i) = Nt (i)                                               (7)

where Yt (i) and Nt (i) denote …rm i’s output and labor input, respectively,
for i 2 [0; 1]. After its operational period (i.e., once its founder dies) the …rm
becomes unproductive (with its index i being "inherited" by a newly created
…rm).

                                            14
       Each …rm behaves as a monopolistic competitor, setting the price of its
good in order to maximize its value, subject to the demand constraint Yt (i) =
(Pt (i)=Pt )    Ct , where Ct       C1;t + C2;t .
       I introduce nominal rigidities by assuming that the price of each good is
set in advance, i.e. before the shocks are realized. Thus, the price of a good
that will be produced and sold in period t, denoted by Pt , is set at the end
of t     1 in order to solve

                                                             Pt
                            max Et    1         t 1;t Yt           Wt
                              Pt                             Pt

subject to the demand schedule Yt (i) = (Pt =Pt )                  Ct , where    t 1;t   (C1;t 1 =C2;t )
is the relevant discount factor. The implied optimal price setting rule is then
given by
                                                   Pt
                           Et   1    t 1;t Yt                MWt        =0                   (8)
                                                   Pt
where M          1
                     .
       Note also that if …rms could instead set the price of their good after the
shocks are realized, they would choose a price Pt equal to a constant gross
markup M times the nominal marginal cost Pt Wt . Hence, under ‡exible
prices (or in the absence of uncertainty):

                                          Pt = MPt Wt

2.3       Monetary Policy

The central bank is assumed to set the short-term nominal interest rate it
according to the following rule:

                         1 + it = REt f    t+1 g (      t=   )    QB
                                                                   t =Q
                                                                        B    b
                                                                                             (9)

                                                   15
where       t    Pt =Pt   1   denotes gross in‡ation and          is the corresponding tar-
get. Note that under the above rule the real interest rate responds systemat-
ically to ‡uctuations in in‡ation and the size of the aggregate bubble, with a
strength indexed by              and    b,   respectively.14 Henceforth I assume        > 0,
which guarantees the determinacy of the price level, as shown below. Much of
the explorations below examine the consequences of alternative                   b   settings
for the equilibrium behavior of the bubble itself as well as for consumers’
welfare.


3        Equilibrium
In the present section I derive the model’s remaining equilibrium conditions.
The clearing of the market for each good requires that Yt (i) = C1;t (i)+C2;t (i)
                                          R1        1       1
for all i 2 [0; 1] and all t. Letting Yt     Y (i)1 di
                                           0 t
                                                              denote aggregate
output, we can use the consumer’s optimality conditions (3) and (4) to derive
the aggregate goods market clearing condition:

                                        Yt = C1;t + C2;t                                (10)

       Also, from the income side we have

                                         Yt = Dt + Wt                                   (11)
  14
       As an alternative I have also analyzed the speci…cation

                                 1 + it = R (   t=   )   QB
                                                          t =Q
                                                              B   b




   The main qualitative results obtained under (9) carry over to this alternative speci…ca-
tion, though the analysis is (algebraically) more cumbersome in the latter case.




                                                 16
    Labor market clearing implies
                                              Z     1
                                   1 =                  Yt (i)di
                                                0
                                          = Yt                              (12)

where the second equality follows from the fact that all …rms set identical
prices and produce identical quantities in the symmetric equilibrium. Thus,
the supply of aggregate output is constant and equal to unity.
    Evaluating the optimal price-setting condition under sticky prices at the
symmetric equilibrium we obtain

                        Et   1   f(1=C2;t ) (1           MWt )g = 0         (13)

    Note also for future reference that both in the case of ‡exible prices and/or
in the absence of uncertainty, the optimal price setting implies a constant real
wage
                                          Wt = 1=M

    Asset markets clearing requires

                                           ZtM = 0

and
                                    B
                                   Ztjt   k   = (1            )k

for k = 0; 1; 2; ::.
    De…ne the economy’s aggregate bubble index, QB
                                                 t , and the corresponding

index for the "pre-existing" bubbles, Bt , as follows:
                                          X
                                          1
                             QB
                              t                 (1         )k QB
                                                               tjt   k
                                          k=0


                                                17
                                     X
                                     1
                          Bt               (1   )k QB
                                                    tjt   k
                                     k=1

   It is also convenient to let Ut         QB
                                            tjt denote the aggregate market value

of the newly introduced bubbles. The following equilibrium condition then
follows from (6) and the previous de…nitions:

                                                  C1;t
                  QB
                   t     Bt + Ut = Et                         Bt+1            (14)
                                                 C2;t+1

   Two exogenous driving forces are assumed. First, the value of the new
bubbles brought along by the new cohorts, fUt g, which is assumed to follow
an exogenous i:i:d: process with mean U . Secondly, the innovations in the
value of the pre-existing bubbles, Bt Et 1 fBt g, are assumed to be exogenous
and independent from fUt g.
   Equations (10), (11), (12), (13) and (14) combined with (5) and (9) intro-
duced earlier, describe the equilibrium dynamics of the model economy. Next
I characterize the equilibrium for the deterministic case, for which an exact
solution exists. For the (more interesting) stochastic case, analyzed further
below, I need to rely instead on the log-linearized equilibrium conditions
around a deterministic steady state.

3.1    Equilibrium Dynamics: The Deterministic Case

I start by analyzing the deterministic case, where it is assumed that Ut =
U > 0 and Bt     Et 1 fBt g = 0 for all t: As discussed above, in the absence
of uncertainty the optimal price setting condition (13) implies Wt = 1=M,
for all t. It follows from (11) that Dt = 1        1=M, whereas consumption of
the young and old are given respectively by C1;t = 1=M               Bt and C2;t =


                                           18
1   1=M + Bt , for all t. Furthermore, the real interest rate is given by
                        1     1    1=M + Bt+1
                Rt =                                  R(Bt ; Bt+1 )            (15)
                                  1=M Bt
    Note that the previous conditions determine the equilibrium allocation,
given an equilibrium path for the (pre-existing) bubble, fBt g. The latter
must satisfy the deterministic version of (14), given by
                          Bt + U               Bt+1
                                 =
                         1=M Bt    1         1=M + Bt+1
    Thus a deterministic bubbly equilibrium is de…ned by a sequence fBt g
satisfying
                            (1 1=M)(Bt + U )
                  Bt+1 =                               H(Bt ; U )              (16)
                            =M (1 + )Bt U
with Bt 2 (0; 1=M) for all t, for some U            0. Note that the aggregate
bubble along that path is then given by QB
                                         t = Bt + U . Given fBt g, we

can determine the equilibrium values for the remaining variables using the
expressions above.
    Similarly, a bubbly steady state is de…ned by a pair (B; U ) such that
B = H(B; U ) with B 2 (0; 1=M) and U              0. Note that a steady state is
locally stable (unstable) if @H(B; U )=@B < 1 (> 1).
    The following Lemma establishes the conditions for the existence of such
bubbly equilibria and steady states.

    Lemma 1: A necessary and su¢ cient condition for the existence of a
deterministic bubbly equilibrium is given by

                                   M<1+                                        (17)

    Furthermore, when (17) is satis…ed there exists a continuum of stable bub-
bly steady states, f(B S (U ); U ) j B S (U ) = H(B S (U ); U ) for U 2 (0; U )g, as

                                        19
well as a continuum of unstable bubbly steady states f(B U (U ); U ) j B U (U ) =
                                                              p
H(B U (U ); U ) for U 2 [0; U )g, where U  +(1+ )(1 W )+2          (1 + )(1 W ) >
0.
          Proof : see Appendix 2.

          Figure 1 illustrates graphically the mapping (16), the two steady states,
and the trajectories for the bubble consistent with equilibrium for a given
U > 0.

          Let R(B)    R(B; B) denote the steady state real interest rate. One can
easily check that condition (17) is equivalent to R(0) < 1, which corresponds
to a negative (net) interest rate in a bubbleless steady state. The latter
is in turn associated with a Pareto suboptimal allocation since it implies
1=C1 < =C2 and, hence, the possibility of making all cohorts better-o¤ by
transferring resources from the young to the old (which is what a bubble
does). A similar condition holds in the models of Samuelson (1958) and
Tirole (1985).
          Given that QB = B+U > B it follows from (14) that R(B) < 1 must hold
in any bubbly steady state, thus implying a negative (net) real interest rate
in the latter. Note that if the interest rate were positive any existing bubble
would grow unboundedly, which would be inconsistent with the de…nition of a
steady state.15 Furthermore, the unbounded growth in the size of the bubble
would eventually lead to a violation of the resource constraint, and would
thus be inconsistent with equilibrium. The negative interest rate is needed in
order for the aggregate bubble to remain constant over time, as the shrinking
     15
    As is well known, the introduction of secular productivity growth makes it possible to
reconcile the existence of a bubbly steady state with a positive real interest rate (see, e.g.
Tirole (1985)). See below for further discussion.

                                             20
size of the pre-existing bubble is exactly compensated by introduction of new
bubbles.16
   Note that the previous constraint on the interest rate, together with the
fact that R0 (B) > 0, imposes an upper bound on the steady state bubble,
namely, B      1=M      1=(1 + )             B U (0), where R(B U (0)) = 1. Hence the
upper bound on the size of any bubbly steady state is given by the bubbly
(unstable) steady state when U = 0. Note that the previous upper bound is
always smaller than 1=M, the wage of the young.

   Most importantly for the purposes of the present paper, one should note
that neither the existence nor the allocations associated with a deterministic
bubbly equilibrium are in‡uenced by monetary policy. The intuition behind
that result is straightforward: in the absence of uncertainty, the assumed
constraint on the timing of price setting is not binding, so the economy
behaves as if prices were fully ‡exible. Hence monetary policy is neutral. In
particular, the real interest rate is given by (15), which evolves independently
of monetary policy rule. The role of the latter is restricted to pinning down
in‡ation, whose equilibrium path is given by:
                                      h                          i   1

                          t   =           (Rt =R)   QB
                                                     t =Q
                                                         B   b




3.1.1   Extension: The Case of Positive Deterministic Growth

The analysis above has been conducted under the assumption of a stationary
technology. Consider instead a technology Yt (i) = At Nt (i) with constant pro-
                                  t
ductivity growth, i.e. At =           and      > 1. It is easy to check that under this
  16
     A similar property can be found in the model of capital accumulation with bubble
creation of Martín and Ventura (2012).


                                               21
modi…ed technology the model above implies the existence of an equilibrium
with balanced growth. In particular, it can be easily shown that all the equi-
librium conditions derived above still hold, with the original real variables
(output, consumption, dividend, wage, stock prices, and, eventually, bub-
ble size) now normalized by parameter At , and with Rt being replaced with
et
R       Rt = . Accordingly, a bubble can exist along the balanced growth path
                                                       e
(i.e. a steady state of the normalized system) only if R     1 or, equivalently,
R        , i.e. as long as the real interest rate is below the economy’s growth
rate. Such a bubble would be growing at the same rate as the economy. An
analogous result was shown in Samuelson (1958) and Tirole (1985), among
others. That extension allows one to reconcile the existence of a bubbly
equilibrium with the steady state (net) real interest rate being positive.

3.1.2     Discussion: Robustness to the Introduction of Money

The previous analysis did not incorporate money explicitly. One may wonder,
in particular, whether the existence of bubbly equilibria is robust to the
introduction of money. Two cases must be distinguished, corresponding to
two di¤erent motives for holding money. I brie‡y discuss them in turn.
     The …rst case is that of pure …at money, i.e. money is assumed to be
an intrinsically worthless asset which can be used as a store of value (see,
e.g. Samuelson (1958)). In that case, money is just another bubbly asset,
one that happens to be used also as a unit of account. Its main distinctive
feature is that its net nominal return is zero (by de…nition) and hence its
real return is given by minus the rate of in‡ation. This has an important
consequence in terms of the analysis here: monetary policy can no longer



                                       22
be described by an interest rate rule like (9), since the nominal interest rate
must equal zero in any equilibrium in which money is valued. As a result
one cannot examine the impact of "leaning against the wind policies" of the
sort considered here.17
         Perhaps a more natural (and realistic) approach to the introduction of
money in the framework above consists in assuming that money holdings
provide some services (other than "storage of wealth"). In that case the
nominal interest rate in any monetary equilibrium is no longer pinned down
at zero. Still, a zero lower bound on the nominal interest rate applies. But as
in other examples in the literature of monetary models that assume interest
rate rules, the zero lower bound can be dealt with whenever it is not the
focus of the analysis, by making assumptions that guarantee that it will
not be binding. In the context of the present model, those assumptions
can take two forms (or a combination thereof), both of which are realistic.
First, and as argued above, the assumption of positive trend growth ( > 1)
implies that a continuum of bubbly steady states exist involving positive real
interest rates. Those would be consistent with positive nominal interest rates
in a neighborhood of such steady states, even if a zero steady state in‡ation
(        = 1) were to be assumed. Alternatively, one may assume a su¢ ciently
high, positive in‡ation target (     > 1), in which case, even in the absence of
trend growth, there will be a continuum of steady states involving positive
    17
    In a model with pure …at money and a constant growth rate k of the money supply,
one can show the existence of bubbly equilibria as long as the condition

                                          (1 + ) M
                                 0   k<
                                             M 1
is satis…ed. The composition between the monetary and non-monetary components of the
bubble is, however, indeterminate. See Galí (2013) for details.


                                          23
nominal interest rates. In either case, the assumption that real balances
provide services other than "storage of wealth" implies that consumers will
be willing to hold money even if the latter is dominated in rate of return
by both bonds and bubbly assets, as will be the case whenever the nominal
interest rate is positive. But money will still be valued in that case, and
a well de…ned money demand will determine the amount of steady state
real balances as a function of the interest rate. In Appendix 3 I provide
an example of an extension of the benchmark model above in which real
balances enter separably in the utility function (a common assumption in
macro models), and where the analysis can proceed as in the text without any
changes (other than the possible "normalization" required by the assumption
of positive trend growth, as discussed above).

3.2    Equilibrium Dynamics: The Stochastic Case

The analysis of the deterministic case found above has uncovered the condi-
tions for the existence of a bubbly steady state. My analysis of the stochastic
case, as is common in much of the literature on monetary policy rules, focuses
on stationary ‡uctuations in a neighborhood of one such steady state. Thus,
and in order to make progress in that direction, I start by log-linearizing the
model’s equilibrium conditions around a steady state and analyze the result-
ing system of di¤erence equations. Unless otherwise noted I use lower case
letters to denote the log of the original variable, and the "b" symbol to indi-
cate the deviation from the corresponding steady state value. The resulting
equilibrium conditions can be written as:

                               0=b
                                 c1;t + Rb
                                         c2;t                             (18)

                                      24
                             b
                             c1;t = Et fb
                                        c2;t+1 g                rbt               (19)

                             b
                             c2;t = (1               )dbt + bbt                   (20)


                           qbtB = Rbbt + (1                  R)b
                                                               ut

                                         = Et fbbt+1 g       rbt                  (21)

                                 bt g = Et 1 fdbt g = 0
                          E t 1 fw                                                (22)

                                     rbt =      bt +      btB
                                                         bq                       (23)

where R = R(B) (as de…ned above) and                            B=( B + 1).
   Note that one can rewrite (21) to obtain

                    bbt = Rbbt       1   + (1    R)b
                                                   ut    1   + rbt    1   +   t   (24)

where f t g is an arbitrary martingale-di¤erence process (i.e. Et 1 f t g = 0
for all t). As discussed above, and in order to avoid embedding in the model
an arbitrary link between monetary policy and the size of the bubble, I as-
sume in what follows that        t   is an exogenous sunspot shock whose variance
is independent of the policy rule. By making this assumption I force mone-
tary policy to in‡uence the size of the bubble only through the interest rate
channel and not through an (arbitrary) indeterminacy channel.

3.2.1   Flexible Price Equilibrium

Before I turn to the case of sticky prices, I take a brief detour to analyze the
‡exible price case. This will help us understand the role played by sticky
prices in the analysis below. As discussed above, when …rms can adjust
freely their prices once the shocks are realized, they optimally choose to


                                                25
maintain a constant gross markup M. This, in turn, implies that the wage
and dividend remain constant at their steady state values. Accordingly,
equilibrium condition (22) must be replaced by

                                        bt = dbt = 0
                                        w                                                (25)

       Combined with (19)-(21), the above equilibrium condition implies:

                        rbt = (1 + )BRbbt + B(1            R)b
                                                             ut                          (26)

       The previous condition makes clear that the real interest rate is, under
‡exible prices, independent of monetary policy.(i.e. of                 and   b ).   Plugging
the previous result in (24):

                      bbt = bbt   1   + (1   R)(1 + B)b
                                                      ut    1   +   t


where         R(1 + (1 + )B). Stationarity of the bubble requires                    2 [0; 1),
which I henceforth assume.18 As shown in Appendix 4,                    = @H(B; U )=@Bt .
Thus, the condition for (local) stationarity of the bubble around the steady
state in the stochastic equilibrium corresponds to the condition of stability of
that steady state under the deterministic equilibrium dynamics. The analy-
sis below is restricted to ‡uctuations around a stable deterministic steady
state.19
       Note that under ‡exible prices, monetary policy has no in‡uence on the
evolution of the bubble, due to its inability to a¤ect the real interest rate.
  18
      That stationarity assumption also justi…es the use of methods based on a log-linear
approximation of the equilibrium conditions.
   19              e
      Note that R(B)(1      e + )) = 1 implicitly de…nes an upper bound B
                        + B(1                                               e > 0 on the
size of the steady state bubble consistent with stationarity of bubble ‡uctuations. That
upper bound satis…es B  e = BS = BU


                                             26
Naturally, though, monetary policy can in‡uence in‡ation (and other nomi-
nal variables). In particular, equilibrium in‡ation can be derived by combin-
ing interest rate rule (23) and (26) to yield:

              t   =   (1=   ) (       b       B(1 + ))Rbbt + (             b   B)(1         R)b
                                                                                              ut   (27)

       Not surprisingly the impact of bubbles on in‡ation is not independent of
the monetary policy rule. In particular, we see that some positive systematic
response of the interest rate to the aggregate bubble (                          b    > 0) is desirable
from the viewpoint of in‡ation stabilization. More precisely, the value of

 b   that minimizes the variance of in‡ation under ‡exible prices is given by

 b   = B(1 +          ) > 0, where                R2 varfbbt g=varfb
                                                                   qtB g. Of course, there is no
special reason why the central bank would want to stabilize in‡ation in the
present environment, so I do not analyze this issue further here.20

3.3       Sticky Price Equilibrium

We can combine (18) through (21) to write the goods market clearing con-
dition as:
                      0 = B(1 + )Rbbt + B(1                          ut + Rdbt
                                                                   R)b                rbt

       As discussed in Section 3.2, in the presence of sticky prices we have

                                         bt g = Et 1 fdbt g = 0
                                  Et 1 f w                                                         (28)
  20
    It is easy to check that the central bank could fully stabilize in‡ation in this case if it
could identify and respond separately to existing and new bubbles with a rule

                                          rbt =    t   +     b +
                                                            b bt      bt
                                                                     uu

where     b       B(1 + ) and     u         B:




                                                       27
for all t. Note also that the predetermination of prices implies:

                                          Et 1 f t g =             t                                (29)

      Combining the previous equation with the interest rate rule (23) and
equilibrium condition (22) one can derive the following closed form solution
for the evolution of the bubble (see Appendix 5 for details):

       bbt = bbt   1   +(   b   + 1)(1    R)b
                                            ut       1   +    t   +(   b   B(1 + ))R          t 1   (30)

      Note that the persistence of the bubble ‡uctuations, as measured by
the autoregressive coe¢ cient                    R(1 + B(1 + )), is the same as in the
natural equilibrium and, hence, independent of monetary policy. The latter,
however, can in‡uence the bubble’s overall size and volatility through the
choice of interest rate rule coe¢ cient                  b,   as made clear by (30). Through the
in‡uence of the real interest rate on the size of the bubble bbt as well as on
the incentives to allocate consumption intertemporally, monetary policy will
a¤ect the allocation of aggregate consumption across cohorts, thus a¤ecting
welfare. This is discussed in detail in the following section.
      On the other hand, equilibrium in‡ation is given by the AR(1) process21

                   t   =    t 1     (1=    )(    b           B(1 + )R) (     b   + 1)"t   1         (31)

where "t       R t + (1            ut is the innovation in the aggregate bubble. Thus,
                                 R)b
we see that in‡ation inherits the persistence of the aggregate bubble, while it
‡uctuates as a result of innovations in the latter, interacting with the central
bank’s feedback rule.
 21
      See Appendix 5 for details.



                                                     28
4       The Impact of Monetary Policy on Bubble
        Dynamics
As made clear by the analysis in the previous section, the existence of bubbles
in the present model economy is not a monetary phenomenon. In other
words, the conditions for their existence do not depend on how monetary
policy is conducted.
      When prices are ‡exible, monetary policy is neutral vis-à-vis the bubble:
it cannot have an e¤ect either on its size or on its persistence. On the
other hand, and as shown in section 3.3, in the presence of nominal rigidities
monetary policy can have an e¤ect on the size and volatility of asset price
bubbles. In particular, it can in‡uence the anticipated component of the
bubble, Et 1 fbbt g. As shown in Appendix 5, the latter evolves according to
the simple AR(1) process:

                     Et 1 fbbt g = Et 2 fbbt 1 g + (       b   + 1)"t   1   (32)

where, again, "t     R t + (1      ut is the innovation in the aggregate bubble.
                                 R)b
      Thus we see that the in‡uence of monetary policy on the anticipated com-
ponent of the bubble works through the choice of the interest rate coe¢ cient

 b.   To see how that choice in‡uences the volatility of the aggregate bubble
qbtB note that (32), together with equation

                                qbtB = REt 1 fbbt g + "t                    (33)

implies
                                        R2 (   b   + 1)2
                           qtB g =
                       varfb                        2
                                                           +1      2
                                                                   "        (34)
                                          1


                                          29
           2
where      "    R2        2
                              + (1   R)2   2
                                           u   is the variance of the aggregate bubble in-
novation. That relation is illustrated graphically in Figure 2, which displays
                                                                                                    22
the standard deviation of the aggregate bubble as a function of                                   b.

       An analysis of that relation yields several results of interest (all of which
are captured in Figure 2). First, equation (34) implies that a "leaning against
the wind" policy (which corresponds to                     b   > 0) generates a larger volatility
in the bubble than a policy of "benign neglect" (                            b   = 0). Secondly, and
conditional on        b        0, the stronger is the interest rate response to the bubble,
the larger is the volatility of the latter. Finally, note that the central bank can
minimize the bubble volatility by setting                      b   =     1 < 0, a policy which fully
stabilizes the anticipated component of the bubble (i.e. it implies Et 1 fbbt g =
0, for all t). In other words, stabilization of bubble ‡uctuations requires that
the interest rate be lowered in response to positive innovations in existing or
new bubbles, a …nding clearly at odds with the conventional wisdom.
       As shown above, and as long as                      6= 0, equilibrium in‡ation in the
economy with sticky prices is uniquely pinned down and satis…es

                  t   =        t 1   (1=   )(    b        B(1 + )R) (            b   + 1)"t   1          (35)

       The central bank can follow three alternative strategies if it seeks to sta-
bilize in‡ation. First, it can respond very strongly to in‡ation itself (by
setting        arbitrarily large, for any …nite                b ).    Secondly, it can adjust inter-
est rates in response to ‡uctuations in the bubble with a strength given by

 b   = B(1 + )R (while setting                  at a …nite value). Doing so exactly o¤sets
  22
     The following parameter settings are assumed in constructing Figure 2: = 1, M =
1:2, B = 0:1 and 2 = 2u = 0:01. None of the qualitative …ndings discussed in the text
hinge on the speci…c choice of parameter values, as long as (17) is satis…ed.


                                                     30
the impact of the bubble on (expected) aggregate demand, thus neutralizing
its impact on in‡ation. Note that neither of these policies eliminates ‡uctua-
tions in the bubble, they just prevent the latter from a¤ecting the aggregate
price level. Finally, the central bank may choose to stabilize the anticipated
component of the bubble (the only one that can a¤ect in‡ation when prices
are set in advance), which can be achieved by setting               b   =   1, as discussed
above. The latter result illustrates how the emergence of an aggregate bub-
ble and the existence of ‡uctuations in the latter do not necessarily generate
a policy trade-o¤ between stabilization of the bubble and stabilization of
in‡ation.23
       Note however that in the economy above, with synchronized price-setting
and an inelastic labor supply, in‡ation is not a source of welfare losses. Ac-
cordingly, and within the logic of the model, there is no reason why the
central bank should seek to stabilize in‡ation. It is also not clear that mini-
mizing the volatility of the aggregate bubble constitutes a desirable objective
in itself. In order to clarify those issues, the next section analyzes explicitly
the nature of the model’s implied optimal policy.


5        Optimal Monetary Policy in the Bubbly
         Economy
I analyze the optimal response of monetary policy to asset price bubbles
in the model economy developed above. I take as a welfare criterion the
  23
    The absence of a trade-o¤ obtains when, as assumed above, bubble shocks are the
only source of uncertainty in the economy. Other sources of ‡uctuations may require
interest rate adjustments in order to stabilize in‡ation, which in turn may induce additional
volatility in the size of the bubble.



                                             31
unconditional mean of an individual’s lifetime utility. In a neighborhood of
the steady state that mean can be approximated up to second order as

Eflog C1;t + log C2;t+1 g ' log C1 + log C2                           c1;t g + varfb
                                                            (1=2)(varfb            c2;t g)

      Note that the goods market clearing condition C1;t + C2;t = 1 implies
that varfb
         c1;t g is proportional to varfb
                                       c2;t g. Thus, a central bank that seeks
to maximize welfare under the criterion set above will minimize the variance
of
                                   b
                                   c2;t = (1        )dbt + bbt

where, again,           B=( B + 1) 2 [0; 1].
      That objective poses a dilemma for the central bank. To see this note
that, as derived in Appendix 6, dividends are given by24

             dbt = (1= R) [(   b     B(1 + ))R         t   +(    b       B)(1   R)b
                                                                                  ut ]

      Thus, minimizing the volatility of dividends calls for setting                  b   = B(1 +
 R2 ( 2 = 2" )) > 0. Note that such a policy would require adjusting the inter-
est rate upward in response to positive bubble shocks, in order to stabilize
aggregate demand and to prevent upward (downward) pressure on wages
(dividends) from emerging. However, as discussed in the previous section,
such a policy would amplify the impact of current bubble shocks on the future
size of the bubble through the e¤ect of interest rates on bubble growth, thus
 24
      Accordingly, and given (11) the wage will be given by

           bt
           w    =    (M    1)dbt
                =    (M    1)(1= R) [(   b     B(1 + ))R        t   +(   b   B)(1   R)b
                                                                                      ut ]




                                               32
contributing through that channel to the destabilization of cohort-speci…c
consumption. In fact, and as discussed above, minimizing the volatility of
cohort-speci…c consumption directly linked to bubble ‡uctuations calls for
setting    b   =   1 < 0. Note …nally that neither the volatility of dividends nor
that of the bubble depend on the in‡ation coe¢ cient                            .
      The welfare-maximizing choice of                    b   will naturally seek a compromise
between stabilization of dividends and stabilization of the bubble size. For-
mally, the optimal coe¢ cient minimizes

                                                                    ( R B)2 (       b+   1)2
          varf(1      )dbt + bbt g /         (   b        B)2 +                     2
                                                                                               2
                                                                                               "
                                                                        1

      Figure 3 displays the expected welfare loss as a function of                             b,   under
the model’s baseline parameter settings. The minimum of that loss function
determines the optimal interest rate coe¢ cient. The latter can be written
as:

                                 b   = ( 1) + B(1                     )                                 (36)

where          ( R B)2 =(1           2
                                         + ( R B)2 ) 2 [0; 1] is an increasing function of
B, the steady state size of the bubble (relative to the economy’s size, which
is normalized to unity).
      Thus, the optimal strength of the central bank’s response to the bubble
is a nonlinear function of the average size of the latter, as well as other
exogenous parameters. Figure 4 displays the optimal coe¢ cient                                      b   as a
function of B, under the baseline parameter settings. Note that the mapping
is non-monotonic:       b   is shown to be …rst increasing, and then decreasing, in
the size of the bubble. As the steady state size of the bubble approaches zero,
so does the optimal coe¢ cient, i.e. limB!0                     b   = 0, as can be checked using

                                                     33
(36). On the other hand, as B approaches its maximum value consistent with
stationarity (implying    ! 1), the optimal coe¢ cient converges to (minus)
the corresponding interest rate, i.e. limB!Be    b   =   1 < 0. Hence, given a
su¢ ciently large average bubble consistent with a stable steady state, it is
optimal for the central bank to lower interest rates in response to a rise in
the size of the bubble.
    The latter …nding illustrates that the optimal monetary policy strategy
in response to asset price bubbles does not necessarily take the form of a
"leaning against the wind" policy or one of just "benign neglect".


6     Discussion
The analysis above calls into question the theoretical underpinnings of "lean-
ing against the wind" monetary policies with respect to asset price develop-
ments. According to those proposals central banks should raise interest rates
in the face of a developing asset price bubble, in order to tame it or eliminate
it altogether. The analysis above has shown that, at least when it comes
to a rational asset pricing bubble, such a policy may be counterproductive
and lead instead to larger bubble ‡uctuations and possibly lower welfare as
well. In the model economy developed above, it is generally desirable from
the viewpoint of bubble stabilization (and, under some assumptions, from
a welfare perspective as well) to pursue the opposite policy. That …nding,
which is a consequence of a basic arbitrage constraint that must be satis…ed
by a rational bubble, seems to have been ignored (or, at least, swept under
the rug) by proponents of "leaning against the wind" policies.
    To be clear, it is not my intention to suggest that policies that seek


                                      34
to prevent the emergence of bubbles or its excessive growth are necessarily
misguided, but only to point out that certain interest rate policies advocated
by a number of economists and policymakers may not necessarily have the
desired e¤ects in that regard.
   There are at least three assumptions in my model which undoubtedly
play an important role in accounting for my …ndings. I discuss them brie‡y
next.
   Firstly, and in the context of the OLG model developed above, I have
assumed that there is no systematic impact of interest rate surprises on the
"indeterminate" component of the bubble. Some readers may …nd that as-
sumption arbitrary. But it would be equally arbitrary to assume the existence
of a systematic relation of a given size or sign. Furthermore, and as illus-
trated by the partial equilibrium example of section 1, the possible short run
negative impact of an interest rate hike on the size of the bubble when the
orthogonality assumption is relaxed may be more than o¤set by the subse-
quent higher growth. At the end of the day, whether a systematic relation
between interest rate surprises and bubble innovations exists is ultimately
an empirical issue, but one that will not be settled easily given the inher-
ent unobservability of bubbles. Thus, and if nothing else, one should view
the present paper’s contribution as pointing to the fragility of the founda-
tions of "leaning against the wind" policies advocated on the basis of such a
systematic relation.
   Secondly, the asset pricing bubbles introduced in the model economy
above are of the rational type, i.e. they are consistent with rational expec-
tations on the part of all agents in the economy. In actual economies there


                                     35
may be asset price deviations from fundamentals that are di¤erent in nature
from the rational bubbles considered here and for which "leaning against the
wind" interest rate policies may have more desirable properties. Assessing
that possibility would require the explicit modelling of the nature of devia-
tions from fundamentals and how those deviations are in‡uenced by interest
rate policy. Of course, one should not rule out the possibility that some
models of non-rational bubbles may lead to entirely di¤erent implications
regarding the desirability of "leaning against the wind" policies.
       Thirdly, the analysis above has been conducted in a model economy with
no explicit …nancial sector and no …nancial market imperfections (other than
the existence of bubbles). In fact, the assumption of a representative con-
sumer in each cohort implies that the only …nancial transactions actually
carried out are the sale of bubbly assets by the old to the young, but no
credit is needed (in equilibrium) to …nance such transactions. By contrast,
much of the empirical and policy-oriented literature has emphasized the risks
associated with the rapid credit expansion that often accompanies (and helps
…nance) asset price booms.25 It is not clear, however, that a tighter monetary
policy may be the best way to counter the credit-based speculative bubbles
that may arise in this context, as opposed to a stricter regulatory and super-
visory framework with the necessary tools to dampen the growth of credit
allocated to (potentially destabilizing) speculative activities. Further e¤orts
at modelling explicitly the interaction of credit, bubbles and monetary policy
would thus seem highly welcomed.26
  25
    See, e.g., Schularick and Taylor (2009).
  26
    Recent research on non-monetary economies with rational bubbles and credit frictions
suggests that such interaction is likely to be a complex one, which may depend on a number
of modeling choices. Thus, in a model with capital accumulation and borrowing constraints


                                           36
    Gathering empirical evidence on the impact of monetary policy on asset
price bubbles should, of course, be high on the research agenda. It is clear
that any empirical analysis of that link faces many challenges. Firstly, the
di¢ culty inherent to the identi…cation of an asset’s bubble component does
not facilitate the task. Secondly, any observed comovement between asset
prices and policy rates can hardly be given a simple causal interpretation
since both variables are endogenous and likely to be in‡uenced by numer-
ous factors (including each other). In ongoing research (Galí and Gambetti
(2013)), we seek to assess the impact of monetary policy shocks on asset
price bubbles by estimating time-varying dynamic responses of selected asset
price indexes to an exogenous interest rate shock, identi…ed as in Christiano,
Eichenbaum and Evans (2005). In particular, we seek to uncover changes
over time in the patterns of response of asset prices to such shocks, which
may correspond to changes in the relative size of the bubble component of
several asset categories. Further empirical work on this issue, including case
studies focusing on speci…c bubbly episodes, would seem to be highly welcome
in order to complement any theoretical e¤orts.
à la Martin and Ventura (2012), an interest rate increase engineered by the central bank
will tighten or relax the borrowing constraint (thus dampening or enhancing investment
and growth) depending on its overall impact on the total price (fundament plus bubble)
of the assets which are used as collateral. On the other hand, the nature of the borrowing
constraints assumed by Miao and Wang (2012), among others, implies that the simple
arbitrage relation linking the growth rate of the bubble to the interest rate is broken,
since the bubble generates a "dividend" in the form of the extra pro…ts resulting from
the implied relaxation of the borrowing constraint. Accordingly, the required expected
increase in the bubble resulting from a higher interest rate will be smaller. In addition,
the net e¤ect of an interest rate change on aggregate demand is ambiguous since the
"conventional" e¤ect may be partly o¤set or enhanced by the induced e¤ect on borrowing
constraints, whose sign may depend on a number of factors.




                                           37
7     Concluding Remarks
The present paper should be viewed as part of an e¤ort to enhance our
understanding of the relation between monetary policy and bubbles and,
more speci…cally, of the possible underpinnings of "leaning against the wind"
policies. Both the simple partial equilibrium example, described in Section
1, and the general equilibrium framework analyzed in the remainder of the
paper make clear that the predictions of economic theory regarding that
relation do not always support the conventional wisdom.
    The bulk of my theoretical analysis has made use of a highly stylized over-
lapping generations model with monopolistic competition and price setting
in advance. The overlapping generations structure allows for the existence of
asset price bubbles in equilibrium, as in the models of Samuelson (1958) and
Tirole (1982). The introduction of nominal rigidities implies that monetary
policy is not neutral. In particular, by in‡uencing the path of the real interest
rate, the central bank can a¤ect real asset prices (including those of bubbly
assets) and, as a result, the distribution of consumption across cohorts and
welfare.
    Two main results have emerged from the analysis of that model. First,
contrary to conventional wisdom, a "leaning against the wind" interest rate
policy in the face of bubble ‡uctuations may raise the volatility of the latter.
Secondly, the optimal policy must strike a balance between stabilization of
current aggregate demand–which calls for a positive interest rate response
to the bubble–and stabilization of the bubble itself (and hence of future
aggregate demand)–which would warrant a negative interest rate response to
the bubble. If the average size of the bubble is su¢ ciently large the latter

                                       38
motive will be dominant, making it optimal for the central bank to lower
interest rates in the face of a growing bubble.
   Needless to say the conclusions should not be taken at face value when it
comes to designing actual policies. This is so because the model may not pro-
vide an accurate representation of the challenges facing actual policy makers.
In particular, it may very well be the case that actual bubbles are not of the
rational type and, hence, respond to monetary policy changes in ways not
captured by the theory above. In addition, the model above abstracts from
many aspects of actual economies that may be highly relevant when designing
monetary policy in bubbly economies, including the presence of frictions and
imperfect information in …nancial markets. Those caveats notwithstanding,
the analysis above may be useful by pointing out a potentially important
missing link in the case for "leaning against the wind" policies.




                                      39
   Appendixes

   Appendix 1

   Assuming a stationary environment, the log-linearized di¤erence equation
describing the evolution of the fundamental component is

                    qbtF = (1=R)Et fbF
                                    qt+1 g + (1             1=R)Et fdbt+1 g      rbt

which can be solved forward to yield
                        X
                        1
            qbtF    =         (1=R)k (1            1=R)Et fdbt+1+k g       Et fb
                                                                               rt+k g
                        k=0

                                                                                         k
   Under the AR(1) assumption for the interest rate, Et fb
                                                         rt+k g =                        rrbt   and
hence
                               R                            X
                                                            1
             qbtF   =                  rbt + (1      1=R)         (1=R)k Et fdbt+1+k g
                          R        r                        k=0

          qtF =@"rt =
implying @b                    R=(R         r ).


   Appendix 2

   The following properties of the H mapping are stated for future reference.
   (P1) H(B; U )              0 is twice continuously di¤erentiable for 0                   B <
 =M U
 (1+ )
          B(U ). Note that.H(B; U ) < 0 for B > B(U )
                                         (1 1=M)(1=M+U )
   (P2) @H(B; U )=@Bt =                 [ =M U (1+ )B]2
                                                                  > 0 and @ 2 H(Bt ; U )=@Bt2 =
2 (1+ )(1 1=M)(1=M+U )
   [ =M U (1+ )B]3
                              > 0 for 0           B < B(U ) and limB!B(U ) H(B; U ) = +1
                                        2 (1 1=M)(1=M B)
   (P3) @H(B; U )=@Ut =                  [ =M U (1+ )B]2
                                                                   > 0 and @ 2 H(B; U )=@U 2 =
 (1 1=M)(1=M B)
[ =M U (1+ )B]3
                     > 0 for 0          B < B(U )
   (P4) @ 2 H(B; U )=@B@U > 0 for 0                       B < B(U )



                                                     40
   Consider …rst the case of U = 0. A bubbly equilibrium path must then
satisfy:
                                (1 1=M)Bt
                    Bt+1 =                              H(Bt ; 0)
                               =M (1 + )Bt
   Note that H(0; 0) = 0, implying the existence of a bubbleless determin-
istic steady state in that case, i.e. B = 0. Given (P2), a necessary and
su¢ cient condition for the existence of a bubbly steady state B U > 0 such
                                             M 1
that H(B U ; 0) = B U is @H(0; 0)=@Bt =            < 1, or, equivalently,

                                   M<1+                                      (37)

   Note that in that case H(Bt ; 0) > Bt and @[H(Bt ; 0)             Bt ]=@Bt > 0
for any Bt > B U Thus, the solution to Bt+1 = H(Bt ; 0) given an initial
condition B0 > B U violates the constraint Bt < 1=M in …nite time and
hence is not consistent with equilibrium. On the other hand, H(Bt ; 0) < Bt
for any Bt < B U , implying that the solution to Bt+1 = H(Bt ; 0) given an
initial condition B0 < B U converges asymptotically to the bubbleless steady
state B = 0. Thus, B U is an unstable steady state.

   (Su¢ ciency) Suppose that (37) holds. Then it follows from (P3) and the
continuity of H( ; ) that there is a non-degenerate set (0; U ) of values for the
                                                   p
new bubble U , with U       + (1 + )(1 1=M) + 2        (1 + )(1 1=M) such
that for any U 2 [0; U ) the mapping Bt+1 = H(Bt ; U ) has two …xed points,
denoted by B S (U ) and B U (U ), where B S (U ) < B U (U ) and such that
   (i) H(Bt ; U ) > Bt for Bt 2 [0; B S (U )) [ (B U (U ); B(U ))
   (ii) H(Bt ; U ) < Bt for Bt 2 (B S (U ); B U (U ))
   (iii) Bt = H(Bt ; U ) for Bt 2 fB S (U ); B U (U )g


                                        41
   Thus, given an initial condition B0 2 [0; B U (U )); the solution to Bt+1 =
H(Bt ; U ) corresponds to a bubbly equilibrium path, which converges asymp-
totically to B S (U ). The latter is, thus, a (locally) stable steady state. On
the other hand, any solution to Bt+1 = H(Bt ; U ) given an initial condition
B0 > B U (U ) violates the constraint Bt < 1=M in …nite time and hence
cannot be an equilibrium.
   Note also that B S (U ) is a continuous function de…ned on [0; U ], such that
B S (0) = 0 and @B S (U )=@U > 0.

   (Necessity) Suppose M        1 + . Then (P2) implies @H(0; 0)=@Bt > 1.
Then it follows from (P4) that @H(0; U )=@Bt > 1 for U > 0 as well, implying
H(Bt ; U ) > Bt and @[H(Bt ; U )    Bt ]=@Bt > 0 for any Bt > 0. Thus, the
solution to Bt+1 = H(Bt ; 0) given an initial condition B0 > 0 violates the
constraint Bt < 1=M in …nite time.

   Appendix 3

   Next I describe a variation on the benchmark model in the text which
explicitly introduces money as an additional asset, paying no interest but
yielding utility. The consumer’s utility function is now given by

                   log C1;t + log(Mt =Pt ) + Et flog C2;t+1 g

where Mt denotes the holdings of money at the end of the period. The
modi…ed budget constraints of the young and old are respectively given by:
           Z 1
               Pt (i)C1;t (i)      Mt Zt                         Tt
                              di +     +    + QB t = Wt + Ut +
            0        Pt            Pt    Pt                      Pt
        Z 1
            Pt+1 (i)C2;t+1 (i)        Mt    Zt (1 + it )
                               di =      +               + Dt+1 + Bt+1
         0         Pt+1             Pt+1       Pt+1

                                      42
where Tt represents (lump-sum) monetary injections by the central bank (in
the form of transfers to the young).
   The optimality conditions of the consumer’s problem found in the main
text also apply here with no modi…cations. To those optimality conditions
we now have to add an implied money demand equation of the form:
                                Mt            1
                                   = C1;t 1 +                                 (38)
                                Pt            it
as well as as the zero lower bound constraint it            0 which must hold in
equilibrium (otherwise, bonds would be return-dominated by money).
   The analysis found in the main text (including the steady state and the
log-linearized equilibrium dynamics) goes through without any modi…cations,
once we assume a positive steady state nominal rate, either by having positive
trend growth or positive target in‡ation (see discussion in main text). Given
the equilibrium values of C1;t , Pt , and Mt , money demand equation (38)
determines the quantity of money Mt , which is supplied passively by the
central bank by means of transfers Tt =         Mt .

   Appendix 4

   Note that the H(Bt ; U ) mapping must satisfy

                      H(Bt ; U ) = R(Bt ; H(Bt ; U ))(Bt + U )
                         1     1 1=M+Bt+1
where R(Bt ; Bt+1 )              1=M Bt
                                              . Di¤erentiating with respect to Bt ,
                               R                          1
noting that R1 (B; B) =      1=M B
                                     and R2 (B; B) =   (1=M B)
                                                                 (where Ri denotes
the partial derivative with respect to the ith argument), and evaluating the
resulting derivative at the steady state, we obtain (after some algebraic ma-
nipulation):
                       @H(B; U )
                                 = R(B)(1 + (1 + )B)
                         @B
                                         43
   Appendix 5

   Combine (18) through (21) yield the following goods market clearing con-
dition:
                      0 = B(1 + )Rbbt + B(1                              ut + Rdbt
                                                                       R)b                       rbt

   Taking expectations, and using (22) we obtain:

                                      rt g = B(1 + )REt 1 fbbt g
                                Et 1 fb                                                                               (39)

   Taking expectations on both sides of the interest rate rule (23):

                                Et 1 fb
                                      rt g =                 bt +     b REt 1 fbt g
                                                                                     b                                (40)

   Combining (39) and (40) yields

                           t   =      (R=      )(    b            B(1 + )) Et 1 fbbt g

   Letting "t         R    t   + (1          ut , note that
                                           R)b

              rbt = Et 1 fb
                          rt g + (b
                                  rt                 Et 1 fb
                                                           rt g)                                                      (41)

                  =        B(1 + )REt 1 fbbt g +                      b "t

                  =        B(1 + )R(Rbbt                 1   + (1         R)b
                                                                            ut       1   + rbt 1 ) +   b "t


   It follows that

      (1                 rt = B(1 + )R(Rbbt
               B(1 + )RL)b                                                   1   + (1         R)b
                                                                                                ut 1 ) +       b "t


   Combining the previous result with the bubble di¤erence equation (1
RL)bbt = (1       R)b
                    ut     1   + rbt   1   +   t   yields:

          bbt = bbt   1   +(        + 1)(1         R)b
                                                     ut       1   +       +(               B(1 + ))R
                                b                                     t          b                            t 1


                                                             44
where, as above,            R(1 + (1 + )B) is assumed to be between zero and
one.
   Note that the predictable component of the bubble follows the process

Et 1 fbbt g =       (Et 2 fbbt 1 g +        t 1)   +(      b   + 1)(1        R)b
                                                                               ut         1   +(     b       B(1 + ))R   t 1

            =       Et 2 fbbt 1 g + (       b   + 1)"t     1


   Accordingly,
                                                  (                  + 1)2
                               varfEt 1 fbbt gg =                b
                                                                        2
                                                                              2
                                                                              "
                                                                1
        2
where   "    (1      R)2   2
                           u   + R2     2
                                            .
   Finally, and using the fact that qbtB = R(Et 1 fbbt g +                                    t)    + (1      R)b
                                                                                                                ut =
REt 1 fbbt g + "t , we have

                                                 R2 (      b   + 1)2
                               qtB g =
                           varfb                                2
                                                                       +1         2
                                                                                  "
                                                   1

   Note also that we can now write the equilibrium process for in‡ation as:

                t   =      (R=     )(       b      B(1 + )) Et 1 fbbt g

                    =       t 1    (R=           )(   b         B(1 + )) (            b   + 1)"t         1




   Appendix 6

   As noted in Appendix 5, goods market clearing implies

                    0 = B(1 + )Rbbt + B(1                             ut + Rdbt
                                                                    R)b                       rbt




                                                      45
   Using (41) to substitute out the real rate rbt , one can rewrite the above
condition as

 Rdbt =      b (R t   + (1            ut ) + B(1 + )REt 1 fbbt g
                                    R)b                                               ( B(1       ut + B(1 + )Rbbt )
                                                                                                R)b

      = (      b      B(1 + ))R               t   +(   b        B)(1         R)b
                                                                               ut

                      B
   Letting           B+1
                            we have

  Rb
   c2;t =          R((1         )dbt + bbt )

          = (1            ) R(dbt + Bbbt )

          = (1            )((   b        B(1 + ))R              t   +(   b     B)(1         ut + R Bbbt )
                                                                                          R)b

          = (1            )((   b        B)"t + R BEt 1 fbbt g

   implying

                                                                ( R B)2 (      b+   1)2
                   c2;t g /
               varfb                 (    b        B)2 +                       2
                                                                                            2
                                                                    1




                                                           46
   References

   Bernanke, Ben S. (2002): "Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy,"
speech before the New York Chapter of the National Association of Business
Economists.
   Bernanke, Ben S. and Mark Gertler (1999): "Monetary Policy and Asset
Price Volatility," in New Challenges for Monetary Policy, Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City, 77-128.
   Bernanke, Ben S. and Mark Gertler (2001): "Should Central Banks Re-
spond to Movements in Asset Prices?" American Economic Review 91(2),
253-257.
   Blanchard, Olivier, David Romer, Michael Spence, and Joseph Stiglitz
(2012): In the Wake of the Crisis, MIT Press (Cambridge, MA).
   Borio, Claudio and Philip Lowe (2002): "Asset Prices, Financial and
Monetary Stability: Exploring the Nexus," BIS Working Papers no. 114.
   Cecchetti, Stephen G., Hans Gensberg, John Lipsky and Sushil Wadhwani
(2000): Asset Prices and Central Bank Policy, Geneva Reports on the World
Economy 2, CEPR.
   Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans (2005):
“Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamic E¤ects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,"
Journal of Political Economy, vol. 113, no. 1, 1-45
   Galí, Jordi (2013): "A Note on the Coexistence of Fiat Money and Real
Asset Bubbles," mimeo.
   Galí, Jordi and Luca Gambetti (2013): "The E¤ect of Monetary Policy
on Asset Price Bubbles: Some Evidence," work in progress.
   Kocherlakota, Narayana (1992): "Bubbles and Constraints on Debt Ac-


                                    47
cumulation," Journal of Economic Theory, vol. 57, 245-256.
   Kohn, Donald L. (2006): "Monetary Policy and Asset Prices," speech
at an ECB colloquium on "Monetary Policy: A Journey from Theory to
Practice," held in honor of Otmar Issing.
   Kohn, Donald L. (2008): "Monetary Policy and Asset Prices Revisited,"
speech delivered at the Caton Institute’s 26th Annual Monetary Policy Con-
ference, Washington, D.C.
   Martín, Alberto, and Jaume Ventura (2012): "Economic Growth with
Bubbles," American Economic Review, vol.102(6), 3033-3058.
   Miao, Jianjun and Pengfei Wang (2012): "Bubbles and Credit Con-
straints," unpublished manuscript.
   Samuelson, Paul A. (1958): "An exact consumption-loan model of inter-
est with or without the social contrivance of money," Journal of Political
Economy 66, 467-482.
   Santos, Manuel S. and Michael Woodford (1997): "Rational Asset Pricing
Bubbles," Econometrica 65(1), 19-57.
   Scheinkman, Jose A. and Laurence Weiss (1986): "Borrowing Constraints
and Aggregate Economic Activity," Econometrica, 54(1), 23-45.
   Schularick, Moritz and Alan M. Taylor (2012): "Credit Booms Gone
Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage Cycles and Financial Crises, 1870-2008"
American Economic Review, 102(2), 1029-1061.
   Tirole, Jean (1985): "Asset Bubbles and Overlapping Generations," Econo-
metrica 53, 1499-1528.




                                     48
Bt+1
                               H(Bt,U)
                                          0
                                         45

                                     U
                                 B




                  S
              B




                                              Bt



       Figure 1. Equilibrium Dynamics
                            1.6



                            1.5



                            1.4



                            1.3
Bubble Standard Deviation




                            1.2



                            1.1



                              1



                            0.9



                            0.8



                            0.7
                               -2      -1.5   -1   -0.5     0     0.5   1    1.5    2
                                                          phi-b




                                  Figure 2. Monetary Policy and Bubble Volatility
                      -4
                   x 10




               3
Welfare Loss




               2




               1




               0
                -2         -1.5   -1   -0.5     0     0.5   1   1.5   2
                                              phi-b




                     Figure 3. Monetary Policy and Welfare Losses
                             0.5




                               0
Optimal Bubble Coefficient




                             -0.5




                              -1
                                    0   0.02    0.04   0.06       0.08   0.1   0.12   0.14
                                                              B




                                        Figure 4. Optimal Bubble Coefficient
