NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DISTINCTIVELY BLACK NAMES IN THE AMERICAN PAST
Lisa D. Cook
Trevon D. Logan
John M. Parman
Working Paper 18802
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18802

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013

We thank Rodney J. Andrews, Alan Barreca, William A. Darity, Robert W. Fogel, Claudia D. Goldin,
Darrick Hamilton, Samuel Meyers, Paul W. Rhode, Richard H. Steckel, Franklin D. Wilson, seminar
audiences at Harvard University, University of Minnesota, University of Wisconsin, participants in
The Second Wave conference, NBER Summer Institute, Southern Economic Association and American
Economic Association annual meetings for useful comments. Stanley L. Engerman provided particularly
detailed comments and advice, for which we are grateful. The usual disclaimer applies. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Lisa D. Cook, Trevon D. Logan, and John M. Parman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Distinctively Black Names in the American Past
Lisa D. Cook, Trevon D. Logan, and John M. Parman
NBER Working Paper No. 18802
February 2013
JEL No. J1,N3
ABSTRACT
We document the existence of a distinctive national naming pattern for African Americans in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. We use census records to identify a set of high-frequency
names among African Americans that were unlikely to be held by whites. We confirm the distinctiveness
of the names using over five million death certificates from Alabama, Illinois and North Carolina from
the early twentieth century. The names we identify in the census records are similarly distinctive in
these three independent data sources. Surprisingly, approximately the same percentage of African
Americans had "black names" historically as they do today. No name that we identify as a historical
black name, however, is a contemporary black name. The literature has assumed that black names
are a product of the Civil Rights Movement, yet our results suggest that they are a long-standing cultural
norm among African Americans. This is the first evidence that distinctively racialized names existed
long before the Civil Rights Era, establishing a new fact in the historical literature.

Lisa D. Cook
Department of Economics
Michigan State University
110 Marshall-Adams Hall
East Lansing, MI 48824
lisacook@msu.edu
Trevon D. Logan
The Ohio State University
410 Arps Hall
1945 N. High Street
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
logan.155@osu.edu

John M. Parman
Department of Economics
P.O. Box 8795
College of William and Mary
Williamsburg, VA 23187
and NBER
jmparman@wm.edu

”[Names] had been their sole identity during bondage, often the only remaining link to parents
from whom they had been separated and who had initially named them. No matter how harsh a
bondage they had endured, few freed slaves revealed any desire to obliterate their entire past or
family heritage, and those whose given names or surnames reflected kinship ties tended to guard
them zealously.”
- Leon F. Litwack, Been in the Storm So Long: The Aftermath of Slavery, 1979

”As Negroes...we are apt...to be more than ordinarily concerned with the veiled and mysterious
events, the fusions of blood, the furtive couplings, the business transactions, the violations of faith
and loyalty, the assaults; yes, and the unrecognized and unrecognizable loves through which our
names were handed down to us.”
- Ralph Ellison, “Hidden Name and Complex Fate” in Shadow and Act, 1964

1

Introduction

Experimental, audit, and quasi-experimental studies have found that those with racialized first
names are negatively affected. Busse and Seraydarian [1977] find that distinctively African American names are viewed negatively. Bertrand and Mullainathan [2004] find that those with distinctively African American names have lower call-back rates for employment interviews. Milkman et
al. [2012] find that college professors are significantly less likely to meet with students with African
American names to discuss graduate school. Figlio [2005] finds that teachers have lower ex ante
expectations of children with distinctively African American names, even those that are not African
American themselves, and that this is related to student outcomes and test scores. When recent
analysis revealed racial disparities in NIH grant awards researchers surmised that grant reviewers,
who do not know the race of grant applicants, used first names to infer race [Ginther et al. 2011].
Given the unique social history of African Americans, it is remarkable that the historical development of racialized names has received little scholarly attention. The existing literature on
racialized names is surprisingly ahistorical. Black names are assumed to be a modern phenomenon
that first appeared with the Civil Rights Movement [Fryer and Levitt 2004]. There have been no
studies which investigate the existence or persistence of racialized names in the past. London and
Morgan [1994], for example, use census data from Mississippi in 1910 and argue that racial naming
conventions did not exist, but their analysis is restricted to the most popular names overall. Even
today, the most popular names (John, Michael, James, etc.) are not racially distinctive. Other
2

than studies of the names of African American college students [Eagleson and Clifford 1945] and
reviews of other smaller and non-representative samples [Puckett 1938, 1975; Gaither 1920], we
know of no study that makes a systematic attempt to identify African American naming patterns
before the 1960s.1
This paper documents the existence of distinctively African American first names long before
the Civil Rights Era. Indeed, the pattern we uncover is a national naming pattern among African
Americans in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. To our knowledge, this is the first
study to find distinct racial naming conventions in the past. No historical narrative evidence we
are aware of even suggests that such a robust, national naming pattern would exist.
Documenting the existence of a racial naming pattern in the past is a significant, first-order
contribution to American history and historiography; it reorients the discussion of the historical,
social, economic and political significance of naming patterns. It changes the nature of the discussion of the causes and consequences of black naming patterns. The historical pattern of African
American names also gives scholars a new proxy for race which can be employed to analyze a range
of outcomes, both short- and long-term. For example, the analysis of historical discrimination could
include these names in the analysis to see if outcomes differed within the African American community due to the names [Cook, Logan and Parman 2012]. Even more, models of racial naming,
such as those described in Fryer and Levitt [2004], must be revised to account for the new fact that
African American names have a history which precedes the Civil Rights Movement.
The empirical identification of historical naming patterns is difficult. Given the lack of any
source which records names that we can match to existing data sources, we innovate methodologically to uncover the naming pattern. Unlike contemporary naming studies, the search for historical
naming patterns is further complicated by the paucity of available information. Contemporary
studies by economists exploit birth records, but universal birth registration did not occur until
the 20th century. With the scarcity of historical data, verifiability and falsifiability of any naming
methodology are also important. Any naming pattern identified in a specific data source may or
may not hold across the population. It is therefore important that any methodology used not only
be able to reveal a similar pattern in independent data, but also has the potential to discover the
1

Other historical naming studies are focused on name adoption immediately after the Civil War or with parentchild naming practices [Litwack 1979, Costa and Kahn 2006, Gutman 1976]. These studies do not attempt to identify
a naming pattern among African Americans nor the racial distinctiveness of any naming pattern.

3

lack of a pattern in a separate data source. Key for our methodology is the fact that we identify
names that are both high-frequency and racially distinctive. This is important insofar as idiosyncratic naming practices can give rise to spurious naming patterns (names that are not held by
many individuals but which are held disproportionately), and our methodology guards against that
possibility.2
We adopt a novel, straightforward methodology to identify black names and exploit a large
body of historical data to confirm the naming pattern. Our measure of name distinctiveness is
name disproportionality, the fraction of all people holding a particular name that are of a given
race. Our approach is a simple two-step procedure— we first use census records to find names
that are high-frequency among blacks and then, among the high frequency names, those that are
highly likely to be held by blacks as opposed to whites. Identifying historical names cannot and
should not begin and end with census records, however. There are well-known deficiencies in
census data with respect to coverage of the African American population [Coale and Rives 1973,
Eblen 1974, Ewbank 1987, Preston at al. 1998, Elo 2001]— African Americans are seriously underrepresented. This obviously brings into question the veracity of any naming pattern found in census
sources. We overcome the problem by verifying the names using novel independent sources that
offer similar coverage (in terms of covering a very large number of individuals in the population)
to the census but which are not subject to the potential biases of census data. We confirm the
distinctiveness of the names we identify in census records in three sources: the given names in
Alabama death records (1908-1959), Illinois death records (1916-1947), and North Carolina death
certificates (1910-1970). The correlation between the name-specific measure of disproportionality
for the death records and the 1900 and 1920 census, by name, data is over 0.60. The fact that we
confirm the racial distinctiveness of these high-frequency names in three independent data sources
is strong confirmatory evidence of the generalizability of the names and the national naming pattern
they represent.
The pattern we uncover is strikingly similar to naming patterns today. Indeed, the share of all
2

In related work [Cook, Logan and Parman 2012] we show that the conventional wisdom that African Americans
were likely to adopt the names of famous individuals (as in George Washington Carver) is not consistent with the
data. We find no evidence that first and middle names for presidents and other famous individuals was more likely to
occur among African Americans. For example, George Washington, Thomas Jefferson and other presidential names
were not disproportionately used as first and middle names by African Americans. Indeed, we find that they were
more likely to be used by whites. We view this finding as evidence for the falsifiability of our approach.

4

black men who had a black name is roughly similar to the share of black men who have a black
name today. The names we identify, however, are not related to black names today. None of the
names we identify is a contemporary black name. In short, we uncover a naming pattern previously
unknown in the historical record and show that racially distinctive names for African Americans
are not a product of the Civil Rights Movement. Rather than being the product of cultural changes
in the middle of the twentieth century, the names have changed over time.
In what follows we review the existing literature and describe the conceptual framework underlying our approach. We then describe the methodology used to identify African American names
in census records. A particular innovation of our research is that while we use census records to
identify historical African American names, we use the death certificates as an independent check
of the names we identify in the census records. We describe how these results complicate simple
explanations for racial naming practices based on increasing social consciousness during the Civil
Rights Era. At some point the historical names we identify gave way to a completely different
set of names, and it is likely that the motivations behind such names changed as well. The racial
distinctiveness of the names, however, did not change— these historical names are just as black as
“black names” today. How and why “black names” themselves (and possibly their effects) changed
over time is a new question which must be addressed. We conclude with a discussion of how this
line of research can be extended beyond the identification of the names to include the determinants
and potential causes of the names, intergenerational transmission of the names, and long-term
consequences of the names.

2
2.1

Racialized Names in History and Theory
Racialized Names in History

Historians and anthropologists have long acknowledged that names contain valuable information.
While surnames link individuals to a family line, first, middle and nicknames can do the same. Given
the unique history of African Americans, it is somewhat surprising that the literature on African
American naming conventions is so thin since surnames convey little about their familial or ethnic
origins. Gutman [1976] notes that besides the studies of Puckett [1938] and Wood [1974] little has
been written about African American naming systems in the American past. Engerman [1978] notes
5

that names play an important role in our understanding of African American social development,
and yet they remain under-analyzed, a missing piece of the historical scholarship. Histories of the
African American family and social experience, and histories of the South in general, such as the
seminal works of Brawley [1921], Blassingame [1972], Jones [1985], Frazier [1930, 1939], Litwack
[1979, 1998], Foner [1988], Levine [1978], Woodward [1951], Tindall [1952, 1967], and Franklin
[1980], make little mention of African American naming patterns.
The literature that does exist looks primarily at two issues. The first pertains to contemporary
naming patterns. Sociological theories about African American naming conventions are rooted in
the belief that the contemporary naming practices are an attempt to construct a distinct racial
identity in the absence of surnames which can convey that information [Lieberson and Mikelson
1995, Fryer and Levitt 2004]. This desire reached a critical head during the Civil Rights and
Black Power Movements, which encouraged African Americans to adopt names which prominently
featured links to an amorphous African heritage.
While such arguments seem plausible, they are surprisingly ahistorical. The limited information
we do have on African American naming conventions suggest that names were always important
and that they were used to convey some amount of familial bonding in the past [Gutman 1976].3
An additional problem for the current conceptions of African American naming conventions is the
fact that few of the most popular names today have any African origin. For example, common
African American names such as Tyrone, Shemar, LaKeisha and LaTonya do not have any explicit
African links, and some are of European origin.
The historical literature focused on whether naming conventions defy the conventional wisdom
that the institution of slavery destroyed African American kinship patterns. Gutman [1976] spends
considerable time documenting how naming patterns are consistent with strong kinship bonds
among African Americans. One common practice was to name the eldest son after the father.
Analysis of the 1880 census revealed that nearly a quarter of African American households had
a son named for his father. Gutman also notes that superstitious beliefs, some rooted in African
traditions, may have played a role in naming practices, especially the naming of a child after a
deceased sibling earlier in the birth order. In general, Gutman’s analysis suggests that a significant
3

Costa and Kahn [2006] note that former slaves in more diverse companies, where they interacted with greater
numbers of free blacks, were more likely to change their names following emancipation. In general, first name changes
were rare [Litwack 1979].

6

portion of African American families named sons after elder men in the family such that given
names would have persistent effects.
These naming practices may have roots before emancipation. Gutman argues that African
Americans exhibited a great deal of control over the naming of their offspring in slavery, which
in general is consistent with Blassingame’s [1972], Wood’s [1974] and Genovese’s [1974] histories
of plantation life. Cody [1982] argues that the naming of slave children by their parents was
an important way of establishing their place in the slave community. First names could refer to
parents, grandparents, and other elder members as a way of establishing familial links. There is
no evidence that names were related to slave occupations, however. Children immediately after
emancipation were also likely to be named for other family members, although both Puckett [1938]
and Gutman note that children were sometimes not named until they were at least a month old.4
In general, the historical record shows that the first names of children conveyed some element of
social meaning both before and after emancipation. In the absence of surname salience, first names
of male children appear to be prominent carriers of family history. While historical scholarship
has not paid a great deal of attention to black names with the exception of a few studies [such as
Cassidy 1966, DeCamp 1967, and Price and Price 1972], the humanities are rich with names as
descriptive carriers of historical legacies and also as exercises in power [Benston 1982, Cooke 1977,
King 1990, Green 2002]. What is not known is whether this practice resulted in a set of names
that were disproportionately held by blacks.
Theorizing about the historical causes and consequences of that meaning is difficult. Part of
this lies in the general lack of consensus about the nature of the slave family and the adaptations
made after the end of chattel bondage and the decisions parents made when naming their children.
While it is unclear how much naming practices during slavery reflected individual slave intent to
form familial bonds, the naming practices thereafter would certainly be in the control of parents.
The open questions are whether the names can be systematically identified and what the names
themselves conveyed about the family and its history.
Names have been viewed as the product of a complex network of social, political, and familial
influences. Litwack [1979], for example, analyzes name changes immediately after emancipation.
4

The death certificate data that we have does show a larger number of deaths to ”infants” among blacks than
whites, but how much of this can be attributable to naming practices versus poor reporting remains unclear.

7

Although he does not identify any naming patterns among African Americans, he does show that
the period after chattel bondage offered African Americans a unique opportunity to construct a
new identity. The ability to choose a surname was a political act— many chose names not of their
most recent owner, but of those further back in family lineage. Others adopted first names as
well [see Costa and Kahn 2006]. In general, however, Litwack notes that names which conveyed
kinship were especially salient to African Americans, and the oral histories of former slaves reveal
that names were a key ingredient in the remaking of the social order.5 To the extent that names
conveyed family links, they were guarded and, according to Gutman [1976], passed on from one
generation to the next.
Hahn [2003] sees kinship links as a potential source of political power for African Americans
before the Great Migration. Given that the African American population remained largely rural
until the middle of the twentieth century, the labor arrangements at the time included agreements
not only with specific families, but in a non-negligible number of cases kinship networks of several
interrelated families. Such arrangements “not only tried to provide loved ones with protection and
subsistence but also acknowledged the fundamental threads of economic and political solidarity
that they had woven and learned to rely on as slaves” [pp. 168-169]. Just as names themselves
conveyed familial links, it is likely that they may have been more prominent in protective kinship
networks.
This is not to say that these conclusions are uncontroversial. While scholars have added greater
nuance to the destructive nature of the slave economy on African American family bonds laid out
by Frazier [1939], the actual stability of the family is an open question. Fogel [2003] questions
the reliability of Gutman’s evidence since it comes from large plantations where familial structure
would be more likely to be intact and where slaveholders would be least likely to be involved in
the task of naming newborn slaves. Additional factors such as the age and timing of marriage, age
at menarche, fertility patterns and infant mortality have not yet been fully resolved. Similarly, the
role of sexual assault in slave fertility remains controversial [Fogel and Engerman 1974, Fogel 2003,
Gutman 1975], and its influence on slave naming practices is unknown. These obviously interact
with naming practices and the degree to which we should draw instruction from them.
5

Litwack describes how whites lamented the fact that freedmen could choose the surnames of prominent white
families. Other whites noted that the presence of surnames for freedmen would alter the social order— while whites
were usually referred to with proper titles, having official surnames would entitle freedmen to similar designations.

8

Blassingame [1972] and Elkins [1959] differ on the weight that one should attach to naming
patterns, especially those from the antebellum era. Cassidy [1966] and DeCamp [1967] show that
African naming conventions were perverted in the New World. For example, Sambo, a name
which became associated with a shiftless individual, is actually a Hausa name for the second
son [Wood 1974]. While one could view names as the product of a means of resistance as in
Stampp [1956] it could also be viewed as being part of an implicit contract as in Genovese [1974],
or a product of a combination of social factors that would be idiosyncratic in nature, defying
attempts at generalization. Engerman [1978] notes that who named slave children, and whether
slave owners retained veto power over names, is unknown. Therefore, the study of slave names is
more complicated than racial naming patterns alone, since it is unclear who named whom.
In sum, the scant history on African American naming conventions establishes few facts but
several informed guesses. First, the literature suggests that names were used to convey a degree
of familial attachment in the past. Second, names appear to be persistent, male children were
commonly named for parents and other elders. Third, there has been no attempt to identify a racial
naming pattern in the past and no corresponding systematic quantitative evidence underlying the
historical literature. We do not know if the names themselves were distinct, if the practices resulted
in a distinct naming pattern, and what those names would be.

2.2

Theorizing Racialized Names

The issue for racialized names is that not all people in any group adopt the naming convention, and
those with distinctively racialized names might fare better or worse than those of their own racial
group. While X may be a white name it is certainly not true that all whites are named X. In other
words, it could be that the effects of racialized names are a concentrated source of advantage or
disadvantage. Fryer and Levitt [2004], for example, find that distinctively African American names
are not well-correlated with other outcomes once they control for socioeconomic factors. The size
and direction of such effects would naturally depend on what the naming convention signals. Since
a racialized name gives outsiders a low-variance signal of race, it may also affect the outcomes
of those with racialized names differently from those without racialized names in the same racial
group.
While many view the accumulating evidence of negative effects of holding a racialized name as
9

the persistence of racial bias, open questions remain. The literature described above seeks to link
names to racial groups, but it can be difficult to ascribe the effects to group membership. Naming
patterns evolve over time. Lieberson and Bell [1992] find that name uniqueness is increasing, and
more recent research using all first names in the United States has found that the commonality
of first names has been declining since the 1950s [Twenge et al. 2010]. Lieberson and Mikelson
[1995] find that the prevalence of unique names for African Americans has increased faster than
the general population. It can be difficult, therefore, to ascribe the name effect to race as opposed
to a combination of race and socioeconomic factors that could be exacerbated by increasing name
uniqueness [Fryer and Levitt 2004].
A problem for the contemporary study of names is the lack of a clear distinction between unique,
exclusive, and racially-assignable names. A standard definition of a unique name is one that is held
by only one individual in a given birth cohort. Fryer and Levit [2004] and Lieberson and Mikelson
[1995] show that significant shares of the African American population have unique names today.
By design, unique names are raced— they belong to the race of the unique-named by default.6
Exclusive names are not unique names (many individuals born in a given year will have them),
but they are only given to members of a particular racial group. For example, if Kenyatta is a
name only given to African Americans, it is exclusive, but not unique. Assignable names are ones
which are disproportionately assigned to members of one race. For example, today Tyrone is a
name assigned disproportionately to African American males, but there are members of other races
with that given name. It is, after all, a name of Irish origin.
The issue is that unique, exclusive and assignable names may have different functional consequences that may run in different directions and present different methodological issues. Fryer and
Levitt [2004], for example, construct an index of names using the probability that an individual is
black given a particular name. In such an index both exclusive and unique names have extreme
values. Only assignable names will display any variation in index values. Audit and experimental
studies, however, use names which are assignable. A key for audit studies is that the general population be able to infer race from the name, and an implicit precondition is that such a name is not
unique nor infrequent in the population of interest.
6

A particular issue with unique names is distinct spelling of a name with the same pronunciation. For example,
each unique spelling of ”unique” (Yuniqe, Uni’que, Euniqe and Eunique) would be unique names to the extent that
they would only be held by one individual in any given birth cohort.

10

Unique names may be stigmatized for reasons unrelated to race. For example, unique names
may be difficult to pronounce, which may carry a unique stigma [Laham et al. 2012]. The ability
to infer race from a name is, in part, due to its frequency. Although research has shown that some
unique names by race have particular attributes [Lieberson and Mikelson 1995], how much of this
effect can be due to race as opposed to uniqueness is unknown. Since our goal is to identify a
national naming pattern among blacks we do not attempt to identify unique names in the data.
Another problem for historical investigation is that unique names may be due to misspellings or
other errors.7 Also, by design it will be difficult to identify unique names in independent data
sources as they may appear in one source and not in another. Instead, we focus on a historical
pattern of assignable and exclusive racial names, names that were held by relatively large numbers
of African Americans but few, if any whites.

3

Identifying African American Names

Documenting a distinctive naming pattern among African Americans in the past is difficult for a
number of reasons. First, the history of African Americans leaves us with few linguistic cues that
would identify such names. While ethnic names are the product of historical, linguistic, religious
and political events, such methods cannot be used for African Americans. There is no list of
historical African American names which we can take to the data. Indeed, our task is to identify
such names. Second, while census records would seem to offer a straightforward method to identify
and verify naming patterns, the relatively poor coverage of the African American population in
historical census records would leave any patterns identified solely through census records subject
to numerous criticisms [Coale and Rives 1973, Eblen 1974, Ewbank 1987, Preston at al. 1998, Elo
and Preston 1994, Elo at al. 1996, Elo 2001]. For example, the names identified in census records
may be related to proximate determinants of the names themselves, leaving us with a spurious list
of names that reflect other factors. Third, other sources of historical data which could be used to
verify names are not broadly representative of the black population. Tax records, military records,
rolls from churches and fraternal organizations and school records are neither representative of the
black population nor do they provide similar coverage of other races in the same data source— key
7

Given the manual recording of the sources we use this could lead to spurious identification of unique names.

11

for identifying the distinctive nature of a name.
Apart the data itself, identifying and verifying a historical naming pattern within any group
presents methodological problems as well. Any historical method must not rely on potential determinants of the names. The literature on contemporary black names uses birth certificate information which contains name and race to identify high frequency names which are disproportionately
held by a particular group. Birth registrations for our historical period of interest (1880-1940) were
not standardized nor universal. In the absence of lists of historical names, information on historical
naming patterns, and historical birth registrations, we adopt a novel and transparent approach
to identify black names that begins with a geographically stratified sample of black households in
census data and then seeks to (1) internally validate the distinctive nature of the names in census
records and (2) use a wealth of new, broadly representative data from a different set of locations to
verify the distinctiveness of the names in the census records. In this regard, our approach is falsifiable, because the tests of external and/or internal validity can fail to support the distinctiveness
of the names we identify.
Our methodological approach builds on the conjecture that if black naming patterns existed
in the past they would be found in independent samples of the black population, and the relative
distinctiveness of the names would be well correlated in those independent samples. Additionally,
finding similar estimates of disproportionality for the same name from different regions would be
consistent with a national pattern of names for African Americans and not the conflation of a
regional pattern with differences in racial population density.
But how will we know which names to look for? The small literature in the historical scholarship
is not particularly useful methodologically. The record gives us no names to investigate, and reliance
on such a source would not identify new names that may be highly distinctive. As such, we adopt
a novel approach to identify and, more importantly, verify black names. Specifically, we choose
a set of states in the census that are broadly representative of black location patterns in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. We search for names among household heads that were
high frequency and disproportionately held by African Americans among all household heads. We
then internally verify the racial distinctiveness of those names using all males in the census records.
Our approach, particularly our desire to internally validate the names in census records, causes
us to restrict our attention to naming patterns for men. Since we use household heads to identify
12

the names we capture few women. While African American women were more likely to be household
heads than white women in the past [Ruggles 1994], we capture very few white women as household
heads in historical census data. As such, we have poor (and potentially biased) measures of distinctiveness for women. Another problem is that naming conventions at the time, especially in the
South, often used first and middle names for women. This results in a smaller set of high-frequency
first names among women, and we need reliable sources for middle names to identify and verify a
naming pattern for females. Middle names are not recorded consistently in the historical data.
One would like to begin and end with the census records, but they cannot be used to verify black
names. As noted earlier, census records have significant gaps for the African American population.
For example, if father-son patterns are more likely to be held among black households and those
households are more likely to be enumerated, we will overestimate the frequency and disproportionality of those names. The resulting black names will be spurious, a function of household selection
in the census data. In general, if census enumeration is correlated with proximate determinants of
the names any further analysis using the names will be biased.
For verification we need sources that would give similar population coverage but which would be
independent of census enumeration. It is important to stress that such a source requires coverage
of the non-black population to measure racial distinctiveness. Historical sources that give similar
population coverage as the census and which contain names and race are rare. We use death certificate records to independently verify the names identified in the census records. Death certificates
contain information on race and name for a large number of individuals. Also, the establishment
of universal death registration early in the twentieth century gives us confidence that population
coverage will be comparable to the census, but independent of it. Most important is that fact that
death records are not selected on households— as such, we avoid the problem of intergenerational
naming biasing the death records.8 Our basic argument is that whatever biases exist in census
enumeration would not be the same in death registration, nor would they hold across several different states with idiosyncratic death registration histories. In this way, we are confident that the
pattern we find is truly a national, historical naming pattern and not a figment of the data. Similar
patterns of racial disproportionality in independent data sources covering large percentages of the
8

Deaths in this time period did not require the presence of a doctor. As such, the death records include deaths
that occurred in and especially outside of medical facilities.

13

population are at the heart of our method to verify black names.

3.1

Identifying African American Names in Census Data

A two-pronged strategy was used to identify historical patterns of racialized names, following Cook
[2004, 2011]. We begin by constructing an index of African American names for the period 1900
to 1920. We used two methods to construct the index. The first strategy answered the question:
conditional on being African American, which names are most likely to be observed? This is the
frequency measure. Random samples of black (Negro), mulatto, and colored heads of households
from the 1900 and 1920 censuses were drawn from the District of Columbia and three states:
Georgia, Michigan and New York. One location was selected from each major region: the Upper
South, the Deep South, the Mid-Atlantic region, and the Midwest. Washington, D.C. was selected
to represent the Upper South because of its history during and following slavery as a destination for
migrants from nearby (former) slave states (Kentucky, Maryland, North Carolina, South Carolina,
and Virginia). The West was not included in index construction due to the relatively lower numbers
of black residents across these census years.
Specifically, every tenth head of household was selected among black heads of households who
were residents of the given states in 1900 and 1920. From these samples, frequencies were calculated
for first names. This resulted in first names that appeared more frequently than the median
frequency across states and more frequently than the median frequency across census years. Names
were then validated using a first-name search in the 1900 and 1920 census years [IPUMS]. Names
that were not common to results were considered matching if the exact first name appeared in
the first-name field. A random sample (every 10th record) was drawn from the resulting records.
Search results were not constrained geographically nor with respect to relation to head of household.
A match was successful if the person in the name field of the search result was indeed a black
(Negro, mulatto, or colored) person. The match rate for singletons was between 10 (Ambrose)
and 88 percent (Prince). To be clear, we begin with a stratified sample of states and then verify
the pattern among all household heads. The disproportionate share of successful matches in the
national sample suggests that the resulting names are in fact national black names rather than
simply regional black names.
The second strategy answered the question: conditional on having a name widely adopted by
14

African Americans following the end of slavery, what is the probability that the person is African
American?9 This is the disproportionality measure. The entire 1900 and 1920 census was used and
the names were not restricted to heads of households. This is our method of internally validating
the census names and our key measure of name distinctiveness since it is conditional on the name
being high-frequency.
Among African Americans, there were twenty-one first names that appeared more frequently
than the median frequency for whites or were a larger share of the total names than the African
American share of the total population. To our knowledge, this is the first time such a national,
internally-valid list of historical black names has been identified. In what follows we use the
twenty-one names identified in these two strategies as the distinctively African American names.
We restrict our attention to the first names that occur with some non-negligible frequency since we
are concerned with matching the names we identify in the census records to the death certificates.
These names are listed in Table 1. (Note, we combine names such as “Abraham” and “Abe” as
a single name, given that one is a nickname for the other in most instances and for other sets of
names spellings could vary by small degree. This yields a set of seventeen ”name sets” that we use
in further analysis due to the combinations.)
The names in Table 1 merit their own discussion. First, they bear little relation to “black names”
today. Indeed, of the names used in the Bertrand and Mullainathan’s [2004] and Milkman, et al.
[2012] audit studies, none of them appears as our names and vice versa. The most popular names
in that study, which used birth certificate data were names such as Leroy, Tyrone, Jamal, Hakim,
Darnell and Rasheed. The notion that black names are a contemporary cultural construction is
inconsistent with the names identified in Table 1. These names contain no explicit links to African
heritage yet, as we show later, were racially distinctive.
Second, the general features of the names we identify (that most of the first names are biblical)
are consistent with the observations of other scholars. The appearance of biblical names suggests
that Genovese’s [1974] narrative that religion gave slaves a sense of humanity has some support.
9

In related work we test the proposition that African Americans of adopted the first and last names of presidents,
e.g., George Washington, or famous people in the black community, e.g., Booker T. Washington, as first and middle names. We find that later, this ”well-known” practice may have been common among blacks, but it was not
unique or more likely among black households. Whites were just as likely to name males after presidents or other
famous individuals. For example, we find that names such as ”George Washington” and Thomas Jefferson were not
disproportionately held by African Americans.

15

Given the role of religion in slave life, names with biblical attachment may have conveyed special
meaning to slaves and could have been names for elders that were being passed on. We caution that
without additional evidence this is only a conjecture but is consistent with the general pattern of
names we identify.10 Other names may reflect political or social intentions. For example, honorific
names such as Master, King and Prince could reflect a desire to imbue pride. Names such as
Freeman could certainly reflect political ideals and the emancipation of former bondsmen (one’s
child was born free). We caution, however, that drawing meaning from the names in Table 1
is preliminary. Additional historical scholarship is needed before economic, social and political
intentions can be verified. To be sure, now that the names are known the social significance of the
names merits further investigation.

4

Data for Verifying Black Names

The novelty of our approach derives not only from the identification of historical black names, but
also from the external validation of these names. As we noted earlier, we use census records to
identify a set of high-frequency names among African Americans that are not widely held by whites.
The problem with such an approach is that it is not inherently falsifiable— the names we identify
may be driven by biases in sampling or other errors. While this is unlikely to explain the results
for a majority of the names, it could still be the case that many of the names we identify would
be unique to the census records themselves. Without external validation from independent data
sources the pattern we uncover may not be general. As our goal is to identify a national pattern of
naming among African Americans in the past, it is critical that the pattern we find is also observed
in other sources.

4.1

Death Records

Death registrations are unique records which give the names and races of large numbers of individuals. Unfortunately, not all states listed race in historical death registrations. We use the death
records from three states not used in the census identification of names: Alabama, Illinois, and
10

This is consistent with the scant literature on names among African Americans, which found that daughters were
not likely to be named for family members [Gutman 1976]. Our strategy to indentify names used household heads
as part of the strategy, and as such women are under represented.

16

North Carolina. Each state had different death registration histories, had different racial makeup,
and comes from different regions of the country. Below we describe each state’s death registration
data.

4.1.1

Alabama

The Alabama records are drawn from the Alabama Deaths and Burials Index created by the
Genealogical Society of Utah for the years 1881 to 1974 (N= 1,186,076). For the early years, the
index is drawn from multiple sources including church, civil and family records of Alabama deaths
and burials. Beginning with 1908, state law required that all deaths within the state be registered
with death certificates being filed with the Alabama Center for Health Statistics. The index for
1908 through 1974 is based on these death certificates. The transcribed information available for the
Alabama records can includes first, middle and last name in addition to race and other measures.
Not all records contain complete information for all fields.

4.1.2

Illinois

The Illinois names are drawn from all of the available records in the Illinois deaths and stillbirths
index for 1916 to 1947 (N=1,539,849). This index includes information transcribed from one-page
pre-printed death certificate forms (images of the original forms are not available in the online
database). The 1916 start date for the records is the result of a 1915 statute that required the
State Board of Health (succeeded by the Illinois Department of Public Health) and county clerks
to record deaths and stillbirths. Statewide compliance with this statue was at 95 percent by 1919.
The transcribed information available for the Illinois records can includes first, middle and last
name in addition to race and other measures. As with the Alabama records, not all records contain
complete information for all fields.

4.1.3

North Carolina

The North Carolina data is constructed from the universe of death certificates for individuals who
died between the years of 1910 and 1975 (N= 1,787,826).11 A key difference between the Alabama
and Illinois data is that the North Carolina data can be linked to the actual death certificate. The
11

This process is more fully described in Logan and Parman [2011].

17

data includes full name, gender, race, age at death, birth date, birth place (city, state, country),
death date, death location (city, county), spouse’s name, father’s name and mother’s name. A
unique feature of this data is the presence of mother and father’s names on the death record, which
will be used in future work to explore intergenerational naming patterns.

4.2

Advantages and Disadvantages of Death Records

The advantages of death certificates for name pattern verification are numerous. First, death
certificates are person-specific records while census enumeration is household-based. While one
can compare names over all persons in the census the construction of the data itself gives an
inherent independence between the two sources. A household count may miss specific members of
the household but a death record could only possibly misrecord (or fail to record) an individual
death. Second, for each set of death records that we use death certification was required early in
the twentieth century, so those born in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries are most
likely to appear in both sets of records. A key advantage for name verification is that each state
had different baseline levels of black population shares, and different ethnic mixes of the white
population. Since the goal is to see if name disproportionality is similar in different locations the
comparison of the census results with the within state distributions from a state not used to derive
the names is strong evidence of a general pattern.
There are disadvantages to death certificates data as well.

While we can capture intrastate

migration (the dominant migratory pattern early in the century), we cannot capture the effects of
selective migration. This would be particularly pressing for the study of names by race if black
(white) migrants were more (less) likely to have a black name. This is exacerbated by the large
migratory flows from the South during the Great Migration [Eichenlaub et al. 2010]. We view this
as highly unlikely. Unless one could successfully argue that a distinctly black name was strongly
related to the probability of migration (which itself could be investigated in subsequent work) our
results would not be influenced by migration itself. It is also important to note that both our
identification and validation includes states that were destinations during the Great Migration.

18

5

External Validity of the African American Names

The first task is to show that the names we have identified in the census data have similar properties
in the death certificates. Table 2 shows the 17 name-sets identified as African American names in
the census records. For each name we compute the share of all males with the same first name who
are African American for the 1900 Census, 1920 Census and the death certificates, respectively.
For a name to be perceived as belonging to one race, it would have to be the case that the name
was shared by a disproportionate number of African Americans. Although the names we identified
came from frequency counts of household heads, the shares that we estimate are for all males. For
each sample of death certificates, the proportional shares are within sample.
Table 2 shows that there were distinctively African American names in the early twentieth
century in the census data. These names are also distinctive in the death records. Not only are the
names identified as distinctive in the census records confirmed in the death certificate data, but the
relative distinctiveness is remarkably similar. Since the identification of the names was based on
their frequency and not their disproportionate share, we view the fact that so many of the names
are disproportionately held by African Americans as confirmation of their racial distinctiveness.
Disproportionality of the names varies over space, however. For example, Abraham is much
more distinctive in Alabama and North Carolina than in Illinois, the land of Lincoln. Booker was
universally distinctive. In Alabama every name identified in the census was disproportionately
black, and overall more than 75 percent of the names identified in the census are disproportionate
in each state. One important departure is the name Master. Although Master appears to be
disproportionate in the census data, we could find no African American with that name in the
Alabama records and the name was not disproportionately held by African Americans in Illinois
and North Carolina. While the general pattern holds for nearly all of the names identified in the
census, it is not the case that every name identified in the census records is disproportionate in the
death records. We view this as justification not only for confirming the names identified in census
data, but also the general falsifiability of our methodological approach.
Most important, Table 2 shows that the names identified in the census data from records in
Georgia, Michigan, New York, and Washington, D.C. are also African American names in the death
certificate data. This external validation is important in that it shows that the naming patterns

19

were indeed racial and not driven by regional or other factors that would leave names that would
appear to be African American when they are not. This robust pattern of name disproportionality
suggest that the names identified in the census records were indeed more likely to be held by African
Americans.
In Table 3 we show further statistical measures of the distinctive nature of the names identified.
First, we estimate the correlation of the disproportionality in the death records with the measure
from census records. The results show the overall correlation is quite strong. While the Alabama
correlations are not as strong, this is partly due to the fact that the names are particularly disproportionate in the Alabama data. Second, we address the frequency and relative likelihood of having
one of these names. One question would be related to the fraction of the overall black population
that had these names. These names may be distinctive but apply to a very small fraction of blacks
and therefore unlike naming patterns today. Interestingly, the overall shares are similar. While 3.1
percent of all African American male births in the state of Massachusetts between 1974 and 1979
were assigned one of the nine names in resume audit studies, 2 percent of all males in the death
certificate data were named one of the names we identified in census records.
We also find that whites were significantly less likely to have one of these names. Fewer than
1 percent of whites had one of these names in any state. An African American male in North
Carolina is nearly four times more likely than a white male to have one of the names we identified
in the census data. In Alabama, a black man was sixteen times more likely to have one of the
names as a white man, and in Illinois black men were more than twice as likely to have one of the
black names identified in the Census data.
We note that Table 2 shows that caution should be extended when constructing names indices
from various sources. Any source of names could contain a sizeable fraction of names that could
be distinct in one data source but not in another. This is one reason the external validation we
emphasize is key. Not only does reducing the sample size increase the likelihood of generating
a distinctive name by construction, but also regional name patterns must be distinguished from
racial patterns. Given the geographic segregation of the African American community at the time,
Southern names in general will be spuriously African American. In fact, some names that are not
as predominant as African American names in the census data are more strongly racial in the death
certificate data. For example, Isaac is less likely to be held by African Americans in the census
20

data, where less than twenty percent of men holding the name are African American, but more
than eight-five percent of the men named Isaac in the North Carolina death certificate data are
African American. The same pattern holds for Moses, Elijah, and Isaiah. The reverse is also true.
Master represented a larger share in the census data than in the death certificate data.12
One issue with the measure of name shares is the fact that death certificates will include a
large number of infant deaths. Many infants in the past were not named at death. In keeping with
conservative (underestimates) of name shares we include every death record in our denominators
for name proportions. In the bottom panel of Table 3 we report the shares correcting for infant
deaths. We stress that this percentage includes infant births where the child was unnamed on the
death certificate. Correcting for infant mortality revises the historical percentage to well above two
percent. In other words, when we restrict ourselves to those surviving infancy our naming pattern
is even more similar to the contemporary naming pattern. In addition, the relative likelihood of a
white man having a black name decreases, largely due to the fact that infant mortality was higher
among whites than blacks. Tables 2 and 3 establish that the names we identified were indeed held
by blacks disproportionality and exhibited a very similar pattern in independent data sources.

6

Discussion and Future Directions

6.1

Considering Possible Mechanisms

It would be cavalier of us to offer specific mechanisms for the African American names. When
one considers that the very existence of racial first names in the past was unknown it would be
a daunting task to propose specific channels through which such a heretofore unknown regularity
would arise. Our goal is to establish the naming pattern as a fact which merits further theorizing
and investigation. Only after the naming pattern has been established and confirmed can we begin
to think seriously about its influence on any potential outcome. Finding any racial patterns in first
names in the American past is in and of itself a significant contribution to the historiography of
the American family. Considering any implications must be done with great care.
While we do not propose to offer what the mechanisms may be, it is instructive to cast doubt
12
These patterns suggest that external validation of names may be important in seeking to analyze the consequences
of distinctive names.

21

on some potential explanations. This helps to narrow the focus of future research to uncover the
mechanisms that could explain this result. We consider one potential explanation most pressing–
that of name selection.
It could be the case that the names are a figment of selection. In particular, assuming a new
name in adulthood as opposed to using ones name assigned at birth. If those with distinctive names
who experienced positive outcomes chose to retain their names while others discarded them the
result could be endogenous. This would be an interesting fact as the current literature discusses
the ways that African Americans attempt to avoid the racial stigma of black names. If African
Americans in the past chose to use names due to outcomes, that would be worthy of note. The
historical record, however, does not provide any evidence of African Americans adopting different
first names after the Reconstruction era. In fact, the very lack of any literature documenting this
practice suggests that it was rare. While Litwack [1979] describes the power of names and the
ability to choose names after emancipation, the later history of African American life in the South
provides no discussion of this issue [Litwack 1982, Hahn 2003, Ritterhouse 2006, Hale 1998]. To
the extent that the races separated after the Reconstruction era [Woodward 1955], fewer interracial
interactions would have given African American less incentives to change names, and it is unclear
why those with the most distinctive African American names would retain them.
Overall, unlike the literature on European immigrants, whose name changes during the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries are well documented, there is no evidence that African
Americans did the same. While the lack of a literature on this subject does not mean it did
not occur, the lack of a discussion stands in stark contrast to the literature on name changes
after the Civil War and the literature on racial passing. Similarly, the literature on name changes
consistently shows that name changes were made by those seeking to avoid the stigma of an ethnic
name. African Americans did not have such an opportunity. As Wilkerson [2011] describes, name
changes among African Americans would have little effect on their outcomes and could not obscure
their racial identity in the past. Unlike today, anonymous means of screening (such as the review
of resumes) did not occur in most occupations. We do not believe that names identified here are
the product of later-life name selection.

22

6.2

Future Directions

Given these striking results, we believe that further research on this topic should take two directions.
First, to consider the effect of distinctive names on a range of outcomes. This would include
information that can be gathered from the death certificate itself as well as information that can be
linked to the deceased’s death record. This information includes birthplaces, occupation, parental
names and other measures. Naturally, the relationship between the names and mortality is also
an interesting outcome [Cook, Logan and Parman 2012]. A larger project matching the death
certificates to census files would reveal even more about the names and their origins. In doing
so we can correct for age-misreporting on death certificates among African Americans. Additional
measures such as family size, number of siblings, birth order, and parental occupation. For example,
those with distinctive names may come from larger or smaller families, have higher birth orders
and the like. These and other household characteristics would give us a better idea of factors that
predict whether one would have a distinctive name or not.
The second project is to uncover causal consequences of the names. This will include differences
in mortality due to the names, which can be ascertained from the death certificates. Measures
such as literacy, occupation, fertility, employment, religious affiliation and other measures that are
available in historical data can be estimated. Also, tax records could be used to investigate whether
those with the names identified here are more likely to hold property. Also, since census records
allow for the identification of siblings, linking to the census would also allow us use householdspecific effects where one sibling would have an African American name and the other would not.
This would provide a strong test of the potential social explanations for the effects of distinctive
names, as in Parman [2010, 2012].

7

Conclusion

This paper presented the first evidence of racially distinctive naming patterns among African Americans in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The literature has never supposed that
such a naming pattern existed, yet we found robust evidence of names common among black men
that were rarely used by whites. We use a straightforward methodology and novel data sources
to uncover this naming pattern. We used census records to identify high-frequency names among
23

household heads in selected states that were disproportionately held by African Americans. This
disproportionality held among all men in census records. We then confirmed the racial disproportionality of those names using the death records of three states. We found that the names were
similarly disproportionately black in those independent data sources.
Our method and results harken back to an earlier style of quantitative historical scholarship
which produced new facts that altered our understanding of the past. Fogel [1975: 337] notes
that such methods form the backbone of rigorous quantitative historical work: ”The most common
method of direct measurement in history is counting. My reference to counting as a rigorous method
of measurement is not to be taken derisively. I use portentous language for what appears to be
an elementary operation partly because I want to emphasize the dramatic change in interpretation
that may result merely by moving from an impression to an actual count.” This paper provides
such a dramatic interpretation. The existence of these names changes the very definition of black
names. Indeed, the most profound implication of this work is that ”black names” have a history
which deserves further investigation.
The history of black names opens up a large number of new questions. What meaning did these
names have for the parents who chose them for their children? Were whites and blacks aware of
the stark disproportionality of these names? Did they have socioeconomic effects similar to black
names today? Were certain types of black families more or less likely to have these names in their
families? Even more, the evolution of black names raises even more interesting questions. Why
did these names fall out of use? Given the disproportionality found here, it is unlikely that these
names were viewed as ”white” names that blacks would need to abandon. Also, if these names
were linked to elders, why would names linked to elders cease to be used? Could changes in family
structure explain the decline in the frequency of these names?
At a minimum, our results show that racial naming patterns existed is the past, long before
the Civil Rights Era. This hitherto unknown fact suggest that there are likely several pieces of
the African American experience which remain hidden from contemporary scholarship and which
require serious and sustained investigation. The discovery of the specific causes of this relationship
will go hand in hand with the development of the nascent literature on the political and social
histories of African Americans in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
If naming patterns among African Americans represent cultural and social development and
24

family linkages [Engerman 1978], changes in those names would represent changes in those same
measures. Finding these historical racially identifiable names, which bear little relation to their
contemporary counterparts, necessitates a discussion of black cultural and social development after
the Civil War and before the Great Migration. This period marks the beginnings of a truly selfgoverning African American community— the foundations of African American society and culture
outside the shadow of chattel bondage. While we have evidence of community development, the
establishment of institutions, new economic arrangements, and black political participation, many
open questions remain. This period has been relatively neglected in quantitative historical scholarship, and findings such as the names presented here should stimulate further research into this
period of American history.

25

References
[1] Benston, K.W. (1982) ”’I Yam What I Am’: Naming and Unnaming in Afro-American Literature.” Black American Literature Forum 16: 3-11.
[2] Bertrand, M. and S. Mullainathan (2004). ”Are Emily and Greg More Employable than Lakisha
and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination” American Economic Review
94: 991-1013.
[3] Blassingame, J.W. (1972) The Slave Community: Plantation Life in the Antebellum South.
New York: Oxford University Press.
[4] Brawley, B. (1921). A Social History of the American Negro. New York: Macmillan.
[5] Busse, T.V. and L. Seraydarian (1977). ”Desirability of First Names, Ethnicity and Parental
Education.” Psychological Reports 40: 739-742.
[6] Cassidy, F.G. (1966). ”Multiple Etymologies in Jamaican Creole.” American Speech 41: 211215.
[7] Coale, A. and N.W. Rives (1973). “A Statistical Reconstruction of the Black Population of
the United States, 1880-1970: Estimates of True Numbers by Age and Sex, Birth Rates, and
Total Fertility.” Population Index 39: 3-36.
[8] Cody, C.A. (1982). ”Naming, Kinship, and Estate Dispersal: Notes on Slave Family Life on a
South Carolina Plantation, 1786 to 1833” William and Mary Quarterly 39: 192-211.
[9] Cook, L.D. (2004) African American Inventors Data Set, Stanford University; updated 2005,
2007.
[10] Cook, L.D. (2011) ”Inventing Social Capital: Evidence from African American Inventors,
1821-1930.” Explorations in Economic History 48: 507-518.
[11] Cook, L.D., T.D. Logan and J.M. Parman (2012) ”The Long-Term Consequences of Distinctively Black Names: New Evidence from the American Past.” Working paper, The Ohio State
University.
[12] Cooke, M.G. (1977) ”Naming, Being, and Black Experience.” Yale Review 67: 167-186.
[13] Costa, D. L. and M. Kahn (2006) ”Forging a New Identity: The Costs and Benefits of Diversity
in Civil War Combat Units for Black Slaves and Freemen.” Journal of Economic History 66:
936-962.
[14] DeCamp, D. (1967). ”African Day-Names in Jamaica.” Language 43: 139-149.
[15] Dillard, J.L. (1973) Black English. New York: Vintage.
[16] Eagleson, O.W. and A.D. Clifford (1945). ”A Comparative Study of the Names of White and
Negro Women College Students.” Journal of Social Psychology 21: 57-64.
[17] Eblen, J.E. (1974) “New Estimates of Vital Rates of United States Black Population During
the Nineteenth-Century.” Demography 11:301–319

26

[18] Eichenlaub, S.C., S.E. Tolnay and J.T. Alexander (2010) ”Moving Out but Not Up: Economic
Outcomes in the Great Migration.” American Sociological Review 75: 101-125.
[19] Elkins, S.M. (1959) Slavery: A Problem in American Institutional and Intellectual Life.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
[20] Ellison, R.W. (1964) Shadow and Act. New York: Random House.
[21] Elo, I.T. (2001). “New African American Life Tables from 1935-1940 to 1985-1990.” Demography 38: 97-114.
[22] Elo, I.T. and S.H. Preston (1994). “Estimating African American Mortality from Inaccurate
Data.” Demography 31: 427-258.
[23] Elo, I.T., S.H. Preston, I. Rosenwaike, M. Hill and T. Cheney (1996). “Consistency of Age Reporting on Death Certificates and Social Security Records Among Elderly African Americans.”
Social Science Research 25: 292-307.
[24] Engerman, S.L. (1978). “Review Essay: Studying the Black Family.” Journal of Family History
3: 78-101.
[25] Ewbank, D.C. (1987) “History of Black Mortality and Health Before 1940.” Milbank Quarterly
65(S1):100–28
[26] Figlio, D.N. (2005). ”Names, Expectations and the Black-White Test Score Gap.” NBER
Working Paper No. 11195.
[27] Fogel, R.W. and S.L. Engerman (1974). Time on the Cross: The Economics of American Negro
Slavery. Boston: Little, Brown and Co.
[28] Fogel, R.W. (1975). ”The Limits of Quantitative Methods in History.” American Historical
Review 80: 329-350.
[29] Fogel, R.W. (2003) The Slavery Debates: A Retrospective, 1952-1990. Baton Rouge, LA:
Louisiana State University Press.
[30] Foner, E. (1988) Reconstruction: America’s Unfinished Revolution, 1863-1877. New York:
Harper and Row.
[31] Franklin, J.H. (1980) From Slavery to Freedom. Fifth Edition. New York: Knopf.
[32] Frazier, E.F. (1930) ”The Negro Slave Family.” Journal of Negro History 15: 198-259.
[33] Frazier, E.F. (1939) The Negro Family in the United States. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
[34] Fryer, R.G. and S.D. Levitt. (2004). ”The Causes and Consequences of Distinctively Black
Names” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119: 767-805.
[35] Gaither, F. (1920). ”Fanciful are Negro Names.” New York Times Magazine, February 10, p.
19.
[36] Genovese, E.D. (1974) Roll, Jordan, Roll: The World the Slaves Made. New York: Pantheon.

27

[37] Ginther, D.K., W.T. Schaffer, J. Schnell, B. Masimore, F. Liu, L.L. Haak, and R. Kington
(2011). ”Race, Ethnicity, and NIH Awards.” Science 333: 1015-1019.
[38] Green, L.J. (2002) African American English: A Linguistic Introduction. New York: Cambridge University Press.
[39] Gutman, H.G. (1975). Slavery and the Numbers Game: A Critique of Time on the Cross.
Chicago: University of Illinois Press.
[40] Gutman, H.G. (1976). The Black Family in Slavery and Freedom, 1750-1925. New York: Vintage.
[41] Hahn, S. (2003). A Nation Under Our Feet: Black Political Struggles in the Rural South from
Slavery to the Great Migration. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
[42] Hale, G.E. (1998). Making Whiteness: The Culture of Segregation in the South, 1890-1940.
New York: Vintage.
[43] Jones, J. (1985) Labor of Love, Labor of Sorrow: Black Women, Work, and the Family, From
Slavery to the Present. New York: Vintage.
[44] King, S. (1990) ”Naming and Power in Zora Neale Hurston’s Their Eyes were Watching God.”
Black American Literature Forum 24: 683-696.
[45] Laham, S.M., P. Koval and A.L. Alter (2012). ”The Name-Pronunciation Efect: Why People
like Mr. Smith more than Mr. Colquhoun.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, in
press.
[46] Levine, L.W. (1978) Black Culture and Black Consciousness. New York: Oxford University
Press.
[47] Lieberson, S. and E.O. Bell (1992). ”Children’s First Names: An Empirical Study of Social
Taste.” American Journal of Sociology 98: 511-554.
[48] Lieberson, S. and K.S. Mikelson (1995). ”Distinctive African American Names: An Experimental, Historical, and Linguistic Analysis of Innovation.” American Sociological Review 60:
928-946.
[49] Litwack, L.F. (1979) Been in the Storm so Long: The Aftermath of Slavery. New York: Knopf.
[50] Litwack, L.F. (1998) Trouble in Mind: Black Southerners in the Age of Jim Crow. New York:
Knopf.
[51] Logan, T.D. and J. Parman (2011). ”Race, Socioeconomic Status and Mortality in the 20th
Century: Evidence from the Carolinas.” Working Paper, The Ohio State University.
[52] London, A.S. and S.P. Morgan (1994). ‘”Racial Differences in First Names in 1910.” Journal
of Family History 19: 261-284.
[53] Milkman, K.L., M. Akinola and D. Chugh (2012) ”Temporal Distance and Discrimination: An
Audit Study in Academia.” Forthcoming, Psychological Science.
[54] Parman, John (2010). ”Gender and Intergenerational Mobility: Using Health Outcomes to
Compare Intergenerational Mobility Across Gender and Over Time.” Working Paper, University of California, Davis.
28

[55] Parman, John (2012). ”Childhood Health and Human Capital: Evidence from Genetic Brothers in Arms.” Working Paper, College of William and Mary.
[56] Preston, S.H., I.T. Elo, A. Foster, and H. Fu (1998). “Reconstructing the Size of the African
American Population by Age and Sex, 1930-1990.” Demography 35: 1-21.
[57] Price, R. and S. Price (1972) ”Saramaka Onomastics: An Afro-American Naming System.”
Ethnology 11: 341-367.
[58] Puckett, N.N. (1938). ”American Negro Names.” Journal of Negro History 23: 35-48.
[59] Puckett, N.N. (1975). [Black Names in America: Origins and Usage]. M. Heller, ed. Boston:
G.K. Hall.
[60] Ritterhouse, J.L. (2006). Growing Up Jim Crow: How Black and White Southern Children
Learned Race. Chapel Hill, NC: UNC Press.
[61] Ruggles, S. (1994). “The Origins of African-American Family Structure.” American Sociological Review 59: 136-151.
[62] Ruggles, S., J. T. Alexander, K. Genadek, R. Goeken, M. B. Schroeder, and M. Sobek. (2010).
“Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machine-readable database].” Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
[63] Stampp, K.M. (1956) The Peculiar Institution: Slavery in the Antebellum South. New York:
Knopf.
[64] Tindall, G.B. (1952). South Carolina Negroes, 1877-1900. Columbia, SC: University of South
Carolina Press.
[65] Tindall, G.B. (1967). The Emergence of the New South, 1913-1946. Baton Rouge, LA:
Louisiana State University Press.
[66] Twenge, J.M., E.M. Abebe and W.K. Campbell (2010). ”Fitting in or Standing Out: Trends
in American Parents’ Choices for Children’s Names, 1880-2007.” Social Psychological and
Personality Science 1: 19-25.
[67] Wilkerson, I. (2011). The Warmth of Other Suns. New York: Vintage.
[68] Woodward, C.V. (1951). Origins of the New South, 1877-1913. Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana
State University Press.
[69] Woodward, C.V. (1955). The Strange Career of Jim Crow. New York: Oxford.
[70] Wood, P. H. (1974). Black Majority: Negroes in Colonial South Carolina from 1670 through
the Stono Rebellion. New York: Norton.

29

Table 1
Historical African American First Names
Abe
Abraham
Alonzo
Ambrose
Booker
Elijah
Freeman
Isaac
Isaiah
Israel
King
Master
Moses
Pearlie
Percy
Perlie
Purlie
Presley
Presly
Prince
Titus

Table 2
Black Name Disproportionality in Census and Death Records
Share of All Males with Same First Name who are African American
North
First Name

Alabama

Illinois

Carolina

1900 Census

1920 Census

1908-1959

1916-1947

1910-1970

Abe/Abraham

37.50%

34.62%

79.17%

5.15%

55.75%

Alonzo

14.64%

50.00%

13.88%

54.05%

Ambrose

10.70%

8.44%

47.06%

6.60%

20.48%

Booker

85.19%

99.51%

98.25%

94.20%

94.34%

Elijah

28.81%

36.05%

56.78%

16.51%

49.01%

Freeman

37.50%

25.00%

39.19%

86.16%

40.59%

Isaac

19.68%

19.55%

56.71%

8.45%

87.54%

Isaiah

46.56%

49.23%

94.70%

51.61%

71.49%

Israel

15.35%

9.29%

89.66%

4.93%

11.61%

King

57.08%

48.91%

75.51%

35.04%

66.76%

Master

25.00%

31.28%

---

3.17%

19.09%

Moses

36.85%

38.98%

69.92%

21.52%

68.11%

Percy

30.20%

23.40%

33.66%

73.57%

56.86%

Perlie/Purlie/Pearlie

51.10%

80.00%

25.93%

90.00%

46.11%

53.90%

33.33%

82.14%

32.50%

Presley/Presly
Prince

78.05%

69.18%

94.78%

62.12%

82.46%

Titus

32.93%

28.94%

90.48%

16.67%

30.48%

9.90%

11.64%

5.52%

30.83%

Share of all men who are African American
11.60%

Notes: 1900 and 1920 Census measures are from all male names from 5% IPUMS samples
from Georgia, Michigan, New York, and Washington, DC.
Percentages in bold are those where the name share exceeds the share of men who are African American.

Table 3
Descriptive Measures of Name Distinctiveness
Correlation of Name-Specific Death Record Disproportionality with Census Disproportionali
Alabama

Illinois

North Carolina

Census Year

1908-1959

1916-1947

1910-1970

1900

0.449

0.665

0.685

1920

0.216

0.627

0.553

Share of all African American men with an African American name
1.92%

1.66%

2.04%

0.70%

0.55%

Share of all white men with an African American name
0.12%

Relative (black/white) likelihood of having an African American name
16.27

2.37

3.69

Proportions Excluding Infants (deaths before one year of age)
Share of all African American men with an African American name
2.17%

2.11%

2.68%

0.79%

0.73%

Share of all white men with an African American name
0.12%

Relative (black/white) likelihood of having an African American name
18.38

2.67

3.65

Notes: 1900 and 1920 Census measures are from all male names from 5%
IPUMS samples from Georgia, Michigan, New York, and Washington, DC.

