                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       THE DEMAND FOR CIGARETTES AS DERIVED FROM THE DEMAND FOR
                           WEIGHT CONTROL

                                          John Cawley
                              Stephanie von Hinke Kessler Scholder

                                       Working Paper 18805
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18805


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2013




We thank David Frisvold, Don Kenkel, and Catherine Maclean, as well as participants in the American
Society of Health Economists biennial conference and the Food & Drug Administration’s Economics
of Tobacco Roundtable, for their helpful comments. We gratefully acknowledge financial support
from: Cornell's Institute for Health Economics, Health Behaviors, and Disparities (Cawley) and the
UK Medical Research Council (von Hinke Kessler Scholder; MRC Early Career fellowship in the
economics of health, reference number G1002345). The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by John Cawley and Stephanie von Hinke Kessler Scholder. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Demand for Cigarettes as Derived from the Demand for Weight Control
John Cawley and Stephanie von Hinke Kessler Scholder
NBER Working Paper No. 18805
February 2013
JEL No. D01,H2,H3,I1,Z18

                                              ABSTRACT

We provide new evidence on the extent to which the demand for cigarettes is derived from the demand
for weight control (i.e. weight loss or avoidance of weight gain). We utilize nationally representative
data that provide the most direct evidence to date on this question: individuals are directly asked whether
they smoke to control their weight. We find that, among teenagers who smoke frequently, 46% of
girls and 30% of boys are smoking in part to control their weight. This practice is significantly more
common among youths who describe themselves as too fat than those who describe themselves as
about the right weight.

The derived demand for cigarettes has important implications for tax policy. Under reasonable assumptions,
the demand for cigarettes is less price elastic among those who smoke for weight control. Thus, taxes
on cigarettes will result in less behavior change (but more revenue collection and less deadweight
loss) among those for whom the demand for cigarettes is a derived demand. Public health efforts to
reduce smoking initiation and encourage cessation may wish to design campaigns to alter the derived
nature of cigarette demand, especially among adolescent girls.


John Cawley
3M24 MVR Hall
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
and Department of Economics
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
jhc38@cornell.edu

Stephanie von Hinke Kessler Scholder
Department of Economics and Related Studies
University of York
Heslington, York, YO10 5DD, UK
Stephanie.Scholder@york.ac.uk
Introduction

    Tobacco use is the number one preventable cause of death in the United States,

responsible for an estimated 467,000 deaths in 2005 (Danaei et al., 2009). It is also

associated with significant medical care costs. For example, smoking at age 24 is associated

with lifetime medical expenditures that are $3,757 higher for women and $2,617 higher for

men (Sloan et al., 2004). There are also substantial externalities associated with smoking,

which amount to $6,201 over the lifecycle, or $1.44 per pack of cigarettes (Sloan et al.,

2004).

    As a result, there is tremendous interest in better understanding the demand for cigarettes

(Chaloupka and Warner, 2000). One view, from public health, is that cigarettes are simply

nicotine delivery vehicles, and that individuals smoke because they are addicted to nicotine

and are trying to maintain optimum levels of the drug (see, e.g. British Medical Journal,

1977). This paper investigates a more economic explanation, which is that, for some groups,

the demand for cigarettes is derived from the demand for weight control. The demand for a

good is considered to be derived if the good is demanded as an input into the production of

another thing of value. The classic example is that a firm’s demand for capital, labor, and

materials is derived from its desire to earn profits by selling market outputs that are produced

with those inputs (Marshall, 1920).

    Derived demand is relevant for many risky health behaviors. For example, a teenager’s

suicide attempt may be derived from a desire for attention or a wish to punish one’s parents

or boyfriend/girlfriend (Cutler, Glaeser and Norberg, 2001). Other examples include:

teenage girls’ demand for sex, which may be derived from her desire to keep her boyfriend;

and teenagers’ demand for drugs and alcohol, which may be derived from a desire for peer

acceptance (Kenkel, 2006; Cawley, 2008).

    This paper makes three important contributions to the literature. First, we provide direct


                                               2
evidence from two large, nationally representative U.S. samples as to whether consumers

demand cigarettes for the purposes of weight control. Specifically, we analyze data on

adolescents from the Health Behavior in School-aged Children surveys and data on adults

from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys. These surveys are ideal for

answering this question because they directly ask whether individuals are smoking for the

purpose of controlling their weight. Second, we provide evidence regarding whose demand

for cigarettes is derived from a demand for weight loss. Third, we discuss the implications of

our findings for tax policy and anti-smoking campaigns more generally.

     To preview our results, the data for youths indicate that roughly 5% of teenagers smoke

as a form of weight control. However, conditional on being a frequent smoker, 46% of girls

and 30% of boys report smoking for weight control. Smoking for weight control is

particularly common among white girls and those who consider themselves too fat. Among

adults, we find that less than 1% report smoking to control their weight, and these individuals

also represent a small percentage of frequent smokers. We conclude with a discussion of the

implications of these findings for tax policy and antismoking campaigns.



The Interaction between Weight and Smoking

    Interestingly, for the demand for cigarettes to be derived from the demand for weight

control, it is not necessary that smoking reduce weight. It is only necessary for consumers to

believe that smoking reduces weight, and to demand cigarettes for that reason.

    However, there is strong evidence from medical research that smoking does in fact

promote weight loss. A review of the medical literature concludes that smoking increases

energy expenditure by raising the metabolic rate: smoking a single cigarette is estimated to

induce a 3% rise in energy expenditure within 30 minutes (Chiolero et al., 2008). Moreover,

there is strong evidence that nicotine suppresses the appetite (Mineur et al., 2011; Chiolero et


                                               3
al., 2008). Thus, smoking reduces weight both by increasing energy expenditure and

decreasing energy intake. In fact, a recent commentary in the medical journal Diabetes stated

that “smoking is one of the easiest and most reliable approaches to weight loss, at least for

low-level smokers (<= 10 cigarettes/day)” (Novak and Gavini, 2012).

    As a result, those who quit smoking tend to gain an average of 4-5 kg within 10 years of

quitting (Flegal et al., 1995). The prospect of gaining weight may discourage smokers from

even attempting to quit. In addition, weight gain after quitting increases the risk of smoking

relapse (Chiolero et al., 2008). Thus, a desire to avoid weight gain may not only increase

smoking initiation but also decrease quit attempts and decrease the probability of success

among those trying to quit.

    An economic literature investigates the link between cigarette taxes and obesity in the

U.S., hypothesizing that higher cigarette taxes reduce smoking, with the unintended

consequence of raising weight. The majority of these studies conclude that higher cigarette

taxes are associated with higher body mass index (BMI) or rates of obesity (e.g. Chou,

Grossman, and Saffer, 2004; Rashad, Grossman, and Chou, 2006; Baum, 2009), but other

studies find no correlation between cigarette taxes and BMI or obesity (Gruber and Frakes,

2005; Nonnemaker et al. 2009). To some extent, the difference in results may be driven by

differences in the way the studies control for time trends (Baum, 2009; Nonnemaker et al.,

2009). Fang, Ali and Rizzo (2009) use local cigarette prices as an instrument for smoking

status and conclude that smoking reduces body mass index, in particular for those in the

healthy-weight range.

    The cigarette industry is aware that the demand for its products may be derived from the

demand for weight control. Tobacco industry documents released during the Master

Settlement Agreement reveal that cigarette manufacturers realized that consumers consider

smoking to be an appetite suppressant. In fact, they marketed cigarettes to promote that


                                               4
belief, and added appetite suppressants (such as tartaric acid) to cigarettes to reinforce that

notion (Gonseth et al., 2012).

     Cigarette marketing reflecting this derived nature of cigarette demand appeared as early

as the 1920s (Amos and Haglund, 2000), when Lucky Strike ran the ad campaign “Reach for

Lucky instead of a sweet”, which featured attractive women shadowed by obese silhouettes

with the caption: “Is this you five years from now? When tempted to over-indulge, reach for

a Lucky instead.”2 This ad campaign was so effective that it led to an advertising war in

which the cigarette industry distributed information about the health risks of overeating and

the candy industry counterattacked by distributing information about the health risks of

smoking (Wagner, 1929; Calfee, 1986). The Federal Trade Commission ended the conflict

by prohibiting tobacco companies from advertising cigarettes as a “reducing aid”, even by

implication (Whelan, 1984, pp. 62-63).

     While there is abundant evidence that both adults and youths, and especially girls,

believe that smoking helps control weight (see e.g. Camp et al., 1993; Boles and Johnson,

2001; U.S. DHHS, 1988), it is unclear to what extent people smoke for that reason. The

evidence that exists is indirect and only suggestive. Several studies have found that girls who

are heavier, or are concerned about their weight, are more likely to smoke (Voorhees et al.,

2002; Wee et al., 2001; Tomeo et al., 1999; Wiseman et al., 1998; French et al., 1994).

Those studies report correlations, but three economic studies (each using a different dataset)

suggest that the relationship is causal for teenage girls (Cawley, Markowitz and Tauras, 2004;

Cawley, Markowitz and Tauras, 2006; Rees and Sabia, 2010). Exploiting the heritable

component of weight as a natural experiment in longitudinal data, these studies find that a

higher baseline weight increases the probability that teenage girls (but not boys) initiate

smoking by the next survey wave.

2
 Cigarette companies’ desire to exploit the derived nature of cigarette demand is also apparent in the names of
certain brands, such as Trims and Virginia Slims.

                                                       5
    However, even these studies are unable to answer why girls who are heavier, or more

concerned about their weight, are more likely to smoke or initiate smoking. The logical

hypothesis is that such girls demand cigarettes for weight control, but the little direct

evidence on this comes from small and unrepresentative samples. For example, Crisp et al.

(1998) found that roughly 20% of a sample of smoking schoolgirls in London (N=365), and

roughly 34% of a sample of smoking schoolgirls in Ottawa (N=125) reported that they

“definitely” smoked “instead of eating” and because it “makes me less hungry.” Camp et al.

(1993) surveyed 659 students in two Catholic high schools in Memphis and found that 39%

of regular female smokers and 12% of regular male smokers reported smoking as a weight

control strategy, while not a single black male or female smoked for that reason. Finally,

Klesges and Klesges (1988) surveyed 1,076 students, faculty and staff at a large university in

the southern U.S. and found that 32.5% of all smokers reported using smoking as a weight

loss strategy. This study contributes to the literature by examining direct evidence of the

derived demand for cigarettes using two nationally representative datasets.

Data and Methods

    The two datasets examined here are the Health Behavior in School-Aged Children

(HBSC) and the National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys (NHANES). The HBSC

is a cross-national study coordinated by the World Health Organization to gain insight into

the health and well-being of youth (US D.H.H.S., 2003). HBSC collects data for a sample of

1,500 school children in each of three age groups: 11, 13 and 15 years. Children are selected

using a clustered sampling design, in which the initial sampling unit is the school class. Data

are collected through self-administered questionnaires completed in the classroom.

    We examine HBSC data for the United States for 2001-02 and 2005-06, when the survey

included questions on weight control strategies. In addition to the sample of 11, 13 and 15

year olds, the U.S. sample was expanded to provide a nationally representative sample of 6th


                                                6
to 10th graders, aged 11-16 (US D.H.H.S., 2005).

    Respondents to the HBSC self-report their weight and height. Self-reports of weight and

height by adolescents are characterized by reporting error, but are considered of sufficiently

high quality for use in research (see, e.g. Goodman et al., 2000; Brener et al., 2003a). We use

these weights and heights to calculate their BMI and classify respondents as underweight,

healthy weight, overweight, or obese using growth charts from the Centers for Disease

Control and Prevention (U.S. D.H.H.S, 2002). Respondents also report the perception of

their body weight: when asked “Do you think your body is…”, they respond with one of the

following: “much too thin”, “too thin”, “about right”, “a bit too fat”, or “much too fat.”

    The HBSC asks: “How often do you smoke cigarettes as present?” Respondents are

coded as smokers if they answer “every day,” “at least once a week, but not every day,” or

“less than once a week” and are coded as non-smoker if they respond “I do not smoke.”

When we examine smoking frequency, we combine the first two responses, leaving three

categories: “at least once a week,” “less than once a week,” and “do not smoke”.

Furthermore, the HBSC asks respondents about the type of weight control behaviors they

engage in. For our purposes, a key question is: “Which of the following things did you do to

control your weight during the last 12 months?” to which one possible answer is “smoke

more.”

    The full HBSC sample includes 14,817 students in 2001-02 and 9,227 students in 2005-

06. However, questions about individual’s weight control behaviors were not asked of

middle school children in 2001-02, and were only asked of half of the sixth graders in 2005-

06. Hence, our sample includes 14-16 year old high school students in grades 9 and 10 in

2001-02 (n = 5,226) and 12-16 year old middle and high school students in grades 6 to 10 in

2005-06 (n = 7,690). To ensure the same sample is used in all analyses, we drop those with

missing data on smoking behaviors, weight, height, and weight perception, resulting in a final


                                               7
sample of 10,442 students (4,113 in 2001-02 and 6,329 in 2005-06).

    We also analyze data on adult respondents to the National Health and Nutrition

Examination Survey (NHANES) Continuous. In the 2005-06, 2007-08, and 2009-10

NHANES, respondents who reported that they tried to lose weight or did something to keep

from gaining weight in the past 12 months are asked: “How did you try to lose weight?”

Among the optional answers is: “Started to smoke or began to smoke again.” Note that the

wording is different from that in the HBSC, as it asks about the extensive margin (initiation)

rather than the intensive margin; we discuss the implications of this below.

    The NHANES asks: “Do you now smoke cigarettes?” Respondents are coded as

smokers if they respond “every day” or “some days” and are coded as non-smokers if they

respond “not at all.”

    We utilize three weight-related measurements in NHANES: (1) weight and height

recorded by medical professionals during the medical examination of respondents, (2)

respondents’ perception of their weight (“How do you consider your weight”), where they

responded either “underweight”, “about the right weight”, or “overweight”, and (3)

respondents’ weight preferences, as indicated by the question “Would you like to weigh

more, less, or stay about the same?”.

    The full NHANES sample contains 10,348 respondents in 2005-06, 10,149 respondents

in 2007-08, and 10,537 in 2009-10. We drop those who did not take a medical examination,

those who are pregnant, and those younger than 16, as they were not asked about their weight

control strategies. To ensure the same sample is used in all analyses, we drop those with

missing data on current smoking, smoking for weight control, weight, height, weight

perception, and weight preferences, resulting in a final sample of 15,744 respondents aged

16-85 years (4,345 in 2005-06; 5,505 in 2007-08; and 5,894 in 2009-10).

    To examine the extent to which the demand for cigarettes is derived from the demand for


                                               8
weight control, we calculate the unconditional percentage of the sample that reports smoking

to control their weight. To investigate which subgroups are most likely to demand cigarettes

as a method of weight loss, we estimate probit regressions of smoking for weight loss as a

function of BMI classification, weight perception, age, year, race and maternal

socioeconomic status (SES) based on her occupation category. We classify maternal

occupations categorized as professional or business as high SES; occupations categorized as

technical, office or skilled as medium SES; and those categorized as service or laborer as low

SES. We estimate all models separately by gender. Because HBSC respondents are selected

using a clustered sampling design, we cluster standard errors at the school level to account for

any correlation in error terms among children in the same school. All descriptive statistics

and analyses are weighted by the sample weights provided by the surveys.



Results

    Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the explanatory variables in the HBSC sample.

The prevalence of obesity (based on self-reported weight and height) is lower for girls (9.4%)

than boys (14.9%). However, describing oneself as “much too fat” is more than twice as

common among girls (5.8%) than boys (2.3%).

    Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for the explanatory variables in the NHANES

sample. The prevalence of obesity (based on measured weight and height) is roughly one-

third for both women (35.7%) and men (33.4%). There is a gender difference, however, in

the percent of NHANES respondents who describe themselves as overweight: 63.6% for

females and 50.2% for males.

    Table 3 (for HBSC) and Table 4 (for NHANES) present descriptive statistics for

smoking variables, showing the proportions of individuals who are current smokers, and who

smoke for weight control by gender. The first row of Table 3 indicates that, in the HBSC,


                                               9
girls are significantly less likely than boys to smoke (15.1% vs. 17.5%), but the second row

shows that smoking for weight control is more common among girls (5.3%) than boys

(4.8%), though this difference is not statistically significant.

    Subsequent rows in Table 3 show differences in the tendency to smoke for weight

control by age, grade, race, smoking frequency, weight classification and weight perception.

Smoking for weight control is more likely among older than younger girls; e.g. it is reported

by 6.7% of 16-year-olds compared to 1.8% of 13-year-olds. Among girls, smoking for

weight control is more than twice as likely for whites (6.6%) than African-Americans (2.8%,

p<0.001) , whereas it is roughly equally likely for white (4.7%) and African-American boys

(5.0%, p=0.738).

    Table 3 also reveals that large fractions of frequent smokers (defined as those who smoke

at least once per week) report that they smoke to control their weight; this is true of 46.4% of

female frequent smokers and 30.0% of male frequent smokers. Thus, although only 5.3% of

girls and 4.8% of boys smoke to control their weight, they represent large percentages of the

youth whose smoking is a serious public health concern.

    The final rows of Table 3 present the proportion of respondents who smoke to control

their weight by weight classification (calculated using their weight and height) and the

individual’s perception of their weight. Among girls, the overweight and obese are more

likely than the healthy weight to report smoking to control weight, but the difference is not

statistically significant. However, a girl’s perception of her weight does predict smoking to

control weight: girls who describe themselves as “much too fat” and “too fat” are more likely

to smoke for weight control than girls who describe themselves as “about right” (15.7% and

6.8% respectively versus 3.3%).

    Among boys, the obese are significantly more likely to smoke for weight control than the

healthy weight (7.5% versus 4.4%). Similarly, boys who describe themselves as “much too


                                                10
fat” are significantly more likely to smoke for weight control than those who describe

themselves as “about right” (10.5% versus 4.1%).

    These findings are consistent with derived demand; youth who are, or believe themselves

to be, overweight are more likely to smoke for weight control. However, an unexpected

result in Table 3 is that the underweight are also more likely to report smoking for weight

control. Among girls, those who describe themselves as “much too thin” are significantly

more likely than girls who say they are “about right” to smoke for weight control (10.9%

versus 3.3%), though there is not a difference between girls whose BMI is in the underweight

as opposed to healthy weight category (even though BMI is calculated using self-reported

weight that may reflect perceptions). For boys, those who perceive themselves to be “much

too thin” are more likely than those who perceive themselves to be “about right” to smoke for

weight control (8.9% versus 4.1%), and those whose self-reported weight and height is in the

underweight range are significantly more likely to report smoking for weight control than

those in the healthy weight range (8.5% versus 4.4%). We discuss this surprising finding later

in the paper.

    Table 4 presents similar information for the sample of NHANES adults. The prevalence

of smoking among NHANES adults (19.9% among women, 25.3% among men) is higher

than that among HBSC teenagers (15.1% among girls, 17.5% among boys). However, the

prevalence of smoking to control weight is much lower among NHANES adults (0.6% of

women, 0.3% of men) than among HBSC teenagers (5.3% of girls, 4.8% of boys). This is

likely in part due to the difference in question wording (the HBSC asked whether respondents

smoke more to control their weight, and the NHANES asks whether they started to smoke or

began to smoke again to control their weight).

    Even among daily smokers in the NHANES, very few report smoking to control their

weight (1.0% of men and 2.7% of women). However, there is evidence of the derived nature


                                              11
of cigarette demand. For both men and women, respondents who report they would like to

weigh less are six to eight times more likely to report smoking for weight control than

respondents who say they would like to weigh the same, and the differences are statistically

significant for both genders. In addition, men who are obese are significantly more likely

than healthy weight men to smoke for weight control (0.6% versus 0.1%). The practice is

also significantly more common among men who describe themselves as overweight than

men who describe themselves as about right (0.5% versus 0.1%).

    To investigate in more detail who has a derived demand for cigarettes, we estimate probit

regressions of smoking to control one’s weight, as a function of observable characteristics.

Models are estimated using the HBSC data. Because of the small percentage of NHANES

respondents who report smoking to control their weight (47 out of 7,915 females and 25 out

of 7,829 males), we do not estimate regression models for the NHANES.

    Table 5 presents the marginal effects of probit regressions of smoking for weight control

on one of three measures of weight (BMI, BMI classification and weight perception) plus

demographic characteristics, estimated using the full HBSC sample (i.e. not just smokers).

    Among girls, each additional unit of BMI is associated with a 0.2 percentage point higher

probability of smoking for weight control (column 1). Although the probability that a girl

smokes for weight control rises with weight classification, the differences in point estimates

are small and are not statistically significant (col. 2). In contrast, a girl’s perception of

weight is strongly and significantly correlated with the probability of smoking for weight

control (col. 3). Girls who describe themselves as “a bit too fat” are 2.9 percentage points

more likely to smoke for weight control, and those who describe themselves as “much too

fat” are 11.9 percentage points more likely to engage in the practice compared to those who

describe themselves as “about right”. Given that only 5.3% of girls in the sample smoke for

weight control, these magnitudes are substantial. As was found in the unconditional results


                                                 12
of Table 3, girls who describe themselves as “much too thin” are also significantly more

likely to smoke for weight control than girls who describe their weight as “about right”

(moreover, the point estimate is large: 8.4 percentage points). Another finding of interest is

that African American girls are 2.4 to 3.0 percentage points less likely to smoke for weight

control than otherwise identical white girls.

     Among boys, we find that the obese are 2.8 percentage points more likely to smoke for

weight control than healthy-weight boys, and that boys who describe themselves as “much

too fat” are 6.9 percentage points more likely to smoke for weight control than boys who

describe their weight as “about right” (col. 6). The practice is more likely among the older

boys in the sample, but no other observable characteristics significantly predict the practice.

     The differences in the predictive power of weight classification and weight perception,

especially for girls, beg the question of how the two differ. Table 6 presents cross-tabulations

for girls and boys. Even though clinical weight classification is based on self-reported weight

and height, and thus may be biased by the respondent’s perception of their weight, there is

considerable variation of perceptions within weight classifications. Among healthy weight

girls, 1.3% describe themselves as “much too thin,” 9.1% say they are “too thin,” 60.2%

describe themselves as “about right,” 27.2% say they are “a bit too fat,” and 2.3% describe

themselves as “much too fat.”3 The percentage of girls who report that they are “much too

fat” constitute 0.6% of the underweight, 2.3% of the healthy weight, 9.3% of the overweight,

and 29.0% of the obese. The substantial variation in perceptions within weight classification

explains how smoking for weight control can be more strongly correlated with girls’

perceptions of their weight than their clinical weight classification.

     When we regress smoking for weight control on clinical weight classification and weight


3
  Variation in weight perception within weight classification is likely due in part to the fact that BMI is a poor
measure of fatness, because it does not distinguish between fat from muscle. Thus, the overweight category
includes people who are fat for their height (and may perceive themselves as too fat) as well as those who are
muscular for their height (and may perceive their weight as about right); see Burkhauser and Cawley (2008).

                                                         13
perception (not shown here; available from the authors upon request), weight perception but

not clinical weight classification is statistically significant. From this, we conclude that a

girl’s perception of her weight is a stronger predictor of whether she smokes for weight

control than her self-reported weight and height. When we estimate such a regression for

boys, coefficients on both weight classification and weight perception variables are close to

zero, with none statistically significant.



Extension: How do those who smoke for weight control differ from those who smoke for

other reasons?

    We investigate how those who smoke for weight control differ from those who smoke

for other reasons by estimating probit regressions of smoking for weight loss on observable

characteristics, using only the sample of smokers in the HBSC. We again estimate separate

regressions for each of the three sets of weight variables: BMI, weight classification based on

BMI, and weight perceptions.

    Table 7 presents the marginal effects from these probit regressions. Among girls who

smoke, those who describe themselves as a “bit too fat” are 14.1 percentage points more

likely, and those who describe themselves as “much too fat” are 26.8 percentage points more

likely, to smoke for weight control, compared to those who consider themselves to be “about

right” (col. 3). Among girls who smoke, smoking for weight control is between 12.8 and

16.1 percentage points less likely among African-Americans than whites.

    Among boys who smoke, smoking for weight control is 9.0 percentage points more

likely among the obese, but 9.2 percentage points less likely among the overweight, relative

to the healthy weight (col. 5). However, we also find that, among boys who smoke, the

underweight are 32.1 percentage points more likely to do so for weight control.




                                                14
Extension: How do those who smoke for weight control differ from those who use other

methods to control their weight?

       The HBSC and NHANES each asked respondents about a host of strategies one can

use to control one’s weight. The prevalence of each method is detailed in Table A.1 (HBSC)

and Table A.2 (NHANES) in Appendix A. These tables show that healthy weight control

behaviors, such as exercising, eating more fruit and vegetables, and eating fewer sweets are

much more common weight loss behaviors than smoking. They are also much more common

than other unhealthy methods of weight loss, such as using diet pills or laxatives, and

vomiting. For example, in the HBSC, 84.8% of girls report exercising to control their weight,

and 62.8% report eating fewer sweets, compared to 5.7% who report vomiting, and 5.3% who

report smoking as a method of weight loss. More generally, over 90% of HBSC respondents

“have gone on a diet, changed their eating habits, or done something else to control their

weight during the last 12 months” (not shown in Table, available upon request).

       The lower panel of Table A.1 shows the proportion of the HBSC sample who engage

in each of these strategies, conditional on smoking to control weight. The conditional means

of (e.g.) exercise, eating fewer sweets and less fat are relatively similar to the unconditional

means in the upper panel of the table. In other words, it does not appear to be the case that

those who smoke for weight control are less likely to exercise or eat healthy. In other words,

smoking does not appear to be a substitute for healthy methods of weight control. However,

the prevalence of unhealthy behaviors is substantially more common among those smoking

for weight control than for the sample as a whole. For example, 38.7% of girls and 33.8% of

boys who smoke for weight control also report taking diet pills or laxatives, compared to

6.7% and 3.3% of girls and boys in the full sample. Vomiting for weight loss is practiced by

27.6% of girls and 27.1% of boys who smoke for weight loss, compared to 5.7% of girls and

2.7% of boys in the sample as a whole. Fasting is practiced by 42% of girls and 27.5% of


                                               15
boys who smoke to control their weight, compared to 17.7% and 7.3% of girls and boys in

the full sample. Thus, those engaged in the already-risky and unhealthy practice of smoking

for weight control are more likely to be engaged in a constellation of other risky weight

control behaviors, which is troubling from a public health perspective.

    A comparison of the prevalence of weight control strategies among youth in the HBSC

(Table A.1) and adults in the NHANES (Table A.2) indicates that both healthy and unhealthy

weight control strategies are much less common in the adult sample. Only 37.3% of women

and 29.4% of men exercise to control their weight, compared to 84.8% of girls and 84.2% of

boys in the HBSC sample. Similarly, 24.6% of women and 17.3% of men in the NHANES

report eating less fat, compared to 58.9% of girls and 42.9% of boys in the HBSC. Only a

small proportion of adults report practicing unhealthy weight control behaviors such as

smoking (0.6% or women and 0.3% of men), or taking laxatives or vomiting (0.5% of women

and 0.2% of men). The proportion of individuals engaging in each weight control behavior is

higher among those smoking for weight control (lower panel of Appendix Table A.2) than for

the sample as a whole (the upper panel of the same table). However, as shown in the last row

of Table A.2, these comparisons rely on very small samples and should not be over-

interpreted.

    To further investigate how those who smoke for weight control differ from those who

use other methods to control their weight, we estimate a probit regression for smoking for

weight control on observables, restricting the HBSC sample to those who report attempting to

control their weight (through any means). Results are presented in Table 8. Even within the

set of people trying to control their weight, we find that those who perceive themselves as

“much too fat” are more likely to smoke for weight loss (11.7 percentage points more likely

for girls, 7.0 percentage points more likely for boys). Moreover, boys with a BMI in the

obese range are 2.4 percentage points more likely to smoke to control their weight. In


                                              16
general, with the majority of people in the HBSC sample indicating to have tried to control

their weight in the last 12 months, the results are very similar to those based on the full

sample of HBSC respondents (Table 5). Thus, also among those trying to control their

weight, heavier individuals are more likely to smoke to achieve that end. This is not a linear

relationship, however; we once again find that girls who say they are “much too thin” (yet are

still trying to lose weight) are significantly more likely to smoke as a method of weight

control than girls who say their weight is “about right.”



Discussion

    This paper contributes to the economic literature on the demand for cigarettes by

demonstrating that the demand for cigarettes is, for some individuals, derived from the

demand for weight control. The data presented in this paper, the HBSC for youths and the

NHANES for adults, provide the most direct evidence to date, because both explicitly ask

respondents whether they smoke to control their weight. Overall, a modest percentage of

youth smoke as a form of weight control: 5.3% of girls and 4.8% of boys. However, among

frequent smokers, 46.4% of girls and 30.0% of boys report smoking for weight control. In

contrast, less than 1% of adults smoke to control their weight, and they also represent only a

small percentage of frequent smokers (2.7% of women, 1.0% of men). Regressions indicate

that smoking for weight control is particularly common among youths who describe

themselves as too fat, and is less likely among African-American girls than white girls.

    There are two possible reasons why this evidence is stronger in the HBSC than in the

NHANES. The first is that the cigarette demand of teenagers (especially girls) may be more

likely to be derived than that of adults. For example, girls may be more concerned than adult

women with their weight and appearance. The age pattern could also be explained by people

learning with age that smoking is an unwise method of weight loss.



                                               17
    A second reason is the difference in the wording of the question. The HBSC asks

whether youths “smoked more” to lose weight, whereas the NHANES asks adults whether

they “started to smoke or began to smoke again.” Increasing consumption on the intensive

margin (smoking more) may simply be more common than increasing consumption on the

extensive margin (initiation).

    We find that perception of weight is a stronger predictor of smoking for weight control

among girls than boys. For example, reporting that one is “much too fat” is associated with a

11.9 percentage point higher probability of smoking to control weight for girls, compared to a

6.9 percentage point higher probability for boys. Reporting that one is a “bit too fat” is

associated with a 2.9 percentage point increase in smoking for weight control by girls, but an

insignificant 1.4 percentage point increase for boys. This gender difference is consistent with

a large body of evidence that the labor market and social consequences of being overweight

or obese are greater for women than men: obese women are more likely than obese men to be

socially stigmatized (Puhl, 2011), develop obesity-related depression (Granberg, 2011), or

suffer labor market penalties such as lower wages (Averett, 2011; Cawley, 2004). Given that

the costs of heaviness are greater for women, they may be willing to pay a higher price and

take greater risks for weight control and reduction. For example, even though the prevalence

of obesity in the U.S. is almost identical for women (35.8%) and men (35.7%) (Flegal et al.,

2012), there is a large difference in the proportion trying to lose weight: 60% of women and

36% of men (Baradel et al., 2009).

    We find that African-American girls are between 2.4 and 3.0 percentage points less

likely than white girls to smoke to control their weight. This too is consistent with

differences in the costs of overweight and obesity. Obese African-American women report

being more satisfied with their appearance and are less likely to suffer obesity-related

depression, social stigmatization or employment discrimination than obese white females


                                               18
(Granberg, 2011; Puhl, 2011; Averett, 2011).

    An unexpected finding, however, is that those who perceive themselves to be

underweight are also more likely to report smoking for weight control. Among both girls and

boys, those who describe themselves as “much too thin” are significantly more likely than

those who describe their weight as “about right” to smoke for weight control. One possible

explanation is that smoking is an extremely effective method of weight loss, and, absent

smoking, these underweight individuals would be much heavier, so they accept being too thin

as the lesser of two evils. However, this does not necessarily hold for girls, as it is only those

who perceive themselves to be underweight, rather than those who actually are underweight,

who smoke for weight control. (Among boys, both underweight and the perception of being

“too thin” predict smoking for weight control). Exploring this finding is an interesting

direction for future research.

    The findings of this paper are relevant for cigarette tax policy and understanding

heterogeneity in consumer response to prices. Specifically, our findings suggest that the

Hicks-Marshall laws of derived demand (Marshall, 1920; Bronfenbrenner, 1961) apply to

teenage girls’ price elasticity of the demand for cigarettes. The Hicks-Marshall laws were

originally derived to explain the wage elasticity of a firm’s demand for labor, but the laws

generalize to any other case of derived demand. The laws state the following conditions

under which a derived demand will be relatively price inelastic: 1) the demand for the

ultimate objective is relatively price inelastic; 2) the input is essential to the production of the

objective, i.e. there are no easy substitutes for the inputs; and 3) expenditures on the input are

a relatively small fraction of the total cost of the ultimate objective (this is sometimes referred

to as the importance of being unimportant).

    In the context of the demand for cigarettes being derived from the demand for weight

control, there is evidence supporting each of the Hicks-Marshall conditions. The first


                                                 19
condition may be satisfied because losing weight, or avoiding weight gain, is considered

important among females and especially among white adolescent females (Puhl, 2011;

Granberg, 2011). As a result, teenage girls’ demand for a slim appearance may be highly

inelastic. The second condition may be satisfied because the vast majority of weight loss

attempts fail (e.g. Crawford et al., 2000). Therefore, people may perceive that there are

relatively few substitutes for cigarettes as a means of suppressing appetite. Teenage girls in

particular may not have access to alternative methods of weight loss, such as prescription

weight loss drugs or bariatric surgery. Recall that “smoking is one of the easiest and most

reliable approaches to weight loss, at least for low-level smokers” (Novak and Gavini, 2012).

Moreover, teenage girls may consider losing weight by smoking to be more enjoyable than

losing weight through exercise or diet. Finally, although cigarettes are relatively expensive,

the third condition may be satisfied because a substantial fraction of the cigarettes smoked by

youth are not purchased by them. For example, Forster et al. (2003) find that only 16% of

teenage smokers paid for the last cigarette they smoked; the remainder had bummed them

from friends or stolen them from others (e.g. parents). Similarly, 34% of respondents to the

Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System said that their usual source of cigarettes was to

borrow them (Katzman et al., 2007). Overall, the Hicks-Marshall laws of derived demand

appear to apply, which suggests that those who demand cigarettes for weight loss (e.g.

teenage girls who perceive themselves as too fat) may be relatively inelastic to cigarette

prices and taxes.

    Although only 5.3% of girls and 4.8% of boys smoke to control their weight, 46% of

girls who smoke frequently, and 30% of boys who smoke frequently, engage in that practice.

This is relevant for tax policy because it is the frequent smokers who impose the greatest

costs, and thus it is their behavior that public health most wants to modify.

    The decreased sensitivity to prices and taxes suggests that other policies may be more


                                               20
effective in reducing smoking among teenage girls. As a result of the Family Smoking

Prevention and Tobacco Control Act of 2009, the FDA now has regulatory authority over

tobacco and cigarette advertising. As shown in internal documents from the tobacco industry

(e.g. Gonseth et al., 2012), cigarette companies have historically advertised in such a way as

to encourage consumers to use cigarettes to control their weight. The FDA may wish to

consider using its new authority over cigarette advertising to ensure that industry does

nothing to reinforce the derived nature of cigarette demand.

    Public health campaigns to deter smoking initiation may wish to consider addressing the

link between smoking and weight control, and smoking cessation messages may wish to

address smokers’ concerns that quitting would result in weight gain. However, the wording

and design of such messages is important; they may make people aware of the possibility that

smoking can be used as a method of weight control and thereby unintentionally increase

smoking initiation. Historically, some poorly-designed public health messages have

backfired and had the opposite effect than was intended (Byrne and Neiderdeppe, 2011). In

principle, the recognition that the demand for cigarettes is partly derived from the demand for

weight loss can be used to craft more effective messages to prevent smoking initiation and

encourage smoking cessation.

    By clarifying the link between obesity and smoking, this paper contributes to the larger

economic literature on interactions between risky health behaviors, for example: gateway and

stepping stone effects (e.g. Pacula, 1997; van Ours, 2003), the complementarity of alcohol

and tobacco (e.g. Dee, 1999), and the substitutability of alcohol and marijuana (e.g. DiNardo

and Lemieux, 2001). In general, such interactions between risky health behaviors are an

interesting and promising direction for future research.

    There are several limitations of our data. The HBSC includes only self-reported, not

measured, weight and height, and thus there is an unknown degree of reporting error that


                                              21
results in misclassification into weight categories such as overweight and obese. However,

studies of this error conclude that self-reported weight and height by youths are of

sufficiently high quality for use in research (Goodman et al., 2000; Brener et al., 2003a).

Another limitation is that BMI, and clinical weight classifications based on BMI, are

imperfect measures of fatness in that they ignore body composition – they do not distinguish

fat from muscle (Burkhauser and Cawley, 2008); this may explain why we find differing

results for weight classification based on BMI and the respondent’s perception of their

weight. Unfortunately, the HBSC does not contain direct or objective measures of fatness,

only self-reported weight and perception of own weight, so we are limited to using those

measures.

    Smoking status is also self-reported and thus may contain error, but the HBSC was well-

designed to collect such information, as it was self-administered (versus administered by an

interviewer) and conducted in the classroom (as opposed to the home); both of these survey

characteristics have been found to yield more accurate reports of risky behaviors by youths

(Brener et al., 2003b).

    This investigation into the derived nature of cigarette demand offers several directions

for future research. First, it is important to measure the price elasticity of cigarette demand

among teenage girls who do and do not demand cigarettes for weight control, in order to

determine the effectiveness of cigarette taxes in deterring smoking for these groups. Second,

future research could investigate the extent to which the demand for cigarettes is derived

from the demand for still other things, such as peer acceptance. Third, future studies could

examine the extent to which incorporating derived demand into economic models improves

our understanding of other risky behaviors, such as unprotected sex, alcohol consumption,

drug use, and suicide. Finally, an important direction for future research is to determine how

advertising can create or strengthen a derived demand, by making the advertised good seem


                                               22
like a necessary input into the production of things that that the consumer values, such as peer

acceptance, coolness, and attractiveness.




                                              23
                                      References

Amos, A. and Haglund, M., 2000. From Social Taboo to “Torch of Freedom”: The
       Marketing of Cigarettes to Women. Tobacco Control 9, 3-8.
Averett, Susan L. 2011. “Labor Market Consequences: Employment, Wages, Disability, and
       Absenteeism.” In: John Cawley (editor), Handbook of the Social Science of Obesity.
       (Oxford University Press: New York).
Baradel, Lesley A., Cathleen Gillespie, Jana R. Kicklighter, Michele M. Doucette, Meera
       Penumetcha, Heidi M. Blanck. 2009. “Temporal changes in trying to lose weight and
       recommended weight-loss strategies among overweight and obese Americans, 1996–
       2003.” Preventive Medicine 49: 158–164.
Baum, C.L. The effects of cigarette cost on BMI and obesity. Health Economics 18, 3–19.
Boles, S. and Johnson, P., 2001. Gender, Weight Concerns and Adolescent Smoking.
       Journal of Addictive Diseases 20 (2), 5-14.
Brener, Nancy D., Tim McManus, Deborah A. Galuska, Richard Lowry, Howell Sechsler.
       2003a. “Reliability and Validity of Self-reported Height and Weight Among High
       School Students.” Journal of Adolescent Health, 32: 281-287.
Brener ND, Billy JOG, Grady WR. 2003b. “Assessment of Factors Affecting the Validity of
       Self-Reported Health-Risk Behavior Among Adolescents: Evidence From the
       Scientific Literature.” Journal of Adolescent Health, 33: 436-457.
British Medical Journal. 1977. “Do People Smoke for Nicotine?” (6094): 1041-1042.
Bronfenbrenner, M. 1961. “Notes on the Elasticity of Derived Demand.” Oxford Economic
       Papers, 13(3): 254-261.
Burkhauser, Richard V., and John Cawley. 2008. “Beyond BMI: The Value of More
       Accurate Measures of Fatness and Obesity in Social Science Research.” Journal of
       Health Economics, 27(2): 519-529.
Byrne, Sahara, and Jeff Niederdeppe. 2011. “Unintended Consequences of Obesity
       Prevention Messages.” In: John Cawley (editor), Handbook of the Social Science of
       Obesity. (Oxford University Press: New York).
Calfee, Jack E. 1986. “The Ghost of Cigarette Advertising Past.” Regulation,
       November/December, pp. 35-45.
Camp, D. et al., 1993). The Relationship between Body Weight Concerns and Adolescent
       Smoking. Health Psychology 12 (1), 24-32.
Cawley, John. “The Impact of Obesity on Wages.” Journal of Human Resources, 2004,
       39(2): 451-474.
Cawley, John. 2008. “Reefer Madness, Frank the Tank or Pretty Woman: To What Extent
       Do Addictive Behaviors Respond to Incentives?” Chapter 7 in: Frank Sloan and
       Hirschel Kasper (editors), Incentives and Choice in Health and Health Care, (MIT
       Press: Cambridge, MA).
Cawley, John, Sara Markowitz, and John Tauras. 2004. “Lighting Up and Slimming Down:
       The Effects of Body Weight and Cigarette Prices on Adolescent Smoking Initiation.”
       Journal of Health Economics 23, 293-311.
Cawley, John, Sara Markowitz, and John Tauras. 2006. “Body Weight, Cigarette Prices,
       Youth Access Laws and Adolescent Smoking Initiation.” Eastern Economic Journal,
       32(1): 149-170.
Chaloupka, Frank J. and Kenneth E. Warner. 2000. “The Economics of Smoking.” In A.J.
       Culyer and J.P Newhouse (eds.) Handbook of Health Economics, Volume 1. (New
       York: Elsevier), pp. 1539-1628.
Chiolero, A., D. Faeh, F. Paccaud, and J. Cornuz. 2008. “Consequences of Smoking for

                                          24
       Body Weight, Body Fat Distribution, and Insulin Resistance.” American Society for
       Clinical Nutrition, 87(4), 801-809.
Chou SY, Grossman M, Saffer H. 2004. “An economic analysis of adult obesity: results
       from the behavioral risk factor surveillance system.” Journal of Health Economics 23,
       565–587.
Crawford, D., Jeffery, R.W. and French, S.A. 2000. “Can Anyone Successfully Control
       Their Weight? Findings of a Three Year Community-Based Study of Men and
       Women.” International Journal of Obesity, 24: 1107-1110.
Crisp, A. et al., 1998. Smoking and Pursuit of Thinness in Schoolgirls in London and
       Ottowa. Postgraduate Medical Journal 74:473-9.
Cutler DM, Glaeser EL, Norberg KE. 2001. “Explaining the Rise in Youth Suicide.”
       Chapter 5 in: Jonathan Gruber (editor), Risky Behavior among Youths: An Economic
       Analysis, pp. 219-270.
Danaei, Goodarz, Eric L. Ding, Dariush Mozaffarian, Ben Taylor, Jurgen Rehm, Christopher
       J. L. Murray, Majid Ezzati. 2009. “The Preventable Causes of Death in the United
       States: Comparative Risk Assessment of Dietary, Lifestyle, and Metabolic Risk
       Factors.” PLoS Med 6(4): e1000058. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1000058.
Dee, Thomas S. 1999. “The complementarity of teen smoking and drinking.” Journal of
       Health Economics, 18: 769-793.
DiNardo, John and Thomas Lemieux. 2001. “Alcohol, marijuana, and American youth: the
       unintended consequences of government regulation.” Journal of Health Economics,
       20: 991-1010.
Fang H, Ali MM, Rizzo JA. 2009. “Does smoking affect body weight and obesity in
       China?” Economics and Human Biology, 7(3):334-50.
Flegal K.M., R.P. Troiano, E.R. Pamuk, R.J. Kuczmarski and S.M. Campbell. 1995. “The
       influence of smoking cessation on the prevalence of overweight in the United States.”
       N Eng J Med, 333: 1165-1175.
Flegal, Katherine M., Margaret D. Carroll, Brian K. Kit, and Cynthia L. Ogden. 2012.
       “Prevalence of Obesity and Trends in the Distribution of Body Mass Index Among
       US Adults, 1999-2010.” JAMA, 307(5): E1-E7.
Forster, J., V. Chen, T. Blaine, C. Perry, and T. Toomey. 2003. “Social Exchange of
       Cigarettes by Youth.” Tobacco Control, 12: 148-154.
French, S. et al., 1994. Weight Concerns, Dieting Behavior, and Smoking Initiation among
       Adolescents: A Prospective Study. American Journal of Public Health 84 (11), 1818-
       20.
Gonseth, Semira, Isabelle Jacot-Sadowski, Pascal A. Diethelm, Vincent Barras, Jacques
       Cornuz. 2012. “The tobacco industry’s past role in weight control related to
       smoking.” European Journal of Public Health, 1–5.
Goodman, Elizabeth, Beth R. Hinden, and Seema Khandelwal. 2000. “Accuracy of Teen and
       Parental Reports of Obesity and Body Mass Index.” Pediatrics, 106: 52-58.
Granberg, Ellen. 2011. “Depression and Obesity.” In: John Cawley (editor), Handbook of
       the Social Science of Obesity. (Oxford University Press: New York).
Gruber, J. and Frakes, M. 2006. Does falling smoking lead to rising obesity? Journal of
       Health Economics 25, 183–197.
Katzman, Brett, Sara Markowitz, and Kerry Anne McGeary. 2007. “An Empirical
       Investigation of the Social Market for Cigarettes,” Health Economics, 16(10): 1025-
       39.
Kenkel, Don. 2006. “Health behaviours among young people.” In: Andrew M. Jones (ed.),
       The Elgar Companion to Health Economics.
Klesges, R. & Klesges L., 1988. Cigarette Smoking as a Dieting Strategy in a University

                                            25
      Population. International Journal of Eating Disorders 7(3):413-9.
Marshall, Alfred. 1920. Principles of Economics, 8th Edition. (Philadelphia PA: Porcupine
      Press).
Mineur YS, Abizaid A, Rao Y, Salas R, DiLeone RJ, Gundisch D, Diano S, De Biasi M,
      Horvath TL, Gao X-B, Picciotto MR. 2011. “Nicotine Decreases Food Intake
      Through Activation of POMC Neurons.” Science, 332:1330-32.
Nonnemaker, J. et al. 2009. Have efforts to reduce smoking really contributed to the obesity
      epidemic? Economic Inquiry 47, 366–376.
Novak CM, Gavini CK. 2012. “Smokeless Weight Loss.” Diabetes, 61:776-777.
Pacula, Rosalie Liccardo. 1997. “Economic Modelling of the Gateway Effect.” Health
      Economics, 6: 521-524.
Puhl, Rebecca. 2011. “Bias, Stigma, and Discrimination.” In: John Cawley (editor),
      Handbook of the Social Science of Obesity. (Oxford University Press: New York).
Rashad, Inas, Michael Grossman and Shin-Yi Chou. 2006. “The Super Size of America: An
      Economic Estimation of Body Mass Index and Obesity in Adults,” Eastern Economic
      Journal, 32(1), 133-148.
Rees, D. and J. Sabia. 2010. Body Weight and Smoking Initiation: Evidence from Add
      Health. Journal of Health Economics 29, 774-7.
Sloan, Frank A., Jan Ostermann, Christopher Conover, Donald H. Taylor, Jr. and Gabriel
      Picone. 2004. The Price of Smoking. MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.
Tomeo, C. et al., 1999. Weight Concerns, Weight Control Behaviors, and Smoking
      Initiation. Pediatrics 104 (4), 918-24.
US Department of Health and Human Services, 1988. The Health Consequences of
      Smoking: Nicotine Addiction: A Report of the Surgeon General. US Department of
      Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control, Center for Health
      Promotion and Eduation, Office of Smoking and Health, Publication No. CDC 88-
      8406. Rockville, MD
US Department of Health and Human Services. 2002. 2000 CDC growth charts for the
      United States: methods and development. Vital and National Health Statistics, Series
      11, Number 246, May.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2003. Health Resources and Services
      Administration, Maternal and Child Health Bureau. Health Behavior in School-aged
      Children Survey, 2001-02 [Computer file]. Calverton, MD: ORC Macro (Macro
      International Inc.) [producer].
US Department of Health and Human Services, 2005. Health Behavior in School-Aged
      children, 2001-2002 [United States]. US Department of Health and Human Services.
      Health Resources and Services Administration. Maternal and Child Health Bureau.
Van Ours, Jan C. 2003. “Is cannabis a stepping-stone for cocaine?” Journal of Health
      Economics, 22: 539-554.
Voorhees, C. et al., 2002. Early Predictors of Daily Smoking in Young Women: The
      National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute Growth and Health Study. Preventive
      Medicine 34, 616-24.
Wagner, Philip. 1929. “Cigarettes vs. Candy: War Correspondence from a New Battle
      Front.” The New Republic, February 13, 1929, pp. 343-345.
Wee, C. et al., 2001. Relationship Between Smoking and Weight Control Efforts Among
      Adults in the United States. Archives of Internal Medicine 161, 546-50.
Whelan, E.M. 1984. The Smoking Gun: How the Tobacco Industry Gets Away with Murder.
Wiseman, C. et al., 1998. Smoking and Body Image Concerns in Adolescent Girls.
      International Journal of Eating Disorders 24, 429-433.


                                            26
                              Table 1:
   Summary Statistics of Explanatory Variables, HBSC full sample

                                           Girls                  Boys
                                   Mean        Std Dev.   Mean       Std Dev.

Weight and weight classification
 BMI                               21.74       (4.295)    22.16       (4.223)

 Underweight                       0.026       (0.158)    0.027       (0.161)
 Healthy weight                    0.723       (0.448)    0.632       (0.482)
 Overweight                        0.158       (0.365)    0.193       (0.394)
 Obese                             0.094       (0.292)    0.149       (0.356)

Perception of weight
 Much too thin                     0.013       (0.112)    0.024       (0.153)
 Too thin                          0.073       (0.259)    0.128       (0.334)
 About right                       0.510       (0.500)    0.581       (0.493)
 Too fat                           0.347       (0.476)    0.244       (0.430)
 Much too fat                      0.058       (0.234)    0.023       (0.149)

Demographics
 Age                               14.63       (1.040)    14.68       (1.063)
 Grade                             8.958       (1.105)    8.913       (1.130)
 2001                              0.446       (0.500)    0.538       (0.500)
 2006                              0.454       (0.498)    0.462       (0.499)

Smoking frequency
 Smoking at least once a week      0.087       (0.282)    0.099       (0.298)
 Smoking less than once a week     0.064       (0.245)    0.076       (0.265)
 Smoking do not smoke              0.849       (0.358)    0.825       (0.380)

Race
 African American                  0.149       (0.356)    0.137       (0.344)
 White                             0.562       (0.496)    0.588       (0.492)
 Other                             0.243       (0.429)    0.229       (0.420)
 Missing                           0.047       (0.212)    0.046       (0.209)

Maternal socioeconomic status
 High                              0.272       (0.445)    0.263       (0.441)
 Middle                            0.233       (0.423)    0.222       (0.416)
 Low                               0.180       (0.384)    0.176       (0.381)
 Missing                           0.315       (0.465)    0.338       (0.473)

Number of observations                     5613                   4829




                                   27
                             Table 2:
 Summary Statistics of Explanatory Variables, NHANES full sample

                                       Women                          Men
                                   Mean   Std Dev.           Mean        Std Dev.

Weight and weight classification
 BMI                               28.633          (7.339)   28.583          (5.824)

 Underweight                       0.024           (0.154)   0.011           (0.104)
 Healthy weight                    0.342           (0.475)   0.258           (0.439)
 Overweight                        0.276           (0.447)   0.396           (0.489)
 Obese                             0.357           (0.479)   0.334           (0.472)

Perception of weight
 Underweight                       0.034           (0.182)   0.055           (0.228)
 About right weight                0.330           (0.470)   0.443           (0.497)
 Overweight                        0.636           (0.481)   0.502           (0.500)

Weight preferences
 Would like to weigh less          0.742           (0.438)   0.575           (0.494)
 Would like to weight same         0.222           (0.415)   0.332           (0.471)
 Would like to weigh more          0.037           (0.188)   0.093           (0.291)

Demographics
 Age 20-40                         0.349           (0.477)   0.387           (0.487)
 Age 40-60                         0.397           (0.489)   0.396           (0.489)
 Age 60+                           0.254           (0.435)   0.217           (0.412)
 Married/cohabiting                0.700           (0.458)   0.707           (0.455)
 Divorced/separated                0.144           (0.351)   0.107           (0.309)
 Single, never married             0.155           (0.362)   0.185           (0.389)
 Missing marital status            0.001           (0.029)   0.001           (0.026)
 2005/06                           0.320           (0.466)   0.324           (0.468)
 2007/08                           0.334           (0.472)   0.332           (0.471)
 2009/10                           0.347           (0.476)   0.344           (0.475)

Smoking frequency
 Every day                         0.171           (0.377)   0.213           (0.410)
 Some days                         0.028           (0.166)   0.040           (0.196)
 Do not smoke                      0.801           (0.400)   0.747           (0.435)

Race
 Non-Hispanic White                0.701           (0.458)   0.703           (0.457)
 Non-Hispanic Black                0.121           (0.326)   0.105           (0.306)
 Other                             0.178           (0.383)   0.192           (0.394)

Educational level
 Less than 9th grade               0.059           (0.235)   0.070           (0.255)
 Grade 9-11                        0.124           (0.329)   0.122           (0.327)
 High school                       0.238           (0.426)   0.253           (0.435)
 Some college                      0.317           (0.466)   0.287           (0.452)
 College                           0.261           (0.439)   0.267           (0.442)
 Missing education                 0.001           (0.032)   0.001           (0.037)

Number of observations                      7915                      7829



                                    28
                                        Table 3:
     Proportion of smokers, and proportion indicating to use smoking to control body
                               weight; HBSC full sample

                                                              Girls                      Boys
                                                      Mean        Std Dev       Mean        Std Dev      p-value
                                                                                                         of t-test

Respondent is a current smoker                        0.151       (0.358)       0.175         (0.380)     0.001

Smoking to control weight in last 12 months           0.053       (0.225)       0.048         (0.214)     0.206

 By age
  12                                                  0.030       (0.171)       0.019        (0.137)      0.342
  13                                                  0.018*      (0.133)       0.023        (0.150)      0.510
  14 (reference)                                       0.042      (0.201)       0.045        (0.207)      0.747
  15                                                  0.065*      (0.247)       0.052        (0.221)      0.094
  16                                                  0.067*      (0.250)       0.061        (0.239)      0.563
p-value: : equal means                                       <0.001                      0.005

 By grade
  6th grade                                           0.039*     (0.194)        0.015*       (0.123)      0.038
  7th grade                                           0.022      (0.147)        0.027*       (0.164)      0.501
  8th grade (reference)                               0.027      (0.161)         0.054       (0.227)      0.005
  9th grade                                           0.049*     (0.217)        0.050        (0.218)      0.930
  10th grade                                          0.075*     (0.263)        0.054        (0.226)      0.017
p-value: : equal means                                      <0.001                       0.002

 By race
  African American                                    0.028*     (0.165)        0.050        (0.218)      0.013
  White (reference)                                   0.066      (0.248)        0.047        (0.211)      0.002
  Other                                               0.048*     (0.213)        0.047        (0.211)      0.923
p-value: : equal means                                      <0.001                       0.941

 By smoking frequency
  At least once a week                                0.464*      (0.499)       0.300*        (0.459)     <0.001
  Less than once a week (reference)                    0.090      (0.287)        0.092        (0.290)     0.925
  Do not smoke                                        0.009*      (0.092)       0.014*        (0.117)     0.018
p-value: : equal means                                       <0.001                      <0.001

 By weight classification
  Underweight                                         0.040       (0.198)       0.085*        (0.279)     0.125
  Healthy weight (reference)                          0.050       (0.219)       0.044         (0.205)     0.209
  Overweight                                          0.065       (0.247)       0.036         (0.186)     0.004
  Obese                                               0.061       (0.239)       0.075*        (0.263)     0.324
p-value: : equal means                                        0.227                      <0.001

 By weight perception
  Much too thin                                       0.109*      (0.314)       0.089*       (0.287)      0.668
  Too thin                                            0.035       (0.185)       0.048        (0.214)      0.325
  About right (reference)                              0.033      (0.179)        0.041       (0.199)      0.105
  Too fat                                             0.068*      (0.251)       0.055        (0.228)      0.159
  Much too fat                                        0.157*      (0.364)       0.105*       (0.307)      0.177
p-value: : equal means                                       <0.001                      0.003

Number of observations                                       5613                      4829
Note: The p-value is based on a test of equality between the mean for boys and that for girls. Other race includes
American Indian, Asian, Native Hawaiian, and more than one race. *: significantly different from the reference
category at 5% significance level


                                                       29
                                        Table 4:
     Proportion of smokers, and proportion indicating to use smoking to control body
                              weight; NHANES full sample

                                                Women                       Men
                                            Mean   Std Dev          Mean      Std Dev      p-value of t-test

Respondent is smoking now                   0.199       (0.400)     0.253       (0.435)        <0.001

Smoking to control weight in past year      0.006       (0.078)     0.003       (0.057)         0.008

 By age
  20-40                                     0.008       (0.087)     0.004       (0.066)         0.122
  40-60 (reference)                         0.008       (0.087)     0.004       (0.060)         0.056
  60+                                      0.002*       (0.042)     0.001       (0.023)         0.191
p-value: : equal means                              0.015                   0.073

 By race
  Non-Hispanic white (reference)            0.005       (0.070)     0.003       (0.053)         0.133
  Non-Hispanic Black                       0.011*       (0.106)    0.008*       (0.086)         0.268
  Other                                     0.007       (0.085)     0.002       (0.050)         0.015
p-value: : equal means                              0.052                   0.072

 By smoking frequency
  Every day                                0.027*    (0.161)       0.010*    (0.099)            0.001
  Some days (reference)                     0.044    (0.207)        0.019    (0.138)            0.079
  Do not smoke                             0.000*    (0.019)       0.000*    (0.022)            0.792
p-value: : equal means                           <0.001                  <0.001

 By weight classification
  Underweight                               0.000       (0.000)      N/A          N/A            N/A
  Healthy weight (reference)                0.006       (0.078)     0.001       (0.038)         0.019
  Overweight                                0.007       (0.083)     0.002       (0.047)         0.009
  Obese                                     0.006       (0.077)    0.006*       (0.076)         0.983
p-value: : equal means                              0.693                   0.033

 By weight perception
  Underweight                                N/A          N/A        N/A          N/A            N/A
  About right weight (reference)            0.005       (0.070)     0.001       (0.033)         0.005
  Overweight                                0.007       (0.084)    0.005*       (0.074)         0.341
p-value: : equal means                              0.212                   0.002

By weight preferences
  Would like to weigh less                0.0078*    (0.088)      0.0051*     (0.071)           0.104
  Would like to weight same (ref)         0.0013     (0.036)       0.0006     (0.025)           0.442
  Would like to weigh more                0.0021     (0.046)       0.0012     (0.034)           0.702
p-value: : equal means                           0.006                    0.004

Number of observations                              7915                    7829
 Note: The p-value is based on a test of equality between the mean for women and that for men. Other race
 includes Mexican Americans, other Hispanics, and more than one race. N/A indicates no individuals smoke to
 control their body weight. The summary statistics are based on the 7915 observations for women and 7829
 observations for men. *: significantly different from the reference category at 5% significance level.



                                                     30
                                             Table 5:
                Predictors of smoking as a way to control weight, HBSC full sample

                                                       Girls                                       Boys
                                         b/se          b/se            b/se          b/se          b/se           b/se

 BMI                                  0.002***                                      0.001
                                       (0.001)                                     (0.001)
 Underweight                                           -0.015                                      0.042
                                                      (0.016)                                     (0.034)
 Overweight                                            0.017                                       -0.009
                                                      (0.011)                                     (0.010)
 Obese                                                 0.021                                      0.028**
                                                      (0.015)                                     (0.012)
 Much too thin                                                       0.084*                                       0.050
                                                                     (0.049)                                     (0.035)
 Bit too thin                                                         0.005                                       0.006
                                                                     (0.015)                                     (0.013)
 Bit too fat                                                        0.029***                                      0.014
                                                                     (0.009)                                     (0.010)
 Much too fat                                                       0.119***                                     0.069*
                                                                     (0.031)                                     (0.036)

 Age 13                                 -0.019          -0.018        -0.018         0.007          0.010         0.010
                                        (0.012)        (0.013)       (0.012)       (0.025)        (0.026)       (0.026)
 Age 14                                 -0.012          -0.010        -0.010         0.031          0.037         0.034
                                        (0.014)        (0.015)       (0.014)       (0.022)        (0.023)       (0.023)
 Age 15                                  0.005          0.008          0.007         0.034         0.039*        0.038*
                                        (0.016)        (0.016)       (0.016)       (0.021)        (0.021)       (0.021)
 Age 16                                  0.012          0.017         0.014        0.049*         0.056**       0.055**
                                        (0.018)        (0.019)       (0.018)       (0.025)        (0.026)       (0.027)
 2006                                 -0.040***      -0.040***     -0.034***        -0.014         -0.014        -0.014
                                        (0.010)        (0.010)       (0.009)       (0.010)        (0.010)       (0.010)
 Race: Black/African American         -0.030***      -0.030***     -0.024***        0.002          0.003         0.004
                                        (0.008)        (0.008)       (0.009)       (0.010)        (0.010)       (0.010)
 Race: Other                             0.002          0.002         0.002         0.006          0.006         0.007
                                        (0.010)        (0.010)       (0.009)       (0.010)        (0.010)       (0.010)
 Race: Missing                        -0.042***      -0.042***     -0.039***        0.006          0.003          0.008
                                        (0.006)        (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.019)        (0.017)       (0.019)
 Maternal SES: Medium                   0.023*         0.023*         0.019         -0.011         -0.011        -0.011
                                        (0.013)        (0.013)       (0.012)       (0.009)        (0.009)       (0.009)
 Maternal SES: Low                       0.014          0.014          0.012         0.007         0.008          0.009
                                        (0.013)        (0.013)       (0.013)       (0.013)        (0.013)       (0.014)
 Maternal SES: Missing                 0.023**        0.023**       0.022**         0.012          0.011          0.012
                                        (0.010)        (0.010)       (0.010)       (0.010)        (0.010)       (0.010)

 No. of observations                     5613          5613           5613           4829          4829           4829


Notes: The dependent variable equals 1 when the individual indicates to smoke for weight control. The reference category is
a white 14-year old with a healthy weight in 2001, who perceives its weight to be about right, and average maternal SES; *
p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                           31
                                         Table 6
  Cross-tabulation of weight categories by self-perception of weight, HBSC full sample

                                     Much       Too thin      About       Bit too    Much too   Total
                                    too thin                  right         fat        fat

       Girls
        Underweight                  13.26       23.29        55.02        7.84       0.58      100
        Healthy weight                1.25        9.13        60.22        27.15       2.25     100
        Overweight                   0.12         0.25        30.26        60.09       9.29     100
        Obese                           -         0.21        13.39        57.39      29.01     100

       Boys
        Underweight                  17.00       33.22        45.89        3.18       0.71      100
        Healthy weight                2.83       18.19        68.27        10.19       0.52     100
        Overweight                   0.37         1.98        53.14        42.52       2.00     100
        Obese                        0.57         0.19        23.59        65.28      10.37     100


Notes: clinical weight classification is based on self-reported weight and height.




                                                         32
                                        Table 7:
    Predictors of smoking as a way to control weight, conditional on reporting to be a
                                current smoker, HBSC

                                                        Girls                                        Boys
                                          b/se          b/se            b/se           b/se          b/se           b/se

 BMI                                     0.002                                        0.002
                                        (0.004)                                      (0.004)
 Underweight                                            0.223                                       0.321**
                                                       (0.178)                                      (0.138)
 Overweight                                             0.062                                      -0.092**
                                                       (0.061)                                      (0.043)
 Obese                                                  0.066                                        0.090*
                                                       (0.078)                                      (0.053)
 Much too thin                                                         0.221                                         0.082
                                                                      (0.176)                                      (0.123)
 Bit too thin                                                          0.059                                        -0.008
                                                                      (0.103)                                      (0.055)
 Bit too fat                                                         0.141***                                        0.029
                                                                      (0.049)                                      (0.046)
 Much too fat                                                        0.268***                                       -0.010
                                                                      (0.078)                                      (0.092)

 Age 13                                   0.041         0.056          0.091           0.088         0.088           0.087
                                         (0.206)       (0.208)        (0.219)        (0.174)        (0.178)        (0.175)
 Age 14                                   0.070         0.090          0.121          0.000          0.021          -0.002
                                         (0.186)       (0.184)        (0.189)        (0.131)        (0.135)        (0.131)
 Age 15                                   0.149         0.167          0.205          -0.033         -0.028         -0.036
                                         (0.176)       (0.171)        (0.174)        (0.129)        (0.129)        (0.130)
 Age 16                                   0.114         0.130          0.167          -0.013         -0.014         -0.010
                                         (0.186)       (0.182)        (0.187)        (0.129)        (0.128)        (0.130)
 2006                                  -0.132***     -0.137***      -0.127***         0.000         -0.009         -0.001
                                         (0.048)       (0.047)        (0.046)        (0.039)        (0.037)        (0.038)
 Race: Black/African American          -0.152***     -0.161***       -0.128**         -0.006         0.004          -0.000
                                         (0.054)       (0.054)        (0.056)        (0.047)        (0.045)        (0.047)
 Race: Other                              0.014         0.011          0.020          0.028          0.031          0.030
                                         (0.060)       (0.059)        (0.060)        (0.059)        (0.057)        (0.058)
 Race: Missing                         -0.291***     -0.291***      -0.280***         0.069          0.027           0.073
                                         (0.030)       (0.030)        (0.033)        (0.088)        (0.070)        (0.087)
 Maternal SES: Medium                    -0.034        -0.037         -0.051          -0.027         -0.022         -0.030
                                         (0.060)       (0.059)        (0.061)        (0.051)        (0.051)        (0.051)
 Maternal SES: Low                       -0.016        -0.021         -0.010          0.014          0.030          0.019
                                         (0.068)       (0.067)        (0.070)        (0.057)        (0.060)        (0.058)
 Maternal SES: Missing                    0.055         0.054          0.044          0.068          0.065          0.070
                                         (0.062)       (0.061)        (0.062)        (0.055)        (0.053)        (0.054)

 No. of observations                      761            761            761            724            724           724


Notes: The dependent variable equals 1 when the individual indicates to smoke for weight control. The sample only includes
those who indicate they are current smokers (i.e. at least once a week or less than once a week). The reference category is a
white 14-year old with a healthy weight in 2001, who perceives its weight to be about right, and average maternal SES; *
p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                            33
                                       Table 8:
 Predictors of smoking as a way to control weight, conditional on attempting to control
                                  your weight, HBSC

                                                       Girls                                       Boys
                                         b/se          b/se            b/se          b/se          b/se           b/se

 BMI                                    0.001*                                      0.001
                                        (0.001)                                    (0.001)
 Underweight                                           -0.010                                      0.044
                                                      (0.020)                                     (0.038)
 Overweight                                            0.016                                       -0.016
                                                      (0.011)                                     (0.010)
 Obese                                                 0.017                                      0.024**
                                                      (0.015)                                     (0.012)
 Much too thin                                                      0.165**                                       0.076
                                                                     (0.073)                                     (0.047)
 Bit too thin                                                         0.010                                       0.008
                                                                     (0.017)                                     (0.015)
 Bit too fat                                                        0.029***                                      0.010
                                                                     (0.009)                                     (0.010)
 Much too fat                                                       0.117***                                     0.070*
                                                                     (0.031)                                     (0.038)

 Age 13                                 -0.020          -0.019        -0.019         0.009          0.013         0.013
                                        (0.013)        (0.014)       (0.013)       (0.028)        (0.029)       (0.030)
 Age 14                                 -0.011          -0.010        -0.010         0.033          0.039         0.037
                                        (0.015)        (0.015)       (0.015)       (0.024)        (0.025)       (0.026)
 Age 15                                  0.007          0.009         0.008         0.038*         0.043*        0.042*
                                        (0.017)        (0.017)       (0.016)       (0.023)        (0.023)       (0.024)
 Age 16                                  0.014          0.019         0.015        0.056**        0.060**       0.060**
                                        (0.019)        (0.020)       (0.019)       (0.028)        (0.029)       (0.029)
 2006                                 -0.042***      -0.042***     -0.036***       -0.018*        -0.019*       -0.018*
                                        (0.010)        (0.010)       (0.010)       (0.011)        (0.011)       (0.011)
 Race: Black/African American         -0.030***      -0.030***     -0.024***        0.002          0.003         0.003
                                        (0.009)        (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.012)        (0.012)       (0.012)
 Race: Other                             0.003          0.003         0.002         0.007          0.007         0.007
                                        (0.010)        (0.010)       (0.010)       (0.011)        (0.011)       (0.011)
 Race: Missing                        -0.045***      -0.044***     -0.041***        0.002          0.001          0.005
                                        (0.006)        (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.020)        (0.018)       (0.020)
 Maternal SES: Medium                   0.026*         0.026*        0.021*         -0.014         -0.014        -0.014
                                        (0.014)        (0.014)       (0.013)       (0.010)        (0.010)       (0.010)
 Maternal SES: Low                       0.016          0.016          0.015         0.007         0.007          0.009
                                        (0.015)        (0.014)       (0.014)       (0.015)        (0.015)       (0.015)
 Maternal SES: Missing                 0.026**        0.026**       0.025**          0.014          0.013         0.014
                                        (0.011)        (0.011)       (0.011)       (0.011)        (0.011)       (0.011)

 No. of observations                     5283          5283           5283           4351          4351           4351


Notes: The dependent variable equals 1 when the individual indicates to smoke for weight control. The sample only includes
those who indicate they have attempted to control their weight in the last 12 months. The reference category is a white 14-
year old with a healthy weight in 2001, who perceives its weight to be about right, and average maternal SES; * p<0.10, **
p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                           34
        Appendix A: Proportion of boys and girls using specific weight control strategies

                     Table A.1: Weight control strategies used in the HBSC:
        sample of girls and boys who responded to the question on weight control, and the
                         sample conditional on smoking for weight control

                                                       Girls                        Boys
                                              Mean             Std   No. of     Mean     Std          No. of     p-value
                                                               Dev    obs.               Dev           obs.      of t-test

Weight control behaviors, full sample:
 Exercise                                      0.848      (0.359)     5598      0.842      (0.365)     4822       0.412
 Eat more fruit and/or vegetables              0.631      (0.482)     5567      0.522      (0.500)     4806      <0.001
 Eat fewer sweets                              0.628      (0.483)     5595      0.487      (0.500)     4819      <0.001
 Eat less fat                                  0.589      (0.492)     5586      0.429      (0.495)     4809      <0.001
 Drink fewer soft drinks                       0.553      (0.497)     5576       0.41      (0.492)     4817      <0.001
 Eat less (smaller amounts)                    0.538      (0.499)     5581      0.302      (0.459)     4810      <0.001
 Fasting                                       0.177      (0.382)     2280      0.073      (0.261)     1865      <0.001
 Use diet pills or laxatives                   0.067      (0.250)     5600      0.033      (0.179)     4816      <0.001
 Vomiting                                      0.057      (0.233)     5594      0.027      (0.162)     4814      <0.001
 Smoke more                                    0.053      (0.225)     5613      0.048      (0.214)     4829       0.206
 Diet under supervision of professional        0.051      (0.220)     5533      0.036      (0.185)     4778      <0.001
 Other                                         0.028      (0.164)     2321      0.026      (0.159)     1923       0.718



Weight control behaviors, conditional
on smoking for weight control
 Exercise                                      0.823      (0.382)      262      0.832      (0.375)      221       0.801
 Eat less (smaller amounts)                    0.752      (0.433)      261      0.481      (0.501)      218      <0.001
 Eat fewer sweets                              0.705      (0.457)      259      0.574      (0.496)      219       0.003
 Eat less fat                                  0.654      (0.477)      260      0.467      (0.500)      218      <0.001
 Drink fewer soft drinks                       0.582      (0.494)      259      0.415      (0.494)      219      <0.001
 Eat more fruit and/or vegetables              0.566      (0.497)      256      0.570      (0.496)      219       0.929
 Fasting                                       0.420      (0.495)      144      0.275      (0.449)      102       0.020
 Use diet pills or laxatives                   0.387      (0.488)      257      0.338      (0.474)      218       0.268
 Vomiting                                      0.276      (0.448)      260      0.271      (0.446)      219       0.915
 Diet under supervision of professional        0.097      (0.296)      253      0.160      (0.368)      215       0.038
 Other                                         0.019      (0.139)      147      0.018      (0.134)      104       0.942



    Note: The p-value is based on a test of equality between the mean for boys and that for girls. The upper panel
    shows the proportion of girls and boys in the full sample that engages in the different weight control behaviors.
    The lower panel shows the averages conditional on the respondent indicating to smoke for weight control.




                                                           35
                  Table A.2: Weight control strategies in the NHANES:
      full sample of women and men, and conditional on smoking for weight control

                                                      Women                        Men
                                                   Mean  Std Dev           Mean      Std Dev       p-value

  Weight control behaviors, full sample:
   Eat less food                                   0.384       (0.486)     0.272      (0.445)      <0.001
   Exercised                                       0.373       (0.484)     0.294      (0.456)      <0.001
   Drink a lot of water                            0.262       (0.440)     0.153      (0.360)      <0.001
   Eat less fat                                    0.246       (0.431)     0.173      (0.378)      <0.001
   Switch to food with lower calories              0.226       (0.418)     0.141      (0.348)      <0.001
   Eat fewer carbohydrates                         0.165       (0.371)     0.112      (0.315)      <0.001
   Skip meals                                      0.097       (0.295)     0.073      (0.260)      <0.001
   Eat diet foods                                  0.081       (0.273)     0.043      (0.202)      <0.001
   Eat more fruit, vegetables and salad            0.083       (0.276)     0.056      (0.230)      <0.001
   Eat less sugar, candy, sweets                   0.058       (0.234)     0.046      (0.211)      <0.001
   Join a weight loss program                      0.059       (0.236)     0.007      (0.081)      <0.001
   Change eating habits                            0.057       (0.232)     0.041      (0.197)      <0.001
   Take non-Rx supplements                         0.044       (0.205)     0.021      (0.142)      <0.001
   Follow a special diet                           0.045       (0.207)     0.027      (0.161)      <0.001
   Liquid diet formula                             0.034       (0.182)     0.015      (0.122)      <0.001
   Take prescription diet pills                    0.018       (0.132)     0.004      (0.061)      <0.001
   Other                                           0.010       (0.101)     0.008      (0.090)       0.167
   Start to smoke or begin to smoke again          0.006       (0.078)     0.003      (0.057)       0.008
   Take laxatives or vomit                         0.005       (0.072)     0.002      (0.045)      <0.001
  Number of observations                                   7915                    7829

  Weight control behaviors, conditional
  on smoking for weight control
   Eat less food                                   0.629         (0.488)   0.940         (0.242)   0.004
   Drink a lot of water                            0.588         (0.498)   0.642         (0.489)   0.663
   Eat less fat                                    0.597         (0.496)   0.411         (0.502)   0.139
   Exercised                                       0.566         (0.501)   0.426         (0.505)   0.270
   Skip meals                                      0.530         (0.504)   0.531         (0.509)   0.993
   Switch to food with lower calories              0.486         (0.505)   0.379         (0.495)   0.397
   Eat fewer carbohydrates                         0.270         (0.449)   0.448         (0.508)   0.134
   Eat more fruit, vegetables and salad            0.270         (0.449)   0.067         (0.255)   0.044
   Eat diet foods                                  0.209         (0.411)   0.182         (0.394)   0.791
   Change eating habits                            0.189         (0.396)   0.034         (0.184)   0.072
   Follow a special diet                           0.170         (0.380)   0.215         (0.419)   0.649
   Take non-Rx supplements                         0.130         (0.340)   0.228         (0.428)   0.293
   Join a weight loss program                      0.122         (0.331)   0.089         (0.291)   0.678
   Liquid diet formula                             0.091         (0.291)   0.175         (0.387)   0.312
   Eat less sugar, candy, sweets                   0.073         (0.263)   0.052         (0.228)   0.748
   Take prescription diet pills                    0.060         (0.241)   0.069         (0.258)   0.893
   Take laxatives or vomit                         0.054         (0.229)    N/A            N/A     0.250
   Other                                           0.008         (0.091)    N/A            N/A     0.662
  Number of observations                                    47                      25

Note: The p-value is based on a test of equality between the mean for men and that for women; N/A implies
none of the respondents engaged in this weight control behavior. The upper panel shows the proportion of
women and men in the full sample that engages in the different weight control behaviors. The lower panel
shows the averages conditional on the respondent indicating to smoke for weight control.

                                                     36
