                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



           INFORMATION AND QUALITY WHEN MOTIVATION IS INTRINSIC:
                   EVIDENCE FROM SURGEON REPORT CARDS

                                          Jonathan T. Kolstad

                                         Working Paper 18804
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18804


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2013


The data used in this analysis were obtained from the Pennsylvania Health Care Cost Containment
Council (PHC4), which requests the following disclaimer: The Pennsylvania Health Care Cost Containment
Council (PHC4) is an independent state agency responsible for addressing the problem of escalating
health costs, ensuring the quality of health care, and increasing access to health care for all citizens
regardless of ability to pay. PHC4 has provided data to this entity in an effort to further PHC4’s mission
of educating the public and containing health care costs in Pennsylvania. PHC4, its agents and staff,
have made no representation, guarantee, or warranty, expressed or implied, that the data – financial,
patient, payor, and physician specific information – provided to this entity, are error-free, or that the
use of the data will avoid differences of opinion or interpretation. This analysis was not prepared by
PHC4. This analysis was done by Jonathan T. Kolstad. PHC4, its agents and staff, bear no responsibility
or liability for the results of the analysis, which are solely the opinion of the authors.

I would especially like to thank my thesis committee: Susan Athey, David Cutler and Robert Huckman.
In addition, I am grateful to Amitabh Chandra, Mike Chernew, Mark Duggan, Richard Frank, Ben
Handel, Amanda Kowalski, Tom McGuire, Joe Newhouse, Mark Pauly, Amanda Starc, Bob Town,
Heidi Williams, Frank Wolak and seminar participants at the ASHE Biennial Meeting, Stanford, Emory,
RAND, Wharton, Cornell, Washington University, CBO and Harvard for many helpful comments.
Support from the National Institute on Aging (Grant P01 AG005842) is gratefully acknowledged. All
errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Jonathan T. Kolstad. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Information and Quality when Motivation is Intrinsic: Evidence from Surgeon Report Cards
Jonathan T. Kolstad
NBER Working Paper No. 18804
February 2013
JEL No. I10,I11,I18,L15

                                              ABSTRACT

If profit maximization is the objective of a firm, new information about quality should affect firm behavior
only through its effects on market demand. I consider an alternate model in which suppliers are motivated
by a desire to perform well in addition to profit. The introduction of quality “report cards” for cardiac
surgery in Pennsylvania provides an empirical setting to isolate the relative role of extrinsic and intrinsic
incentives in determining surgeon response. Information on performance that was new to surgeons
and unrelated to patient demand led to an intrinsic response four times larger than surgeon response
to profit incentives.


Jonathan T. Kolstad
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
306 Colonial Penn Center
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
jkolstad@wharton.upenn.edu
       A defining feature of health care markets is imperfect information (Arrow, 1963).
Standard models show that in settings where consumers are poorly informed about product
quality there are welfare losses due to the less-than-optimal supply of costly quality (Dranove
and Satterthwaite, 1992) or the absence of markets for products and services that consumers
otherwise value (Akerlof, 1970). Losses generally stem from profit maximizing suppliers who
are able to profit from information to which they are privy, but cannot be obtained (or verified)
by the demand side (e.g. Arrow, 1963; Gaynor, 2006; Salop and Stiglitz, 1977). Consequently,
policies to correct market failures due to asymmetric quality information focus on demand. In
health care markets, where quality is widely believed to be suboptimal, this is the rationale for
efforts to gather performance information, such as mortality, and offer it directly to consumers.
The existing evidence on such quality reporting in health care, however, generally find
improvements in measured quality, but little evidence for corresponding changes in consumer
demand (Epstein, 2006; Steinbrook, 2006).
       To better explain the observed behavior of surgeons facing public quality reporting and to
explore the nature of incentives among firms and individuals receiving public ratings, I consider
the role of information in determining market outcomes when suppliers also have non-pecuniary
incentives. I use the term “intrinsic motivation” to refer to incentives unrelated to profit and
model it as a function not only of quality itself but of the ability to observably perform well
relative to a reference group. In this context, information enters profit motives and alters intrinsic
incentives when collecting and disseminating information provides the individual with a better
sense of his or her own quality compared to peers.
       The empirical setting for this study is the introduction of quality “report cards” for
surgeons performing Coronary Artery Bypass Graft (CABG) surgery in Pennsylvania. Utilizing a
detailed panel of data on surgeons and patients, I explore the effects of quality report card release
on subsequent surgeon performance. Exploiting the information contained in the report card’s
risk adjustment scheme, I model surgeons’ prior and posterior beliefs about market quality levels
(both their own and that of their peers). I find an impact of this information on changes in
surgeon quality but not on demand – evidence for the presence of non-pecuniary incentives
resulting from quality reporting.
       To incorporate profit incentives, I estimate a structural model of consumer demand for
surgeons. Consumer utility is modeled as a function of the detailed set of individual patient and



                                                                                                    2
surgeon observables. In addition, I account for unobserved (to the econometrician) influences on
choice, including the role of physician agency, using a random coefficients demand model
(Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes, 1995; Train, 2003). Simulations, relying on the estimated demand
parameters, produce a measure of the additional market rewards for quality due to reporting.
Variation in the ex ante distribution of patient demand for quality and the competitive structure
of the markets leads to large differences in extrinsic incentives between surgeons. Individuals
facing stronger profit incentives following the release of quality report cards show greater
improvements in performance. This effect, however, is relatively small. Extrinsic incentives led
to an additional 3 percent decline in the statewide risk adjusted mortality rate (RAMR) between
the pre- and post-report card periods. Incorporating estimates of the intrinsic response to
information predicts changes in surgeon quality that accords well with the observed response to
reporting. The intrinsic response to quality reporting is about four times as large as the response
due to profit incentives induced by changes in demand for quality. Quality improvements cannot
be explained by changes in underlying patient severity, either based on observables used in the
risk adjustment scheme or “unused” observables collected, but not included in risk adjustment.
There is evidence for selection efforts on “unused” observable. However, the impact of these
severity measures on outcomes are far smaller than those included in the risk adjustment. Further
sensitivity analysis finds that the observed intrinsic response cannot be explained by dynamic
pecuniary incentives – either in volume or mix of insurance payers – or inter-temporal
technological change.
       This paper contributes to the debate in economics on the merit of reporting schemes.
Quality reporting and disclosure policies have been implemented across a variety of industries to
address a multitude of market failures (Chatterji and Toffel, 2007). Reviewing the evidence,
Fung, Graham, and Weil, (2007) find the welfare impact of information-based policy
interventions varies dramatically depending on the market and regulatory environment. Their
assessment, however, appraises disclosure through the lens of the standard profit-maximizing
model. The same approach also underlies much of the evaluation of reporting for CABG
surgery. Despite finding that additional quality improvement followed the introduction of
reporting programs (Epstein, 2006; Ghali et al., 1997; Peterson, et al., 1998; Hannan, et al.,
2003), the debate on and analysis of reporting efforts has focused on consumers’ ability to
interpret and respond to the information supplied. If quality report cards deliver information on



                                                                                                      3
and to suppliers who care about performance intrinsically, then their impact (both positive and
normative) is not solely mediated through changes in demand.
        Decisions about the value and type of quality information that should be measured and
publicly reported depend critically on the model of supplier behavior. If suppliers operate under
a standard profit model, demand side incentives can produce quality improvements. On the other
hand, to the extent that information about peers alters surgeons’ intrinsic incentives, public
release is of less relevance. In fact, contrary to current efforts to simplify provider report cards, it
may be preferable to deliver data with more clinical detail.
        This paper also contributes to a broad literature in economics on information and
incentives. Work in behavioral game theory and experimental economics has demonstrated a
potential role for reference-based utility in individual behavior and incentives (Fehr and Schmidt,
2006; Heffetz and Frank, 2008). To date, however, relatively few empirical studies have
documented such incentives in practice (Bandiera, Barankay, and Rasul, 2005; Sauermann and
Cohen, 2008). This is due in part to the difficulty of empirically identifying changes in
information in a market. The CABG setting allows me to overcome this problem by observing an
exogenous and measurable change – the release of quality report cards.
        The paper proceeds as follows. Section I develops a model of quality choice with
intrinsic motivation. Section II discusses the data and setting. Section III presents the
econometric specifications and results. Section IV provides discussion and section V concludes.


I. A Model of Surgeon Objectives with Uncertainty
        I begin by considering a model of the equilibrium quality choices of surgeons who gain
utility from income (profit) and from performing well. Because quality is also valued
independently of earnings, surgeons are willing to forgo some profit to enhance quality. This
willingness is a function of the ability to observe performance – determined by the information
structure of the market. The intuition of the model is that a surgeon with little information on his
own performance, and that of his peers, is unable to accurately observe both static levels of
quality and improvements. In this way, increased uncertainty dilutes the intrinsic incentive for
quality improvement because surgeons do not see the result of effort or may believe, in the
absence of information, that they are performing as well they should be. This information also
impacts surgeon incentives through the standard channel – quality information informs



                                                                                                       4
consumers and, subsequently, determines quality elasticity of demand and the profitability of
quality improvement.
         Consider the quality choice of a surgeon in a monopolistically competitive market with
regulated prices above the marginal cost of production. Prices are fixed at a regulated level, preg

and surgeons maximize utility by selecting a quality level  i subject to a convex production

technology, c( i , qi ) . To incorporate preferences that include both profit and intrinsic incentives,

I express supplier utility as:
                                      U i  i (i ,i , )  i (i , j , )          (1)

Allowing profit and intrinsic utility from quality to enter as additively separable terms can

incorporate a range of intrinsic preferences and is a common feature of models of physician

behavior (Fehr and Schmidt, 2006; Harsanyi, 1955; McGuire, 2000; Segal and Sobel, 2004). The

term i ( i , j , ) captures individual i’s intrinsic utility from quality relative to the reference

group j  J .1 Firm demand, q i ( i , i , ) , is determined by the quality of surgeon i as well as

the quality choices of all competing surgeons. The reference group J is not necessarily the same

as the set of all competing surgeons, indexed by – i. Information in the market is captured by the

variable  , the effect of which I return to below. Surgeon i solves the following problem:

        max U i   i ( i , i , )  i ( i , j , )  qi ( i , i ) preg  c( i , qi )  i ( i , j )   (2)
          i

The argument that maximizes (2) (optimum quality) is reached when:
                   qi (i , *i )              ( , * )        c( i , *j )
                                         preg  i i j                                                   (3)
                                     i                        i                   i



1
  Intrinsic motivation has a strict definition in the psychology literature: utility from the activity must be derived
from a stimulus within the individual (Sauermann and Cohen (2008) provide a useful synopsis). The model here
captures intrinsic incentives under this definition as well as in a more general sense (typically used by economists).
It fits a strict interpretation of intrinsic utility if reference utility is derived internally but, due to uncertainty, is
altered by the outside information. However, if surgeons care directly about a ranking that is provided by the report
card this is (strictly speaking) an extrinsic motive because it is initiated by an outside stimulus. For simplicity, in this
paper I refer to all non-pecuniary rewards as intrinsic though I acknowledge this may not adhere to convention in
some fields.


                                                                                                                           5
where all partial derivatives are taken with respect to own quality, taking the best response of
other surgeons as given. The optimum is simply the point at which the sum of the marginal
revenue (determined by the price and demand elasticity of quality) and marginal intrinsic utility
is equal to the marginal cost of quality.2 Implicitly differentiating (3), optimal quality increases
in demand for quality (determined jointly by consumers’ willingness-to-pay for quality and their
ability to observe it) and intrinsic utility from quality improvement. Quality declines with the
marginal cost of quality. In the standard model (where a surgeon cares only about pecuniary
            i ( i , *j )
rewards)                                0 and the equilibrium condition is reduced to setting marginal cost
                                 i

equal to marginal revenue.3 Equilibrium quality is an increasing function of the residual elasticity
of demand for quality.
       I also assume that a surgeon determines his or her own quality relative to a reference
      ~
group  j  ( j , j ) . Intrinsic utility from quality is captured in the model as a function that maps

the deviation between an individual’s quality and their reference point to a change in utility:
            ~
 i ( i*   j ) . The precise relationship depends on the reference group and the shape of the

intrinsic loss function.
         The information structure of the market captures the impact of quality reporting in the
model. Information in period t is indexed by the set t  { ,  } containing two elements. The
first term,  , captures information on the relative location of a surgeon in the distribution. The
second term,  , measures the “quality” of information or the precision of a surgeon’s beliefs
about the distribution of reference qualities.4 From equation (1) and the first-order condition in
(3), it is clear that changes to the information structure can alter both components of surgeon
utility. First, improved information allows consumers to more easily observe the quality of their


2
  One could also move the marginal intrinsic incentive in equation (3) to the right hand side. In this case the intrinsic
incentive enters as a “reduction” in marginal cost. This interpretation is developed by Gaynor (2006) to model
supplier quality choice with not-for-profit incentives.
3
  Because prices are set by a regulator (Medicare), demand is equal to marginal revenue provided quality elasticity
of demand is not a function of patient cost (i.e. raising quality does not lead to differential increases in demand from
the most severe patients). I assume payments are sufficient to make marginal patients profitable. In cardiac surgery
this condition is likely to hold. Huckman (2006) finds that cardiac surgical Diagnosis Related Groups (DRGs) are
profitable on average and at the margin. Chernew, Gowrisankaran, and Scanlon, (2001) also find evidence that
reimbursement for cardiac surgery is greater than cost (though the degree of profitability varies by payer).
4
  In a general model, surgeons are Bayesian learners and new information induces a posterior distribution of
reference quality. Updating alters both mean beliefs about relative quality and the precision of the posterior.


                                                                                                                       6
full choice set of surgeons. This change in demand alters the pecuniary returns to quality
improvement. Second, a better signal provides surgeons with more precise information on the
performance of the set J in the reference group. Improved knowledge about the reference group
alters the shape of the intrinsic utility function because changes in performance are more easily
measured and produce utility gains.
         Figures 1 and 2 present a graphical example. In Figure 1, each surgeon has a convex
marginal cost curve (labeled MC) and a marginal revenue curve that is increasing in quality
(labeled MR). In this standard model a surgeon is solely extrinsically motivated. He selects the
point at which the marginal cost of quality improvement equals the marginal pecuniary benefit
(MR). Introducing information on performance alters quality by changing the slope of the
marginal revenue from improving quality. This can be seen in the rotation from MR0 to MR1.
Quality reporting leads to improvement in performance from                  * to  * * by altering demand
for quality and, thus, the pecuniary reward.


                                        [Figure 1 Approximately Here]


         Figure 2 introduces a mixed surgeon utility function. The upper panel contains two
possible intrinsic utility functions. Two surgeons (labeled 1 and 2) have the same concave
intrinsic utility function, but compare themselves to the lowest and highest surgeon in their
reference set respectively.5 The deviation between profit and utility maximizing quality, visible
in the lower panel of Figure 2, is determined by the shape of the MC, MR and MB curves. For
any monotonically increasing intrinsic utility function the marginal benefit curve (MB) is higher
than MR. Graphically, this is captured in the increase in equilibrium quality from                   * * to  ' or
 ' ' , depending on surgeon’s intrinsic utility function and reference point.6

                                        [Figure 2 Approximately Here]


5
  Note that the curve for surgeon 2 is convex as presented due to the reference point. Utility, however, is still
concave in that returns are diminishing for changes further from the reference quality, the “best” surgeon.
6
  In Figure 2, equilibrium quality is relatively high even for a profit maximizing supplier so for surgeon 1 (where the
reference point is defined by the lowest quality in the group) intrinsic incentives increase quality to  ' , a small
effect. On the other hand, for surgeon 2, who aspires to be “the best”, intrinsic incentives are relatively strong,
leading to an equilibrium quality choice of  ' ' .


                                                                                                                      7
           Prior to quality reporting, without information on peers, any change in quality is
indistinguishable from noise. In the top panel of Figure 2, this is the flat intrinsic utility function
( i   0 ) . Without information, improving quality does not increase utility because it cannot

be observed. Utility from quality need not, however, be set at zero if surgeons gain some level of
static intrinsic utility – the “warm glow” from being a cardiac surgeon.
            After report cards are released new information is provided with the signal
1  { ' ' ,  ' '}. Information that alters a surgeon’s perceived relative quality changes his utility
either positively or negatively (e.g. they learn they are better or worse than expected). Marginal
incentives are also altered by the quality of the signal and the ensuing shape of the utility
function. In this case, because there was no information prior to quality reporting, the prior slope
of intrinsic utility is zero so any signal that provides new information will unambiguously
increase the slope of the intrinsic utility curve resulting in increased intrinsic incentives for all
physicians.7 This need not be true, however. If surgeons have some information on the
distribution of reference quality prior to formal reporting then the slope of the intrinsic utility
function will not initially be zero and some surgeons can receive new information that
diminishes or leaves incentives unchanged. Rather than make explicit assumptions about priors
that would allow unambiguous predictions, I note the potential for quality reporting to either
increase or decrease intrinsic incentives and allow for both effects empirically.8
           A measure of extrinsic and intrinsic utility can also be computed in this framework. In
Figure 2, the area below the marginal cost curve between A and B and above the marginal
revenue curve between A and C measures the additional cost in excess of revenue a surgeon is
willing to expend in order to improve performance solely to gain intrinsic utility.9 That is, for

7
  This also underscores the fact that for any intrinsic utility function unrelated to information, quality reporting
should not alter non-pecuniary incentives for quality. Even if surgeons are purely altruistic and perfect agents for
patients, quality reporting would not alter quality levels unless information enters utility (the argument parallels
perfect agency in Ellis and McGuire (1986)). For example, not-for-profit providers are assumed to more accurately
reflect social preferences in their strategies but, in general, models have not considered the knowledge they have
about quality and how this impacts their incentives (Arrow, 1963; Newhouse, 1970; Sloan, 2000).
8
  To make more explicit predictions in this setting would require me to define a set of beliefs for a given surgeon as
well as the form of the signal being provided by the report card. The assumptions required would be very strong and
could basically determine any set of outcomes based on those assumptions. Miller (2006) demonstrates the
challenge posed by distributional assumptions on the form of competition in modeling provider response to quality
reporting, though without incorporating intrinsic incentives.
                                                                                 ''           ''
9
                                                                                              
    For any cost function and demand curve the dollar value of intrinsic utility is MC ( ) d  MR( )d .
                                                                                **            **




                                                                                                                     8
every quality investment beyond        * * a surgeon loses money at the margin. Willingness to
undertake such investments captures a non-pecuniary incentive in the utility function related to
costly quality.
        The primary goal of the remainder of the paper is to measure empirically the relative
contribution of each of these incentive components in determining surgeon response to quality
reporting in Pennsylvania. Viewed in Figure 2, this effort reduces to decomposing the observed
quality improvement from        * to  ' ' into the share due to the move from MR0 to MR1, and the
share due to changes in intrinsic incentives from ( i    0 ) to ( i   1 ) . Decomposing

quality change in this manner is testing the predictions of the model that suppliers imperfectly
observe quality, that they care about this quality independently of pecuniary rewards and that
they gain new information from the release of quality report cards.


II. Background and Setting
A. Quality Reporting in Health Care
        Quality reporting programs have been implemented in many forms across a variety of
markets for health insurance and for providers (see Kolstad and Chernew (2009) for a review of
the evidence to date). As of 2006, forty seven states had some form of quality reporting system
in place for health care providers (thirty seven are mandatory and ten are voluntary) (Steinbrook,
2006). The most studied within the provider context have been the CABG report card programs
in New York and Pennsylvania.10 Reporting of surgeon and hospitals’ risk-adjusted mortality
rate (RAMR) for CABG began in 1989 in New York State. Pennsylvania’s experiment followed
shortly thereafter and was led by the Pennsylvania Health Care Cost Containment Council
(PHC4), a public/private partnership. They began collecting discharge data on outcomes and
patient comorbidities in 1990. The first widely available report card was released in May of 1998
and included data from 1994-95.11
        Some of the earliest evidence on these policies comes from surveys of market
participants and case studies. The former suggest that quality reporting did not significantly alter

10
   Similar report card programs for cardiac surgery are now in use in many states including California,
Massachusetts, Florida and New Jersey as well as at the country level in the United Kingdom (Steinbrook 2006).
11
   Reports based on 1990-1993 data were constructed and released between 1992 and 1995. However, these reports
are no longer available and discussions with experts suggest that these data and the reports were not widely
distributed. Furthermore, the risk-adjustment measures differed from later reports.


                                                                                                                 9
consumer choice (Schneider and Epstein, 1998; Hannan et al., 1994).12 Dziouban, et al. (1994)
present a case study of the response of a large community teaching hospital to New York State’s
release of quality report cards. This description is particularly relevant as that experience maps
very closely both to the theory developed in this study and to the empirical implementation that
relies on risk adjustment as a measure of new information provided to surgeons. The hospital had
comprehensive data capture and case review practices in place prior to quality reporting in order
to improve performance. Despite this, new information was provided from the report card due to
learning that their patient population was less severe than expected and, thus, their actual quality
was low, despite their observed mortality rate. This new information led to a detailed analysis
and practice changes that resulted in subsequent quality improvements (reductions in RAMR).
Studies that rely on observed consumer behavior find more evidence for an effect of quality
reporting on aggregate market share, though the effects remain relatively small (Cutler,
Huckman, and Landrum, 2004; Dranove and Sfekas, 2008; Mukamel and Mushilin, 1998).
         Another line of research on supplier response to quality reporting has focused on
selection against sicker patients. In their survey, Schneider and Epstein (1998) found that 63
percent of surgeons report reduced willingness to operate on severe patients and 59 percent of
cardiologists report having difficulty finding a surgeon for their more severe patients. Dranove et
al. (2003) compare outcomes for cardiac patients in the Medicare population in New York and
Pennsylvania with those in locations without report cards. They find patients had better matches
with providers – a gain from the release of information – as well as selection by surgeons against
sicker patients, higher resources use and worse outcomes.13 Fong (2008) considers similar
selection behavior in a theoretical setting. While this paper does not bear on the existence of such
effects, her findings underscore the important role supplier objectives should play in determining
optimal policy.
         Survey evidence and, to a slightly lesser extent, revealed preference suggest little demand
response. On the other hand, a review of the medical literature finds, “…there is evidence that
the public disclosure of death rates associated with surgery in New York and other states has



12
   The introduction of quality reporting was highly contentious in New York and Pennsylvania (Bumiller, 1995). To
the extent that surgeons or cardiologists had an opinion on the topic there is a concern that their answers reflected
their preference for or against quality reporting.
13
   The aggregate welfare effect of report cards during their study period was negative.


                                                                                                                  10
contributed to reductions in operative mortality…” (Steinbrook, 2006). Applying the mixed
incentive model in this paper can explain these findings.


B. CABG Surgery
       CABG surgery is one of a range of possible treatments for coronary artery disease, a
condition in which a patient’s blood flow to the heart is compromised by narrowing of the
coronary arteries. The severity and symptoms of the disease vary with the degree of obstruction.
Cardiac catheterization, a process that allows a cardiologist to image the blockage(s), is used to
assess the extent of the disease and determine the appropriate treatment regime. Patients can be
managed medically using drugs (beta blockers, Asprin, ace-inhibitors, etc.) or surgically with
either PTCA or CABG. If a surgical intervention is decided upon, the patient must then choose
between angioplasty and CABG and select a cardiac surgeon. All of these choices depend not
only on patient characteristics but also on the incentives facing their agent in the choice, the
cardiologist (e.g. Afendulis and Kessler, 2007).
       Cardiac bypass surgery is the most invasive treatment for cardiovascular disease. After
opening the chest wall, the surgeon creates a bypass around the blocked coronary artery using
either internal mammary arteries or arteries from the leg. The production function is complex
and determined not only by the attending surgeon, but also by a team of physicians and support
staff (Edmondson, Bohmer, and Pisano, 2001). The physicians required for a CABG procedure
include a cardiac anesthesiologist and the operating surgeon. In addition, a perfusionist, nursing
and other support staff play an important role in the procedure itself and the follow up care as the
patient recovers. A widely documented effect in this market is the presence of a volume-outcome
relationship. This is generally attributed to learning-by-doing, though the endogeneity of volume
raises the alternate mechanism of selective referral (Arrow, 1963; Gowrisankaran, Ho, and
Town, 2006; Gaynor, 2006; Ramanarayanan, 2007).
       The model developed thusfar has focused on the surgeon as the unit of analysis, not the
hospital. This reflects the fact that, with a few specific exceptions, surgeons are not employed by
the hospitals at which they perform surgery. Rather hospitals provide a space for surgeons to
perform CABG as well as the necessary support staff and resources. The surgeons themselves act
as freelance workers and gain profits directly from providing additional services (Cutler,
Huckman, and Kolstad, 2010). Underscoring the freelance nature of the relationship, many



                                                                                                   11
surgeons have privileges to perform CABG surgery across different hospitals at the same time
(Huckman and Pisano, 2006). The hospital and surgeon are compensated separately with a fee
for the different services provided by each. The fee-for-service (FFS) compensation for CABG
makes it one of the most profitable types of care for Medicare enrollees and most types of private
insurance (Huckman, 2006; Chernew, Scanlon, and Hayward, 1998). Because reimbursement is
above cost – both on average and at the margin – and payments are made directly to surgeons for
each surgery, the quantity of procedures provided is a direct measure of profit.


C. Data
         Data were obtained from the Pennsylvania Health Care Cost Containment Council
(PHC4) and contain observations for 89,406 CABG surgeries performed in the state of
Pennsylvania in 1994-95, 2000 and 2002-03 (PHC4, 1998, 2002, 2004, 2005). Each observation
includes information on the surgeon performing the surgery, the hospital at which the surgery
was performed, patient demographics, a set of patient comorbidities, the patient’s home zip code,
data on the payer type, and a set of outcome variables.14 The outcome of interest in this paper is
inpatient mortality. In addition, I merge data on surgeon tenure in the Pennsylvania market.15
This is intended to capture the life-cycle nature of returns to quality as well as costs that are
associated with age of the surgeon. To account for the fact that academic surgeons may differ in
their incentives, I also gather data on the number of publications for each surgeon by 1995 and
the number of citations to those publications.
         I compute a measure of risk adjusted mortality to capture surgeon performance using the
standard approach used by PHC4. Each observation includes a dummy variable equal to 1 if a
patient died in the hospital during or immediately following surgery. The log probability of death
is computed as follows:
                        Pr( MORTi , s ,h  1 | xi ) 
                     ln                               =  +  X + i,s,h                   (4)
                        1  Pr( MORT  1 | x )  0 1 i
                                     i , s ,h      i 




14
   Patient characteristics include age, indicators for cardiogenic shock, concurrent angioplasty, complicated
hypertension, dialysis, female gender, heart failure, and prior CABG or valve surgery.
15
   This is computed based on the date the surgeon was first licensed in the State. These data are gathered by
matching surgeon names with the state database of license information available at
http://www.dos.state.pa.us/bpoa/cwp/view.asp?a=1104&q=432785.


                                                                                                                12
where i indexes patient, s surgeon and h hospital. MORT is the indicator variable that equals 1 if
the patient died in the hospital. This model is estimated for each report card period (1994-95,
2000, 2002 and 2003).16 The fitted values are obtained for each patient to form a predicted
probability of death – the Expected Mortality Rate (EMR). For each surgeon, I then compute a
measure of risk adjusted performance (RAMR):
                                                OMRs ,h   
                                  RAMRs , h             OMRPA
                                                           
                                                                               (5)
                                                EMRs ,h   
where the risk adjusted, expected and observed mortality rates for each surgeon s or hospital h
are RAMR, EMR and OMR respectively. Risk adjustment is accomplished by dividing the actual
number of fatalities by the expected number of deaths conditioning on the actual patients
selecting surgeon s or hospital h. This ratio is then normalized by multiplying it by the statewide
average mortality rate.
         Table 1 contains summary statistics for key variables in the data. As angioplasty gains
market share, substituting for CABG, the statewide volume declines (this also occurred in
neighboring states, see Cutler, Huckman, and Kolstad, 2010). The performance improvement
over time is also apparent in the reductions in the mean RAMR. Between 1994 and 2003 the
mean surgeon RAMR dropped 42 percent from a rate of 3.42 percent to 2 percent. Figure 3 plots
quarterly mean RAMR and unadjusted mortality highlighting the drop following the release of
quality report cards in 1998. Comparing performance in 1994-95 to the period between 2000 and
the second quarter of 2002 (quarters 24 to 33 in the graph) shows a decline in quarterly average
RAMR and OMR, though these results are noisy from quarter to quarter.


                                        [Table 1 Approximately Here]


                                       [Figure 3 Approximately Here]


         Table 2 presents a matrix of transition probabilities between quintile measures of surgeon
quality (5 indexes the highest quality and 1 the lowest in each period) in 1995 and 2000. The
evidence suggests that it is feasible for surgeons to improve performance regardless of baseline

16
  The coefficient estimates and marginal effects for this regression for the 1994-95 and year 2000 data are presented
in Appendix A1.


                                                                                                                  13
quality. Of the worst performing surgeons in 1995, 13 percent were in the top 20 percent in 2000,
while 8 percent remained in the lowest performing group. Surgeons in the 3rd quintile of
performance in 1995 were equally likely to be in the highest quality as the lowest quality quintile
by 2000 (16 percent in both cases). Transition probabilities are computed using the full sample of
surgeons. Looking at the right most column of Table 2 it is also clear that exit is substantial,
particularly in the highest and lowest quality (quintiles 5 and 1 respectively). For this reason
subsequent analyses are limited to surgeons observed in both the pre- and post- reporting period.


                                        [Table 2 Approximately Here]


III. Econometric Models and Results
A. Identifying Intrinsic Incentives Using Information
         To measure the effect of new information on surgeon choices due to intrinsic incentives, I
construct an estimate for the new information provided by quality reporting that was available
only to surgeons, but not observed by consumers. The empirical question is whether surgeons
who receive new information that is unrelated to demand differ in their subsequent quality
improvement.
         To construct the information measures I assume that, in the absence of data, a surgeon
forms beliefs about performance by observing successes and failures – his or her own inpatient
mortality rate. Surgeons do not, however, know with great certainty whether a patient is likely to
have died given their underlying severity and the latest techniques and technologies.17 The
introduction of risk adjustment provides this information by giving surgeons the “true” difficulty
of their cases – the expected outcome had the average surgeon in the state handled the case. The
degree to which this confirms or differs from surgeons’ priors is a measure of the amount of new
information contained in the report for each surgeon.
         I approximate this empirically as a non-linear function of the difference between a
surgeon’s mean pre-report card RAMR and OMR: f ( RAMR pre  OMR pre ) . A surgeon with a


17
  It is plausible physicians may have an indication of a given patient’s severity. However, the evidence on physician
difficulty in assessing probabilities, the dynamics of new technologies and techniques and physician reliance on
rules of thumb in treatment choices suggests that the objective measure of risk adjustment would provide new
information relative to their existing assessments of patient severity (e.g. Frank and Zeckhauser, 2007). Dziouban, et
al. (1994) present a case study of precisely this mechanism in response to New York State’s quality report cards.


                                                                                                                   14
larger difference between his RAMR and his observed mortality, regardless of the level of each,
is provided more new information by the introduction of quality reporting. Figure 4 presents a
histogram of the frequency of this measure. Information contained in the risk-adjustment appears
to be roughly normally distributed around zero, with a substantial share of surgeons who have a
RAMR that differs from their OMR.


                                   [Figure 4 Approximately Here]


        Viewed through the lens of the theory in section I, this measure of information
corresponds to a specific case in which surgeons care intrinsically about performing as well as
possible given the average level of skill and technology in the market. More generally, this
measure captures the magnitude of new information that might induce effort due to a comparison
with many possible reference groups (e.g. very high quality surgeons for those learning they are
doing very well and just getting to be average for those learning they are not doing as well). The
intuition of the model holds in these cases though the empirical expression allows the response to
vary for good and bad news of different magnitudes without explicitly testing the precise
reference group. I return to this issue with some sensitivity analysis in section IV.D. that allows
local peers to differentially impact effort.
       I begin the analysis by plotting the difference between surgeon RAMR and OMR for
1994-95 against both the percentage change in surgeon volume from 1995 to 2000 and the
percentage change in RAMR over the same period. These results are presented in Figure 5. I fit
the data using a Kernel-weighted local polynomial smoother (Fan, 1996) to estimate a
nonparametric surgeon response to new information.


                                   [Figure 5 Approximately Here]


       The lower curve plots the relationship of the difference between surgeon RAMR and
OMR in 1994-95, and the change in surgeon volume between 1995 and 2000. The curve is
remarkably flat, suggesting that this measure of new information did not lead to large changes in




                                                                                                  15
demand.18 The upper curve in Figure 5 plots the same information measure against surgeons’
change in RAMR following reporting (computed by taking the difference relative to 1995 levels
so positive values represent quality improvement). The curve is u-shaped centered near zero.
These results suggest that RAMR remained roughly the same between 1995 and 2000 for
surgeons receiving no new information. Moving away from zero in either direction, we see that
increased information led to larger improvements in quality.
         The effect increases monotonically in each direction over most information ranges.
Enhanced incentives for surgeons whose performance was worse than expected (RAMR>OMR)
fits easily into the model described in section I. Performance improvement among surgeons
learning they were at higher than expected quality is inconsistent with standard models of
incentives, but accords with intrinsic incentives that are affected by quality information. If the
shape of the intrinsic utility function is such that the posterior slope is greater than the prior, then
improved information can enhance incentives, regardless of the sign of the change.19 An example
of this type of effect is a surgeon who desires to be the best. Learning that he is better than
expected and closer to his objective increases the incentive to improve.
         To implement this identification strategy in a testable model requires additional
parametric assumptions. I saturate the model by separating the magnitude of new information
into quintiles of the difference between RAMR and OMR, indexed by n. Surgeons in the bottom
two quintiles (groups 1 and 2) receive information that they are worse than they thought they
were (i.e. RAMR is higher than their OMR). Surgeons in the middle quintile (percentiles 40 to
59 of the distribution and the omitted category in estimation) receive no new information
(RAMR roughly equal to OMR) and the surgeons in the top two quintiles (groups 4 and 5)
receive new information that suggests they are better than expected. It is possible that surgeons
whose RAMR is similar to their OMR also learn from the introduction of report cards. To the
extent this is true, we expect some response from quintile three if they are intrinsically




18
   Formalizing this plot as a regression, I cannot reject the hypothesis that the five quartiles of the distribution of
RAMR-OMR had the same change in volume between 1995 and 2000.
19
   While I do not formally rely on this as a test, responding to information that performance is better than expected
by improving performance is inconsistent with the behavior predicted by a standard model of profit maximization.


                                                                                                                      16
motivated. In this case the estimated effect of intrinsic incentives is a lower bound.20 Using this
measure of information, the primary estimating equation is as follows:
                                            5
                  s      s  n  I n , s ( RAMR pre  OMR pre )  X s  X h   s , h        (6)
                                           n 1


where the dependent variable is the change in surgeon quality (RAMR) between the pre- and
post-reporting periods. X s is a set of surgeon level observables, X h is a set of hospital level

controls and  s is an i.i.d., mean zero error term. If information alters quality due to intrinsic

incentives, additional data from report cards should produce performance improvement. The
hypothesis H 0 : n  3 is a test for intrinsic incentives associated with the information contained
in each group n. With quality as the dependent variable, changes in profit incentives due to
quality reporting also enter the model, captured by   s . Estimating (6) thus requires

constructing a measure of the change in extrinsic incentives (the relative slope of MR in Figure
1) induced by quality reporting. This is the focus of the next section of the paper.
         One important concern in estimating (6) is the potential for mean reversion that could
bias the estimated effect of both intrinsic and extrinsic incentives on changes in surgeon quality.
To account for this possibility, I include a surgeon’s average RAMR in 1994-95 in the
vector X s . This eliminates mean reversion in the estimated effect of information and controls for

the mechanical relationship between a surgeon’s baseline quality and the implied returns to
quality improvement.21 Despite these empirical advantages, I also present results without the pre-
reporting RAMR because any correlation between RAMR and the intrinsic information measure
will bias the n coefficients towards zero.
         Finally, technological change over time could affect the model. I account for this in two
ways. First, risk adjustment is computed for each period and, subsequently, incorporates changes
in the average ability to treat a patient with a given comorbidity. That is, a surgeon’s risk
adjusted performance in period t is defined in terms of the expected mortality conditional on
20
   Another reasonable possibility is that higher performing surgeons have a better idea of their underlying patient
severity than those at the bottom of the distribution. In this case it is also true that the estimated impact for groups 1
and 2 will be biased downwards. I thank an anonymous referee for this helpful extension.
21
   I also note that, even in the absence of 1994-95 RAMR control, if I have accurate measures of quality concerns
about mean reversion will be minimized (i.e. the error term on the estimated quality in each period is small relative
to the treatment effect). Because I have observations from a relatively long pre- and post- period (I observe an
average of 240 surgeries per surgeon in the pre- and 160 in the post-reporting period), I expect the variance in
estimated quality in each period to be small relative to the magnitude of the effect I am trying to identify (RAMR
change).


                                                                                                                        17
patient covariates given the current period technology. This controls for the majority of inter-
temporal improvement in technology. A second concern is that technological change alters
quality due to unobserved factors uncorrelated with the risk adjusters. I assume that this effect is
equal across the panel of surgeons, conditional on surgeon and market observables. Under this
assumption, the intercept  captures any additional unobserved technological change.
Furthermore, specifications that include a surgeon’s baseline RAMR allow the impact of
technology to enter flexibly across the ex ante quality distribution. If, for example, a new
technique or device were introduced that is more effective for lower performing surgeons (or
they adopt this later than surgeons observed to be high quality) it is captured in the relationship
between mean 1994-95 RAMR and changes in quality.


B. Surgeon Quality and Patient Demand
        In order to more precisely relate demand side factors to surgeon quality choices following
reporting, I estimate a structural model of consumer demand. Relying on parameter estimates for
patients’ utility, I can simulate alternate information environments. I model patients’ discrete
selection of a surgeon allowing for factors that are unobserved (to the econometrician) but alter
choice. These enter as random coefficients. (Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes, 1995; Nevo, 2000;
Train, 2003). I present a brief discussion of the key variables and refer the reader to Kolstad
(2012) for a detailed description of the structural model.
        Each patient selects from the set of surgeons in his or her Hospital Referral Region
(HRR). The utility for patient i from choosing a given surgeon s is a function of travel cost,
expected health improvement (capturing all components of quality) and an error term. Indirect
utility to consumer i who selects surgeon s is:
                                ui ,s ,h  g ( X i ,i , Z s ,h , s ,h ;  )   i ,s ,h   (7)

where X i and  i are vectors of observed and unobserved patient characteristics all of which lead

to differences in taste. Z s ,h is a K-dimensional vector of hospital and surgeon characteristics not

directly related to expected health.  s ,h is the expected quality (gains in health) for surgeon s at

hospital h. Finally,  i , s ,h is an iid error term with a type-1 extreme value distribution and  is a

vector of parameters. A patient selects surgeon s at hospital h if and only if ui ,s  ui ,  s  s  s .



                                                                                                           18
Indirect utility in (7) is derived directly from a quasilinear utility function without wealth effects
or prices. Prices do not enter choice because patients are generally well insured (55 percent by
Medicare) so the out-of-pocket cost is unlikely to vary in any meaningful way between
surgeons.22
         Information (and quality reporting) enters the model by altering beliefs about expected
health gains from choosing a given surgeon, s. Patients are assumed to develop beliefs based on
all available information on surgeon performance (from both formal and informal information
sources). One important feature of patient choice is the likely influenced by an experienced agent
(the patient’s cardiologist). To account for the role of agency in determining demand, I include a
measure of the patient-surgeon match assumed to be mediated through agency. This is captured
by the deviation between a patient’s severity and the lagged average severity seen by surgeon s
in the prior quarter ( EMRi  EMR s,t 1 where EMR is computed using the fitted values from
equation (4)). Incorporating this measure into the demand systems assumes that patients who
have more comorbidities are sicker on average and would benefit more from being treated by a
surgeon who has the training and background to treat relatively sick patients. I also assume that
this match value is not known to patients. While he may be aware of his own severity he would
not know the appropriate surgeon given previous patient flows. This information is, however,
known by a referring cardiologist. Conditioning demand on agent specific information allows
patient flows to respond to reporting directly, taking potentially important agent preferences into
account, and any agent (cardiologist) response to quality reporting that changes preferences over
patient-surgeon matching on severity.


Incorporating these features into the choice model, the expected quality if patient i chooses
surgeon s at hospital h is:
                                             i,s,h  (X i  i )RCs,h (8)
RC is a vector of surgeon and surgeon-hospital characteristics observed by the patient. Included
in RC is a continuous measure of surgeon performance – prior quarter RAMR – and dummies for
discrete quality ratings included in the report card (i.e. better, worse or as expected mortality
based on patient severity). Substituting back into (7) the patient’s utility function is:
22
   To test this assumption I estimate a specification of the choice model using data only from Medicare and Private
fee-for-service patients (those who are known not to face any constraints on choice). This has little effect on first
stage parameter estimates for demand or second stage estimates of surgeon response.


                                                                                                                    19
                                     ui,s,h  X i Z s,h  (X i  i )RCs,h   i.s.h (9)
Individual choice is thus a function of observed (to the econometrician) patient and surgeon
attributes as well as unobserved factors that alter patient response to quality information.23 The
probability that patient i chooses surgeon s at hospital h is:
                                               e X i Z s,h (X i  i )RC s ,h
                               Pi,s,h                                            ( b,W )di   (10)
                                               e X i Z  s,h (X i  i )RC  s,h i
                                              sS


where the unobserved components of utility are distributed according to the distribution
 (i b,W ) that is known up to a mean and covariance, b and W, to be estimated. Using this
expression, I fit the data using simulated maximum likelihood (Train, 2003). Estimates for the
demand system are computed by solving analytically for the logit choice probabilities and
integrating out the random taste distribution by taking draws from the joint distribution of
unobserved terms.
           Results are presented in Table 3. I estimate the model with time period interactions for
the period before (1994-95) and following the release of the 1998 report card, but prior to the
release of the ensuing report cards (2000 and the first two quarters of 2002). The estimates are
generally consistent with expectations. Travel distance enters choice significantly, as does
surgeon quality. The effect of the introduction of quality reporting on demand can be seen in the
interactions of the quality variables with the dummy for post-quality reporting. Columns 3 and 4
include controls for agency induced surgeon-patient matching. Because these effects are
significant in all specifications, I include these controls in all subsequent analysis.


                                               [Table 3 Approximately Here]


C. Calibrating Report Card Related Extrinsic Incentives
           To calibrate the magnitude of the demand side incentives facing each surgeon, I simulate
a series of counter-factual scenarios. Extrinsic incentives are captured by the measured returns to
quality identified by the demand system.




23
     Contained in such unobserved influences are agency, insurance network constraints and patient-surgeon matching.


                                                                                                                 20
           The impact of information on profit is measured empirically by computing a predicted
choice probability under alternate information scenarios – with and without quality reporting.
The estimate for the report card induced change in profit is:



                                                                                                                 (11)



            I
where       Pˆ
           i 1
                  i,s,h   ( X it , Z st , h , s ,t |  RC ) is the sum of the fitted choice probabilities for all patients i

receiving surgery in the HRR in which surgeon s practiced in period t, a measure of expected
demand.  indexes the information environment (pre- or post-report cards) that define the
         RC



consumer utility parameters. I sDem  is a dummy variable equal to 1 if surgeon s has an expected
demand using post-reporting demand parameters that is greater than expected volume using pre-
report card demand (a windfall profit from quality reporting).24 Including I sDem  and interacting
it with the change in predicted volume allows the model to flexibly capture potentially
discontinuous changes in incentives at a surgeon’s current volume due to income effects (an
issue discussed in more detail below). I also include market fixed effects to control for all time
invariant market level factors that influence the profitability of quality. In this model, differences
in the profitability of quality for surgeons are identified by differences in geographic locations,
the distribution of patients’ tastes, the competitive structure of the market and (in models without
a control for 1994-95 RAMR) baseline quality. For example, a surgeon who is at a low quality
level in the pre-reporting period and faces few high quality competitors and patients who (given
their locations and attributes) respond strongly to quality reporting has a greater return to
improving performance.
           Surgeon response to pecuniary rewards for quality depends on the strength of income and
substitution effects (McGuire and Pauly, 1991). If income effects dominate, reductions in
demand at a surgeon’s current level of quality should alter extrinsic incentives more than the

24
     The difference in volume is measured with respect to the predicted volume pre-quality reporting. Surgeons
                                                             Dem 
expecting to gain volume after quality reporting ( I s                1 ) have negative estimates for the volume difference (
                                                                         )



                                                                                                                                 21
opportunity to gain additional patients by improving performance. Losing volume (profit)
increases the marginal utility of an additional patient, mediated through the marginal utility of
income.25 On the other hand, if income effects are not sufficiently strong, demand side incentives
are better measured by computing the ceteris paribus returns to a reduction in RAMR. Equation
(11) models both effects by allowing incentives to differ for surgeons expecting to gain and
expecting to lose patients after quality reporting (captured by the coefficients 2 and 3 ).
        Using the approach in (11) and the full first stage demand system (including agency
controls), the sample mean predicted quarterly change in volume is .14 with a standard deviation
of 3.09. The small average effect (statistically indistinguishable from zero) is offset by a large
variance across surgeons. Figure 6 plots the frequency of quarterly differences between
surgeons’ pre- and post-report card predicted volumes. Breaking the impact down by positive
and negative demand effects, the mean predicted change in demand is 1.3 patients for surgeons
losing volume in a given quarter, and a gain of 2.5 patients for surgeons gaining volume.
Compared to the average quarterly volume of 30 surgeries in the sample, these effects are
economically significant.


                                       [Figure 6 Approximately Here]


        To put the financial returns in perspective, Huckman (2006) finds that the marginal profit
from a CABG surgery is $6,900.26 Thus surgeons facing the average decline in demand expected
a reduction in annual profit (joint with the hospital at which they practice) of $35,000 and
surgeons gaining volume expected an annual profit increase of $69,000. To get an idea of the
share of this profit that might accrue to a surgeon, we can compare the total profit to the
Medicare fees provided to surgeons performing a single CABG (the dollar converted Relative
Value Units associated with CABG with a single arterial bypass). The surgeon fee was $2,126 in
1994, $2,359 in 1995 and $2,009 in 2000 (Federal Register, 1993; 1994; 1999).27 Comparing




25
   The extreme version of this argument is consistent with the classic target income hypothesis (see McGuire (2000)
for a review of a long literature)..
26
   This is computed using data from New York and is a measure of total marginal profit to the hospital and the
surgeon. Average profit is $2000 for a Medicare beneficiary and $3900 across all payer types.
27
   I thank Josh Gottlieb for sharing the CABG specific RVU fees.


                                                                                                                 22
these fees to the estimated marginal profit suggests that surgeons retained roughly one third of
the profits associated with an additional CABG procedure in direct compensation.28


D. Mixed Incentives and Quality Improvement
         Using this measure of profit incentives and the information contained in the risk
adjustment, I estimate equation (6). The coefficients  and  n capture the effect of a change in
profit and a change in information respectively on the change in surgeon RAMR between 1994-
95 and 2000. I account for measurement error from the first stage demand estimates by using
bootstrap simulation to compute the standard errors. Table 4 presents results.


                                          [Table 4 Approximately Here]


         Parameter estimates for n are negative for all surgeon information groups. The effects
are large and significant for information groups 1 and 2 (surgeons learning their performance
was lower than expected). I fail to reject the hypothesis H 0 – that information increased intrinsic
incentives for quality – for surgeons in groups 1 and 2. Interpreting the coefficient estimates in
Table 5 suggests that, after controlling for demand side incentives and mean reversion, surgeons
who learn significantly more about their own quality and that of their peers and find that they are
not performing as well as expected (group 1) improve quality by an average of .57 to .62
percentage points more than surgeons receiving no information from reporting. In columns 1 and
3, those without controls for 1994-95 RAMR, the impact of learning is much larger for the same
group, around 2.5 percentage points. The same learning, but for those only slightly worse than
expected, produced an average improvement of between .71 and .68 percentage points of RAMR
with and without market fixed effects respectively. The magnitude of the response is relatively
similar including a control for pre-reporting quality.29 Finally, surgeons learning they were much
better than expected improved by an average additional 1 percentage point compared to surgeons


28
   If the freelance surgeon bills the patient directly in addition to the estimated marginal profit the full fee would go
directly to the surgeon in addition to the profit to the hospital. In this case, the share of the marginal profit would be
roughly 24% (=2200/9100). In both cases, the marginal incentives are substantial.
29
   These results are robust to alternate specifications of baseline RAMR. In unreported regressions, I allow for
quadratic and non-parametric (quintiles) specifications of mean RAMR in 1994-95. The results are qualitatively
unchanged relative to a linear control.


                                                                                                                        23
gaining no new information, though this effect is ameliorated by including pre-reporting average
RAMR.
       I next turn to the estimates of the  coefficients that capture surgeon response to profit
incentives. Profit incentives enter with the “right” sign – surgeons facing more responsive
patients improve quality by more. The coefficient estimates of 1 suggest that for every
additional patient a surgeon expected to lose per quarter under quality reporting (given ex ante
surgeon, competitor and consumer characteristics) they reduced RAMR by an average of .04 to
.01 additional percentage points. Estimates of 2 are insignificant, suggesting that the response
does not drop discontinuously when surgeons expect to maintain their pre-report card volume
(e.g. income effects are relatively small). Consistent with a stronger substitution effect, surgeons
expecting to gain patients are also observed to respond to greater report card-induced demand
response. This can be seen in the significant estimates of 3 across all specifications. In Table 5,
the extrinsic response effects are similar even after controlling for baseline quality, suggesting
the differences are driven by surgeons responding to patients who are more quality elastic, not
merely by the mechanical relationship between current quality and demand. Overall, surgeons
expecting to gain more patients due to quality reporting improve by more, regardless of their
current volume.


IV. Discussion
A. Comparing Intrinsic and Extrinsic Response to Quality Reporting
       The evidence thus far is consistent with a role for both extrinsic and intrinsic incentives
in determining surgeons’ response to quality reporting. I use the estimates from equation (6) to
calibrate the relative magnitudes of these incentives by fitting the model under alternative
incentive scenarios (i.e. with and without extrinsic and intrinsic incentives). For brevity, I only
report results from the analysis using full controls (the relevant coefficient estimates are in
column 4 of Table 4).
       Overall, the model predicts changes in RAMR relatively well. The coefficient of
correlation between the predicted and actual change in RAMR for each surgeon is .89. The full
model predicts a mean improvement of .64 percentage points of RAMR compared to the actual
average of .72. Despite the relatively good fit, I use predicted improvement to compare the role



                                                                                                      24
of extrinsic and intrinsic incentives. As long as the error is not correlated with the intrinsic or
extrinsic incentive measures, the predicted changes are consistent.
       I begin by computing the predicted change in quality had report cards not been
implemented. Constraining   0 and  n   3 the average predicted change in RAMR between
1994-95 and 2000 is .07 percentage points. Allowing for extrinsic incentives only (incorporating
 and continuing to set  n  3 ), the predicted quality improvement is .19 percentage points of
RAMR. Surgeons’ response to profit incentives led to an additional decline in RAMR of .12
(=.19-.07) percentage points. Compared to the mean statewide RAMR in 1994-95 (3.42 percent),
this constitutes an additional 3.5 percent decline in mortality.
       Allowing only information-induced intrinsic incentives to enter the model (i.e. setting
  0 ) the model predicts a market wide average RAMR that is an average of .52 percentage
points lower due to quality reporting. The intrinsic response to quality reporting alone led to an
additional .45 (=.52-.07) percentage point decline in RAMR, or 13 percent lower statewide
RAMR. Comparing the two effects, the incremental impact of quality reporting mediated
through intrinsic response is roughly four times as large as the response to profit incentives.
Taken together, it is clear that report cards had an important role in quality improvement for
CABG surgery in Pennsylvania. The bulk of that impact, though, is driven by information
observed by surgeons and not by incentives generated by consumer response to reporting.


B. Incentives for Selecting Healthier Patients
       A concern in any effort to measure performance is the potential for efforts to game the
rating system. This has been widely discussed in the context of quality reporting in health care
generally and in CABG surgery specifically (e.g. Dranove, et al., 2003), raising the question of
whether the results in this paper reflect patient selection rather than true quality improvement.
This section focuses on understanding whether the observed improvements following quality
reporting can be explained by selection efforts by surgeons.
       The detailed data on underlying patient characteristics allow me to address the question
of selection directly as a potential explanation for the observed quality improvement in Table 4.
To do so, I rely on a test that is similar to the test for selection in insurance markets using
“unused observables” (Finkelstein and Poterba, 2006). Specifically, I model changes in
surgeon’s share of patients with risk factors that were used to model patient severity (“used”


                                                                                                      25
patient observables) as well as candidate variables for risk adjustment that were gathered but not
used in the final model (“unused” patient observables). That is, the PHC4 data contain a set of
patient comorbidites that were thought at the outset to be correlated with mortality, but were not
ultimately used because they were found not to be sufficiently predictive.30 If surgeons were
selecting on patient characteristics that they believed were correlated with risk but not captured
by risk adjustment these are precisely the measures we would expect to change for surgeons
whose RAMR declined due to seeing healthier patients. To do so, I estimate a variant of equation
(6) that replaces the dependent variable with the change in share of patients treated by surgeon s
who had at least one comorbidity r between the pre- and post-reporting periods. The estimating
equation of interest is thus:

                                                                                                       (12)

where the independent variables are as in equation (6). The null hypothesis H 0 : n  3
is a test that the groups observed to improve due to intrinsic incentives did not differentially
change the observable or unobservable severity of patients, they treated depending on the
outcome variable. Similarly, we expect the coefficient  to equal zero if differences in profit
incentives did not lead surgeons to differentially change the composition of patients they
treated.31
         The results are presented in Table 5. The left two panels present results from estimating
equation (12) using the share of patients with at least one comorbidity used to risk adjust CABG
outcomes. The coefficients on the measures of new information due to reporting that drive
intrinsic incentives are positive for all measures of new information. Depending on the
specification the coefficient estimates for n are statistically significant different from zero. This
suggests that, if anything, surgeons who had more new information from reporting saw
measurably more severe patients. The coefficient estimates of 2 and 3 (the impact of facing
larger extrinsic incentives) are statistically significant. The coefficient on the dummy variable for

30
   The unused observables in 1994-95 and 2000 include whether a patient had cardiomyopathy, diabetes, COPD, or
peripheral vascular disease as well as race and obesity. Unfortunately, data on peripheral vascular disease, obesity
and COPD were not collected in the 1994-95 data. Thus, the variables used in computing patient shares with
“unused” observables are based on cardiomyopathy, diabetes and race.
31
   One thing to note is that this is not a test for the existence of any selection due to quality reporting overall. Rather,
this test asks whether the main results in the paper (those in Table 5) can be explained by selection. If the entire
market is shifting the types of patients receiving CABG due to selection incentives but surgeons with differing
incentives do not do so differentially we will not find evidence for selection in this test.


                                                                                                                         26
facing higher demand with quality reporting is .034 with and .031 without controlling for
baseline RAMR, suggesting that surgeons who stood to gain patient volume from quality
reporting differentially saw more severe patients after report cards were released. This effect is
declining in the magnitude of the expected gain in market share. The estimates of 3 are -.006
and -.007, depending on the specification, though only the estimate in column (1) is significant at
conventional levels. Thus, for every additional patient expected surgeons gaining market share
actually lowered the share of patients with an observable risk adjuster. Recall that the average
surgeon gaining patients expected to increase volume by 2.5 surgeries per quarter. Scaling the 3
coefficients by 2.5, the net effect for the average surgeon expecting to gain volume on the change
in the share of patients with an observable risk adjuster is a reduction in share of 1.9 (=.034-
(2.5*.006)) to 1.3 (=.031-(2.5*.007)) percentage points. In the pre-reporting period the average
share of patients with at least one observable risk adjuster for surgeons who stood to gain volume
was 48 percent. Thus, the differential change in share of patients with at least on risk adjuster for
surgeons expecting to gain volume due to reporting was a decline of 2.7 to 4 percent.32


                                         [Table 5 Approximately Here]


         The right half of Table 5 extends the analysis to test not only for changes in the
observable risk adjusters – where the risk adjustment scheme should mitigate selection incentives
– but also for changes in the share of patients with “unused” risk adjusters. If surgeons have the
ability to select patients who are healthier in unobservable (to the regulatory) ways, we expect to
see changes in the share of patients with these comorbidities for those surgeons who improved
performance due to either extrinsic or intrinsic incentives. The majority of coefficient estimates
are small and statistically insignificant, suggesting that the improvements in quality observed are
not due to significant changes in patient severity not included in risk adjustment. There are,
however, some significant effects. Specifically, it appears that surgeons learning their
performance was much worse than expected saw significantly fewer patients with at least one
“unused” risk adjuster. The coefficient estimates of -.037 and -.082 with and without controls for

32
  In an additional specification (not reported), I re-estimate the same model using only the share of patients with
cardiogenic shock as the dependent variable. Conversations with CABG surgeons suggests they believe this is a key
factor that would make a patient more difficult and, therefore, a characteristic that we would expect to see avoided if
possible. The coefficient estimates for intrinsic and extrinsic incentives are not significantly different from zero.


                                                                                                                    27
baseline RAMR are both statistically and economically significant in terms of patient
composition. Comparing this to the surgeon average of 31 percent of patients with at least one
unused risk adjuster in 1994-95 suggests this group saw a reduction of between 12 and 26
percent in the number of patients with an unused risk adjuster.
         These results suggest efforts to select patients, one potential channel through which this
group of surgeons improved performance. Incorporating the actual contribution of these
measures of severity to outcomes, however, suggests that this large shift in patients was unlikely
to explain the improvement in quality found in section IV.B. In appendix A1, I replicate the
PHC4 risk adjustment model with and without “unused” risk adjusters. These results make clear
that the marginal contribution of avoiding a patient with any of the unused risk adjusters had a
far smaller impact on expected mortality than the used risk adjusters and was unlikely to
materially affect RAMR. Appendix Table A1 presents the model used in the 1994-95 risk
adjustment model. The fourth column presents the marginal effects of the full model with both
used and unused risk adjusters. The unused risk adjusters are all an order of magnitude smaller
than the used risk measures and none are statistically significant. If we take the upper bound on
the marginal effect of any of the unused risk adjusters, a .6 percentage point increase in the
probability of inpatient mortality for patients with cardiomyopathy, a reduction of 8 percentage
points in the share of patients with this risk adjuster would translate to a reduction in RAMR of
.05 percentage points. Compared to the estimated differential improvement of this group of
surgeons of .92 percentage points (column 4 of table 4), selection can only explain 5 percent of
the observed improvement due to intrinsic incentives. Furthermore, this is a conservative
estimate as the impact of cardiomyopathy is approximately 6 times larger than the marginal
impact of the other unused risk adjusters and it is unlikely the full share of patients who shifted
away from surgeons learning they were worse than expected had this comorbidity.33
         Taken together, these results suggest that surgeons with differing intrinsic incentives to
improve quality do not appear to have accomplished reductions in mortality by changing their
patient mix either based on observable or unobservable (to the regulator) patient severity. It does,
however, appear that surgeons learning they were performing poorly did try to select


33
  Table A2 presents a similar risk adjustment model with and without unused risk adjusters using data from the
post-report card period. The coefficient estimates for the unused risk adjusters remain largely the same with only the
estimate for diabetes without complications changing. Since the marginal effect for this unused risk adjuster was
actually to make patients less severe, avoiding those patients would not explain the observed improvement.


                                                                                                                   28
unobservably healthier patients. Despite this, the actual contribution of this selection to quality
improvement was negligible. If anything, this finding suggests selection could be an issue, but
the risk adjustment scheme employed by PHC4 was sufficient to account for measures that can
contribute significantly to mortality risk.


C. Long Run/Dynamic Pecuniary Incentives
         Perhaps the most relevant threat to the validity of the model is the potential for dynamic
pecuniary returns to quality improvement. If current period investments are related to future
demand, what we are calling intrinsic incentives may in fact be quality improvement in response
to expected future compensation. To provide a simple test for such long run pecuniary
incentives, I assume that surgeons make decisions based on rational expectations of future
returns to quality improvements.34 I estimate the following model:
                                                                                                (13)

where qs ,t is the quantity of patients seen by surgeon s in period t and                           is the change in

surgeon quality between period t-n and t-y. z, n and y are positive integers satisfying: n>y.
Including the quantity of surgeries by surgeon s in all periods, t-z, controls for the full stock of
demand and quality effects prior to period t. Because I am primarily interested in surgeons’
response to quality reporting introduced in 1998, I estimate (13) using surgeon volume in 2003
as the dependent variable and measure the change in quality as the difference between a
surgeon’s 1994-95 and 2000 RAMR. I control for baseline quality and surgeon volume in 1994,
1995, 2000 and 2002.
         The estimated coefficient on  s , 2000,199495 is -1.98 (s.e.=1.52). The negative and

statistically insignificant estimate suggests that surgeons were unlikely to expect changes in
quality to produce pecuniary returns in the future. If anything, it appears that greater quality
improvement led to a slightly smaller number of patients in the long run. I also estimate (12)
with the change in quality between 1994 and 1995 as an independent variable. The estimated
coefficient on  s ,1995,1994 is .43 (s.e.=.6), again an insignificant effect of the change in quality on


34
  This is a simplifying assumption, though standard in traditional models of incentives and investment. However,
models that incorporate risk or ambiguity aversion are not being tested direction in equation (13). Appendix A3
discusses the different incentives, both extrinsic and intrinsic, that could be at play and the identifying variation and
assumptions for each.


                                                                                                                       29
subsequent annual volume; in this case 8 years hence. These results are consistent with Johnson
(2010) who studies the impacts of market learning (as opposed to report card-based) about
quality among cardiac surgeons on their career paths over time. She also finds no impact of
quality (measured by mortality) on long run surgery volume in the Medicare market.
        It is also plausible that the performance improvements do not change patient volume, but
allow surgeons to gain more patients whose insurance provides better remuneration through
surgical fees for CABG. The detailed data on patients’ insurance allows us to test for this directly
by estimating another variant of equation (13). I find little evidence for changes in payor share as
a result of quality improvements. For brevity, results are presented in Appendix A2.


D. Local Peers and Learning
        I turn next to a sensitivity test for the specific model that information alters surgeons’
behavior by altering their knowledge about a reference group. The base specification (equation
(6)) models surgeons’ learning using the risk adjustment based on statewide performance. If
surgeon incentives are related to their knowledge about the performance of their peers I also
expect that new learning about other peer groups will alter the intrinsic incentives. The most
easily defined peer group is the set of other surgeons practicing at the same hospital. To test for
an effect of learning about within-hospital peer performance, I re-estimate (6) and include a
measure of the difference between surgeon s’ RAMR in the pre-reporting period and the top
(lowest RAMR) and bottom (highest RAMR) surgeon at the hospital at which they practiced in
1994-95. The model is:
                                5
       s      s  n  I n , s ( RAMR pre  OMR pre )   ( RAMR pre  min RAMRh , s , pre )
                               n 1                                                                    (14)
        ( RAMR pre  max RAMRh , s , pre )  X s  X h   s , h

Results are presented in Table 6 for models including baseline RAMR, with and without market
fixed effects.


                                        [Table 6 Approximately Here]


        In both models, coefficient estimates for both  and  are negative and significant,
suggesting a surgeon learning he is further from either the best – opportunity to improve – or the



                                                                                                              30
worst surgeon at his hospital improves RAMR by relatively more. These results support the
earlier findings, that report card learning alters incentives by improving knowledge about a
reference group. Moreover, adding these controls produces larger coefficient estimates for  n
suggesting that surgeons compare performance both to their peers at their own hospital and to the
full statewide population.


V. Conclusion
        The impact of information on equilibrium quality is mediated through demand insofar as
suppliers choose quality levels to maximize profit. In this paper, I present an alternate model in
which reference intrinsic utility also determines surgeons’ willingness to make costly quality
improvements. Information (quality reporting) alters a surgeon’s beliefs about their own quality
level relative to a reference set of peers. If intrinsically motivated suppliers update their beliefs in
a Bayesian fashion, the improved posterior beliefs alter the shape of the intrinsic utility function
and thus a surgeon’s marginal incentive to improve quality.
        The risk-adjustment model that underlies quality report cards provides a simple way of
identifying the magnitude of the new information provided to surgeons and its effect on
performance. Surgeons who gain more information about their performance relative to their
peers (from risk adjustment) improve significantly more. A structural patient choice model
allows me to estimate the profit incentives from quality reporting. Conditioning on extrinsic
incentives, the intrinsic response to information leads to significant declines in RAMR and is
large relative to the response to profit motives. Improvements cannot be explained by surgeon
efforts to shift the composition of the patients they treat, either on observable risk measures used
in risk adjustment or on “unused” observables that could be used to game the quality measure.
        The results of this paper add to the literature on the behavioral response to improved
information in markets. However, I note some shortcomings and directions for future work. I
consider a specific setting – cardiac surgery – that may not generalize to other markets or
professions. The field of medicine, perhaps more than any other, relies on not-for-profit
incentives to correct market failures. As trainees, physicians also become accustomed to
evaluation mechanisms based on relative performance (grades and MCAT for medical school,
board scores for residency and licensure, etc). For these reasons, the relative magnitude of




                                                                                                     31
intrinsic versus extrinsic effects I find among cardiac surgeons may be larger than in other
settings.
        Nevertheless, these results provide an empirical first step and guidance on the potential
role for mixed incentives in determining skilled professionals’ effort and investment. The
findings also contribute to our understanding of the effects of quality reporting in health care and
inform policy making in this market.




                                                                                                    32
References
Afenduis, Christopher C. and Daniel P. Kessler. 2007. “Tradeoffs from Integrating Diagnosis
 and Treatment in Markets for Health Care” American Economic Review, 97(3): 1013-1020.
Akerlof, George A. 1970. “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market
 Mechanism.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3): 488-500.
Arrow, Kenneth. 1962. “Economic Implications of Learning by Doing.” The Review of
 Economic Studies, 29: 155-173.
Arrow, Kenneth. 1963. “Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care.” American
 Economic Review, 53: 941-73.
Bandierra, Oriana, Iwan Barankay and Imran Rasul. 2005 “Social Preferences and the Response
 to Incentives: Evidence from Personnel Data” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3): 917-
 962
Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes. 1995. “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium.”
 Econometrica, 63(4): 841-890.
Bumiller, Elisabeth. 1995. “Death Rate Rankings Shake New York Cardiac Surgeons.” New York Times,
 September 6.
Chatterji, Aaron K. and Michael W. Toffel. 2007. “Shamed and Able: How Firms Respond to
 Information Disclosure.” Corporate Social Responsibility Initiative Working Paper 39.
Cutler, David M., Robert S. Huckman, and Jonathan T. Kolstad. 2010. “Input Constraints and the
 Efficiency of Entry: Lessons from Cardiac Surgery.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
 2(1): 51-76.
Cutler, David M., Robert S. Huckman, and Mary Beth Landrum. 2004. “The Role of Information
 in Medical Markets: An Analysis of Publicly Reported Outcomes in Cardiac Surgery.”
 American Economic Review, 94(2): 342-346.
Chernew, Michael, Gautam Gowrisankaran, and Dennis P. Scanlon. 2001. “Learning and the
 Value of Information: Evidence from Health Plan Report Cards.” NBER Working Paper 8589.
Chernew, Michael, Dennis P. Scanlon, and Rod Hayward. 1998. “Insurance Type and Choice of
 Hospital for Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery.” Health Services Research, 33(3): 447-
 466.




                                                                                           33
Dranove, David, Daniel Kessler, Mark McClellan, and Mark Satterthwaite. 2003. “Is More
 Information Better? The Effect of `Report Cards’ on Health Care Providers.” Journal of
 Political Economy, 111(3): 555-588.
Dranove, David and Mark Satterthwaite. 1992. “Monopolistic Competition When Price and
 Quality and Imperfectly Observable.” RAND Journal of Economics, 23(4): 518-534.
Dranove, David and Andrew Sfekas. 2008. “Start Spreading the News: A Structural Estimate of
 the Effects of New York Hospital Report Cards.” Journal of Health Economics, 27(5): 1201-
 1207.
Dziouban, Stanley W., Joseph B. McIlduf, Stuart J. Miller, and Richard H. Dal. 1994. “How a
 New York Cardiac Surgery Program Uses Outcomes Data.” The Annals of Thoracic Surgery,
 58: 1871-1876.
Edmondson, Amy C., Richard M. Bohmer, and Gary P. Pisano. 2001. “Disrupted Routines:
 Team Learning and New Technology Implementation in Hospitals.” Administrative Science
 Quarterly, 46(4): 685-716.
Ellis, Randall P. and Thomas G. McGuire. 1986. “Provider Behavior Under Prospective
 Reimbursement, Cost Sharing and Supply. Journal of Health Economics, North Holland:
 Elsevier. (5) 129-151.
Epstein, Andrew. 2006. “Do Cardiac Surgery Report Cards Reduce Mortality? Assessing the
 Evidence.” Medical Care Research and Review, 63(4): 403-426.
Fan, Jianqing. 1996. Local Polynomial Modeling and Its Applications, London: Chapman and Hall.
Federal Register, December 2, 1993.
Federal Register, December 8, 1994.
Federal Register, December 8, 1999.
Fehr, Ernst and Klaus M. Schmidt. 1999. “A Theory of Fairness, Competition and Cooperation.”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114: 817-868.
Fehr, Ernst and Klaus M. Schmidt. 2006. “The Economics of Fairness, Reciprocity and Altruism –
 Experimental Evidence and New Theories” In Handbook of the Economics of Giving, Altruism and
 Reciprocity, ed. Serge-Christophe Kolm and Jean Mercier Ythier. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Finkelstein, Amy and James Poterba. 2006. “Testing for Selection Using “Unused Observables”” NBER
 Working Paper 12112.




                                                                                          34
Fong, Kyna G. 2008. “Evaluating Skilled Experts: Optimal Scoring Rules for Surgeons.” Mimeo,
 Stanford University.
Frank, Richard and Richard Zeckhauser. 2007. “Custom-made versus ready-to-wear treatments:
 Behavioral Propensities in physicians’ choices.” Journal of Health Economics, 26(6): 1101-1127.
Fung, Archon, Mary Graham, and David Weil. 2007. Full Disclosure: The Perils and Promise of
 Transparency, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gaynor, Martin. 2006. “What Do We Know About Competition and Quality in Health Care
 Markets?” NBER Working Paper 12301.
Ghali, William, Arlene Ash, Ruth Hall, Mark Moskowitz. 1997. “Statewide Quality
 Improvement Initiatives and Mortality After Cardia Surgery.” The Journal of the American
 Medical Association, 277(5): 379-82.
Gowrisankarin, Gautam, Michael Chernew, and Dennis P. Scanlon. Forthcoming. “Learning and
   the Value of Information: Evidence from Health Plan Report Cards.” Journal of
   Econometrics.
Gowrisankarin, Gautam, Vivian Ho, and Robert J. Town. Forthcoming. “Causality, Learning and
   Forgetting in Surgery.”
Hannan, Edward L, Hardold Kilburn, Michael Racz, Eileen Shields, and Mark R, Chassin. 1994.
   “Improving the Outcomes of Coronary Artery Bypass Surgery in New York State.” Journal
   of the American Medical Association, 271(10): 761-6.
Hannan, Edward L. Chuntao Wu, Thomas J. Ryan, Edward Bennett, Alfred T. Culliford, Jeffrey
   P. Gold, Alan Hartman, O. Wayne Isom, Robert H. Jones, Barbara McNeil, Eric A. Rose,
   Valavanur A. Subramanian. 2003. “Do Hospitals and Surgeons With Higher Coronary Artery
   Bypass Graft Surgery Volumes Still Have Lower Risk-Adjusted Mortality Rates.”
   Circulation, 108(7): 795-801.
Harsanyi, John C. 1955. “Cardinal Welfare, Individualistic Ethics, and Interpersonal
   Comparisons of Utility.” Journal of Political Economy, 98: 1119-58.
Heffetz, Ori and Robert H. Frank. 2008. “Preferences for Status: Evidence and Economic
   Implications.” Handbook of Social Economics, ed Jess Benhabib, Alberto Bisin, Matthew
   Jackson. Johnson School Research Paper Series No. #05-09: Elsevier.
Huckman, Robert S. 2006. “Hospital Integration and Vertical Consolidation: An Analysis of
   Acquisitions in New York State.” Journal of Health Economics, 25(1): 58-80.



                                                                                            35
Huckman, Robert S. and Gary P. Pisano. 2006. “The Firm Specificity of Individual Performance:
   Evidence from Cardiac Surgery.” Management Science, 52(4): 473-488.
Johnson, Erin M. “Ability, Learning and the Career Path of Cardiac Specialists” mimeo, MIT, Sloan
 School of Management.
Kolstad, Jonathan T. and Chernew, Michael. 2009. “Consumer Decision Making in the Market for
 Health Insurance and Health Care Services.” Medical Care Research and Review, 66(1): 28S-52S.
McGuire, Thomas G. 2000. “Physician Agency” In Handbook of Health Economics, ed. Anthony J.
 Culyer and Joseph P. Newhouse. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
McGuire, Thomas G. and Mark V. Pauly. 1991. “Physician Response to Fee Changes with Multiple
 Payers.” Journal of Health Economics, 10(4): 385-410.
Miller, Nolan. 2006. “Report Cards, Incentives and Quality Competition in Health Care.” Mimeo,
 University of Illinois.
Mukamel, Dana B. and Alvin I. Mushlin. 1998. “Quality of Care Information Makes a Difference: An
 Analysis of Market Share and Price Change After Publication of the New York State Cardiac Surgery
 Mortality Reports.” Medical Care, 35(1): 945-54.
Nevo, Aviv. 2001. “A Practitioner’s Guide to Estimation of Random-Coefficients Logit Models
 of Demand.” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 9(4): 513-548.
Newhouse, Joseph P. 1970. “Toward a Theory of Nonprofit Institutions: An Economic Model of
 a Hospital.” American Economic Review, 60(1): 65-71.
Pennsylvania Health Care Cost Containment Council. 1998. Coronary Artery Bypass Graft
 Surgery—1994-95 Data: Research Methods and Results.
Pennsylvania Health Care Cost Containment Council. 2002. Coronary Artery Bypass Graft
 Surgery—2000 Data: Research Methods and Results.
Pennsylvania Health Care Cost Containment Council. 2004. Coronary Artery Bypass Graft
 Surgery—2002 Data: Research Methods and Results.
Pennsylvania Health Care Cost Containment Council. 2005. Coronary Artery Bypass Graft
 Surgery—2003 Data: Research Methods and Results.
Peterson, Eric D., Elizabeth R. DeLong, James G. Jollis, Lawrence H. Muhlbaier, and Daniel B.
 Mark. 1998. “The Effects of New York’s Bypass Surgery Provider Profiling on Access to Care
 and Patient Outcomes in the Elderly.” Journal of American College of Cardiologists, 32(4):
 993-9.



                                                                                              36
Rammanarayanan, Subramaniam. 2008. “Does Practice Make Perfect: An Empirical Analysis of
 Learning-by-Doing in Cardiac Surgery.” UCLA Anderson School of Management.
Salop, Steven and Joseph Stiglitz. 1977. “Bargains and Ripoffs: A Model of Monopolistically
 Competitive Price Dispersion.” Review of Economic Studies, 44(3): 493-510.
Sauermann, H. and Cohen, W.M. (2008) What Makes Them Tick? Employee Motives and Firm
 Innovation.
Segal, Uzi and Joel Sobel. 2006. “Tit for Tat: Foundations of Preferences for Reciprocity in
 Strategic Settings.” Journal of Economic Theory, 136(1): 197-216.
Schneider, Eric C. and Arnold M. Epstein. 1998. “Use of Public Performance Reports: A Survey
 of Patients Undergoing Cardiac Surgery.” Journal of the American Medical Association,
 279(20): 1638-1642.
Sloan, Frank A. 2000. “Not-for-Profit Ownership and Hospital Behavior.” In Handbook of Health
 Economics, ed. Anthony J. Culyer and Joseph P. Newhouse. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Steinbrook, Robert. 2006. “Public Report Cards -- Cardiac Surgery and Beyond.” New England
 Journal of Medicine, 355(18): 1847-1849.
Train, Kenneth E. 2003. Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation. Cambridge University Press.




                                                                                               37
Appendix A1: Risk Adjustment Model


 In this section, I replicate the risk adjustment model used by the Pennsylvania Health Care
 Cost Containment Council (PHC4) to predict inpatient mortality following CABG surgery in
 1994-95. The details of the risk adjustment scheme are covered in PHC4 (1998). To replicate
 the results, I estimate a logistic regression following equation (4). Results are presented in
 Table A1. The first column presents coefficients for the logistic regression. The second column
 presents the marginal effects of each of the observables on the probability of inpatient
 mortality. The third and fourth columns present the same model but also incorporate the
 unused risk adjusters used in the analysis in section IV.B. In addition, I re-estimate the same
 model, used in the 1994-95 report card, using data from the year 2000. This demonstrates the
 relative impact of the same comorbidities in the post-reporting period. The models are not
 exactly comparable as PHC4 switched from using ASG severity scores, coded in discrete
 levels between 0 and 4 in Table A1, to using a continuous severity measure provided by
 Mediqual. Nevertheless, the estimates appear relatively similar. These results are presented in
 Table A2.


Appendix A2: Payer Mix and Reimbursement
       In this section, I test the long run impact of quality improvement on the mix of insurance
coverage a surgeon treats. To do so, I estimate a variant of equation (13). In the new
specification the dependent variable is the probability a sugeon in each group sees a patient with
insurance plan type z.
       Results are presented in Table A3. Each column presents one regression in which
changes in the share of patients seen by each surgeon in 2003 is regressed against improvements
in quality between 1994-95 and 2000, controlling for the payer shares in those earlier periods and
baseline RAMR in 1994-95. The coefficients on most types of coverage are small and
statistically insignificant. The only changes in coverage type that are statistically significant are
for the share being treated with either Medicare HMO or Medicaid. Quality improvements in
earlier periods seem to lead to slightly larger share of Medicare HMO enrollees and a smaller
share of Medicaid patients. These effects are, however, small in magnitude. Taken together these




                                                                                                    38
results do not suggest substantial long run impacts on insurance composition for those surgeons
who improved quality between 1994-95 and 2000.



Appendix A3: Types of Incentives and Identification
The approach taken both in the theoretical and empirical model of intrinsic response to quality
reporting is relatively general. Both focus on identifying and separating the response of surgeons
to new information that is unrelated to changes in patient demand from the change due to
changes in patient demand. Underlying this general question, different components enter into
intrinsic and extrinsic incentives in theory. Those components are identified with different
sources of variation and assumptions. To help clarify each of these components, Table A4
enumerates each of the features that enter into extrinsic (column 1) and intrinsic (column 3)
motivation in the surgeon setting. Columns 2 and 4 then present a summary of the key
identifying assumptions and variation for each of these features.




                                                                                                  39
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics by Year

                                                                         Mean    Mean
             Year     Observations      Surgeons         Hospitals      RAMR*    OMR*
           1994-95       18,351              201            43            3.42   3.23
             2000        19,594              182            55            2.38   2.20
             2002         15,999             187            62            2.02   1.82
             2003         15,157             183            63            2.00   1.85
       *Surgeon weighted average

            Table 2: Transition Matrix for RAMR Quintile Between 1995 and 2000

                                               2000 RAMR Quintile
                                             1    2    3    4     5    Exit
                                        1   0.08 0.11 0.03 0.03 0.13   0.63
                              1995
                                        2   0.08 0.24 0.26 0.16 0.08   0.18
                             RAMR
                                        3   0.16 0.13 0.11 0.29 0.16   0.16
                             Quintile
                                        4   0.16 0.11 0.13 0.08 0.18   0.34
                                        5   0.19 0.05 0.08 0.05 0.16   0.46




                                                                                        40
                                                   Table 3: Demand System Parameter Estimates

                                                                                                              Depend
                                                                                                                   dent Varia
                                                                                                                            able: Log Probabiility Patientt i Selects Surgeon s
                                                                                                Mea
                                                                                                  an                                 S.D.                        Mea
                                                                                                                                                                   an                                S.D.


Mean Surgeon RAMR s,t-1                                                                      -0.001    (0.002)            -0.001      (0.003)              -0.001      (0.002)             0.000       (0.003)
Mean Surgeon RAMR s,t-1*Post RC                                                              -0.008    (0.004)    **      -0.001      (0.008)              -0.008      (0.004)   **       -0.001       (0.008)
Distance (Miles) i,s                                                                         -0.216    (0.006)    ***      0.014      (0.011)              -0.212      (0.006)   ***      -0.007       (0.005)
Distance (Miles) i,s*Post RC                                                                  0.072    (0.010)    ***      0.007      (0.013)               0.073      (0.010)   ***      -0.004       (0.008)
Distance Squared (Miles) i,s                                                                 -0.001    (0.000)    ***      0.005      (0.000) ***          -0.001      (0.000)   ***       0.005       (0.000) ***
Distance Squared (Miles) i,s*Post RC                                                         -0.002    (0.000)    ***      0.000      (0.000) *            -0.002      (0.000)   ***       0.000       (0.000)
EMR i-EMR s,t-1                                                                                                                                             1.084      (0.516)   **        0.092       (0.886)
EMR i-EMR s,t-1*Post RC                                                                                                                                    -3.616      (1.173)   ***       0.208       (2.145)
EMR i-EMR s,t-1 Squared                                                                                                                                   -17.322      (3.483)   ***      -0.308       (4.919)
EMR i-EMR s,t-1 Squared*Post RC                                                                                                                           -17.107      (9.839)   *        -5.032      (14.717)
Low Quality RC Score 1994-95 s                                                               -1.059    (0.121)    ***      1.540      (0.154) ***          -0.499      (0.075)   ***       0.601       (0.188) ***
Low Quality RC Score 1994-95 s*Post RC                                                       -0.165    (0.087)    *        0.238      (0.225)              -0.002      (0.068)            -0.046       (0.238)
High Quality RC Score 1994-95 s                                                               0.283    (0.024)    ***      0.017      (0.112)               0.271      (0.024)   ***      -0.033       (0.095)
High Quality RC Score 1994-95 s*Post RC                                                      -0.130    (0.105)             0.277      (0.511)              -0.097      (0.055)   *        -0.087       (0.377)
Not in Report Card 1994-95 s                                                                  0.137    (0.023)    ***      0.043      (0.091)               0.131      (0.023)   ***       0.022       (0.090)
Not in Report Card 1994-95 s*Post RC                                                          0.079    (0.042)    *        0.064      (0.192)               0.067      (0.049)             0.193       (0.243)

Observations                                                                                                 720,3644                                                       720,364
Log Likelihodd                                                                                              -86606.220                                                     -86570.20
Sample                                                                                              19              002 (Q1--2)
                                                                                                     994-95, 2000, 20                                              19
                                                                                                                                                                    994-95, 2000, 2002 (Q1--2)



*,**, and *** denote statistical signficance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectivvely.
Notes: Distance is computed from the center of patients' zip codes to the hospital ata which the surgeon
                                                                                                  s        performedd surgery. EMR
                                                                                                                                 E      s, t-1 is the mea
                                                                                                                                                        an expected mortality rate (severity) of pattients treated by
surgeon s in the prior quarter. EMR i -EMR s, t-1 is the absolute value of the differe
                                                                                     ence. Post RC C takes a value of 1 if period t is in the post-reporrt card periodd (2000, 2002 (Q1-2)). Low annd High Quality
Scores are dummy variables for surgeons who were flagged as having higher (lowe      er) mortality than expeceted. No ot in reportt cards takes a value e of 1 for surg
                                                                                                                                                                      geons not included in the qua
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ality report card
due either to volume of surgeries or entery or exit from the market.




Table 4: Effect of Report Card Induced Information and Demand on Surgeon Quality

                                                                                                                endent Varriable: Change RAMR
                                                                                                             Depe                        R    s 19
                                                                                                                                                 994-95 to 2000
                                                                                              (1)                              (2
                                                                                                                                2)                               (3
                                                                                                                                                                  3)                               (4
                                                                                                                                                                                                    4)
Intrinsic Incentives
1994-95 Report Card Info (RAMR-OMR) Group
  Much Better than Expected (0-20%)                                                   -1.016        (0.407) **          -0.213       (0.350)              -0.988       (0.345) ***          -0.198       (0.286)
  Slightly Better than Expected (20-40%)                                              -0.332        (0.334)             -0.241       (0.320)              -0.417       (0.374)              -0.305       (0.302)
  Slightly Worse than Expected (60-80%)                                               -0.855        (0.304) ***         -0.709       (0.280) **           -0.854       (0.292) ***          -0.681       (0.288) **
  Much Worse than Expected (80-100%)                                                  -2.460        (0.373) ***         -0.827       (0.385) **           -2.672       (0.391) ***          -0.923       (0.343) ***
Extrinsic Incentives
  Pred Vol No RC-Pred Vol RC                                                          -0.037        (0.028)             -0.015       (0.035)              -0.023       (0.039)              -0.007       (0.030)
  Increased Demand with RC (I[RCDem>0])                                                0.262        (0.190)              0.066       (0.161)               0.279       (0.202)               0.084       (0.183)
  I[RCDem>0]*Pred Vol No RC-Pred Vol RC                                               -0.137        (0.063) **          -0.150       (0.067) **           -0.118       (0.070) *            -0.143       (0.071) **
Controls
  Mean RAMR 1994-95                                                                                                     -0.695       (0.068)    ***                                         -0.699       (0.057)   ***
  Surgeon License Year (PA)                                                            0.287        (0.087) ***          0.292       (0.067)    ***        0.288       (0.090) ***           0.294       (0.073)   ***
  Surgeon License Year (PA) Squared                                                   -0.007        (0.002) ***         -0.006       (0.001)    ***       -0.007       (0.002) ***          -0.006       (0.002)   ***
  Publications                                                                         0.221        (0.067) ***          0.175       (0.074)    ***        0.226       (0.066) ***           0.180       (0.063)   ***

Market Fixed Effects?                                                                         Noo                             N
                                                                                                                              No                                Ye
                                                                                                                                                                 es                               Ye
                                                                                                                                                                                                   es
Observations (surgeon/quarter)                                                               1,57
                                                                                                72                           1,5
                                                                                                                               572                             1,57
                                                                                                                                                                  72                                72
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1,57

R Squared                                                                                 0.17
                                                                                             729                            0.34
                                                                                                                               491                            0.18
                                                                                                                                                                 896                               641
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.36


*,**, and *** denote statistical signficance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                                                                            r           .
Notes: Observations are at the surgeon quarter level. Changes in RAMR are  a computed    d such that negatiive coefficien
                                                                                                                        nt represent lower mortality
                                                                                                                                            m        (imp
                                                                                                                                                        provements in quality). Pred Vo  ol No RC-Pred
Vol RC is positive for surgeons who expect to lose volume due to reporting  g. For surgeo
                                                                                        ons who expect too gain volume  e the difference in volume
                                                                                                                                            v       is mu
                                                                                                                                                        ultiplied by -1 so positive value
                                                                                                                                                                                        es represent
quality improvements. I[RCDem>0] if equal a dummy equal to 1 for surgeo    ons expecting g increased volum
                                                                                                         me with reporrt cards. Block boottstrap standa ard errors clustered at the surggeon,year level
in parentheses.
  Table 5: Effect of Report Card Induced Information and Demand on Changes in Patient
                                         Severity
                                                                                           Dependentt Variable: Change in Share of Patients with Specific Comorb
                                                                                                                                                               bidities/Risk Adjusters 1994-95
                                                                                                                                                                                             5 to 2000
                                                                                            "Used" Rissk Adjusters             "Used" Rissk Adjusters             "Unused" Rissk Adjusters             "Unused" Rissk Adjusters
Intrinsic Incentives
1994-95 Report Card Info (RAMR-OMR) Group
  Much Better than Expected (0-20%)                                                          0.032         (0.025)                0.041         (0.024)      *        0.009        (0.018)                 -0.014           (0.016)
  Slightly Better than Expected (20-40%)                                                     0.049         (0.019)      **        0.050         (0.023)      **      -0.006        (0.019)                 -0.010           (0.013)
  Slightly Worse than Expected (60-80%)                                                      0.036         (0.021)      *         0.040         (0.022)      *        0.033        (0.020)                 0.021            (0.013)
  Much Worse than Expected (80-100%)                                                         0.042         (0.019)      **        0.060         (0.029)      **      -0.037        (0.018)      **         -0.082           (0.024)    ***
Extrinsic Incentives
  Pred Vol No RC-Pred Vol RC                                                                 -0.002        (0.002)               -0.002         (0.002)              -0.002        (0.002)                 -0.002           (0.002)
  I[RCDem>0]                                                                                  0.034        (0.009)      ***       0.031         (0.008)     ***      -0.007        (0.009)                 0.002            (0.009)
  I[RCDem>0]*Pred Vol No RC-Pred Vol RC                                                      -0.006        (0.004)       *       -0.007         (0.004)               0.003        (0.004)                 0.004            (0.004)
Controls
  Mean RAMR 1994-95                                                                                                              -0.007         (0.006)                                                    0.019            (0.007)    **
  Surgeon License Year (PA)                                                                  0.001         (0.007)                0.001         (0.006)               0.018        (0.006)     ***         0.018            (0.004)    ***
  Surgeon License Year (PA) Squared                                                          0.000         (0.000)                0.000         (0.000)               0.000        (0.000)     ***         0.000            (0.000)    ***
  Publications                                                                               0.005         (0.005)                0.004         (0.004)               0.005        (0.004)                 0.007            (0.003)    **

Observations (surgeon/quarter)                                                                        1,,590                              1,5
                                                                                                                                            590                               1,5
                                                                                                                                                                                590                                 1,5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      590

R Squared                                                                                            0.0
                                                                                                       0353                               0.04
                                                                                                                                             475                            0.07
                                                                                                                                                                               760                                 0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      545


*,**, and *** denote statistical signficance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
Notes: Observations are at the surgeon quarter level. Block bootstrap standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the surgeon, year le   evel. Shares are computed on a 0 to 1 scale. Pred Vol No RC-Pred Vol RC  R is positive
for surgeons who expect to lose volume due to reporting. For surgeons who expect to gain volume the   e difference in volume is multiplied byy -1 so positive (negative) values reppresent increases (decreases) in the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e share of
patients with used or unused observables. "Used" risk adjusters are those patient characteristics inclu
                                                                                                      uded in the final risk adjustment in thee report card that were available in both
                                                                                                                                                                                   b    1994-95 and 2000. They include e cardiogenic
shock, complicated hypertension, dialysis, concurrent PTCA and gender. "Unused" observables are pa     atient characteristics that were gatheered in 1994-95 and 2000 but not ussed in the risk adjustment scheme fo  or the report
card. They include cardiomyopathy, diabetes and race.




     Table 6: Effect of Report Card Induced Information and Demand on Surgeon Quality
                Including Learning about Within Hospital Reference Surgeons
                                                                                                                                      Depend
                                                                                                                                           dent Variable: Change
                                                                                                                                                          C      R
                                                                                                                                                                 RAMR s
                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                              1994-95 to 2000
                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                             (1)                                  (
                                                                                                                                                                                  (2)
                                  Intrinsic Incentives
                                  1994-95 Report Card Info (RAMR-OMR) Spline
                                    Much Better than Expected (0-20%)                                                                -0.360        (0.314)             -0.362           (0.278)
                                    Slightly Better than Expected (20-40%)                                                           -0.346        (0.308)             -0.396           (0.286)
                                    Slightly Worse than Expected (60-80%)                                                            -0.632        (0.263)    **       -0.646           (0.250)      **
                                    Much Worse than Expected (80-100%)                                                               -0.961        (0.304)    ***      -1.007           (0.339)      ***
                                    RAMR s-Best RAMR h                                                                               -0.313        (0.136)    **       -0.310           (0.129)      **
                                    RAMRs-Worst RAMR h                                                                               -0.041        (0.008)    ***      -0.038           (0.008)      ***

                                  Extrinsic Incentives
                                    Pred Vol No RC-Pred Vol RC                                                                       -0.040        (0.043)             -0.039           (0.037)
                                    Increased Demand with RC (I[RCDem>0])                                                             0.233        (0.191)              0.221           (0.172)
                                    I[RCDem>0]*Pred Vol No RC-Pred Vol RC                                                            -0.004        (0.067)             -0.013           (0.057)
                                  Controls
                                    Mean RAMR 1994-95                                                                                -0.406        (0.152)    ***      -0.417           (0.134)      ***
                                    Surgeon License Year (PA)                                                                         0.249        (0.075)    ***       0.259           (0.076)      ***
                                    Surgeon License Year (PA) Squared                                                                -0.005        (0.002)    ***      -0.005           (0.002)      ***
                                    Publications                                                                                      0.145        (0.062)    **        0.148           (0.056)      ***
                                    Publications Squared                                                                             -0.007        (0.002)    ***      -0.007           (0.002)      ***

                                  Market Fixed Effects?                                                                                     Noo                                  Y
                                                                                                                                                                                 Yes
                                  Observations (surgeon/quarter)                                                                              72
                                                                                                                                           1,57                                 1,,572

                                  R Squared                                                                                                0.38
                                                                                                                                              830                              0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                 3873


                                  *,**, and *** denote statistical signficance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                                  Notes: Observations are at the surgeon quarter level. Block bootstrap standard errors (in parentheses)
                                                                                                                             p              are clustered
                                                                                                                                                c         a the
                                                                                                                                                          at
                                  surgeon,year level. Changes in RAMR are computed such that negative coefficient repres     sent lower mortality
                                                                                                                                                y (improveements in
                                  quality). Pred Vol No RC-Pred Vol RC is positive for surgeons who expect to lose volume due to reporting. For F surgeo  ons who
                                  expect to gain volume the difference in volume is multiplied by -1 so positive values repres
                                                                                                                             sent quality improvvements. I[[RCDem>0]
                                  if equal a dummy equal to 1 for surgeons expecting increased volume with report cards. RAMRs-Worst
                                                                                                                            R               RAMMRh multip plied by -1
                                  so positive values represent quality improvement.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      42
Table A4: Components of Extrinsic and Intrinsic Incentives and Identification
           Extrinsic           Identification             Intrinsic             Identification
                                                                       Difference between prior
                       Change in volume with and                       beliefs (OMR) and
                       without quality reporting                       information on average
                                                      Performance
              Profit   given market structure.                         peers' performance had they
                                                    relative to peers
                       Assume CABG is profitable on                    treated the same patients
                       average and at the margin.                      (RAMR). Assume surgeons do
                                                                       not know RAMR perfectly.
                       Relationship between RAMR                       Release of report cards with
                       change from 1994-95 to                          information. Assume
                       2000 and 1994 to 1995 and    Ability to observe performance of peers, given
            Long run
                       change in volume and payor     performance      the set of patients they treat,
              profit
                       mix in 2003. Condition on    relative to peers is imperfectly observed.
                       short run changes due to the                    Specification check controls
                       release of report cards.                        for local peer performance.
                       Compare surgeons expecting
         Risk aversion to gain volume to those
                       expecting to lose volume.
                       Assume rational expectations
         Beliefs about
                       among surgeons. Assume no
            long run
                       long run risk or ambiguity
           incentives
                       aversion.




                                                                                                         45
Table A1: Risk Adjustment Model Used in the 1994-95 Report Card with and without
             “Unused Observables” Using Year 1994-95 Observations

                                                                   Dependent Variable: Inpatient Mortality

                                                         (1)               (2)             (3)             (4)
                                                       Logit         Marginal Effect     Logit       Marginal Effect
       ASG Score 1 (d)                                 0.656             0.011           0.644           0.011
                                                       (1.02)            (0.02)          (1.02)          (0.02)
       ASG Score 2 (d)                                 1.323             0.029           1.300           0.028
                                                       (1.02)            (0.03)          (1.02)          (0.03)
                                                              **                                *
       ASG Score 3 (d)                                2.015              0.088           1.989           0.086
                                                       (1.02)            (0.09)          (1.02)          (0.09)
                                                             ***                *              ***
       ASG Score 4 (d)                                3.767              0.417          3.739            0.409
                                                       (1.03)            (0.25)          (1.03)          (0.25)
                                                               *                 *              *                *
       Age                                            -0.061            -0.001          -0.062          -0.001
                                                       (0.04)            (0.00)          (0.04)          (0.00)
                                                              **               **              ***              **
       Age Squared                                    0.066             0.001           0.068           0.001
                                                       (0.03)            (0.00)          (0.03)          (0.00)
                                                             ***               ***             ***             ***
       Cardiogenic Shock (d)                          1.758             0.076           1.754           0.076
                                                       (0.14)            (0.01)          (0.14)          (0.01)
                                                             ***               ***             ***             ***
       Concurrent PTCA (d)                            0.436             0.009           0.450           0.010
                                                       (0.13)            (0.00)          (0.13)          (0.00)
                                                             ***               ***             ***             ***
       Compicated Hypertension (d)                    0.533             0.012           0.507           0.011
                                                       (0.14)            (0.00)          (0.14)          (0.00)
                                                             ***               ***             ***             ***
       Dialysis (d)                                   1.814             0.081           1.799           0.079
                                                       (0.14)            (0.01)          (0.14)          (0.01)
                                                             ***               ***             ***             ***
       Female (d)                                     0.448             0.009           0.436           0.008
                                                       (0.06)            (0.00)          (0.06)          (0.00)
                                                             ***               ***             ***             ***
       Heart Failure (d)                              0.797             0.018           0.778           0.018
                                                       (0.07)            (0.00)          (0.07)          (0.00)
                                                             ***               ***             ***             ***
       Prior CABG or Valve Surgery (d)                1.294             0.041           1.299           0.041
                                                       (0.08)            (0.00)          (0.08)          (0.00)
       Non-White (d)                                                                     0.066           0.001
                                                                                         (0.11)          (0.00)
       Diabetes without Complications (d)                                                0.068           0.001
                                                                                         (0.07)          (0.00)
       Diabetes with Complications (d)                                                   0.124           0.002
                                                                                         (0.13)          (0.00)
                                                                                                *
       Cardiomyopathy (d)                                                                0.316           0.006
                                                                                         (0.18)          (0.00)
       n                                               38656              38656          38656           38656
       *              **              ***
           p < .10,        p < .05,         p < .01

       Notes: Includes all observations from 1994-95. Logit models present coefficients estimates from a logistic
       regressions with inpatient mortality as the outcome variable. Even numbered columns present marginal
       impact of each risk adjuster on the probability of inpatient mortality. ASG risk scores are supplied by PHC4
       directly. (d) for discrete change of dummy variable from 0 to 1




                                                                                                                       46
     Table A2: Risk Adjustment Model Used in the 1994-95 Report Card with and without
                    “Unused Observables” Using Year 2000 Observations

                                                                                                                                   Dependent Variable: Inpatient Mortality

                                                                                                                (1)                          (2)                                   (3)                      (4)
                                                                                                              Logit                    Marginal Effect                            Logit               Marginal Effect
                                                                                                                    ***                          ***                                   ***                      ***
                           MediQual CABG Severity                                                            6.993                        0.152                                 6.875                    0.148
                                                                                                              (0.53)                       (0.01)                                (0.53)                   (0.01)
                           Age                                                                                0.011                        0.000                                  0.021                   0.000
                                                                                                              (0.04)                       (0.00)                                (0.04)                   (0.00)
                           Age Squared                                                                        0.000                        0.000                                  0.000                   0.000
                                                                                                              (0.00)                       (0.00)                                (0.00)                   (0.00)
                                                                                                                    ***                          ***                                   ***                      ***
                           Cardiogenic Shock (d)                                                             2.006                        0.121                                 1.991                    0.118
                                                                                                              (0.20)                       (0.02)                                (0.20)                   (0.02)
                           Concurrent PTCA (d)                                                                0.264                        0.007                                  0.281                   0.007
                                                                                                              (0.32)                       (0.01)                                (0.32)                   (0.01)
                                                                                                                    **                            *                                     **                       *
                           Compicated Hypertension (d)                                                       0.333                         0.008                                 0.314                    0.008
                                                                                                              (0.15)                       (0.00)                                (0.16)                   (0.00)
                                                                                                                    ***                          ***                                   ***                      ***
                           Dialysis (d)                                                                      1.621                        0.080                                 1.610                    0.078
                                                                                                              (0.18)                       (0.02)                                (0.18)                   (0.02)
                                                                                                                    ***                          ***                                   ***                      ***
                           Female (d)                                                                        0.223                        0.005                                 0.245                    0.006
                                                                                                              (0.08)                       (0.00)                                (0.08)                   (0.00)
                                                                                                                    ***                          ***                                   ***                      ***
                           failureh (d)                                                                      0.807                        0.022                                 0.805                    0.022
                                                                                                              (0.08)                       (0.00)                                (0.08)                   (0.00)
                                                                                                                    **                            *                                     **                       **
                           Prior CABG or Valve Surgery (d)                                                   0.296                         0.007                                 0.304                   0.007
                                                                                                              (0.14)                       (0.00)                                (0.14)                   (0.00)
                                                                                                                                                                                        *                        *
                           Non-White (d)                                                                                                                                         0.175                    0.004
                                                                                                                                                                                 (0.10)                   (0.00)
                                                                                                                                                                                        ***                      ***
                           Diabetes without Complications (d)                                                                                                                   -0.325                  -0.007
                                                                                                                                                                                 (0.10)                   (0.00)
                           Diabetes with Complications (d)                                                                                                                       -0.031                   -0.001
                                                                                                                                                                                 (0.15)                   (0.00)
                           Cardiomyopathy (d)                                                                                                                                     0.225                   0.005
                                                                                                                                                                                 (0.20)                   (0.01)
                           n                                                                                  22856                              22856                           22856                    22856
                           *                  **                  ***
                               p < .10,            p < .05,             p < .01

                           Notes: Includes all observations from 2000. Logit models present coefficients estimates from a logistic
                           regressions with inpatient mortality as the outcome variable. Even numbered columns present marginal
                           impact of each risk adjuster on the probability of inpatient mortality. Risk adjustment model based on the
                           model used by PHC4 in 1994-95 but includes a continuous measure of severity, “MediQual CABG Severity”
                           score, instead of the ASG score. The severity score replaced the discrete ASG scores in data provided by
                           PHC4. (d) for discrete change of dummy variable from 0 to 1




                          Table A3: Effect of Changes in Quality on Long Run (2003) Payor Mix
                                                                                                                                        Dependent Variable: Sha
                                                                                                                                                              are of Patients with Payor Type 2003
                                                                                                  Privatte FFS            Private Ma
                                                                                                                                   anaged Care                Medicaare FFS            Medicare
                                                                                                                                                                                              e HMO              Medicaaid               Uninssured
Change RAMR 1994-95 to 2000                                                                    -0.001 (0.001)               0.002      (0.001)              -0.002    (0.002)          0.003    (0.001) **    -0.001     (0.001) *     0.000 (0.000)
Share Payor Type 1994-95                                                                        0.202 (0.131)              -0.133      (0.162)              0.267     (0.195)          0.244    (0.186)       0.478      (0.220) **   -0.003 (0.038)
Share Payor Type 2000                                                                           0.254 (0.124) **            0.334      (0.244)              0.109     (0.235)          1.211    (0.379) ***   0.143      (0.245)       0.009 (0.204)
Mean RAMR 1994-95                                                                               0.000 (0.001)               0.000      (0.002)              -0.004    (0.003)          0.000    (0.002)       0.002      (0.001) **    0.000 (0.000)
Observations (surgeon/quarter)                                                                       1,2
                                                                                                       242                        1,,242                          1,242                    1,24
                                                                                                                                                                                              42                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1,242                   1,2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             242

R Squared                                                                                            0.1
                                                                                                       102                          0..022                         0.060                      0.17
                                                                                                                                                                                                 73                   4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.064                   0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            003


*,**, and *** denote statistical signficance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
Notes: Observations are at the surgeon quarter level. Bootstrap standard errors (in parentheses) are clusstered at the surgeon level. Sh
                                                                                                                                       hares are computed on a 0 to 1
scale. Each column is the change in share for the payor type listed in the header in 2003.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  47
Figure 1: Profit Maximizing Quality Choice



          $




                                                 MC




                                                      MR1
                                                      MR0




                                       *  **              




                                                                48
Figure 2: Intrinsic Utility and Quality Choice

       $


                                     1 (i   1 )




                         (i   0 )                           2 ( i   1 )




            j                                                        
                                                               j


       $




                                                          MC
                 MB1=MR1+ 1 '
                                                  B             MB1=MR1+ 2 '

                                                               MR1
                                                      C
                                           A                   MR0




                                     *  ** '    ''                




                                                                                    49
                                                        Figure 3: Mean Quarterly Performance

                                  4.5

                                   4
Patient Weighted Mean RAMR /OMR




                                  3.5

                                   3

                                  2.5

                                   2

                                  1.5

                                   1

                                  0.5

                                   0
                                        0   1   2   3   4   5    6    7       24 25 26 27        32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39
                                                                                   Quarter


                                                            Risk Adjusted Mortality Rate     Observed Mortality Rate




                                                                                                                       50
  Figure 4: Frequency of New Information Provided by the 1994-95 Report Card



                  40
                  30
    Frequency
       20         10
                  0




                                 -5                 0                    5
                                                 RAMR-OMR



Figure 5: Local Polynomial Smoothed Estimates for the Relationship Between New
                 Information and Changes in Volume and Quality
                 1.5
   Percent Change 1995 to 2000
      0        .5-.5      1




                                      -4   -2          0             2   4
                                                 RAMR-OMR

                                                RAMR        Volume




                                                                                 51
Figure 6: Frequency of Quarterly Differences Between Surgeons’ Pre- and Post-Report
                              Card Predicted Demand


                600
                400
    Frequency
                200
                0




                      -10                      0                     10                   20
                            Difference in Predicted Volume w/ and w/o Quality Reporting




                                                                                               52
