NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MARKET-BASED EMISSIONS REGULATION WHEN DAMAGES VARY ACROSS SOURCES:
WHAT ARE THE GAINS FROM DIFFERENTIATION?
Meredith Fowlie
Nicholas Muller
Working Paper 18801
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18801

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013

Fowlie thanks the Energy Instute at Haas for support under a research contract from the California
Energy Commission. Muller thanks the United States Environmental Protection Agency for support
under award: EPA-OPEI-NCEE-08-02. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Meredith Fowlie and Nicholas Muller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Market-based Emissions Regulation When Damages Vary Across Sources: What Are the
Gains from Differentiation?
Meredith Fowlie and Nicholas Muller
NBER Working Paper No. 18801
February 2013
JEL No. Q58
ABSTRACT
Much of the air pollution currently regulated under U.S. emissions trading programs is non-uniformly
mixed, meaning that health and environmental damages depend on the location and dispersion characteristics
of the sources. Existing policy regimes ignore this fact. Emissions are penalized at a single permit
price, regardless of the location of the source. In theory, differentiated policies can be designed to
accommodate non-uniformly mixed pollution using emissions penalties that vary with emissions damages.
Under perfect certainty, damage-based policy differentiation is unambiguously welfare improving.
In the presence of uncertainty about damages and abatement costs, differentiated policies need not
welfare dominate simpler, undifferentiated designs. Using rich data from a major U.S. emissions trading
program, we estimate the welfare impacts of policy differentiation. Surprisingly, we find that differentiated
emissions trading results in welfare loss as compared to the undifferentiated trading regime that was
implemented. This result manifests because ex post realized abatement costs appear to have exceeded
expectations. We further show that, in this context, a differentiated price-based policy welfare dominates
the differentiated quantity-based alternative.

Meredith Fowlie
Department of Agricultural & Resource Economics
University of California, Berkeley
301 Giannini Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-3310
and NBER
fowlie@berkeley.edu
Nicholas Muller
Department of Economics
Warner Hall, 305D
Middlebury College
303 College Street
Middlebury, VT 05753
and NBER
nicholas.muller74@gmail.com

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18801

1

Introduction

Economists have long advocated for market-based approaches to pollution regulation (Montgomery, 1972; Baumol and Oates, 1988). The past three decades have witnessed large scale
experimentation with market-based policy designs. By many measures, this experimentation has
been very successful. Targeted emissions reductions have been achieved or exceeded, and it is
estimated that total abatement costs have been signi…cantly less than what they would have been
in the absence of the trading provisions (Fowlie et al., 2012; Keohane, 2007; Stavins, 2005).
In terms of economic e¢ ciency, however, many existing policies fall short of the theoretical
ideal. E¢ ciency requires that the marginal cost of pollution reduction be set equal to the marginal
damage caused by emissions. If pollution is "non-uniformly mixed" (i.e. health and environmental
damages from pollution depend on the location of the source), e¢ ciency requires that the marginal
costs of pollution abatement should vary across sources according to the degree of damage caused
(Montgomery, 1972; Tietenberg, 2006). To achieve this, policy incentives should re‡ect di¤erences
in marginal damages across sources. However, the majority of existing and planned marketbased emissions regulations are implemented as spatially uniform, "undi¤erentiated" policies; all
regulated emissions are penalized at the same tax rate or permit price.
Some of the most pernicious air quality problems in the United States involve non-uniformly
mixed pollutants. Examples include nitrogen oxides (NOx) and sulfur dioxide (SO2 ), which are
two criteria pollutants currently subject to undi¤erentiated market-based regulation. In 2008, the
Federal Court of Appeals ruled that this regulatory approach fails to adequately accommodate
spatial transport of pollution and the associated variation in damages across sources.1 Since
that time, debates surrounding market-based regulation of non-uniformly mixed pollutants have
escalated. Our aim in this paper is to investigate the welfare implications of regulating nonuniformly mixed pollutants using undi¤erentiated - versus di¤erentiated- policy instruments.
In theory, market-based policies can be designed to accommodate non-uniformly mixed pollution. Baumol and Oates (1988) use a general equilibrium model to depict optimal pollution
taxes in a setting with heterogeneous costs and damages. The optimal tax rate is calibrated to the
marginal damage caused by emissions. When damages vary by source, so do the tax rates. Others
have proposed so-called "di¤erentiated" emissions permit market designs wherein di¤erences in
marginal damages are re‡ected in di¤erent compliance requirements and incentives (Mendelsohn,
1986; Tietenberg, 1995; Muller and Mendelsohn, 2009).
A simple theoretical model provides a foundation for our analysis. We begin by considering
the canonical case in which a regulator equipped with perfect information seeks to minimize
1

On July 11, 2008, in North Carolina v. EPA, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit vacated the
Clean Air Interstate Rule (CAIR) which was to intended to provide a cost-e¤ective, market-oriented approach
to regulating a non-uniformly mixed pollutant (subject to compliance feasibility). State of North Carolina v.
Environmental Protection Agency, No. 05-1244, slip op. (2008), District of Columbia Court of Appeals.

2

pollution damages plus abatement costs. In this setting, moving from an undi¤erentiated to a
di¤erentiated policy design will be unambiguously welfare enhancing so long as policy parameters
are set optimally and damages di¤er across sources. As in Mendelsohn (1986), we show that the
gains from policy di¤erentiation will depend on both the extent of the variation in damages across
sources and the slopes of the marginal abatement cost functions.
Although the perfect information case provides a useful jumping-o¤ point, it ignores an important feature of real-world policy settings. Information imperfections have played a signi…cant
role in constraining the design and implementation of market-based emissions policies, and nonuniformly mixed pollution regulation in particular. We thus extend the baseline model to more
accurately capture the information constraints that complicate policy implementation in practice.
We consider both uncertainty regarding source-speci…c damages and imperfect information about
abatement costs.
Building on this theoretical foundation, we examine the welfare implications of policy di¤erentiation in the context of a landmark emissions trading program. The NOx Budget Program
(NBP) imposed a binding cap on nitrogen oxide emissions from large point sources in the Eastern
United States. In the design stages, policy makers considered imposing damage-based restrictions
on interregional trading.2 Ex ante policy simulations projected only nominal gains from policy differentiation (Krupnick et al. 2000, US EPA, 1998). Consequently, the program was implemented
as a single jurisdiction, spatially uniform trading program.
This paper revisits the decision to forego spatially di¤erentiated NOx trading in favor of
the simpler undi¤erentiated alternative. We begin by assessing the bene…ts and ex post realized
costs incurred under the NOx Budget Program as implemented. We then examine how these
welfare impacts would have manifested di¤erently under damage-di¤erentiated policy regimes.
This retrospective look at both factual and counterfactual policy regimes is motivated by the
following three observations:
First, integrated assessment models now provide much richer estimates of the variation in damages from pollution. Recent advances in data collection and computer-analytics have improved
modeling of pollution formation, fate, and transport. Advances in epidemiology and related …elds
have improved our understanding of exposure pathways and dose-response relationships. In principle, these advances allow for more informed and data-driven policy design and implementation
(Esty, 2004). We use a state-of-the-art stochastic integrated assessment model, AP2, to estimate
marginal damages for each facility in the NBP.3 In contrast to the pollution damage estimates that
informed the design of the NOx Budget Program, we document signi…cantly more spatial variation in damages across regulated sources. All else equal, this suggests larger gains from policy
di¤erentiation.
2
3

See the Federal Register 63(90), Monday, May 11, 1998, page 25902.
AP2 is the stochastic version of the APEEP model (Muller, Mendelsohn, 2009).

3

Second, policy analysts have duly noted that standard approaches to ex ante modeling may fail
to capture key features of the real world decision processes that drive emissions abatement decisions
(Krupnick et al. 2000). Deterministic, compliance cost-minimization algorithms, together with
engineering estimates of the capital and operating costs, are typically used to inform policy design
and implementation. If …rms’ environmental compliance choices deviate signi…cantly from the
predictions of these models, anticipated policy outcomes may not materialize. With the bene…t of
hindsight, we estimate an econometric model of …rms’compliance choices. This model is used to
simulate …rms’response to counterfactual policy incentives and to approximate ex post realized
abatement costs. Importantly, we …nd substantive di¤erences between ex post observed compliance
choices and those predicted by engineering cost minimization.
The third observation pertains to the policy relevance of the issues we address. In the years
since the NOx Budget Program was implemented, debates about how to regulate non-uniformly
mixed pollution have escalated. In court proceedings, the need for more sophisticated analysis
has been identi…ed.4 Recent improvements in data quality and analysis pave the way for a more
sophisticated regulatory response to non-uniformly mixed pollution problems. We bring state-ofthe-art integrated assessment modeling of emissions damages, together with econometric modeling
of …rms’responses to market-based emissions regulation incentives, to this analysis of di¤erentiated
policy alternatives.
Our paper contributes to an important empirical literature examining the bene…ts and costs
incurred under market-based emissions regulation. Papers in this literature generally fall into one
of two categories: ex ante analysis of likely outcomes under proposed regulations (e.g. Fullerton,
1997; Krupnick et al., 2000 ); and ex post evaluation of realized outcomes (e.g. Deschenes et
al., 2012; Joskow et al., 1998; Fowlie, 2010). Policy makers have stressed the importance of
identifying di¤erences between the assumptions underlying ex ante analysis and ex post realized
outcomes in order to inform and improve future ex ante cost analysis (US EPA, 2012). This
importance notwithstanding, very little work has been done to systematically compare ex ante
modeling and ex post analysis.5 We document discrepancies between observed compliance choices
and standard assumptions of ex ante analysis. Although these discrepancies imply higher-thanexpected abatement costs, we still …nd that the bene…ts from the program exceed costs by an
estimated $264 M per year.6
Having demonstrated the positive welfare gains conferred by undi¤erentiated emissions trad4

See State of North Carolina v. Environmental Protection Agency, No. 05-1244, slip op. (2008), District of
Columbia Court of Appeals.
5
Carlson et al. (2000) is an important exception.
6
Our measure of avoided damages accounts for adverse e¤ects on human health, reduced yields of agricultural
crops and timber, reductions in visibility, enhanced depreciation of man-made materials, and damages due to lost
recreation services. Notably, we do not account for reductions in pharmaceutical purchases and other defensive
expenditures. Deschenes et al. (2012) …nd that improvements in air quality achieved under the NBP reduced drug
expenditures by approximately $900 million annually. Our estimated annual bene…ts are therefore conservative.

4

ing, we then ask whether these gains would have been larger under di¤erentiated trading. Adopting
standard assumptions with respect to valuation parameters and cost minimization modeling, we
…nd that damage-di¤erentiated emissions trading between sources would likely have reduced welfare vis a vis undi¤erentiated trading. This surprising result stands in stark contrast to recent
work which suggests signi…cant welfare gains from policy di¤erentiation in the context of the Acid
Rain Program (Muller and Mendelsohn, 2009). Unlike previous studies, we use an econometrically estimated model of …rms’compliance decision to simulate …rm-level responses to observed
and counterfactual policy incentives.7 When ex post realized abatement costs are larger than
expected, the costs of policy di¤erentiation can exceed the bene…ts.
Finally, our work contributes to the classic literature that investigates the relative e¢ ciency of
price and quantity-based policies under uncertainty. Echoing Weitzman (1974), we …nd that price
and quantity-based regimes are associated with distinctly di¤erent outcomes when abatement
costs are uncertain and policy parameters must be …xed before uncertainty is resolved. In the
particular case we analyze, policy di¤erentiation increases welfare in the price-based regime, but
reduces welfare in the quantity-based regime. Also consistent with the earlier literature (e.g.
Baumol and Oates, 1988; Fishelson, 1976) we …nd that the expected social loss (vis a vis the
ex post optimum) is the same under di¤erentiated price and quantity-based policy regimes when
uncertainty is limited to randomness in the parameters of the marginal bene…t function.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces a simple model
useful for analyzing the welfare implications of damage-based policy di¤erentiation. Section 3
provides an overview of the NOx Budget Trading Program. Section 4 describes how we construct
our estimates of the potential gains from policy di¤erentiation in the NBP. Section 5 summarizes
our results. Concluding remarks are o¤ered in Section 6.

2

Theoretical framework

The theoretical framework developed in this section serves three purposes. First, the model is
used to derive the di¤erentiated and undi¤erentiated policy designs that are the focus of the
more detailed, applied analysis to follow. Second, we derive an intuitive expression for the gains
from policy di¤erentiation which will aid in the interpretation of the policy simulation results.
Finally, the modeling framework is used to explore the implications of uncertainty regarding both
abatement costs and damages.
We suppose that a …rm’s abatement cost function is a quadratic function of the level of abatement. In most cases, including the policy setting that is of primary interest here, a quadratic func7

There are some additional distinguishing characteristics of our paper vis a vis prior work looking at the acid rain
program. We employ stochastic (versus deterministic) marginal damage estimates which allows us to characterize
uncertainty surrounding our estimates. Also, nitrogen oxide behaves di¤erently than sulfur dioxide once emitted.
This has implications for the degree to which damages vary across sources.

5

tional form provides a reasonable approximation to the true form.8 We transform this quadratic
2
abatement function so that costs are expressed as a function of emissions: Ci (ei ) = 0i
1i ei + i ei
00
(see Appendix 1). We assume that Ci0 (ei ) 0 Ci (ei ): We further assume that the regulator has
estimates of the marginal cost function parameters { 0 ; 1 ; } for each source.9
We capitalize on a series of empirical simulations (discussed in Appendix 3) to impose structure on the function that maps emissions to aggregate damages D(e1 ; :::; eN ). These damages
depend not only on the aggregate level of emissions, but also on how the emissions are distributed
across sources.10 We assume that the damage function is linear in source-speci…c emissions and
additively separable.
We de…ne source-speci…c pollution damage functions in terms of emissions: Di (ei ): For each
source, we de…ne a marginal damage parameter Di0 (ei )
i . The product of the marginal damage i times the corresponding unit-level emissions ei yields damages caused by emissions at unit
X
i. Summing across these yields the total damages: D(e) =
i ei : We suppose that the poli

icy maker’s objective is to minimize the total social cost T SC associated with emissions of this
pollutant:
N
X
T SC =
(Di (ei ) + Ci (ei ))
(1)
i=1

The …rst component in equation (1) measures damages from pollution. The second term
measures the costs of reducing emissions levels below unconstrained "business as usual" levels. To
minimize total social cost, one di¤erentiates equation (1) with respect to source-level emissions.
As is well-known, assuming an interior solution, …rst-order conditions for total cost-minimization
imply:
Ci0 (ei ) = i 8 i:
(2)
Intuitively, marginal costs are set to equal marginal damages across all sources. The ( ) superscript
denotes e¢ cient emissions levels. Solving for ei conditional on the functional form assumptions
outlined above yields an expression for the optimal level of emissions at source i:
ei =

i

1i

2

8

:

(3)

i

In the context of the NOx Budget Program, source-speci…c marginal abatement cost functions are more accurately summarized as step functions. For ease of exposition, we assume a quadratic functional form in the theory
model. But we release this assumption in the policy simulations.
9
This assumption regarding the regulator’s information endowments re‡ects how the US EPA (for example) has
set aggregate quantity limits using …rm-speci…c cost estimates in the course of their regulatory decision-making
processes.
10
In this analysis, we will focus exclusively on the spatial heterogeneity in damages. See Joskow, Martin and
Ellerman (2007) for an analysis of the implications of temporal variation in damages.

6

Having characterized the …rst-best emissions outcome, we can evaluate the performance of alternative market-based policy designs against this benchmark.

2.1

Market-based regulation of non-uniformly mixed pollution under
perfect certainty

We are interested in evaluating the performance of both quantity-based and price-based policy
instruments. In the United States, emissions trading programs that place a limit on the quantity
of permitted emissions are used to regulate non-uniformly mixed point source pollution at both
the federal and regional level.11 In Europe, emissions taxes are more commonplace.12
Price and quantity-based policy instruments can be implemented as "di¤erentiated" or "undi¤erentiated" programs. Undi¤erentiated policies e¤ectively treat emissions as if they cause the
same degree of environmental damage on a per-ton basis. In contrast, under a di¤erentiated policy
regime, the cost of o¤setting a unit of pollution varies according to the degree of damage caused.
We develop a simple two-…rm model to motivate the four policy designs that are the focus
of this paper. The two …rms di¤er in terms of the emissions damages they cause. Emissions
at …rm (H) cause relatively high damages; emissions at …rm (L) cause relatively low damages.
As a jumping o¤ point, we begin by assuming that policy makers know the source speci…c marginal damage parameters and marginal cost parameters for both …rms with certainty. Given this
complete information, we derive welfare maximizing policy parameters.
2.1.1

The di¤erentiated tax

To derive the di¤erentiated tax structure that minimizes total social costs as de…ned by (1), we
begin by assuming that both the low and high damage …rms seek to minimize the sum of their
abatement costs and tax payments. Using the low damage …rm as an example, the …rm’s cost
minimization problem is:
min : T CL =
ei

0L

1L eL

+

2
L eL

+

L eL ;

(4)

where T C denotes the total cost of complying with the program (i.e. abatement costs plus tax
liabilities) and L denotes the tax for the low-damage …rm. First order conditions for a minimum
imply that the …rm sets marginal abatement cost equal to the tax rate it faces (see Appendix 1.2).
L
L
The corresponding cost-minimizing emissions level is: eD
L = 2 L : For the high damage …rm, the
H
H
cost-minimizing emission level is eD
:
H = 2
H

11

Examples include the Federal Acid Rain Program, the NOx Budget Program, and the Regional Clean Air
Incentives Market in Southern California.
12
Examples include France’s tax on NOx and volatile organic compounds, and Sweden’s tax on NOx (Millock,
Nauges, and Sterner, 2004).

7

D
The welfare maximizing tax rates can be found by evaluating T SC at feD
L ; eH g and then di¤erentiating T SC sequentially with respect to ( L ; H ) : This yields the well-known result that the
source-speci…c tax rates should be set equal to the corresponding source-speci…c marginal damages
(see Appendix section 1.2).

2.1.2

The undi¤erentiated tax

In real-world policy contexts, it may not be possible to levy a tax that varies across sources according to the marginal external cost. Consequently, undi¤erentiated taxes are far more common.
We consider the case in which the regulator is constrained to tax all …rms at the same rate.
We maintain the assumption that …rms seek to minimize the sum of their abatement costs
and tax payments. Compliance cost minimizing …rms set their marginal abatement costs equal to
the uniform tax rate. The corresponding cost-minimizing emissions levels eUL and eUH are derived
in Appendix 1.3. We evaluate the social welfare function T SC at feUL ; eUH g and then di¤erentiate
T SC with respect to : Setting @T@SC equal to zero and solving for yields an expression for the
social cost minimizing uniform tax = ( H L ++ H L ) : This is analagous to the well-known weighted
H
L
average formula of Diamond (1973) de…ning the optimal uniform tax rate on activities that generate non-uniform external costs. In our case, the optimal undi¤erentiated tax is a weighted average
marginal damage. Damages associated with less steeply sloped marginal abatement cost curves
are weighted more heavily.
It is straightforward to show that, conditional on our maintained functional form assumptions,
aggregate emissions are the same under both the …rst-best di¤erentiated and second-best undifferentiated tax policies: E = ( L H + H2 L L H H L ) : Appendix 1.3 demonstrates this emissions
L H
equivalence result.
2.1.3

Undi¤erentiated emissions trading

In the emissions trading programs we consider, a …xed quantity of tradeable emissions permits
is allocated to participating sources either by auction or a gratis using some allocation rule that
does not depend on production decisions going forward. Any free allocation of permits to …rm i is
represented by the initial allocation Ai ; i = fL; Hg. Let {Asij ; Abij } represent permits sold by …rm
i to …rm j and bought from …rm i by …rm j at permit price . In the context of an undi¤erentiated
permit system …rm L faces the following problem:
minej T CL =

0L

s:t eL

1L eL

+

AL

2
L eL

+ (AbLH

AsLH )

(5)

AsLH + AbLH

Intuitively, a cost-minimizing …rm will equate emissions abatement costs on the margin with the

8

prevailing permit price

(see Appendix 1.4):
1L

+2

L eL

= :

Having characterized the …rms’ response, we consider the regulators’ constrained optimization
problem. Conditional on implementing an undi¤erentiated emissions trading program, the regulator chooses the emissions cap that minimizes total social costs as de…ned in (1). In Appendix
1.4, we demonstrate that welfare maximizing emissions cap is precisely equal to the aggregate
emissions observed under the undi¤erentiated (and di¤erentiated) tax regimes.
2.1.4

Di¤erentiated emissions trading

We now consider how the undi¤erentiated emissions trading program design can be modi…ed so as
to achieve the socially optimal allocation of emissions de…ned by (3): There is a growing literature
that examines damage-di¤erentiated, quantity-based policies (Teitenberg, 1995; Farrow et al.,
2004; Horan and Shortle, 2005; Muller and Mendelsohn, 2009). To date, work in this area has
focused primarily on using the ratio of marginal damages between each pair of regulated sources
to de…ne the terms of compliance.13 It is straightforward to operationalize this form of policy
di¤erentiation within our simple analytical framework.
Let represent the average of the marginal damage across all sources in a trading program.
In our simple two …rm case, = L +2 H : We construct …rm-speci…c ratios ri , normalizing each …rm’s
marginal damage by the mean damage parameter. For example, the ratio for the low-damage …rm
is rL = L . To remain in compliance, this …rm must hold rL permits to o¤set each unit of
uncontrolled emissions. Under this form of policy di¤erentiation, the …rm’s compliance constraint
is slightly modi…ed with respect to (5). The compliance cost minimization problem becomes:
min T CL =
ej

0L

s:t: rL eL

1L eL

+

AL

2
L eL

+ (AbLH

AsLH )

(6)

AsLH + AbLH

In Appendix 1.5, we show that a compliance cost minimizing …rm will reduce emissions until the
cost of abatement on the margin equals the prevailing permit price weighted by the …rm-speci…c
1L +2 L eL
trading ratio r. In equilibrium, the ratio of marginal costs between the two …rms is: 1H
=
+2 H eH
L rL
; where represents the shadow value of the …rm’s regulatory compliance constraint. Since
H rH
= L = H ; we have:
13

It is worth pointing out that the phrase "trading ratio" is somewhat misleading insofar as these ratios a¤ect
emissions trading activities only indirectly via the e¤ect on compliance requirements.

9

2

1L

L eL

2

1H

=

L

H eH

(7)

H

Note that this is congruent with the ratio of …rst-best emission levels.
Conditional on implementing a di¤erentiated trading program described above, the regulator
must choose how many permits to distribute. In Appendix 1.5, we derive an expression for the
permit allocation that minimizes total social costs. Given this permit allocation, the optimal
outcome is achieved, and the aggregate emissions are equivalent to those observed under the other
policy regimes.
2.1.5

Welfare maximizing policy parameters

We have thus far derived the following optimal tax rates (di¤erentiated and undi¤erentiated)

i

=
=

(8a)

i

(

+
H +

H L

H

L)

(8b)

L

and the following optimal permit allocations (di¤erentiated and undi¤erentiated):

AU
AD

=
=

H

H

L

L L

H L

+

H

2

H

H

L

H

L(

L

+

L L

(9)

L
2
H L

H
H

+

L)

2
H

L

:

(10)

Each of these is chosen to maximize social welfare given the assumed structure of the corresponding
policy regime. We can now make a simple observation:
(R1) Accurate information regarding the source-speci…c cost parameters is required to e¢ ciently
implement three of the four market-based policies we consider. The di¤erentiated tax is the one
exception.
Intuitively, when source-speci…c damages are linear in emissions, information about abatement
costs is not needed to de…ne the optimal tax rates i .

10

2.2

Welfare Gains from Di¤erentiation: No Uncertainty.

Although policy di¤erentiation has no impact on aggregate emissions, it does a¤ect how emissions
are distributed across sources in equilibrium.14 In both price and quantity-based regimes, policy
di¤erentiation reduces emissions at the source that causes relatively high damage source and
increases emissions at the relatively low damage source:
eUL
eUH

eD
L =
eD
H =

L

2(

H

H

+

H

2(

H

L)
L

+

L)

<0
>0

This reallocation of emissions has potentially signi…cant welfare implications. We …rst illustrate
these welfare changes graphically. We then derive an analytical expression for the gains from
policy di¤erentiation which will prove useful when interpreting our more detailed policy simulation
results.
Figure 1 illustrates the simple two …rm case: The width of this …gure, measured in units of
emissions, is equal to the optimal aggregate emissions level E : Given the emissions equivalence
result demonstrated in the previous section, we hold total emissions constant at E across the
di¤erentiated and undi¤erentiated policy regimes. At the left origin, all emissions occur at the
low damage …rm and emissions at the high damage …rm are driven to zero (eH = 0): The upward
sloping solid line, moving from left to right, represents the marginal abatement costs at the low
damage …rm: Cl0 (el ). At the right origin, the high damage …rm emits E (i.e. eH = E ) and
the low damage …rm emits nothing (eL = 0):The solid line increasing from right to left measures
marginal abatement costs at the high damage …rm Ch0 (eh ).15
Equilibrium emissions under an undi¤erentiated policy regime are given by {eul ; euh g. This
equilibrium occurs at the intersection of Ch0 (eh ) and Cl0 (el ) which is congruent with the …rstorder condition for cost-minimization under both the undi¤erentiated tax and the undi¤erentiated
emissions trading regime described above. This allocation of permitted emissions minimizes the
total abatement costs required to meet the emissions cap: However, this is not the optimal outcome.
Total social welfare could be improved by shifting some of the permitted emissions away from the
high damage source to the low damage source.
Equilibrium emissions under either the di¤erentiated tax or the di¤erentiated trading regime
are given by {eL ; eH g. The broken lines represent the marginal abatement cost schedules scaled
14

This emissions equivalence does depend on the linearity of the marginal abatement cost curves. If marginal
abatement cost curves are only approximately linear, the equivalence of optimal emissions across the di¤erentiated
and undi¤erentiated tax case will only approximately hold. This point will be made clearly in the subsequent
applied analysis.
15
In Figure 1, we assume that the relatively high damage …rm also faces relatively higher costs of abatement.
If the reverse were true, the optimal cap E would change, but it would still be the case that too much of the
permitted emissions would be allocated to the high damage …rm under the undi¤erentiated policy.

11

by the inverse of the corresponding marginal damage: Ci0 (ei ) 1i ; i = l; h: By (7), the allocation
of emissions under damage-di¤erentiated trading occurs where these broken lines intersect. This
allocation of the permitted emissions achieves the optimal trade o¤ between abatement costs and
bene…ts from reduced damages.
The bene…ts from policy di¤erentiation (in the form of reductions in damages vis a vis the
undi¤erentiated equilibrium) are represented by area ABCE The increase in abatement costs is
equal to area ACD. The net bene…ts from di¤erentiation are thus de…ned by the shaded areas
ABD + CDE. The net gains from policy di¤erentiation are unambiguously positive in this setting.
Using the functional forms from above, it is straightforward to derive an expression for the
net bene…ts from di¤erentiation in terms of the model parameters (see Appendix 2):
U

T SC ( ; )

2
( L
H)
T SC ( ; ) =
4( l + h )
D

0;

(11)

Note that the welfare gains from di¤erentiation are equivalent for taxes and permits under complete
information. We can now make the following two observations based on equation (11):
(R2) The extent to which policy di¤erentiation reduces pollution damages (via a reallocation of
permitted emissions) and increases net welfare gains is increasing with the variation in damages
across sources.
If damages do not vary across sources, there is no advantage to di¤erentiated policy. Accordingly,
the more heterogeneous the damages, the greater the bene…ts from di¤erentiation, all else equal.
(R3) The extent to which policy di¤erentiation reduces pollution damages (via a reallocation of
permitted emissions) and increases net welfare gains is decreasing with the slope of the marginal
abatement cost functions.
Intuitively, if marginal abatement costs are steeply increasing in abatement, it will be relatively
more costly to shift emissions from the high damage to the low damage source.
Note that the bene…ts from di¤erentiation do not depend on the correlation between sourcespeci…c abatement cost parameters and source-speci…c damage parameters. This contrasts with
the …ndings of Mendelsohn (1986) who …nds that positive covariance between abatement cost parameters and emissions damages increase the relative e¤ectiveness of di¤erentiated policy designs.
Given our maintained assumptions regarding the linearity of the damage function, this relationship
disappears.

2.3

Uncertainty

Thus far, we have analyzed market-based regulation of non-uniformly mixed pollution when sourcespeci…c marginal damage parameters and source-speci…c abatement costs are known with certainty.
12

In fact, real-world policy contexts are characterized by considerable uncertainty regarding both
costs and damages from pollution. We begin this section by focusing exclusively on uncertainty
surrounding the source-speci…c damage parameter estimates. We then introduce uncertainty about
abatement costs.
2.3.1

Design implications of damage uncertainty

As noted above, recent advances in data collection and computer supported analytics have enhanced our ability to measure and analyze emission fate and transport, exposure pathways, and
dose-response relationships (Esty, 2004). State-of-the-art integrated assessment modeling can
now provide policy makers with rich information regarding source speci…c damages. In principle,
this facilitates a more informed and data-driven approach to policy design and implementation.
However, estimates of source-speci…c marginal damages are still highly uncertain. Much of the
variation in damage estimates is driven either by the stochastic nature of the inputs (e.g. meteorological conditions) or parameter uncertainty that is unlikely to be resolved over the duration of
the program (e.g. uncertainty regarding dose response or mortality valuation parameters).
We extend the model to more accurately represent the information that can, in principle,
be used to inform policy design. We assume that the joint distribution of the marginal damage
parameters f ( L ; H ) is known ex ante. This is a reasonable assumption given the kind of modeling
tools that implementing agencies currently have at their disposal. We continue to assume that a
risk neutral policy maker seeks to minimize the expected social costs of pollution. We assume that
policy design parameters are chosen at the outset of the program and are …xed for the duration.
For now, we maintain our assumption that the regulator has complete information regarding
abatement costs. While this is clearly a restrictive assumption, we invoke it in order to derive an
expression that isolates the a¤ect of damage uncertainty, and damage uncertainty alone, on the
gains from policy di¤erentiation.
Maintaining the simple two-…rm set-up as above, the policy maker seeks to minimize expected
total social costs from emissions:
min T SC = CH (eH ) + CL (eL ) +
eH ;eL

Z Z

(

H eH

+

L eL )f ( L ; H )

(12)

The …rst order condition for cost minimization with respect to feL ; eH g yields:
0
CH
(eH ) = E[ h ]

(13)

Cl0 (el ) = E[ l ]
In the presence of uncertainty about marginal damage parameters, setting marginal abatement
13

costs equal to expected marginal damages maximizes expected welfare.
We note some important quali…cations. First, our assumption regarding the linear form of the
damage function is important here. In the literature that examines the implications of uncertain
damages on optimal policy, researchers have argued that the optimal trading ratio between two
sources with equal expected damages but varying degrees of uncertainty should penalize the more
uncertain damages (e.g. Horan and Shortle, 2005 ). In our case, linearity in damages eliminates
the covariance term that gives rise to this penalty.
Our assumed policy objective function is also important. We assume that the regulator
seeks to minimize the expected social costs of pollution. If instead the regulator wants to meet
an ambient target probabilistically, varying degrees of uncertainty will matter because otherwise
identical …rms will have di¤erential marginal e¤ects on the probability the target is violated.
Conditional on these assumptions, we can derive the optimal policy parameters under damage
uncertainty. The di¤erentiated tax (8a) and undi¤erentiated tax (8b) should be de…ned in terms
of expected marginal damage parameters E[ L ] and E[ H ]. Similarly, compliance ratios ri should
be de…ned in terms of expected marginal damages.
2.3.2

The gains from di¤erentiation under damage uncertainty

Uncertainty regarding source speci…c damage parameters implies uncertain gains from policy differentiation. To illustrate how this uncertainty manifests, it is instructive to consider the realized
gains from di¤erentiation conditional on a particular realization of f L ; H g:
Let 0 = f 0H ; 0L g denote a draw from the joint distribution of marginal damages f ( L ; H ).
Given this realization of damages, the di¤erence in total social costs under the di¤erentiated design
(T SC D ), relative to an undi¤erentiated policy (T SC U ) is derived in Appendix 2.1. This expression
reduces to:16
T SC U ( 0 ; )

T SC D ( 0 ; ) =

1(
2

0
L

0
H ) (E[ L ]

(

L

+

H)

E[

H ])

1 (E[ l ] E[ H ])2
:
4 ( L + H)

(14)

From this expression we see that the net gains from policy di¤erentiation reduce to (11) if
source-speci…c damages manifest as expected. Realized net bene…ts from policy di¤erentiation will
be greater than expected if the realized di¤erence in marginal damages across sources is greater
than expected. Finally, if the ranking of sources with respect to damages is the reverse of what
was expected, the …rst argument in (14) turns negative. In other words, policy di¤erentiation can
actually reduce welfare when marginal damage parameters are uncertain.
16

We maintain our assumption of certain abatement costs here; the gains are identical for quantity-based and
price-based instruments.

14

2.3.3

Cost uncertainty

As compared to uncertainty about damages, cost uncertainty manifests somewhat di¤erently in the
model. Integrated assessment modeling provides policy makers with a fairly rich characterization
of the uncertainty surrounding damage estimates. In contrast, the methodologies used to estimate
the engineering costs of emissions control options (i.e. the capital equipment expense, the site
preparation costs for the application, and annual operating and maintenance costs) typically yield
a single point estimate. In this section, we investigate how gains from di¤erentiation are impacted
when ex post realized costs deviate from the point estimates that informed policy design and
implementation.
It is beyond the scope of this paper to present a fully general analysis of how abatement cost
uncertainty a¤ects realized gains from policy di¤erentiation. Instead, we present a fairly stylized
treatment of the problem in order to develop the intuition that will be essential to the interpretation
of our policy simulation results. For expositional clarity, we shut down any uncertainty regarding
damages in order to focus exclusively on costs. We con…ne our attention to uncertainty regarding
the slopes of the …rm-speci…c marginal cost functions as this will prove to be particularly relevant
in our setting.
Beginning with the emissions tax regimes, we contrast outcomes under the di¤erentiated and
undi¤erentiated tax. We assume that the policy maker has point estimates of the cost parameters
L and H1 = H0 +
H
H0 and L0 which she uses to de…ne these tax rates. Let L1 = L0 +
denote the ex post realized cost parameters. Given the realization of costs ( 1 ), we compare total
social costs incurred under the …rst-best di¤erentiated tax policy (T SC D ) against the second-best
undi¤erentiated tax policy (T SC U ). Appendix 2.2 derives the following expression:
U

T SC (

1;

0)

D

T SC (

1;

0)

=

(

H)

L

4

2

2
H1 L0

L0 H0 L0

+

+

2
L1 H0
2
H0

0:

(15)

While expression (15) is di¢ cult to parse, it is clearly non-negative. If realized costs equal expected
costs, the gains from policy di¤erentiation reduce to (11). Moreover, we show in Appendix 2.2
that the partial derivative of (15) with respect to L or H is negative.
(R5): For the case of emission taxes, the gains from di¤erentiation are non-negative in the presence
of cost uncertainty and certain damages.
This result makes intuitive sense given (R1). Recall that accurate cost information is needed to
de…ne the optimal undi¤erentiated tax rate but not the di¤erentiated tax rates. A di¤erentiated
tax thus confers advantages associated via increased ‡exibility (i.e. the tax scales with the damage
caused) and the information required ex ante to deliver ex post optimal results.
For the case of tradable permits, an analogous exercise yields an even more complex expression. One key implication is that, under a quantity-based policy regime, the welfare implications
15

of policy di¤erentiation are ambiguous. In other words, policy di¤erentiation can be welfare reducing. Under abatement cost uncertainty, the regulator is unlikey to be able to be able to set the
optimal aggregate cap, ex ante. If the imposed cap proves to be too tight or too loose given ex post
realized abatement costs, the trading ratios (rL ; rH ) will no longer yield the …rst best allocation
of emissions across sources.
To see why this is the case, consider the following. By Eq. (3), the optimal emission levels
1H
H
1L
L
and eD
: If the cap has not been set optimally, the relative allocation of
are: eD
H =
L =
2 L
2 H
emissions across high and low damage sources that maximizes welfare subject to the imposed cap
is no longer de…ned by (7). However, the di¤erentiated emissions trading regime is hard-wired to
allocate emissions across sources such that (7) is achieved. In extreme cases, it may be that setting
marginal abatement costs equal across sources (the de…ning characteristic of the undi¤erentiated
market) will welfare dominate the equilibrium characterized by Eq. (7).

3

The NOx Budget Program

The NOx Budget Program (NBP) is a market-based emissions trading program designed to reduce
aggregate NOx emissions and the regional transport of NOx emissions in the eastern United
States. Over the period 2003-2008, the program established a region-wide cap on emissions of
NOx from large stationary sources in twenty eastern states during ozone season (May-September).
The NBP was primarily designed to help Northeastern and Mid-Atlantic states attain Federal
ambient ozone standards. When the NBP was promulgated, signi…cant portions of the Northeast,
Mid-Atlantic, and parts of the Midwest were failing to meet Federal ambient standards (Ozone
Transport Assessment Group (OTAG), 1997).
Although the precise contribution of individual sources to the non-attainment problems in
this region was di¢ cult to estimate at the time of the rulemaking, there was plenty of evidence
to suggest that marginal damages varied signi…cantly across sources. The EPA received over 50
responses when it solicited comments on whether the program should incorporate trading ratios
or other restrictions on interregional trading in order to re‡ect the signi…cant di¤erential e¤ects of
NOx emissions across states(FR 63(90): 25902). Most commentors supported unrestricted trading
and expressed concerns that “discounts or other adjustments or restrictions would unnecessarily
complicate the trading program, and therefore reduce its e¤ectiveness” (FR 63(207): 57460).
These comments and accompanying analysis (US EPA, 1998) led regulators to design a single
jurisdiction, undi¤erentiated trading program. There are no spatial restrictions on trading within
the program. All emissions are treated symmetrically for compliance purposes.
In 2008, a federal district court vacated the Clean Air Interstate Rule (CAIR) that was to
replace the NOx Budget Program citing the policy’s failure to adequately accommodate regional

16

transport of pollution (among other factors).17 Since that time, debates surrounding the marketbased regulation of non-uniformly mixed criteria pollutants have become increasingly heated.
In the interest of informing policy designs going forward, we revisit the decision to forego a
di¤erentiated NBP design in favor of the simpler, undi¤erentiated alternative.
Our analysis will focus exclusively on the coal-…red generating units in the program. Although
other industrial point sources are also included in the NBP, coal-…red electricity generating units
represent approximately 94 percent of the NOx emissions regulated under the program and more
than 94 percent of the NOx emissions reductions over the …rst …ve years (U.S. EPA, 2005; US EPA
2008). Data limitations require that we exempt these small emitters from our analysis. Because
these sources account for such a small share of emissions and emissions abatement, this omissions
should have very negligible impacts on our results.18

4

Estimating the welfare impacts of policy di¤erentiation

Figure 2 provides a diagrammatic summary of the policy simulations we conduct. Taken together,
we conduct eight sets of counterfactual policy simulations. These can be classi…ed in terms of
regulatory regime (prices, quantities, no regulation); our approach to modeling …rms’compliance
choices (cost minimization algorithm or econometric model); and whether policy incentives are
di¤erentiated or undi¤erentiated.
The analysis proceeds in several steps:
1. Estimate the marginal damage parameters

for each source in the NOx Budget Program.

2. Construct engineering estimates of source-speci…c, technology-speci…c abatement costs and
emissions reduction e¢ ciencies. These estimates are constructed using information about
costs and technology operating characteristics that was available at the time of the rule
making.
3. Use the information obtained in steps (1) and (2) to de…ne the ex ante optimal emissions
cap (in the quantity-based policy regimes) and the ex ante optimal emissions tax (in the
price-based regimes).
17
The court found that the CAIR regulation "does not prohibit polluting sources within an upwind state from
preventing attainment of National ambient air quality standards in downwind states."State of North Carolina v.
Environmental Protection Agency, No. 05-1244, slip op. (2008), District of Columbia Court of Appeals.
18
Natural gas and oil-fueled electricity generators subject to the NOx Budget Program are among the units we
omit from our analysis. These units account for less than 5 percent of emissions regulated under the program.
The policy design changes we consider could marginally a¤ect how these units are dispatched. But these marginal
changes would presumably have very small impacts on overall operating costs and aggregate damages. The reason
is that these units have much lower uncontrolled NOx emissions rates. Whereas the average pre-retro…t NOx
emissions rate among coal plants exceeded 5.5 lbs/MWh, average NOx emissions rates among marginal electricity
producers are estimated to range between 0.3 to 2 lbs NOx/MWh (NEISO, 2006; Keith et al., 2003).

17

4. Simulate …rms’compliance choices under both the observed and counterfactual policy regimes.
5. Estimate the total damages associated with the simulated NOx emissions under observed
and counterfactual policy regimes.
6. Estimate the total abatement costs associated with simulated compliance choices.
7. Compare the net bene…ts across di¤erentiated and undi¤erentiated policy designs to obtain
an estimate of the gains from policy di¤erentiation.
The following subsections describe each step in more detail.

4.1

Estimating source-speci…c damages from pollution

NOx emissions a¤ect health and environmental outcomes through two main pathways: ozone
formation and particulate matter formation.19 Speci…cally, emitted NOx interacts with ambient
ammonia to form ammonium nitrate, a constituent of ambient PM2:5 . And NOx also forms
tropospheric O3 through a series of chemical reactions (Seinfeld, Pandis, 1998).Prior research
has shown that the majority of damages due to exposures to both PM2:5 and O3 are premature
mortalities and increased rates of illness (US EPA, 1999; WHO, 2003; Muller and Mendelsohn,
2009).
The extent to which NOx emissions react with precursors to form ozone or particulate
matter depends upon prevailing meteorological conditions, pre-existing precursor emissions and
concentrations, and other factors that vary across time and space. Furthermore, the health impacts
associated with a change in ozone and/or particulate matter at a particular location will depend
on the age and spatial distribution of the human populations at that location. For these reasons,
the damage caused by a given quantity of NOx emissions will depend signi…cantly on the spatial
distribution of the emissions.
In what follows, we characterize both variability and uncertainty in NOx emissions damages
in detail. With respect to the former, we estimate the extent of the variation in marginal damage
estimates across sources in the NOx Budget Program. With respect to the latter, it is important to
emphasize that our uncertainty analysis is not comprehensive. We formally quantify the parameter
uncertainty inherent in source-speci…c damage estimates. But we make no attempt to capture
modeling uncertainty.
19

NOx emissions also contribute to acid rain in some mountain regions, and exacerbate eutrophication problems.
Neither of these e¤ects are modeled in this analysis.

18

4.1.1

Source-speci…c damage parameters

The source-speci…c marginal damage parameters ( i ) capture the estimated e¤ect of an incremental
change in NOx emissions at source i on health and environmental impacts across the airshed. We
use a stochastic integrated assessment model, AP2, to estimate these damage parameters. The
AP2 model is comprised of six modules; emissions, air quality modeling, concentrations, exposures,
physical e¤ects, and monetary damages. The interested reader can …nd a detailed description of
the model in (Muller, 2011).
The air quality model uses a reduced form approach to mapping emissions (e) into pollution
concentrations (C). More precisely, the relationship between emissions of nitrogen oxides released
at source i and the concentration of pollutant s (ozone or particulate matter) at receptor point r
is modeled through a source-receptor matrix in which each cell in the matrix, Csri (ei ); denotes the
incremental contribution of emissions from (i) to concentrations in location (r).20 AP2 then maps
ambient concentrations into physical impacts using dose-response functions. Let skp represent the
dose response coe¢ cient which captures the e¤ect of an incremental change in the concentrations
of pollutant s on health outcome k in population cohort p.21
The …nal modeling step in AP2 translates the physical e¤ects predicted by the dose-response
functions into monetary terms. Let k represent the valuation coe¢ cient that is used to translate
the health outcome k into dollar terms. We rely on valuation methodologies used in the prior
literature. In particular, we employ a VSL of approximately $6 million.22 It is important to note
that our monetized damage estimates do not incorporate defensive investments or costly actions
that individuals take to protect themselves from harmful e¤ects of pollution. Deschenes et al.
(2012) demonstrate that a failure to account for changes in these defensive expenditures can result
in a signi…cant undervaluation of the bene…ts from NOx emissions reductions.
The marginal damage parameters for the 632 coal-…red EGUs regulated by the NBP are
estimated using the marginal damage algorithm used in Muller (2011). First, baseline emissions
data collected by the US EPA in the years immediately preceding the introduction of the NBP
are used by AP2 to compute total national damages. Next, one ton of NOx is added to baseline
emissions at a particular EGU. AP2 is then re-run. Concentrations, exposures, physical e¤ects,
and damages are recomputed. Since the only di¤erence between the baseline run and the "add20

The source-receptor matrix is based on the Gaussian Plume model (Turner, 1994). The predicted pollutant
concentrations generated using the AP2 model have been tested against the predictions made by a more sophisticated and detailed air quality model (see the appendix in Muller, 2011). The agreement between the county-level
surfaces produced by the two models is quite strong.
21
In order to model impacts of exposure to PM2:5 on adult mortality rates, this analysis uses the …ndings reported
in Pope et al., (2002). The impact of PM2:5 exposure on infant mortality rates is modeled using the results from
Woodru¤ et al., (2006). For O3 , we use the …ndings from Bell et al., (2004). In addition, this analysis includes the
impact of exposure to PM2:5 on incidence rates of chronic bronchitis (Abbey et al., 1995).
22
This value, which is used by US EPA, results from a meta-analysis of nearly 30 studies that compute VSLs
using both stated and revealed preference methods.

19

one-ton" run is the additional ton of NOx , the change in damages is strictly attributable to the
added ton. This design is then repeated over all of the EGUs encompassed by the NBP.
4.1.2

Damage parameter uncertainty

Equation [16] provides a parsimonious description of the marginal damage estimates used in our
analysis:
i

=

XXX
ri

k

s

dCsi (ei )
s
:
k kp Pri
dei

(16)

The parameters of the air quality model, the population estimates Pri , the dose response parameters skp and valuation parameters k are all uncertain. Even the emissions levels at individual
sources cannot be predicted with absolute certainty.
We construct an empirical distribution for each i parameter. We …rst make a random draw
(denoted m) from the distributions of each of the parameters in (16). Next, we use the AP2
model to compute emissions, concentrations, exposures, physical e¤ects, and damages based on
the draw m from each input distribution. We then add one ton of NOx to source i and recompute
concentrations, exposures, physical e¤ects, and damages (using the same mth realization from the
input distributions). AP2 computes the di¤erence between damages with baseline emissions and
after adding the ton of NOx to emissions at source (i). This is denoted im :This process is repeated
5000 times using 5000 di¤erent, independent draws from the parameter distriutions. The result
is an empirical distribution of marginal damages for NOx emitted from facility i. This process is
repeated for each EGU in the analysis (using the same set of m independent draws).
The extent to which marginal damage estimates vary across draws is striking. Figure 3
summarizes the intra-source variation in marginal damage parameter estimates for a single representative source. This coal-…red electricity generating unit in Ohio was chosen because the
variance and skewness of the corresponding empirical distribution are very close to the median
values across all units. The point estimate, or expected value, of the damage caused by an incremental change in emissions at this source is $1496/ton NOx. The standard deviation is $1796/ton.
Muller (2011) …nds that most of this within source variation stems from uncertainty in the air
quality modeling component, adult mortality dose-response parameter estimates, and mortality
valuation parameters. The skewness of the distribution stems from the multiplicative nature of
the process that links emissions to damages.
Figure 4 illustrates the extent to which the expected values of source speci…c damage parameters E[ i ] vary across sources. The average parameter value (averaged across all sources) is
$1734/ton of NOx. In the subsequent discussion, we classify any source with estimated damages exceeding (falling below) $1734/ton NOx as "high" ("low") damage. Notably, a signi…cant
amount of the inter-source variation (approximately 45 percent) occurs within (versus between)
20

states. Previous analyses of spatially di¤erentiated NOx trading considered multi-state zonal
approaches to policy di¤erentiation (Krupnick et al., 2000; USEPA, 1998)23 .Our source-speci…c
damage estimates suggests that di¤erentiating policy incentives at the state or region-level would
ignore a signi…cant portion of the spatial variation in damages.
These source-speci…c damage parameters are used to de…ne the tax rates and compliance
ratios in the counterfactual policy regimes we consider. For six of the 632 units in our data, we
…nd that the expected value of the marginal damage parameter is negative. This suggests that
a decrease in NOx emissions at these sources leads to increased overall damages. This result is
driven by the complex, non-linear photochemical reactions that transform NOx and VOCs into
ozone.24 We assume that incentivizing pollution at facilities with negative damage parameter
estimates would be politically unpopular. Instead, we exempt any units with negative expected
damage parameters.

4.2

Engineering estimates of NOx abatement costs

The NBP mandated a dramatic reduction in average NOx emissions rates.25 In the period between
when the rule was upheld by the US Court of Appeals (March 2000) and the deadline for full
compliance (May 2004), …rms had to make costly decisions about how to comply with this new
regulation. To comply, …rms can do one or more of the following: purchase permits to o¤set
emissions exceeding their allocation, install NOx control equipment, or reduce production at dirtier
plants during ozone season.26 For the coal-…red units in our analysis, we rule out reduction in
ozone season output as a compliance strategy and assume that …rm-level production and aggregate
output are exogenously determined and independent of the environmental compliance choice. Coal…red units are typically inframarginal due to their relatively low fuel operating costs. Consistent
with this observation, Fowlie (2010) …nds that the introduction of the NBP reduced pro…t margins
at operating units, but not production levels.
We take as given the population of sources in the NOx Budget Program. That is, we rule
out the possibility that one or more of the counterfactual policy designs we consider would cause
an electricity generating unit to exit the market prematurely.27 The coal plants in our analysis
23

For example, policy makers considered dividing the regulated region into two or three subregions in an e¤ort
to make a distinction among the States that may contribute the most to the ozone transport problem and those
where the wind patterns may be less likely to a¤ect air quality in the other states.
24
Daily ozone concentrations are non-linear and monotonic functions of NOx and the ratio of volatile organic
compounds (VOCs) and NOx. At su¢ ciently low ratios, the conversion of NOx to ozone is limited by the availability
of VOCs. In these VOC limited conditions, reductions of NOx can increase peak ozone levels until the system
transitions out of a VOC-limited state (Seinfeld and Pandis, 1998).
25
Pre-retro…t emissions rates at a¤ected coal plants were, on average, three and a half times higher than the
emissions rate on which the aggregate cap was based (0.15 lbs NOx/mmbtu).
26
We assume perfect compliance on behalf of all units. In fact, compliance has been close to 100 percent for the
duration of the program (US EPA, 2008).
27
Note that, in addition to treating the retirement decision as exogenous, we are not attributing any costs to NOx

21

are long-lived. The average retirement age of a coal plant in the United States is 49 years. We
do observe a small number of coal-…red boilers retiring during the study period. These are units
with decades of service stretching as far back as the end of World War II. We assume that these
retirement decisions are una¤ected by the policy design.
Three factors that are likely to signi…cantly in‡uence a manager’s choice of environmental
compliance strategy are the up-front capital costs K, the anticipated variable operating costs V;
and the expected emissions rate m. The capital costs, variable operating costs, and emissions reduction e¢ ciencies associated with di¤erent compliance alternatives vary signi…cantly, both across
NOx control technologies and across generating units with di¤erent technical characteristics. We
do not directly observe the variable compliance costs and …xed capital costs or the post-retro…t
emissions rates that plant managers anticipated when making their decisions. We can, however,
generate detailed, unit-speci…c engineering estimates of these variables.
In the late 1990s, to help generators prepare to comply with market-based NOx regulations,
the Electric Power Research Institute28 developed software to identify all major NOx control
options (including combinations of control technologies) available to coal-…red boilers, conditional
on unit and plant level characteristics. The software has been used not only by plant managers,
but also by regulators to evaluate proposed compliance costs for the utilities they regulate. This
software was used to generate the boiler-speci…c cost estimates used in this analysis (EPRI, 1999).
This cost estimation exercise is described in detail in Fowlie (2010). Importantly, the boiler-level
and plant-level parameters (including boiler technology type, plant vintage, plant capacity) that
generate variation in these cost and emissions estimates are plausibly exogenous to the compliance
choices we are interested in modeling.
Table 1 presents summary statistics for unit-level operating characteristics that signi…cantly
determine NOx emissions levels. To construct this table, units are classi…ed as either "high
damage" (above average) or "low damage" (below average) units. Overall, these unit-level characteristics are similarly distributed similarly across these high and low damage groups.

4.3

Simulating facility-level compliance decisions

We use two alternative approaches to modeling …rm-level compliance decisions when simulating
policy outcomes. We …rst specify a simple cost minimization model of …rms’compliance choices.
We calibrate key parameters to match standard policy simulation models. This model is used to
approximate the ex ante expectations of a well informed policy maker.
reductions from the new plants replacing these units once they retire. This is equivalent to assuming that operating
characteristics of newly constructed units will be independent of the policy design choices we are analyzing. This
assumption is reasonable given the stringency of new source standards.
28
The Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) is an organization that was created and is funded by public and
private electric utilities to conduct electricity industry relevant R&D.

22

Previous studies have noted that cost minimization algorithms provide a crude and possibly
inaccurate approximation of real-world decision-making (Fowlie, 2010; Krupnick et al. 2000). If
…rm’s environmental compliance choices deviate signi…cantly from cost-minimization algorithms,
standard policy simulation models will inaccurately predict the gains from di¤erentiation. Our second approach replaces the cost minimization algorithm with an econometrically estimated model
of the compliance choice. These represent our best estimate of the outcomes that would actually
materialize.
In both cases, a …rm’s compliance choice is modeled as a static, one-shot decision regarding
what - if any- abatement equipment to install. This static approach is appropriate because all
…rms had to make a choice about how to comply with the program during a fairly short period of
time. The details of the program were …nalized in 2000. The aggregate emissions cap was imposed
(and full compliance was required) in 2004.
4.3.1

Cost-minimization algorithm

We use a simple algorithm to …nd the combination of NOx control options that minimizes the
levelized annual cost of complying with the policy designs we consider. Let j = 1:::Ji index the
NOx control technology options available to the ith electricity generating unit. Let Kij represent
the engineering cost estimate of the required capital investment speci…c to unit i and technology j.
Let Vij represent the corresponding variable operating cost estimate (per kWh). Let mij represent
the corresponding post-retro…t emissions rate. Let ei0 represent the pre-retro…t emissions rate
(i.e. the amount of NOx the ith unit emits per kWh of electricity generated if it installs no new
pollution controls).
In the baseline, undi¤erentiated policy regime, we calculate the ex ante expected annual
compliance cost associated with unit i and compliance strategy j as follows:
min
j

:

Cij = vij Qi + li Kij

(17)

where vij = (Vij + mij )Qi :
Capital investments Kij are converted to annual costs using a levelized annual cost factor li . We
assume a discount rate of 5.5 percent. This rate, which was derived from …nancial data for electric
utilities, is used in the modeling of investments in environmental retro…ts conducted by the US
EPA.29 Unit-speci…c investment time horizons are constructed by subtracting the unit age from
the assumed life span (55 years).30
29

For more complete documentation of this model and its assumptions, see
http://www.epa.gov/airmarkets/progsregs/epa-ipm/docs/v410/Chapter8.pdf
30
The median age of coal plants operating in the United States is 44. We assume a retirement age of 55. If units
are older than 55 years, we assume these units will not invest in pollution abatement equipment. However, we also
adopt standard EPA assumptions regarding the lifespan of the NOx control technology (30 years).

23

Expected annual operating costs vij are obtained by multiplying estimated per kWh operating
costs by expected seasonal production Qi . Historic electricity production during the ozone season,
Qi , is used to proxy for expected ozone season production.31 To estimate the annual variable
compliance cost vij , the technology operating costs are added to the expected (per kWh) costs of
holding permits to o¤set uncontrolled emissions.
We use the model to simulate …rms’compliance choices under the observed and counterfactual
policy regimes. Given an emissions cap and an initial guess for the equilibrium permit price 0 ,
we …nd the compliance option j 0 at each electricity generating unit that minimizes compliance
costs. The ozone season NOx emissions associated with these choices are summed across units. If
these aggregate emissions exceed (fall below) the cap, the permit price is incrementally increased
(reduced) and the process is repeated until the aggregate emissions constraint is just satis…ed.32
When simulating outcomes under the observed policy regime, the cap is set equal to the
seasonal NOx emissions associated with observed compliance choices (658,609 short tons).33 It
is straightforward to modify the model to represent the counterfactual policy regimes we analyze.
In the di¤erentiated trading regime that incorporates compliance ratios, variable compliance costs
X
E[ i ]): In an undi¤erentiated tax regime,
are rede…ned as (Vij + ri mij )Qi , where ri = E[ i ]=( N1
equals the uniform tax rate per unit of emissions. To simulate outcomes under the di¤erentiated
tax, the parameter (introduced in section 2.1.2) is replaced with the source-speci…c expected
damage parameter i :
The top panel in Table 2 summarizes the compliance choices that we observe in the NOx
Budget Program. A majority of units chose to rely on the permit market exclusively for compliance (the "no retro…t" option). A majority of the mandated emissions reductions were achieved
using highly capital intensive selective catalytic reduction (SCR) technologies. The middle panel
summarizes the compliance choices simulated using the cost minimization algorithm. This cost
minimization model poorly predicts the compliance choices that …rms actually made; only 24%
of choices are correctly predicted. In particular, the model overestimates the share of less capital
intensive combustion modi…cations and underestimates the share of capital intensive SCR retro…ts.
31

Anecdotal evidence suggests that managers used past summer production levels to estimate future production
(EPRI, 1999). We adopt this approach and use the historical average of a unit’s past summer production levels
(Qn ) to proxy for expected ozone season production.
32
If this iterative procedure arrives at a point where it is vascillating around the cap, the price that delivers the
quantity of emissions just below the cap is chosen to be the equilibrium price. Equilibrium emissions are calculated
and the simulation stops.
33
The estimated emissions associated with observed compliance choices exceed the emissions levels that were
actually observed. In 2004, the …rst year of full compliance, NOx emissions from coal units were 605,000 short
tons. Emissions from coal plants dropped even lower in later years (US EPA, 2007). One possible explanation
for the discrepancy between our emissions estimates (based on engineering estimates of the emissions associated
with alternative compliance options) and observed emissions is that many units that made no capital investment
in abatement equipment were able to make extensive small-scale improvements to reduce emissions intensity. Linn
(2008) estimates that 10-15 percent of emissions reductions were the product of these small process changes and
modi…cations.

24

In sum, we …nd that compliance choices observed in the NOx Budget Program depart markedly
from those predicted by the cost minimizing algorithm. If the cost minimization-based policy simulations incorrectly predict how …rms respond to the observed (undi¤erentiated) policy, these
models should not be relied upon to accurately simulate …rms’response t o di¤erentiated policy
incentives. For this reason, we pursue a second approach to modeling …rms’compliance decisions
which is designed to more accurately capture the real world distortions and idiosyncrasies that
determine …rms’environmental compliance choices.
4.3.2

An econometric model of the compliance decision

Fowlie (2010) estimates an econometric model of the compliance choices made by plant managers
in the NBP. We use this model to simulate the compliance decisions that plant managers under
both the observed and counterfactual policy regimes. We argue that this choice model can be
used to generate more realistic estimates of …rms’response to observed and counterfactual policy
incentives (as compared to simulations based on the calibrated cost minimization model).
The structure of this choice model is very similar to (17). The primary di¤erence is that parameters are econometrically estimated versus calibrated to match standard policy simulation models.
The decision maker at unit i is assumed to choose the compliance strategy that minimizes the
unobserved latent value Cij :
Cij =

j

+

v
m vij

+

K
m Kij

+

KA

Kij Ageij + "ij ;

(18)

where vij = (Vij + mij )Qi
The deterministic component of Cij is a weighted sum of expected annual compliance costs vij ,
the expected capital costs Kij associated with initial retro…t and technology installation, and a
constant term j that varies across technology types. The technology …xed e¤ects are intended to
capture average biases for or against particular types of NOx control equipment. An interaction
term between capital costs and demeaned plant age is included in the model because older plants
can be expected to weigh capital costs more heavily as they have less time to recover these
costs. The variable cost coe¢ cient ( v ) and the capital cost coe¢ cient ( K ) are allowed to vary
randomly in the population according to a bivariate normal distribution, thereby accommodating
any unobserved heterogeneity in responses to changes in compliance costs.34
Expected annual compliance costs are obtained by multiplying estimated per kWh variable
costs by expected seasonal production Qi . We use the average permit price that prevailed during
the period prior to the NBP compliance deadline ($4500/ton NOx) as a proxy for what managers’
34

It is common in the literature to assume that cost coe¢ cients are lognormally distributed, so as to ensure the
a priori expected negative domain for the distribution (with costs entering the model as negative numbers). Model
speci…cations that assumed a log-normal distribution for cost coe¢ cient failed to converge.

25

expected cost of o¤setting uncontrolled emissions. The econometric model is estimated separately
for units serving restructured wholesale electricity markets versus publicly owned units and units
subject to cost-of-service regulation. A more detailed description of the econometric speci…cation
and estimation results can be found in Fowlie (2010).
Estimates of the parameters of the distribution of v and K in the population can be combined with information about observed choices in order to make inferences about where in the
population distribution a particular decision maker lies (Train, 2003). We use the means of these
plant-manager speci…c distributions to parameterize our policy simulation model. This should improve our ability to simulate the choices that these plant managers would most likely have made
in counterfactual policy scenarios.
Table 3 summarizes the choice model parameter estimates. The top panel reports the estimated technology speci…c …xed e¤ects. These are all negative, suggesting that the average
plant manager was biased against emissions abatement technology retro…ts (vis a vis the compliance option that relies exclusively on purchasing permits). The bottom panel reports the
means of the manager-speci…c distributions of the two cost coe¢ cients ( K and v ):The ratio
( K + KA Age) : v can be interpreted as a measure of how a plant manager trades o¤ …xed capital costs (i.e. investments in NOx control equipment) and variable compliance costs (including
the cost of holding permits to o¤set uncontrolled emissions each year). Point estimates of this
ratio (computed using the estimated means of the manager speci…c conditional distributions) are
0.48 and 0.21 among managers of deregulated and regulated units, respectively. As compared to
the cost minimization model, these econometric estimates imply that plant managers were more
strongly biased against more capital intensive compliance options.35
The bottom panel of Table 2 summarizes the equilibrium choice probabilities under the observed (undi¤erentiated) policy regime. The econometric model correctly predicts that a signi…cant
portion of the mandated emissions reductions is achieved using more capital intensive compliance
strategies.36
With this econometrically estimated compliance choice model in hand, our approach to simulating permit market outcomes is mechanically very similar to simulation exercise described in
section 4.3.1.37 A key assumption is that the fundamental structure of the …rm-level compliance
decisions we model would be invariant to the policy regime changes we consider. This seems very
plausible. We see no reason why managers willingness to trade o¤ annual operating costs and up35

The high discount rate among plants serving restructured electricity markets likely re‡ects signi…cant credit
rating downgrades which a¤ected several …rms during the time period in which plant managers were having to
make their compliance decision.
36
One possible explanation for the apparent over-investment in more capital intensive compliance options could
be the regulatory incentives faced by public power authorities and plants operating under rate-of-return regulation
(Fowlie, 2010).
P
37
One di¤erence is that the simulated emissions are de…ned probabilistically as ei = j Pij eij ; where Pij is the
predicted probability of unit i choosing compliance strategy j.

26

front capital investment, and/or managers’preferences for or against particular pollution control
technologies, should be impacted by policy di¤erentiation.

4.4

Welfare maximizing policy parameters

We are interested in evaluating how alternative approaches to designing market-based policy,
namely the di¤erentiated tax and trading programs described in Section 2.1, perform vis a vis more
standard, undi¤erentiated designs. When parameterizing the policy simulations, we approach the
policy design problem from the perspective of a well informed, welfare maximizing regulator. We
assume the regulator has access to source-speci…c damage estimates summarized in section 4.1.1,
the engineering estimates of abatement costs summarized in section 4.2, and a standard policy
simulation model such as that described in section 4.3.1. Using this ex ante available information,
we identify the policy parameters (i.e. the emissions taxes or emissions quantity limits) that
maximize ex ante expected welfare.38
In the theoretical model that featured only two …rms with linear marginal abatement cost
curves, it was straightforward to solve for the optimal policy parameters analytically. In the applied
analysis that involves hundreds of sources with non-linear abatement cost functions, we solve for
the optimal taxes and emissions caps using simulation. In other words, we simulate outcomes under
a range of policy parameter values in order to identify the welfare maximizing value. Integrating
the fully stochastic integrated assessment model into this policy optimization exercise would be
highly resource intensive. When simulating outcomes for the purpose of identifying the ex ante
optimal tax or emissions cap, we assume that the policy maker uses the same linear, additively
separable approximation that was assumed in section 2 to map emissions into monetized damages.
4.4.1

Ex ante optimal tax rates

By Eq. (8b), the optimal undi¤erentiated (or uniform) emissions tax
is equal to the average
of the source-speci…c damage parameters weighted by the slopes of the corresponding marginal
abatement cost curves. Let ei ( ) denote the emissions-level at source i that minimizes compliance
N
X
costs given the tax rate i = : The uniform tax rate that minimizes
Di (ei ( )) + Ci (ei ( )) is
i=1

$1630/ton NOx.39 The aggregate, ozone season emissions that correspond with this undi¤erentiated tax amount to 726,293 tons.
38

Integrating the fully stochastic integrated assessment model into this policy optimization exercise would be
highly resource intensive. We therefore assume that the policy maker uses the same linear, additively separable
approximation that was assumed in section 2 to map emissions into monetized damages.
39
Note that this value falls below the average marginal damage value of $1734/ton. When we approximate the
slope of the source-speci…c marginal abatement cost curves in the neighborhood of the tax, we …nd that these
curves are less steeply sloped on average (or emissions are locally less responsive to changes in the tax rate) among
relatively low damage (versus high damage) sources.

27

The optimal di¤erentiated tax is more straightforward to de…ne (see Eq. (8a)): Compliance
cost minimizating compliance choices under this di¤erentiated tax regime yield ozone-season emissions of 746,644 tons of NOx. Thus, the emissions equivalence result derived in section 2.1 does
not hold exactly. Strict emissions equivalence requires linear marginal abatement cost curves. The
marginal abatement cost curves in this optimization routine are non-linear step functions.
4.4.2

Ex ante optimal emissions cap

To de…ne the welfare maximizing emissions cap in the undi¤erentiated trading regime, we simulate
cost minimizing compliance behavior in a trading regime characterized by ton-for-ton emissions
trading. We compute the total social cost (i.e abatement costs plus pollution damages) for a
range of emissions cap values. Intuitively, we …nd that the welfare maximizing emissions cap is
equal to the level of emissions that corresponds to the optimal undi¤erentiated tax: 726,293 tons.
The corresponding permit price is $1630/ton NOx. Note that this emissions cap is close to, but
somewhat less stringent than, the cap imposed under the NBP.
Turning to di¤erentiated emissions trading, we con…ne our attention to the di¤erentiated
trading design introduced in section 2. Each source is required to hold ri = i = permits per
unit of uncontrolled emissions. The regulator chooses the total number of tradable permits to
distribute. The total quantity of emissions associated with a given permit allocation will depend
on which sources hold the permits. We simulate permit market clearing for a range of permit supply
quantities. Total social costs are minimized when the aggregate permit supply is constrained to
equal 642,158 tons. Intuitively, the simulated emissions that correspond to this permit allication
sum to 746,644 tons of NOx (i.e. the quantity of emissions that corresponds to the di¤erentiated
tax regime).

4.5

Pollution damages

Once the compliance choices associated with a particular policy design have been simulated, the
corresponding vector of emissions is processed through the stochastic AP2 model. At this stage
of the analysis, rather than systematically perturbing NOx emissions one source at-a-time, NOx
emissions change simultaneously at many of the regulated EGUs (relative to the baseline case).
These pollution damage simulations feature all input parameters (emissions, transfer coe¢ cients in
the stochastic air quality model, population, dose-response, and valuation) as random variables. As
we explain above, we simulate damages using 5,000 possible realizations of the model parameters.
Importantly, when comparing damages across policy scenarios, resultant damages are compared
for the same draws from the input distribution.

28

4.6

Estimating the costs of compliance

Information on the actual expenditures of plants subject to the regulation is not publicly available.
Consistent with our approach to simulating policy outcomes, we take two di¤erent approaches to
estimating these abatement costs. The …rst assumes that ex ante engineering estimates are a
reasonable proxy for the costs that would actually materialize. The second approach …nds the
abatement costs that are most consistent with observed choices.
4.6.1

Engineering estimates of compliance costs

The most direct approach to estimating abatement costs employs the same cost assumptions and
accounting parameters that were used to parameterize equation (17). The levelized annual cost of
compliance under policy regime r is de…ned to be:
LACrCM =

X

Vir Qi + li Kir ;

(19)

i

where Vir and Kir are the boiler-speci…c, technology-speci…c cost estimates associated with the
compliance option chosen by …rm i under policy regime r.
When the econometric model is used to simulate compliance choice probabilities, this cost
estimate is de…ned to be:
LACrEST =

XX
i

Pirj (Vir Qi + li Kir );

j

where Pirj denotes the simulated choice probability associated with unit i and choice j in regime
r:
This approach provides an estimate of ex ante expected abatement costs. However, these
costs are inconsistent with observed compliance choices (and thus the choices simulated using the
econometrically estimated choice model).
4.6.2

Compliance costs consistent with the compliance choice model

The second approach derives the abatement costs that are most consistent with simulated compliance choices. Note that both the cost minimization algorithm and the econometrically estimated
model of the …rm’s compliance choice can be used to simulate the quantity of NOx a source would
emit at a given price per ton of NOx. Repeating this exercise for a range of NOx prices (starting
at $0/ton) traces out a marginal abatement cost (MAC) curve. Integrating under this curve yields
the estimate of the levelized annual abatement cost that rationalizes the simulated compliance
choices.

29

Figure 5 provides a graphical illustration. The horizontal axis measures aggregate emissions
abatement (in millions of tons of NOx per ozone season). The vertical axis measures marginal
abatement costs (in $/ton). The vertical line corresponds to the emissions cap imposed under the
NBP. The lower MAC curve is generated using the model that assumes strict cost minimization
and undi¤erentiated permit trading. Integrating under this lower marginal abatement cost curve
up to the level of abatement required to satisfy the NBP cap yields a levelized annual cost estimate
that is exactly equal to the sum of (19) across simulated compliance choices. The more steeply
sloped MAC curve in …gure 5 is generated using the econometric model of the compliance choice
(under undi¤erentiated trading). Integrating under this marginal abatement cost curve obtains
an estimate of the aggregate cost of compliance that is most consistent with the compliance costs
as perceived by the regulated …rms.40
The di¤erence in the two MAC curves depicted in Figure 5 is striking. If the di¤erence between
these two numbers is attributable to distortions and idiosyncrasies that drive a wedge between
private and social costs (such as status quo bias or price discrimination on the part of pollution
control equipment manufactures), then the lower curve provides a more appropriate cost measure
for our purposes. However, a more likely explanation is that the engineering cost estimates fail to
capture all the costs of …nancing and implementing investments in pollution abatement equipment.
This would imply that the cost estimates that rationalize the econometrically estimated choice
model should serve as our preferred abatement cost estimate.

5

Results and synthesis

This section is divided into three sub-sections. The …rst summarizes outcomes under the NOx
Budget Program as implemented. The second investigates the counterfactual policy scenarios in
the interest of estimating net gains from policy-di¤erentiation. The third sub-section examines
the implications of damage and cost uncertainty.
Recall that we generate two sets of policy simulations for each policy scenario we consider.
Simulations based on the calibrated cost minimization algorithm are intended to approximate ex
ante expectations of a well informed policy maker. Simulations which incorporate the econometrically estimated choice model represent our best estimate of the outcomes that would actually
materialize under a given set of policy incentives. The key di¤erence between these two approaches
is that the latter incorporates information about abatement costs that is revealed by …rms’ex post
observed compliance choices. It important to note that ex post observed information does nothing
40
Note that, by construction, these two alternative approaches to estimating compliance costs yield equivalent
results when the cost minimization model is used to simulate compliance choices. Intuitively, the very same cost
estimates de…ne both the compliance cost minimization routine and the ex post computation of costs. When the
econometric model is used, these two approaches yields very di¤erent results.

30

to resolve damage uncertainty. Thus, information regarding damages does not vary across the two
simulation approaches.

5.1

Welfare impacts of the undi¤erentiated NOx Budget Program

Table 4 summarizes the simulated outcomes under an undi¤erentiated policy regime that is calibrated to match the NOx Budget Program. In these simulations, the emissions cap imposed is
set equal to the seasonal NOx emissions associated with observed compliance choices (658,609
tons). Ex ante expected outcomes are reported in column (1). Estimates which incorporate ex
post revealed information regarding abatement costs and …rms’response to policy incentives are
reported in column (2).
Simulated equilibrium permit prices appear in the top row of this table. Because the marginal
abatement cost curves that rationalize observed choices are steeper than the MAC curves generated
using the cost minimization algorithm, the permit market clearing price in the second column is
signi…cantly higher.
The percentage of permits used to o¤set emissions at relatively high damage sources, reported
in the third row of the table, provides a crude measure of how permitted emissions are distributed
across sources. Facility-level data collected following the introduction of the NBP indicate that
approximately 38 percent of permitted NOx emissions occurred at sources with higher than average
damage parameters. The cost minimization model over-predicts the share of emissions occurring
at these high damage sources (41 percent). The econometric model correctly allocates 38 percent
of permitted emissions to relatively high damage …rms.41
The second panel in Table 4 estimates the abatement costs incurred to comply with the NOx
Budget program. The di¤erence in the levelized annual cost estimates across the two columns
highlights the extent to which observed compliance choices depart from the predictions of the cost
minimization-based model. In column (1), our two approaches to cost estimation yield equivalent
results by construction. In the second column, the cost estimates which are most consistent
with the econometric choice model are somewhat higher than those constructed using engineering
estimates.
The third panel of table 4 summarizes the simulated impacts of the policy on aggregate
damages. Annual bene…ts (i.e. the monetized value of avoided damages vis a vis the baseline)
are generated using the stochastic integrated assessment model. The table reports the average
damage impacts (averaged across all 5000 realizations) and the 5th and 95th percentile estimates
(in parentheses).42
41

Note that we are using the econometrically estimated model to predict outcomes that were used to estimate
the model. This is intended to illustrate the descriptive, versus predictive, power of the model.
42
Strictly speaking, these should not be interpreted as con…dence intervals. Recall that our analytical approach
captures uncertainty about key parameters (such as dose-response parameters and the value of statistical life)

31

Subtracting our preferred abatement cost estimate from avoided damage values yields an
estimate of the annual net bene…ts of the NOx Budget Program. Our estimate of ex ante expected
net bene…ts is $546 million per year ($US 2000). This estimate falls within the range of net bene…ts
that were projected in the design stages of the program, although comparisons with other studies
are confounded by di¤erences in modeling assumptions.43 Our preferred, albeit conservative, point
estimate of annual net bene…ts that were actually realized is $264 million per year.44

5.2

Policy counterfactuals

In this subsection, we investigate the likely welfare implications of policy di¤erentiation. For
expositional reasons, we begin with a discussion of price-based policy designs.
5.2.1

Di¤erentiated and undi¤erentiated emissions taxes

Simulated outcomes under both the di¤erentiated and undi¤erentiated tax regimes are summarized numerically in Table 5 and graphically in Figure 6. The left panel of Figure 6 summarizes
outcomes at high damage sources (i.e. sources with marginal damage parameters that exceed the
average value of $1733/ton). The right panel summarizes outcomes aggregated across relatively
low damage sources.
The downward sloping lines in Figure 6 connect the dots - literally - de…ned by simulated
seasonal emissions (reported in the top panel of Table 5) and and monetary policy incentives (the
emissions tax measured in $/ton NOx). The lower curve in each graph corresponds to ex ante
expected abatement costs. The higher curves correspond to abatement costs as perceived by …rms.
The horizontal lines correspond to di¤erentiated and undi¤erentiated tax rates. The labeled
intersection points de…ne equilibrium outcomes under the di¤erentiated (D) and undi¤erentiated
(U) tax regimes among high (H) and low (L) damage units, respectively. The 0 and 1 subscripts
denote the ex ante expected and ex post revealed costs, respectively.45
and the stochastic nature of the meteorological factors that shape pollution formation, transport, and deposition.
Conceptually, these numbers summarize the outcomes of a policy "lottery" in which probabilities can be attached
to a range of possible emissions damage outcomes. But the set of outcomes represented in our analysis is not
comprehensive. For example, we ignore modeling uncertainty.
43
The Regulatory Impact Assessment that informed the implementation of the program estimated annual net
bene…ts ranging from -$560 to $2510 ($US 1990)) (USEPA, 1998). Burtraw et al (2003)(Burtraw, Bharvirkar, and
McGuinness ) projected annual net bene…ts of $440 million ($1997) per year.
44
It is also worth reiterating that our bene…ts estimates do not account for reduced pharmaceutical purchases
and other defensive expenditures. In a recent study that emphasizes health-related impacts of the NBP, Deschenes
et al. (2012) …nd that monetized bene…ts from avoided defensive expenditures are approximately equal to the
monetized value of reduced mortality rates. Because our analysis fails to account for defensive health expenditures;
our bene…ts estimate should be interpreted as a lower bound.
45
For example, the point labeled DH0 denotes aggregate emissions and the marginal cost of abatement among
high damage sources (H) under the di¤erentiated tax regime (D) when ex ante expected abatement costs are
assumed (0). Simulated emissions among high damage sources amount to 209,000 tons per year (or 28 percent of
746,600 tons as reported in Table 6).

32

Both the table and the …gure show that the cost minimization model predicts lower levels
of emissions (or larger tax-induced emissions reductions) as compared to the simulations that
incorporate the econometrically estimated choice model. This makes intuitive sense. The more
steeply sloped the abatement cost curves, the lower the level of abatement activity induced by a
given emissions tax.
To assess the gains from policy di¤erentiation, we compare the net bene…ts of the policy
(i.e. the avoided damages less abatement costs) across the undi¤erentiated and di¤erentiated tax
regimes. In Figure 6, these net gains are represented by area A (i.e. the increase in avoided
damages less additional abatement costs among high damage sources) plus area B (reductions in
abatement costs less the increase in damages among low damage sources). Taken together, these
ex ante expected gains exceed $60M per year (see Table 5).
The simulations that make use of ex post revealed information regarding compliance choices
provide a more credible estimate of how …rms would actually respond under these counterfactual
tax regimes. These net gains are represented by areas C+D in Figure 6. Gains from policy
di¤erentiation are smaller than expected ($47 M annually). R5 helps provide some intuition for
this result. Because the ex post realized abatement cost curve is steeper than expected, gains from
policy di¤erentiation fall short of expectation.
Finally, note that the di¤erentiated tax achieves the e¢ cient outcome in expectation, regardless of whether ex ante expectations regarding abatement costs prove accurate.This is illustrated
graphically; realized marginal abatement costs are set equal to source-speci…c expected marginal
damages. In contrast, the policy maker requires accurate cost information in order to de…ne the
optimal undi¤erentiated tax (R1) Intuitively, the weights used to de…ne this uniform tax may
innacurately capture the ex post realized relative abatement costs.
5.2.2

Di¤erentiated and undi¤erentiated emissions trading

Table 6 summarizes the results from simulating outcomes under undi¤erentiated and di¤erentiated
emissions trading.46 These results are summarized graphically by Figure 7. Note that the left two
columns in Table 6 are identical to the corresponding columns in Table 5. Likewise, the equilibrium
outcomes DH0 ; UH0 ; DL0 ; and UL0 are identical to the emissions tax case. Intuitively, when the
policy maker’s ex ante information regarding abatement costs is correct, the choice between pricebased and quantity-based policy instruments has no bearing on emissions outcomes in equilibrium.
46

In an earlier working paper, we compared outcomes under the NOx Budget Program as implemented against a
di¤erentiated program that delivered the same quantity of emissions. This comparison was problematic insofar as
neither policy was optimal conditional on ex ante available information. Here, we elect to compare ex ante optimal
di¤erentiated and undi¤erentiated trading regimes. As noted above, an emissions cap of 726 thousand tons per
ozone season minimizes total social costs under an undi¤erentiated trading regime, conditional on ex ante available
information regarding both damages and costs. This is somewhat less stringent than the cap imposed in the NOx
Budget Program. (659 thousand tons).

33

As in the tax case, the di¤erentiated trading program welfare dominates undi¤erentiated trading.
These net gains are represented graphically as the sum of the two shaded triangles in Figure 7
(identical to areas A and B in Figure 6).
When the econometric model is used to simulate compliance decisions under a quantity-based
regime, a very di¤erent picture emerges. Recall that the policymaker charged with setting the
emissions cap does so based on expectations over both source-speci…c damages and source-speci…c
abatement costs. In contrast to the price-based regime, accurate abatement cost information is
required to de…ne optimal di¤erentiated and undi¤erentiated quantity-based policy parameters
(see R1).
Because ex post realized abatement costs are higher than expected; the ex ante optimal
emissions cap proves to be too restrictive ex post. This has welfare implications for both undifferentiated and di¤erentiated trading.
Under the undi¤erentiated regime, the permit price must rise well above the level of the undi¤erentiated tax of $1630/ton to clear the market. Marginal abatement costs are set to $3008/ton
across sources. In other words, the ex ante optimal emissions cap (which proves to be too stringent) incentivizes signi…cantly more emissions abatement as compared to the ex ante optimal tax.
The bene…ts from this additional abatement do not justify the costs. Consequently, the undifferentiated price-based regime welfare dominates the undi¤erentiated quantity-based regime. Net
bene…ts are $353 million under the cap-and-trade program (see Table 6) versus $378 million under
the undi¤erentiated tax (see Table 5).
Under the di¤erentiated trading regime, the price required to clear the market is more than
double the average marginal damage value. This leads to a signi…cant and asymmetric distortion
in policy incentives across sources. Each source must pay i to o¤set a unit of emissions. When
the market clears at a price of , …rms have an incentive to set marginal abatement costs equal
to the value of the damage caused by a unit of emissions. When the market clears at a price that
exceeds average damages, …rms are incentivized to invest too much in abatement activities. And
this distortion is proportional to the source-speci…c damage parameter i :
This distortion is illustrated graphically in Figure 7. To construct this …gure, we use the
marginal abatement cost curves de…ned in Figure 6 by the intersection of the emissions tax rates
and equilibrium emissions (for high and low damage sources respectively). We add to this graph
the equilibrium permit prices and corresponding emissions levels under di¤erentiated and undi¤erentiated trading. This …gure shows that the marginal abatement costs exceed marginal damages
under both di¤erentiated and undi¤erentiated trading. The distortion is particularly dramatic
under the di¤erentiated trading regime among high damage sources.
Importantly, we …nd that policy di¤erentiation leads to a reduction in welfare for tradable permits if we assume that the costs that rationalize observed choices represent the true costs incurred.
In the right panel of Figure 7, the hatched area represents abatement costs savings less the value
34

of increased damages. Under the di¤erentiated policy regime, emissions levels among relatively
low damage sources increase vis a vis the undi¤erentiated regime, and abatement costs fall (as
expected). In the left panel, the hatched area represents the increase in abatement costs among
relatively high damage sources less the value of avoided damages. The increase in abatement
costs induced by policy di¤erentiation easily exceeds the value of the additional avoided damages
because the market clearing permit price signi…cantly exceeds the average marginal damage value.
The distortion created by the overly stringent cap (and the associated permit price that signi…cantly exceeds $1733/ton NOx) is so extreme that the costs of policy di¤erentiation (in the form
of increased abatement costs) exceed the bene…ts.
We note two important quali…cations with respect to this surprising …nding. First, this is not
a general result. If regulators had over-estimated abatement costs, then the di¤erentiated policy
would welfare dominate undi¤erentiated emissions trading (all else equal). Hence, the relative
welfare performance of undi¤erentiated versus di¤erentiated quantity-based policies is a function
of how (not just if) the regulator mis-judges abatement costs. This result is similar to that reported
by Muller (2012) and it prohibits a general result pertaining to the welfare implications of policy
di¤erentiation under cost and damage uncertainty for tradable permits.
Second, while the Monte Carlo exercises executed in this analysis capture the statistical
uncertainty associated with particular parameters, we do not undertake a sensitivity analysis over
di¤erent parameter distributions in AP2. For example, in order to value mortality risks, we employ
results from USEPA’s meta analysis which estimates a mean $6 million VSL and an associated
standard deviation of roughly $3 million (see USEPA, 1999;2010). An alternative would be to use
the results from Mrozek and Taylor (2000) who estimate a mean VSL of approximately $2 million.
Using a di¤erent distribution for the VSL would shift our marginal damage values for all power
plants. As prior authors note, both the value attributed to mortality risks and the dose-response
function governing PM2:5 exposure and adult mortality impacts have pronounced impacts on the
level of the marginal damage estimates. While our use of the $6 million VSL is a standard choice,
many researchers use a di¤erent PM2:5 - mortality dose-response function than that used herein.
In particular, the most commonly used alternative function (Laden et al., 2006) yields (mean)
damages that are on the order of two-to-three times larger than the function employed in the
present paper. Note that if we adopted this parameter value and the associated distribution, the
resulting shift in expected marginal damage would approximately equalize the inter-source average
NOx marginal damage to the market clearing permit price.

5.3

Damage uncertainty

Thus far, our discussion has focused almost exclusively on the expected values of avoided damages
under the policy scenarios we consider. However, our analytical approach allows us to examine how

35

parameter uncertainty, and the stochastic nature of meteorological factors, generate uncertainty
about the welfare impacts of di¤erent policy alternatives. As explained above, we simulate damages
and associated policy outcomes for 5000 states of the world (each one characterized by draws from
the distributions of the damage model parameters). In addition to the mean values, we report
the 5th and 95th percentile values of simulated damage outcomes under the policy regimes we
analyze.
Tables 5 through 7 show how the range of estimates of the net welfare impacts of the NOx
Budget Program is quite large. In states of the world characterized by larger marginal damage
values, net bene…ts are much larger (in excess of $1.7 B). In states of the world characterized by
much lower damage values, the costs of complying with the program (which do not vary across
damage realizations) exceed the bene…ts.
There is also signi…cant variation in our estimates of the welfare gains from policy di¤erentiation across the 5000 parameter draws. One of the factors driving this variation is the degree
to which marginal damages across sources. Recall from ( R3 ) that gains from policy di¤erentiation are increasing with the degree of intersource variation in damages, all else equal. Another
factor generatong variation in the simulated gains from di¤erentiation is the degree of correlation
between expected damages and realized damages. As noted in section 3.2, if ex ante information
regarding the ranking of sources in terms of marginal damages is incorrect, the parameters that
de…ne the terms of compliance will incorrectly incentivize additional abatement activities among
relatively low damage sources (and vice versa).
Finally, it is interesting to note that the variance in the simulated gains from policy di¤erentiation is larger under the quantity-based (versus price-based) policy regime. Intuitively, this is
because the degree to which the imposed cap is too stringent varies across the 5000 realizations. In
some of the cases we consider, realized damages exceed expected damages to such an extent that
the imposed cap is too lax. We …nd that policy di¤erentiation is welfare improving in 25 percent
of simulated cases. Notably, in almost 10 percent of cases, gains from policy di¤erentiation in the
quantity-based regime exceed gains under the price-based policy.

6

Conclusion

How should market-based emissions regulations be designed and implemented when damages from
emissions vary signi…cantly across sources? To shed light on this question, we develop a conceptual
framework to analyze the welfare implications of policy di¤erentiation. We consider di¤erentiated
taxes and a form of di¤erentiated emissions trading that has been emphasized in the theory
literature. Di¤erentiated policy designs welfare dominate undi¤erentiated designs under perfect
information. A key result of our theoretical framework is: once uncertainty is introduced into the
model, the welfare implications of policy di¤erentiation become more ambiguous.
36

The theory model provides the foundation for an applied analysis of the gains from policy di¤erentiation. We consider the landmark NOx Budged Program (NBP). Although emissions
damages vary considerably across sources, for the sake of simplicity, the program features undi¤erentiated emissions trading. This begs the question: could welfare have been signi…cantly increased
under a di¤erentiated policy regime?
There are several important …ndings. The …rst comes out of a direct comparison of the econometrically estimated model of …rms’compliance decisions and a more stylized cost minimization
model calibrated to match a deterministic simulation model used to inform policy-making. Consistent with earlier work by Carlson et al. (2000), we …nd substantive di¤erences between the
observed compliance choices and those predicted by the cost minimization algorithm. In our case,
abatement costs that rationalize observed choices exceed ex ante engineering estimates by a significant margin. These higher-than-expected compliance costs notwithstanding, we estimate that the
gains from the NOx Budget Program as implemented easily exceed the abatement costs incurred.
Having found that the undi¤erentiated emissions trading program delivered welfare gains, we
then ask whether these gains would have been smaller or larger under a di¤erentiated trading
regime. More precisely, we compare di¤erentiated and undi¤erentiated policies designed to maximize ex ante expected welfare. We …nd that a di¤erentiated emissions trading regime would likely
have reduced welfare vis a vis the undi¤erentiated policy that was implemented. This is due to the
fact that the imposed cap was apparently too stringent given ex post realized costs. In contrast,
gains from policy di¤erentiation would likely have been positive under a tax-based regime.
It is worth emphasizing that our …ndings run counter to the general expectation that policy
di¤erentiation will be unambiguously welfare improving. Such expectations were formed under the
assumption of perfect information and thus overlooked the possibility that the ex ante optimal cap
may prove too stringent ex post (e.g. Mendelsohn, 1986). We show that negative welfare impacts
are not only possible, but likely in the particular case of a large scale NOx trading program.
Of course, our empirical results speak only to the welfare implications of policy di¤erentiation
in the NOx Budget Program. This policy context need not be representative of other programs.
For example, the additively separable damage function and underestimation of abatement costs ex
ante need not apply in general. That said, uncertainty regarding emissions damage and abatement
costs is ubiquitous. The ideas and …ndings presented here demonstrate the potential importance
of this uncertainty in determining the welfare consequences of policy di¤erentiation across a range
of policy designs.

37

References
Abbey, D., B. Ostro, F. Peterson, and R. Burchette. "Chronic respiratory symptoms associated
with estimated long-term ambient concentrations of …ne particulates less than 2.5 microns
in aerodynamic diameter and other air pollutants". Journal Expo Analysis Environmental
½ 159.
Epidemiology 5 (2), pp.137 U
Baumol, W. and W. Oates (1988). The Theory of Environmental Policy. Cambridge Univ Pr.
Bell, M. L., A. McDermott, S. Zeger, J. Samet, and F. Domenici (2004). "Ozone and shortterm mortality in 95 US urban communities, 1987-2000.". Journal of the American Medical
Association 17.
Burtraw, D., R. Bharvirkar, and M. McGuinness. "Uncertainty and the net bene…ts of emissions
reductions of Nitrogen Oxides from electricity generation". Land Economics 79 (3).
Carlson, C., D. Burtraw, and K. Palmer (2000). "Sulfur dioxide control by electric utilities:
What are the gains from trade". Journal of Political Economy, 1293–1326.
Deschenes, O., M. Greenstone, and J. Shapiro (2012). "Defensive investments and the demand
for air quality: Evidence from the nox budget program and ozone reductions". Technical
report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Diamond, P. A. (1973). "Consumption externalities and imperfect corrective pricing". Bell Journal of Economics 4 (2).
Electric Power Research Institute (1999). UMBRELLA: Software for Assessing NOx Control
Technology Combinations, Version 1.0. Technical report.
Esty, D. C. (2004). "Environmental protection in the information age". New York University
Law Review.
Farrow, R., M. Schultz, P. Celikkol, and G. Van Houtven (2005). "Pollution trading in water
quality limited areas: Use of bene…ts assessment and cost-e¤ective trading ratios". Land
Economics 81 (2), 191–205.
Fishelson, G. (1976). "Emission control policies under uncertainty". Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 3 (3), 189–197.
Fowlie, M. (2010). "Emissions trading, electricity restructuring, and investment in pollution
abatement". American Economic Review 100 (3), 837–69.
Fowlie, M., S. P. Holland, and E. T. Mansur (2012, April). "What do emissions markets deliver and to whom? evidence from southern california’s nox trading program". American
Economic Review 102 (2), 965–93.

38

Fullerton, D., S. P. McDermott, and J. P. Caulkins (1997). Sulfur dioxide compliance of a
regulated utility. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 34 (1), 32 –53.
Horan, R. D. and J. S. Shortle (2005). "When two wrongs make a right: Second-best pointnonpoint trading ratios". American Journal of Agricultural Economics 87 (2), 340–352.
Joskow, P. L., R. Schmalensee, and E. M. Bailey (1998). The market for sulfur dioxide emissions.
The American Economic Review 88 (4), pp. 669–685.
Keith, G., D. White, and B. Biewald (2003). "OTC emission reduction workbook 2.1: Description and users manual". Technical report, Synapse Energy Economics.
Keohane, N. (2007). "Cost savings from allowance trading in the 1990 clean air act:estimates
from a choice-based model". In C. E. Kolstad and J. Freeman (Eds.), Moving to Markets
in Environmental Regulation: Lessons from Twenty Years of Experience. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Krupnick, A., V. McConnell, and R. for the Future (2000). "Cost-e¤ective NOx Control in the
Eastern United States". Resources for the Future.
Laden, F., J. S. F. S. D. D. (2006). "Reduction in …ne particulate air pollution and mortality:
Extended follow-up of the harvard six cities study". American Journal of Respiratory and
Critical Care Medicine 173, pp. 667–672.
Linn, J. (2008). "Technological modi…cations in the nitrogen oxides tradable permit program".
The Energy journal 29 (3), 153–176.
Martin, K. C., P. L. Joskow, and A. D. Ellerman (2007). "Time and location di¤erentiated
nox control in competitive electricity markets using cap-and-trade mechanisms". Working
Papers 0704, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Center for Energy and Environmental
Policy Research.
Mendelsohn, R. (1986). Regulating heterogeneous emissions. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 13 (4), 301–312.
Millock, K., C. Nauges, and T. N. S. Sterner (2004). "Environmental taxes: A comparison
of French and Swedish experience from taxes on industrial air pollution". CESifo DICE
Report 2 (1), 30–34.
Montgomery, W. (1972). "Markets in licenses and e¢ cient pollution control programs". Journal
of economic theory 5 (3), 395–418.
Muller, N. "Linking policy to statistical uncertainty in air pollution damages". Berkeley Electronic Press Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 11 (1).
Muller, N. "The design of optimal climate policy with air pollution co-bene…ts". Resource and
Energy Economics 34, pp. 696–722.
39

Muller, N. (2011). "Linking policy to statistical uncertainty in air pollution damages". The B.
E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 11 (1), 32.
Muller, N. and R. Mendelsohn (2009). "E¢ cient pollution regulation: Getting the prices right".
The American Economic Review 99 (5), 1714–1739.
New England ISO (2006). 2006 New England marginal emissions rate analysis. Technical report,
ISO New England System Planning Department.
OTAG Air Quality Analysis Workgroup (1997, June). Telling the OTAG ozone story with data.
Technical report.
Pope, C., R. Burnett, M. Thun, and et al (2002). "Lung cancer, cardiopulmonary mortality,
and long-term exposure to …ne particulate air pollution". JAMA 287 (9), 1132–1141.
Seinfeld, J. and S. Pandis (2006). "Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics: From Air Pollution to
Climate Change" (2 ed.). Wiley-Interscience.
Stavins, R. (2005). "Lessons learned from SO2 allowance trading". Choices 20 (1), 53–58.
Tietenberg, T. (1995). "Tradeable permits for pollution control when emission location matters:
What have we learned?". Environmental and Resource Economics 5 (2).
Tietenberg, T. (2006). Emissions Trading-Principles and Practice. Resources for the Future
Pres.
Train, K. (2003). Discrete choice methods with simulation. Cambridge university press.
Turner, D. (2006). "Workbook of Atmospheric Dispersion Estimates: An Introduction to Dispersion Modeling". CRC.
United States Environment Protection Agency (1998a). "Analyzing electric power generation
under the CAAA".
United States Environment Protection Agency (1998b). "Regulatory impact analysis for the
NOx SIP Call, FIP, and Section 126 Petitions".
United States Environmental Protection Agency (2005). NOx budget program : 2005 compliance
and environmental results.
United States Environmental Protection Agency (2008). "NOx Budget Trading Program 2008
Progress Reports".
United States O¢ ce of Environmental Protection. "The bene…ts and costs of the Clean Air Act:
1990 - 2010.
US Environmental Protection Agency Science Advisory Board (2012). SAB review of EPAś
retrospective cost study of the costs of epa regulations: An interim report of …ve case
studies. Technical report.
40

Weitzman, M. (1974). "Prices vs. quantities". The Review of Economic Studies, 477–491.
Woodru¤, T., J. Parker, and K. Schoendorf (2006). "Fine particulate matter (pm2.5) air pollution and selected causes of postneonatal infant mortality in California". Environmental
Health Perspectives 114 (5), 786.
World Health Organization (2003). Health aspects of air pollution with particulate matter,
ozone and nitrogen dioxide. Technical report.

41

$

$
MACh

A

B
MACL

MACh

MACL
D
E

C

0

∗

∗

0

Figure 1: Emissions permit market outcomes under differentiated and undifferentiated policies:
Optimal emissions constraint

42

Policy simulations

Policy
Regime

Price instrument

Choice
Model

Engineering
cost minimization

Policy
Yes
Differentiation?

No

Quantity instrument

Econometric
model

Yes

No

Engineering
cost minimization

Yes

No

No regulation

Econometric
model

Yes

0

2.0e-04

Density

4.0e-04

6.0e-04

Figure 2: Policy simulation road map

0

10000
20000
30000
Unit-specific marginal damage parameter ($/ton NOx)

40000

Figure 3 : Within source variation in marginal damage parameter estimates

43

No

.001
8.0e-04
Density
4.0e-04 6.0e-04
2.0e-04
0
0

2000
4000
Unit-specific marginal damage parameters ($/ton NOx)

6000

0

Marginal Abatement Cost ($/lb NOx)
5000
10000

15000

Figure 4: Between source variation in point estimates of marginal damage values

0

.2
.4
.6
Seasonal emissions reductions (Millions of tons)

.8

Figure 5 : Aggregate marginal abatement cost curves generated using alternative models of the
facility‐level compliance choice

44

5000

5000
4500

E[MACH]

4000

4500

MACH

$/ton NOx

MACL

3500

3500

3000

3000

DH0

2500

DH1
A

2000
1500

UH0

1000

UH1

δH

2500

δH

C

Undifferentiated tax

2000

UL0

UL1

1500

B

1000

δL

500

500

D
DL0

DL1

0

0
0

‐

E[MACL]

4000

0

50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550 600 650

50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550 600 650

Simulated ozone season NOx emissions (1000 tons)
Figure 6 : Gains from policy differentiation under the tax‐based regime

45

δL

5000

5000
4500

E[MACH]

4000

DH1
MACH

4500

MACL

3500

3500
3000

$/ton NOx

E[MACL]

4000

UH1

2500

Undifferentiated permit price

δH

UH0

Undifferentiated tax

UL0

1500
1000

δL

500

δH

2000

2000

1000

DL1

2500

DH0

1500

UL1

3000

DL0

500

δL

0

0
0

0

50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550 600 650

50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550 600 650

Simulated ozone season NOx emissions (1000 tons)
Figure 7 : Gains from policy differentiation under the quantity‐based regime

46

Table 1 : Unit‐level summary statistic

High
damage

Low
damage

248

384

Capacity
(MW)

255.3
(243.3)

282.1
(255.0)

Pre‐retrofit NOX emissions
rate (lbs NOx/mmbtu)

0.55
(0.24)

0.50
(0.20)

Boiler age
(years)

35.9
(10.5)

36.5
(11.6)

Summer capacity factor

65.0
(14.9)

66.1
(15.2)

Variable

# Units

Ozone season production
(MWh)

687,868
(725,920)

Average damage parameter
($/ton NOx)

2621
(692)

779,450
(767758)

1161
(370)

Notes: This table summarizes the operating characteristics of 632 coal‐fired generating units regulated under the
NOx Budget Trading Program. Standard deviations are in parentheses. “High damage” units are those with above
average damage parameter point estimates. “Low damage” units are those with below average damage
parameter point estimates.

47

Table 2 : Observed, predicted, and correctly predicted compliance choices

Compliance
choice

SCR

SNCR

Low NOx
burners

Combustion
Modifications

No retrofit

Total

Observed
choices

187

42

53

58

292

632

Cost minimization model
Predicted
adoption rate

62

80

228

159

103

632

Correctly
predicted

47

6

48

9

76

186
(29%)

Predicted
choices

179

15

35

21

382

632

Correctly
predicted

166

7

22

18

284

497
(79%)

Econometric model

Notes: This table summarizes predicted and observed compliance choices for the 632 electricity generating units
included in the study.

48

Table 3 : Econometrically estimated coefficients of the compliance choice model

Technology specific constants

High damage units

Low damage units

Post‐combustion controls

‐3.06
(1.35)

‐2.21
(1.61)

Low NOx burners

‐2.33
(0.43)

‐2.06
(0.53)

Combustion modifications

‐2.32
(0.69)

‐1.89
(0.85)

Age* capital cost interaction

‐0.13
(0.06)

‐0.17
(0.07)

Annual compliance cost
($1.000,000)

‐0.99
(0.58)

‐1.09
(0.82)

Capital cost
($1.000,000)

‐0.28
(0.33)

‐0.45
(0.43)

248

384

Manager‐specific coefficients

# Units

Notes: Only point estimates are used to parameterize the simulation model. This table reports average coefficient
values (averaged across facilities). Standard deviations are in parentheses. For a more detailed discussion of these
econometric estimates, see Fowlie (2010).

49

Table 4 : Simulated outcomes under observed policy regime

Cost minimization
(1)

Econometric
(2)

Permit price
($/ton NOx)

$1,864

$4,460

Ozone season emissions
(thousand tons NOx)

658.5

658.6

% permitted emissions
occurring at high damage
sources

41%

38%

Levelized annual costs ($M)
(engineering estimate)

$461

$712

Levelized annual costs ($M)
(derived from choice model)

$461

$733

Annual benefits ($M)
(monetized avoided damages )

$1,009
($175‐$2444)

$997
($173‐$2436)

Annual net benefits ($M)
(Preferred measure )

$546
(‐$282, $1979)

$264
(‐$558, $1710)

Model of compliance choice

Notes: This table summarizes the results from simulating investment in NOx abatement and the associated ozone‐
season emissions under the observed, undifferentiated trading regime. 95 percent confidence intervals are in
parentheses. “High damage” units are those with above average damage parameter point estimates. “Low
damage” units are those with below average damage parameter point estimates.

50

Table 5 : Simulated gains from policy differentiation– Emissions tax
Model of
compliance choice

Cost minimization

Econometric

Policy regime

Undifferentiated

Differentiated

Undifferentiated

Differentiated

Permit price
($/ton NOx)

$1630

Ozone season
emissions
(thousand tons
NOx)

723.6

746.6

868

881

% emissions
occurring at high
damage sources

40%

28%

38%

33%

Levelized annual
costs ($M)

$361

$402

$259

$272

Avoided annual
damages
($M)

$883
($158, $2134)

$988
($182, $2370)

$637
($104, $1588)

$697
($125, $1698)

Net benefits
($M)

$522
(‐$203, $1773)

$586
($‐220, $1969)

$378
(‐$155, $1329)

$426
(‐$147, $1426)

$1630

Effects of policy differentiation
Change in annual
costs ($M)

$41

$13

Change in avoided
annual damages
($M)

‐$105
($7, $256)

‐$60
($6, $143)

$64
(‐$34, $215)

$47
(‐$7, $130)

Net gains from
differentiation
(annual in $M)

Notes: This table summarizes the results from simulating investment in NOx abatement and the associated ozone‐
season emissions under counterfactual policy designs. “High damage” units are those with above average damage
parameter point estimates. “Low damage” units are those with below average damage parameter point
estimates.

51

Table 6 : Simulated gains from policy differentiation– Cap‐and‐trade program
Model of
compliance choice
Policy regime

Cost minimization

Econometric

Undifferentiated
(1)

Differentiated
(2)

Undifferentiated
(3)

Differentiated
(4)

Permit price
($/ton NOx)

$1630

$1732

$3008

$3937

Permits allocated
(000)

726.3

642.2

726.3

642.2

Ozone season
emissions
(000 tons NOx)

726.3

746.6

726.2

698.2

% emissions
occurring at high
damage sources

40%

28%

38%

33%

Levelized annual
costs ($M)

$361

$402

$521

$674

Avoided annual
damages
($M)

$883
($158, $2134)

$988
($182, $2370)

$878
($152, $2155)

$990
($180, $2405)

Net benefits
($M)

$522
(‐$203, $1773)

$586
($‐220, $1969)

$353
(‐$373, $1629)

$316
(‐$495, $1731)

Effects of policy differentiation
Change in annual
costs ($M)

$41.0

$149

Change in avoided
annual damages
($M)

‐$105
($7, $256)

‐$112
($6, $267)

$64
(‐$34, $215)

‐$37
(‐$130, $117)

Net gains from
differentiation
(annual in $M)

Notes: This table summarizes the results from simulating investment in NOx abatement and the associated ozone‐
season emissions under counterfactual policy designs. “High damage” units are those with above average damage
parameter point estimates. “Low damage” units are those with below average damage parameter point
estimates. The 5th percentile and 95th percentile values are reported in parentheses.

52

