NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOME COMPUTERS AND CHILD OUTCOMES:
SHORT-TERM IMPACTS FROM A RANDOMIZED EXPERIMENT IN PERU
Diether W. Beuermann
Julian P. Cristia
Yyannu Cruz-Aguayo
Santiago Cueto
Ofer Malamud
Working Paper 18818
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18818
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013

This project is the result of a collaborative effort involving many people. We want to especially thank
Mariana Alfonso (IDB) and Jennelle Thompson (IDB) for their significant contributions. This project
would not have been materialized without the collaboration and commitment shown by the Dirección
General de Tecnologías Educativas in the Ministry of Education of Peru (DIGETE). We thank its current
and former directors, Sandro Marcone and Oscar Becerra, respectively, and their excellent team including
among others Roberto Bustamente, Carmen Alvarez and Victor Castillo. We also thank Giuliana Avila,
Olga Namen, Elizabeth Rosales, Claudia Sugimaru, Diego Vera, and Micaela Wensjoe for outstanding
research assistance. We acknowledge excellent comments and suggestions by Bruce Meyer, and by
seminar participants at Cornell University, the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), the SIEP
conference in Peru, and the University of Pennsylvania. The views expressed in this paper are those
of the authors and should not be attributed to the Inter-American Development Bank. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Diether W. Beuermann, Julian P. Cristia, Yyannu Cruz-Aguayo, Santiago Cueto, and Ofer
Malamud. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Home Computers and Child Outcomes: Short-Term Impacts from a Randomized Experiment
in Peru
Diether W. Beuermann, Julian P. Cristia, Yyannu Cruz-Aguayo, Santiago Cueto, and Ofer
Malamud
NBER Working Paper No. 18818
February 2013
JEL No. I25
ABSTRACT
This paper presents results from a randomized control trial in which approximately 1,000 OLPC XO
laptops were provided for home use to children attending primary schools in Lima, Peru. The intervention
increased access and use of home computers, with some substitution away from computer use outside
the home. Beneficiaries were more likely to complete domestic chores but less likely to read books.
Treatment children scored almost one standard deviation higher in a test of XO proficiency, though
there were no effects on objective and self-reported skills for using a Windows-based PC and Internet.
There were positive impacts on the Raven’s Progressive Matrices test among children who did not
have a home computer before the intervention, but no significant effects for the sample as a whole.
Finally, there was little evidence for spillovers within schools, although close friends and classmates
of laptop recipients did exhibit higher proficiency with the XO computer.
Diether W. Beuermann
Inter-American Development Bank
1300 New York Ave, NW
Washington, DC 20577
dietherbe@iadb.org
Julian P. Cristia
Inter-American Development Bank
1300 New York Ave, NW
Washington, DC 20577
jcristia@iadb.org
Yyannu Cruz-Aguayo
Inter-American Development Bank
1300 New York Ave NW
Washington, DC 20577
yyannuc@iadb.org

Santiago Cueto
GRADE
Av. Almirante Grau #915
Barranco, Lima 4
Perú
scueto@grade.org.pe
Ofer Malamud
Harris School of Public Policy Studies
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
malamud@uchicago.edu

1. Introduction
The development of the personal computer in the late 1970s enabled households to purchase a
computer for the home and children to gain access to an important new technology. Today, home
computers are practically ubiquitous in developed countries. Data from the 2009 round of the
Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) indicates that an average of 95 percent of
15-year-old students in OECD member countries report having a computer at home
(Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2010). In contrast, access to home
computers in developing countries continues to lag. Only about half of 15-year-old students in
Albania, Brazil, Mexico, and Thailand report having a computer at home, while these
proportions are even lower in Indonesia and Peru (Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development, 2010). Many government and non-governmental organizations are seeking to
bridge this “digital divide” by distributing home computers to children in developing countries
despite relatively little evidence about their impacts on children. This paper presents results from
the first large-scale experiment focusing on the effect of home computers on children’s outcomes
in a developing country.
Among the most prominent initiatives to provide computers to children in developing
countries is the One Laptop per Child (OLPC) program. 1 To date, more than 2.5 million OLPC
laptops have been distributed to children in more than 52 countries. Peru has invested most
heavily in this initiative by purchasing almost one million laptops at a cost of $200 million.
Usually, these laptops have been distributed through schools, and the preponderance of use has
occurred in the classroom (Cristia et. al. 2012). However, the emphasis on self-empowered
learning by the founders of OLPC suggests that these laptops may also be beneficial when used
outside the structured classroom environment.
We designed and implemented a randomized control trial (RCT) in which we provided
OLPC laptops to approximately 1,000 students attending public primary schools in Lima, Peru.
The RCT incorporated randomization at both the school level and the individual level. We began
by randomly selecting 14 treatment schools and 14 control schools from a sample of lowachieving public primary schools and conducting a detailed baseline survey. Within treatment
schools, we provided a random sample of participating students with the XO laptops for home
1

The “Euro 200” program in Romania and the “Yo Elijo Mi PC” program in Chile are two examples of government
initiatives that provide home computers to low-income children.

2

use through in-class lotteries, while students in control schools did not receive any interventions.
The design of this RCT was explicitly intended to explore the potential for spillovers from
treatment. 2 Taking advantage of the randomization across and within-schools, together with
comprehensive data on social networks collected at baseline, we can examine the effects on
direct beneficiaries who received laptops as well as indirect beneficiaries such as classmates and
friends. Note that the present study is not intended to directly evaluate the OLPC initiative,
which posits several other necessary provisions for the effective use of OLPC laptops including
“digital saturation” in the community and wireless connectivity.
We find that our intervention was successful in increasing the exposure of children to
OLPC laptops at home. Compliance with the randomized assignment was close to ideal: 93
percent of treatment students received OLPC laptops and no student in the control group
received an OLPC laptop. The effect of the intervention on the likelihood that children had a
computer at home is approximately 40 percentage points, while children in the treatment group
were 34 percentage points more likely to use computers at home during the previous week.
Interestingly, the intervention led to a decline of 11 percentage points in the likelihood of
computer use in Internet cafes, suggesting that children who won a laptop substituted computer
use at home for use outside the home. Overall, children in the treatment group report using
computers at home for about 19 minutes longer each day. The largest effects of computer use
seem to be associated with playing computer games and, to some extent, with listening to music
on the computer. Based on detailed logs that recorded actual computer use, we see a clear decline
in utilization over time.
The intervention also affected the time spent on other activities. Specifically, children in
the treatment group were significantly more likely to complete domestic chores. They also
reported a 6 percentage point lower likelihood of reading books, stories or magazines. By far the
most pronounced impact of the intervention was a 0.88 standard deviation increase for scores on
an objective test that measured proficiency in using the XO laptop. On the other hand, there were
no significant differences between treatment and control groups on objective and self-reported
skills for using a Windows personal computer (PC) and Internet. The effect on cognitive skills,
as measured by the Raven’s Progressive Matrices test, were positive but small and insignificant.

2

A similar approach was employed by Duflo and Saez (2003) to explore information spillovers in retirement
decisions within academic departments of a particular university in the United States.

3

Interestingly, the effect on the Raven’s test was significant, at 0.08 of a standard deviation, for
the sample of children who did not have a home computer before the intervention. Based on
reports by teachers, children in the treatment group were significantly less likely to exert effort at
school compared with their counterparts in the control group. Finally, we did not observe much
evidence for spillovers, though classmates within the social network of children who received
OLPC laptops did display significantly higher levels of proficiency in using the XO laptop.
Although there is a large literature exploring the effects of computer use at school (e.g.,
Angrist and Lavy, 2000; Machin, McNally and Silva, 2006; Banerjee et al., 2007), only a few
recent studies have examined the effect of home computers on children’s outcomes. Malamud
and Pop-Eleches (2011) used a regression discontinuity design to examine a Romanian
government program which provided home computers to poor children in families below a
particular income threshold. They found that home computers led to lower school grades but
higher cognitive skills and computer skills one year after the computers were distributed. Cristia
et. al. (2012) evaluated the OLPC program by implementing a randomized-control trial across
319 primary schools in rural Peru. They found no impacts on academic achievement in math and
language standardized tests but also observed some positive and significant impacts on cognitive
skills. Finally, Fairlie and Robinson (2012) conducted an experimental study of home computers
within middle and high schools in the United States. They found no impacts of home computers
on academic achievement based on standardized tests or grades. 3
This paper makes several contributions to the existing literature on technology in
education. First, this study represents the first large-scale randomized experiment aimed at
exploring the effects of expanding home computer access in a developing country. Focusing on
this setting is especially policy relevant given that governments and households in the
developing world are making significant investments to expand home computer access. Second,
we can provide evidence on spillover effects by exploiting the double-randomization design
(across both schools and individuals) and rich baseline information on social networks. Third,
because our individual-level randomization includes more than 2,700 students with follow-up
data, we can provide very precise estimates of impacts on a variety of outcomes. Finally, our

3

A number of earlier studies estimated the impacts of home computers using more demanding identification
assumptions. For example, Vigdor and Ladd (2010) exploited changes in home computer ownership over time as
reported by students in North Carolina and estimated negative impacts on math and language test scores.

4

study is the first to collect the entire history of computer use logs providing important evidence
on potential mechanisms underlying the effects on final outcomes.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the design and
implementation of the RCT. Section 3 explains our data collection efforts and the empirical
strategy we use to analyze the data. Section 4 presents the main results, while Section 5 offers
additional results on spillovers and impact heterogeneity. Finally, Section 6 provides a summary
of our findings and discusses our future work.
2. Study Design
A randomized control trial (RCT) employing randomization at both the school level and the
individual level forms the basis of the study design. First, we randomly selected 14 treatment
schools and 14 control schools from a sample of low-achieving public primary schools. Then,
within treatment schools, we provided a random sample of students with OLPC XO laptops
while students in control schools did not receive any intervention. Children in all schools also
had occasional access to their school’s own computer lab. The timeline of the study is as follows.
Baseline data were collected in April/May 2011, and the within-school lottery (and delivery of
laptops) was implemented in June/July 2011. Training for students was offered in
August/September 2011, and the follow-up data were collected in November 2011. This section
describes the selection of schools and the within-school interventions in more detail.
2.1 Selection of Schools
We targeted large low-performing public elementary schools in Lima. Specifically, we selected
public elementary schools with morning shifts which enrolled between 400 and 800 students
according to the 2010 School Census data. We then ranked these schools according to their
average performance on the second grade national standardized examination between 2007 and
2009. We administered a brief phone survey to the 70 lowest performing schools with valid
contact information, and collected updated information on enrollment, number of sections, and
access to computers and classrooms. We further restricted our sample to schools which had
fewer than 25 class sections (namely, a maximum of 4 classes per grade), a ratio of school
computers to students lower than 0.15, and a classroom available for a computer lab in the
afternoon. This resulted in a target sample of 40 schools.

5

To assign schools to treatment and control status, we carried out a pair-wise matching
procedure based on Bruhn and McKenzie (2009) who implement the “optimal greedy algorithm”
suggested by King et al. (2007). We matched on average class size (enrollment divided by the
number of class sections) and the ratio of computers to students in each school. The pairs were
formed to minimize the Mahalanobis distance between the values of class size and computer-tostudent ratios within pairs, and one unit in each pair was randomly assigned to treatment and the
other to control. We proceeded to visit the treatment and control schools in each pair and invite
each school to participate in the study. All schools agreed to participate in the study. However, to
allow a higher fidelity of implementation we further reduced the study sample to 14 school pairs
composed of 14 treatment schools and 14 control schools.
2.2 Within-School Interventions
The principal intervention for this study involved providing XO laptops to randomly selected
students in treatment schools. In June-July 2011, we conducted a public lottery for four XO
laptops within each class/section determined eligible for the intervention. A class was considered
eligible for the intervention if more than 60 percent of the children in the class obtained consent
from their parents or legal guardians. Furthermore, only children whose parents provided written
consent were included in the lottery in the eligible classrooms. These procedures were developed
in coordination with schools, principals, and teachers. The lotteries were conducted in class and
parents were invited to attend in order to assure transparency. 4 We distributed 1,048 laptops
provided by the Ministry of Education of Peru.
The laptops were specifically designed to be used by primary students in developing
countries. These netbook-sized computers are light, sturdy, energy-efficient and portable. The
laptops have 512 MB of RAM, 2 GB of flash storage and a battery that lasts for about two to
three hours. The operating system is Linux and the graphical interface is known as Sugar. 5 This
graphical interface has been designed to be used by children and there are hundreds of
applications that can be installed.
Thirty-two applications, selected by the Ministry of Education for nationwide use, were
installed in the distributed laptops. The applications include: i) standard applications such as
4

We conducted several focus groups with parents and teachers from the schools to discuss the concept of lotteries
and explore alternative approaches to conduct the lotteries.
5
The laptops do not run Windows, and they are not compatible with software designed for that operating system.
However, most files (e.g., images, sound and text documents) are compatible with the Windows environment.

6

word processor, drawing software, calculator and chat; ii) educational games including Tetris,
Sudoku and a variety of puzzles; iii) applications to create, edit and play music; iv) two
programming environments; and v) other applications including sound and video recording and
specific sections of Wikipedia. The laptops were also pre-loaded with age-appropriate e-books
selected by the Ministry of Education.
To encourage adequate use of the laptops, we provided all beneficiary students with an
instruction manual and training sessions. The manual we developed presented general
information about how to use the laptop and more in-depth practical instruction for 10 prioritized
applications. The manual was designed for primary school children and emphasized graphical
illustrations and practical assistance on how to use the applications rather than covering technical
knowledge. Weekly training sessions took place in each treatment school during a seven-week
period in August and September. On each Saturday during the training period, there were three
two-hour sessions for students arranged by grade (1-2, 3-4 and 5-6 grades, respectively).
Average student attendance was about 50 percent, and approximately 70 percent of students
attended at least one session.
3. Data and Empirical Strategy
3.1 Data
The data used in this evaluation come from three primary sources: i) administrative data at the
school level from the Peruvian Education Statistics Unit and individual-level standardized tests
from Student Census Evaluation (ECE) at the Ministry of Education of Peru; ii) a baseline
survey among all students attending grades 1 through 6 in treatment and control schools during
April/May 2011 that collected information on basic demographics, computer literacy, computer
and Internet use, time use, and detailed information about social networks, as well as tests of
cognitive skills (Raven’s Progressive Matrices) and standardized tests in math and language
ability; and iii) a short-term follow-up survey in November 2011 restricted to students attending
grades 3 to 6 which covered most topics examined in the baseline survey except for the
standardized tests in math and language ability. The attrition rate of students between the
baseline and follow-up was 9 percent, and it was not statistically different between laptop
winners and non-winners.

7

The administrative data from the Ministry of Education (MINEDU) consisted of several
databases on primary schools in Peru and included annual information on a variety of schoollevel indicators from 2001 to 2010: school location (region, province and district), source of
funding (public/private), year opened, presence of morning and afternoon shift enrollment (by
year and gender) and number of sections in each year administrative, managerial and teaching
staff (number, gender, qualifications). There was also information on infrastructure (water,
electricity, sanitation), furniture (desks, blackboards), educational resources (existence of a
library, number of books), computational resources (number of computers, Internet, network
connection), basic educational outcomes (repetition rate, intra-annual dropout rate). The ECE is
an annual census examination of second grade students in Spanish-only schools that has been
conducted since 2006, covering both mathematics-logic and language comprehension. Coverage
of schools in Lima has been extremely high, and all schools in our sample were tested in 20072009. This information, together with the school-level data for the most recent year of 2010, was
used to construct the initial sample of primary schools and implement the pair-wise matching
procedure.
The format of the baseline and follow-up data collection was extremely similar, with the
exception of the achievement tests in Math and Reading, which were collected only at baseline.
These achievement tests were administered in a group setting to all students in grades 1 to 6 and
were developed separately for each grade using items drawn from previous nationally
standardized exams. We also administered the Colored Raven Progressive Matrices test that was
specifically designed for children ages 5 to 11 and has been widely used to assess non-verbal
cognitive ability. In this test, respondents are presented a series of progressively more difficult
matching-exercises that require choosing the figure that completes a pattern. The test measures
“educative ability - the ability to make sense and meaning out of complex or confusing data; the
ability to perceive new patterns and relationships, and to forge (largely non-verbal) constructs
which make it easy to handle complexity” (Pearson, 2011). Note that, in the empirical analysis,
cognitive and achievement measures are standardized by grade, subtracting the mean and
dividing by the standard deviation in control schools. Finally, we administered three assessments
of computer skills: i) an objective test that measured the proficiency in using an OLPC XO
laptop, ii) a multiple-choice test consisting of five questions intended to measure practical
knowledge about using a Windows personal computer (PC) and Internet, and iii) a set of 11
8

(yes/no) subjective questions in which students were asked to report whether they could perform
various tasks related to using a PC and Internet. 6
Student surveys were administered to children in grades 3 to 6 and aimed to capture
information on socio-demographic characteristics, access and use of computers and laptops, as
well as participation in other activities (e.g., reading, doing homework, watching television,
etc.). The questions on participation were posed for whether a particular activity was completed
in the previous day. The questions about computer and Internet use were substantially more
detailed. They elicited information about where the computer and Internet use took place and
what specific activities were undertaken; they also included the intensive margin by asking about
hours and minutes of use in the prior day. We additionally extracted log files from the XO
laptops to allow for objective assessments of patterns of use. These logs recorded the date and
time when each session started as well as roughly when every application was closed (parental
consent included permission to gather this information). Note that this provides an upper bound
for use because we cannot be certain that children are actually using the computer throughout the
time that an application is open. Effective computer records were collected for about 67 percent
of beneficiaries. Finally, we collected information on social networks at baseline and in the
follow-up by asking children to list their four closest friends and their friends when partaking in
other activities. 7 To generate an estimate of the number of friends not constrained by the list, we
constructed the number of friends for an individual based on the number of times they were
listed by other students in the class.
All teachers in treatment and control schools completed self-administered questionnaires
that collected information on socio-demographic characteristics, education and experience,
access and use of computers and laptops, satisfaction with their work, self-efficacy and attitudes
towards computers in education. School principals also completed a self-administered
questionnaire covering the following: services at the school and the community (running water,
sewage, electricity, phone, Internet); enrollment by grade; access and use of computers; laptops
received; and implementation issues including number of malfunctioning and repaired laptops.

6

These instruments were developed by the authors and are available upon request.
These included the four friends with whom they did homework, the four friends whom they visited at home, and
the four friends they listed as those with whom they would share a computer if they would receive one.

7

9

3.2 Empirical Strategy
The empirical framework for our analysis involves three comparisons. First, we use the
observations on children in the 14 treatment schools to compare children that won the computer
lottery with those who participated in the lottery but did not win. In particular, we estimate the
following regression model:

Yijk ,t = δ j + λ ⋅ Yijk ,t −1 + λ1' X ijk ,t −1 + β1 ⋅Winnerijk + ε1,ijk ,t

(1)

where Yijk ,t denotes the outcome of interest for child i, in class j and school k observed at followup, δ j is a class fixed effect, Yijk ,t −1 is the outcome of interest observed at baseline and X ijk ,t −1 is a
vector of control variables observed at baseline that includes age, number of siblings, number of
younger siblings, whether the father lives with the child, whether the father works at home and
whether the mother works at home. Winnerijk is a treatment indicator which takes the value of
one if child i in class j and school k won a computer and zero otherwise. Finally, ε1,ijk ,t is the error
term which is clustered at the school level in all regressions. Accordingly, estimates of β1
quantify the differences in means between laptop winners and non-winners.
Table 1 provides evidence that the within-school randomization was successful in
generating balance between treatment and control groups. Among the 14 selected characteristics
only one is significant, and only at the 10 percent level. Moreover, Tables A1-A3 in the
Appendix show that among all 40 collected characteristics, only three were significant at the 10
percent level. Thus, the randomization of computers was successful in creating appropriate
treatment and control groups to consistently identify the effects of the intervention through
equation (1).
Our second set of comparisons exploits the information collected on social networks at
baseline to assess the presence of spillover effects among friends within classes. To do this, we
split children who did not win the lottery into two sub-groups: children reported as close friends
of at least one child who did win a lottery, and those not mentioned as a close friend of any child
who won the lottery. Specifically, we run the following regression model:

Yijk ,t = δ j + λ ⋅ Yijk ,t −1 + λ1' X ijk ,t −1 + λ2 ⋅ Nijk + β 2 ⋅Winnerijk + γ ⋅ Friendijk + ε 2,ijk ,t

10

(2)

where Friendijk takes the value of one if child i in class j and school k was reported as a close
friend by at least one lottery winner and zero otherwise. N ijk is the number of participating
children who report child i as a close friend. All other variables are defined as in equation (1). It
is important to control for Nijk because children with more participating friends are also
mechanically more likely to have a lottery winner among their friends. However, conditioning on
the number of friends, whether a child has a friend who won a laptop should be random. We find
that, once we condition on the number of participating friends, baseline characteristics are well
balanced between students whose friends won laptops and those who did not (see Table A4 in
the Appendix).
In equation (2), β 2 is the difference in means between the outcomes of laptop winners
and non-winners who were not friends with any of the lottery winners. Moreover, γ quantifies
the difference in means between non-winners with friends among the lottery winners and nonwinners without friends among any lottery winners. Under the assumption that children who
were not close friends with the lottery winners experienced little or no spillovers from the
intervention, we can interpret estimates of β 2 as a measure of the treatment effect, and γ as a
measure of the spillover effect. Insofar as the intervention involved home computers that were
used outside of school, we believe that this assumption is a reasonable one. 8
To the extent that spillover effects are transmitted entirely through social networks, the
aforementioned strategy will be effective in identifying spillover effects. But if some spillovers
also occur outside of social networks, then such strategy would underestimate these effects.
Accordingly, our third strategy estimates spillover effects among all winners’ classmates by
comparing all non-winner children within the 14 treatment schools to children in the 14 control
schools. However, because the treatment schools and control schools do not seem to be well
balanced at baseline (see Table A5 in the Appendix), we use a difference-in-difference
specification. 9 This approach eliminates any bias from time-invariant differences between
treatment and control schools. Still, due to the possibility of differential time trends, results from

8

However, it is possible that the effect of computer use at home leads to differences in behavior at school which
influence children who are outside the immediate social network of lottery winners.
9
The lack of balance is likely due to the small number of treatment and control schools. Note, the groups are
balanced on the characteristics selected for the pair-wise matching procedure but not on all other characteristics.

11

this approach are more tentative than conclusive. Formally, we run the following regression
model:

Yik ,t =
α + λ ⋅ Treated k + λ1 ⋅ Postt + β3 ⋅ Treated k ⋅ Postt + ε 3,ikw,t

(3)

where Yik ,t denotes the outcome of interest for child i, in school k observed at time t. Treated k
takes the value of one if lotteries were conducted in school k and zero otherwise. Postt takes the
value of one for observations collected in the follow-up data collection and zero otherwise. In
equation (3), estimates of β 3 quantify spillover effects operating from laptop winners on their
socially unrelated classmates.
There are two additional issues associated with estimating spillover across classmates.
First, because the lottery in treatment schools was only performed among students whose parents
provided an informed consent, non-winners are not a random sample of students within treatment
schools. In particular, because winners are drawn only from those students who participated in
the lottery, non-participants are over-represented in the sample of non-winners compared to the
sample of all students. We deal with this problem by reweighting observations among nonwinners to give more weight to those participating in the lottery. Specifically, we divide students
in treatment school classes between those who participated in the lottery and those who did not
participate: for the first group we have a random sample (i.e., the non-winners among lottery
participants); for the second group we have the complete sample. Hence, reweighting those who
participated in the lottery but did not win by

𝑁𝐿 +𝑁𝑤
𝑁𝐿

(where 𝑁𝐿 corresponds to the number of

lottery participants that lost and 𝑁𝐿 to those that won) yields a sample of non-winners that is

representative of the population of students in each school.

The second issue relates to the small number of clusters when making direct comparisons
across just 28 schools. It is well-known that standard approaches to estimating regression
equations with a small number of clusters can introduce biases in the estimation of standard
errors (Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan, 2004). Cameron, Gelbach and Miller (2008) suggests
a bootstrapping procedure called wild bootstrap-t to produce an empirical t-distribution that can
be used to derive p-values. We implement this bootstrapping procedure and derive critical values
for t-stats which are used to determine the significance levels in Tables 11-14.

12

4. Main Results
This section presents the impact of the intervention on computer access and use, other time use,
computer skills, cognitive skills, and teacher assessments. We examine spillover effects and
heterogeneous impacts in the subsequent section. All our results are based on intent-to-treat
(ITT) estimates; that is, we compare laptop winners with non-winners regardless of whether
winners actually received a laptop. For one thing, this may be the more relevant parameter for
policy interest. However, given the extremely high take-up rate of 93 percent, the ITT estimates
will be similar to the treatment on the treated (TOT) estimates. 10 This take-up rate is not so
surprising given that these families had already agreed to participate in the lottery. However, it
also confirms the successful implementation of our intervention. 11
4.1. Computer Access and Use
Table 2 presents our findings related to self-reported computer access and use. The effect of the
intervention on the likelihood that children report having a computer at home is approximately
40 percentage points. This represents a large effect on access to home computers but it is
somewhat ameliorated, as 50 percent of children in the control group already own a computer. 12
There are also significant differences in computer use, with impacts of 6 and 9 percentage points
for using a computer last week and yesterday, respectively. Besides these aggregate measures,
we collected several more detailed measures of computer utilization at both the extensive and
intensive margins.
First, we examine where children use their computers. Consistent with the nature of our
intervention, we observe a large increase of 34 percentage points in the likelihood of using
computers at home during the previous week. There is no change in the likelihood of using a
computer in school. Interestingly, lottery winners are 11 percentage points less likely to use
computers in Internet cafes. Therefore, it seems that children who win a laptop are substituting
computer use at home for use outside the home. We also measure computer utilization on the
intensive margin by asking children about the number of minutes they used a computer during
10

The approximate TOT estimates can be obtained by scaling up the ITT estimates by 1/0.93 or 1.075.
The few cases of non-compliance seem to be because of children whose parents did not follow the procedure to
receive the assigned laptop.
12
Note that only 43 percent of students in the control group report having a home computer at baseline, suggesting
that many of them acquired a computer after (and, perhaps, because of) our intervention. Although we did not
collect information about the nature of other computers in the household, these are unlikely to be XO computers.
11

13

the previous day. We find that children in the treatment group report using computers at home
for 19 minutes longer each day. There are no significant effects on the intensive margin of
utilization at school, Internet cafes or friends’ house. As a useful check on these self-reported
measures of utilization, we also determine actual laptop utilization for the treated group from
logs that we installed in the OLPC laptops. The average daily use based on these logs was 51
minutes over the first six months of the intervention, or 12 minutes lower than the 63 minutes a
day reported by the children themselves. Note that students report overall computer use at home
which can occur with the provided XO laptops or with other computers.
Second, we examine how children use their computers. Table 2 indicates that lottery
winners are 10 percentage points more likely to use computers to play games and 5 percentage
points more likely to use computers to listen to music. They are also 5 percentage points less
likely to watch movies on their computers. Moreover, lottery winners do not differ from nonwinners with their likelihood of reporting computer use for homework. Note that we also
measured Internet access and utilization. However, although our initial intervention did not
include any provision for Internet access, it is not surprising that there were no effects on either
Internet access or utilization.
Finally, in Table 3, we explore the data from the computer logs in more detail. There is a
clear decline in utilization over time by gender, grade, and prior home computer access. There is
also some evidence that boys use computers more intensively than girls (an average of 55 versus
46 minutes daily). Furthermore, children that report having no previous access to home computer
display a significantly higher utilization than children with previous access (an average of 58
versus 44 minutes daily). In terms of the particular software applications used, we observe that
boys are more likely to listen to music than girls, and that younger children in 3rd and 4th grade
are more likely use the music applications than their older counterparts.
4.2. Time Use
Table 4 shows the impact of the intervention on a broad set of activities. These measures are
based on binary variables indicating that the child reported being engaged in each activity in the
previous day. Again, there is a large and significant effect on the likelihood of computer use at
home. Interestingly, there is also a small positive and significant effect on the likelihood of
completing domestic chores such as cooking, cleaning and washing clothes and dishes. One
14

potential explanation for this result is that parents of laptop winners have greater opportunities to
engage their children in domestic activities because they are spending more time at home;
another is that parents of laptop winners may be allowing their children to use the laptop as a
reward for completing chores. The increased likelihood of using the computer seems to crowd
out other activities. For example, we observe a 4 percentage point decline in the probability of
playing without a laptop. Children who won the lottery also report a significantly lower
likelihood of reading books, stories or magazines equivalent to 6 percentage points. This result is
consistent with Malamud and Pop-Eleches (2011) who found that home computers were
associated with lower daily reading. Finally, we find no evidence that winning an OLPC laptop
affects the number of children who report themselves as friends or the frequency of visits from
these friends.
4.3. Computer Skills, Cognitive Skills, and Teacher Assessments
We administered three assessments to measure changes in computer skills over the first 6 months
of exposure to treatment: i) an objective test that measured the proficiency in using an OLPC XO
laptop, ii) a multiple choice test consisting of five questions intended to measure practical
knowledge about using a Windows personal computer (PC) and Internet, and iii) a set of 11
(yes/no) subjective questions in which students were asked to report whether they could perform
various tasks related to using a PC and Internet. Table 5 reveals an extremely large positive
effect of the intervention on the items testing XO-specific laptop knowledge. This effect equals
0.88 of a standard deviation. On the other hand, there are no significant differences between
treatment and control students in both tests aimed at measuring skills related to using a PC and
Internet. 13
We also administered the Raven’s Progressive Matrices test. This cognitive test is
thought to measure general intelligence independent of formal schooling. Moreover, given that
the test requires matching various shapes and patterns to a series of spatial configurations, it may
also pick up an important spatial component of cognitive skills. Previous findings in Malamud
and Pop-Eleches (2011) and Cristia et al. (2012) found significant effects of exposure to
computers on this measure of cognitive skills. However, while the estimated effect of the current
13

We do find some small positive significant effects on test items related to general computer skills that are useful
for either an XO or a PC. However, we find no measurable impacts on items measuring specific computer skills for
using a PC or Internet. The small number of items may also limit our ability to discern sizeable effects.

15

intervention is positive as in earlier studies, it is small and insignificant. One possible
explanation for the absence of any effects here is the short period of exposure to the laptops.
Another is that children in urban areas already have a relatively high base level of cognitive
skills that is not as easily improved through technology. Indeed, their scores on this test are far
higher than those of their counterparts in rural Peru.
Finally, we collected information based on teacher’s perceptions of students about their
social popularity, effort at school and expected educational attainment. For the first two
dimensions, we asked teachers how they evaluate each pupil within his classroom: below
average, average, or above average. Regarding educational expectations, the options reported by
teachers consisted of whether the child was expected to attain primary, secondary or postsecondary education. We then constructed summary indicators that take the value of one if the
teacher reported the highest possible outcome for the pupil and zero otherwise. We did not
observe any effect of treatment on the teacher’s perception of social popularity or educational
expectations. However, there is some evidence that effort at school was negatively affected;
children who won a lottery were 5 percentage points less likely to provide high levels of effort at
school as compared to non-winners. Again, this finding is in line with the evidence on negative
effects of home computer access on school grades in Romania reported by Malamud and PopEleches (2011).
5. Further Results
5.1. Social Networks
Inherent in the nature of within-school interventions is the possibility for spillovers across
students. This represents a potential concern for estimating treatment effects within schools
because the comparison group of students may have also been affected by the treatment.
However, the existence of spillovers across students is also a question of substantial interest in
the education literature. We explore the potential for spillover effects by i) taking advantage of
social network data reported by all students in treatment schools at baseline and ii) including a
set of comparison schools in which no treatment was provided to any students.
We collected information on social networks from all children at baseline. Among
children who did not win the OLPC lottery, we distinguish between those reported as being a
“close friend” of at least one child who did win a lottery, and those not mentioned as a “close
16

friend” of any child who won the lottery. Under the assumption that children who were not close
friends with any lottery winner experienced little or no spillovers from the intervention, we can
compare i) lottery winners with non-winners outside the winners’ direct social networks as a
measure of the treatment effect, and ii) non-winners with friends among the lottery winners
versus non-winners without friends among the lottery winners as a measure of the spillover
effect. Insofar as the treatment was experienced at home, this assumption seems plausible.
We do not observe strong spillover effects in computer access and utilization. However,
as shown in Table 6, children within the direct social network of laptop winners have 3.1 more
minutes of daily computer use at a friend’s house. Although this is a small effect, it does suggest
that some non-winners were able to increase their utilization of computers through their social
networks. Table 7 does not reveal any evidence for spillover effects in time-use or sociability.
But Table 8 does indicate a significant spillover effect of 0.14 standard deviations in XO
computing skills. While the magnitude of this effect is much smaller than the one experienced by
lottery winners, the elasticity of utilization is actually larger than that for lottery winners. Thus,
the increase in computer utilization arising from having friends who received an OLPC laptop
seems to have been translated into specific computer skills.
The strategy of identifying spillover effects through reports of “close friends” is effective
as long as all these effects are transmitted through social networks. However, if some spillovers
occur outside social networks, then this approach underestimates total spillovers. Therefore, our
second strategy exploits the school-level randomization to explore spill-overs on all classmates
in treatment schools. 14
The results pertaining to computer access and utilization are presented in Table 9.
Interestingly, we observe that non-winners had a 5 percentage point higher probability of having
a computer at home than children in our control schools. This might suggest an increased
demand for a home computer for children who participated in the lottery but did not win a
computer. Moreover, we also see a decreased likelihood of computer utilization at school,
equivalent to 17 percentage points. This effect is primarily driven by the increased utilization
within control schools and, at this point, we have no specific explanation of this pattern. We do
not find further effects in computer use and changes in time use, suggesting little action in these

14

We do so with a difference-in-difference framework to address the absence of general baseline balance between
treated and control schools.

17

important mediating variables (Tables 9 and 10). In general, we do not find effects on social
networks except for a negative effect in number of homework partners. Finally, though we do
not find evidence of spillover effects on cognitive abilities, teachers’ assessments or PC and
Internet skills, we find a significant positive effect on skills for using an OLPC laptop (Table 11).
This suggests even larger effects of the intervention on OLPC-specific skills than documented
when comparing winners and losers within treatment schools (Table 5).
5.2.Heterogeneous Effects
In addition to the effects of the intervention on the full sample, we also explored for
heterogeneous effects by individual characteristics. We focused on differences by gender, age,
and prior access to computers, which represent key factors that may be important in mediating
the outcomes of a computer-based intervention. The findings, shown in Tables 12-14, are
organized by our outcome variables in an analogous fashion to the tables showing the main
effects, but we structure the subsequent discussion according to our principal mediating
variables.
The impact of the intervention on access to home computers by gender is similar, with
only slightly higher rates for girls than boys, which are not significantly different from one
another. However, there are some differences in our measures of computer use: girls had higher
impacts than boys on the extensive margin for the previous week (7 versus 5 percentage points),
girls had significantly lower computer use at Internet cafés (11 percentage points) whereas boys
did not; both girls and boys were more likely to play computer games than their non-winner
counterparts (by 13 and 8 percentage points, respectively), but only boys had higher impacts for
listening to music on their computer (9 percentage points). On the intensive margin, both boys
and girls had a positive impact of 20 minutes a day of home computer use. The impact of the
intervention on time use is relatively similar for boys and girls, although only girls have
marginally significantly higher impacts of helping with chores at home (6 percentage points) and
only boys have significantly lower impacts of reading (10 percentage points). Finally, despite the
slightly lower impacts of computer access and use, the impact of the intervention on computer
skills is higher for boys. There is evidence that boys did obtain some general computer skills
from exposure to the OLPC laptop, and boys scored significantly higher on the OLPC-specific
test as compared to girls (0.98 vs. 0.74 of a standard deviation).

18

The impact of the intervention on access to home computers by age is somewhat higher
for younger (43 percentage points) than older children (36 percentage points). In part, this is
because households with older children were more likely to own a home computer before the
intervention. This difference in access is also reflected in higher impacts of use for younger
children: for use in the previous week, younger children exhibit larger effects (8 percentage
points) than older children (4 percentage points); on the intensive margin, younger children
exhibit higher home use (26 minutes a day) than older children (13 minutes a day); and younger
children seem to be spending their computer time playing games and listening to music. The
positive impacts of the intervention on helping with household chores seems to be concentrated
among older children, although it is more than offset by a reduction in spending time taking care
of siblings and relatives. There are no significant differences in the impacts of the intervention on
computer or cognitive skills between younger and older children. However, among younger
children, the intervention is associated with reports of lower effort by teachers.
The differential impacts of the intervention by prior ownership of computers are quite
substantial. Not surprisingly, the impact on access to a home computer at follow-up are
substantially higher for children that reported no previous availability of a computer at home as
compared to their counterparts who did report having access to a computer at home (57 versus 19
percentage points). This differential access is also reflected in patterns of extensive and intensive
computer use in almost all categories: e.g., children with no previous access had larger effects on
home use during the previous week (47 percentage points) than those with prior access (16
percentage points). Furthermore, the positive impacts on helping with household chores are also
concentrated among children without previous access (8 percentage points). Despite the
differential in access and use, lottery winners with and without prior access to home computers
experienced similar increases in XO skills. For impacts on the Raven’s Progressive Matrices
tests, we observe a positive and significant effect of 0.08 standard deviations for lottery winners
without previous access (and no significant impacts for lottery winners with previous access).
The negative impacts on teacher’s reports of perceived school effort are also concentrated in the
group of lottery winners without previous access.

19

6. Summary and Further Work
This paper presents findings from a six-month follow-up of a randomized experiment in which
approximately 1,000 OLPC laptops were provided for home use to students attending public
primary schools in Lima, Peru. The intervention was successful at increasing children’s exposure
to computers by raising the likelihood that children had access to a computer at home and
increasing the likelihood of home computer use at both the extensive and intensive margin. The
intervention also affected the time spent on other activities, with children more likely to
complete domestic chores but less likely to read books compared to their classmates. Although
receiving an OLPC laptop led to a large impact in an objective test of XO proficiency, we find
no evidence that the intervention translated into improvements in skills related to using a
Windows PC or Internet. The effect of the intervention on cognitive skill, as measured by the
Raven’s Progressive Matrices test, was positive but small and insignificant. Moreover, based on
reports by teachers, children who received OLPC laptops were significantly less likely to exert
effort at school. There were some differences in impacts by gender and grade, but the largest
impacts were observed for children who did not have a home computer prior to the intervention.
Among this group of children, the intervention led to a small but significant increase in cognitive
skills. Finally, we did not detect much evidence for spillovers in impacts within schools,
although close friends and classmates of children who received OLPC laptops did show
significantly higher levels of proficiency with the XO computer.
This study is not meant to be an impact evaluation of the OLPC program; as mentioned
earlier, an impact evaluation of OLPC in rural schools in Peru has already been conducted (see
Cristia et al., 2012). In this study, we examine the short-term effects of providing only some
students with a laptop to take home, as well as providing them with training on how to use them.
In Peru’s official OLPC program, all students received a laptop, and training was typically
provided to teachers but not to students. While the analysis of student training sessions is beyond
the scope of this paper, we intend to analyze it in future work. Another of the main principles of
the OLPC initiative is access to the Internet. 15 This was not part of our initial intervention.
However, Internet access may have an impact on cognitive abilities or achievement through the
provision of opportunities for information and communication.

15

OLPC principles are laid out in http://wiki.laptop.org/go/OLPC:Five_principles. Accessed November 22, 2011.

20

We have followed-up on the central intervention analyzed in this paper with a second
intervention that provided Internet to a subset of the children who received OLPC laptops. This
second intervention was conducted in July and August of 2012, approximately 14 months after
the start of the first intervention. 16 Among students who received XO laptops in grades 3 to 5, we
randomly selected 260 students to receive high-speed Internet access at home for five months
until the end of the school year in December 2012. We provided 10 additional training sessions
and a manual for Internet use to help students take full advantage of this resource. We also
attempted to minimize the possibility of exposure to adult content by blocking certain websites
and providing guidelines for use to students and parents. The short-term impacts of this
intervention will be explored in a follow-up survey to be conducted in November 2012, which
will also allow us to investigate the medium term impacts of the original intervention that
provided OLPC laptops. Thus, the combination of these two interventions will help us to
disentangle the effects of home computers with and without Internet access, and to compare
them with a baseline of students who had much more limited access to these technologies at
home.

16

Note that this intervention was only announced in June 2012, so children and parents were not aware of this
intervention until immediately prior to the start of the intervention itself.

21

References
Angrist, J., and V. Lavy. 2002. “New Evidence on Classroom Computers and Pupil Learning.”
Economic Journal 112: 735–765.
Banerjee, A. et al. 2007. “Remedying Education: Evidence from Two Randomized Experiments
in India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122: 1235–1264.
Bertrand, M., E. Duflo and S. Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much Should We Trust Difference in
Difference Estimates.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119: 249–276.
Bruhn, M., and D. McKenzie. 2009. “In Pursuit of Balance: Randomization in Practice in
Development Field Experiments.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1:
200–232.
Cameron, A., J. Gelbach and D. Miller. 2008. “Bootstrap-Based Improvements for Inference
with Clustered Errors.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 90: 414–427.
Cristia, J. et al. 2012. “Technology and Child Development: Evidence from the One Laptop per
Child Program.” Working Paper IDB-WP-304. Washington, DC, United States: InterAmerican Development Bank.
Duflo, E., and E. Saez. 2003. “The Role of Information and Social Interactions in Retirement
Plan Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 118: 815–842.
Fairlie, R., and J. Robinson. 2012. “Experimental Evidence on the Effects of Home Computers on
Academic Achievement among Schoolchildren.” Santa Cruz, United States: University of
California, Santa Cruz. Mimeographed document.
King, G. et al. 2007. “A ‘Politically Robust’ Experimental Design for Public Policy Evaluation,
with Application to the Mexican Universal Health Insurance Program.” Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management 26: 479–506.
Machin, S., S. McNally and O. Silva. 2007. “New Technology in Schools: Is There a Payoff?”
Economic Journal 117: 1145–1167.
Malamud, O. and C. Pop-Eleches, C. 2011. “Home Computer Use and the Development of
Human Capital.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126: 987–1027.
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2010. “PISA 2009 Results:
What Students Know and Can Do.” Paris, France: OECD.

22

Pearson Assessment. 2011. “Raven’s Progressive Matrices.” Oxford, United Kingdom: Pearson
Assessment. Accessed on November 22, 2011 at:
http://www.psychcorp.co.uk/Psychology/AdultCognitionNeuropsychologyandLanguage/
AdultGeneralAbilities/RavensProgressiveMatricesandVocabularyScales/RavensProgressi
veMatricesandVocabularyScales.aspx
Vigdor, J., and H. Ladd. 2010. “Scaling the Digital Divide: Home Computer Technology and
Student Achievement.” NBER Working Paper 16078. Cambridge, United States:
National Bureau of Economic Research.

23

Table 1. Balance: Laptop Winners versus Losers in Treatment Schools
Treatment
(1)

Control
(2)

10.00

10.05

0.49

0.48

2.30

2.24

Father lives at home

0.76

0.77

Father works outside home

0.88

0.88

Mother works outside home

0.51

0.53

Phone

0.45

0.48

Electricity

0.90

0.92

Car

0.25

0.28

0.41

0.43

0.30

0.34

-0.26

-0.23

-0.22

-0.14

-0.13

-0.16

Student Characteristics
Age
Male
Household Characteristics
Number of siblings in household

Access
Computer or laptop at home
Internet at home
Academic achievement
Math
Reading
Cognitive skills
Raven's progressive matrices

Adjusted
Difference
(3)

N
(4)

0.01
(0.03)
0.02
(0.02)

2,817

-0.00
(0.09)
0.00
(0.04)
-0.01
(0.02)
-0.03
(0.03)
-0.03
(0.02)
-0.00
(0.02)
-0.03
(0.03)

2,815

2,815

2,808
2,804
2,817
2,754
2,782
2,735

-0.01
(0.02)
-0.04
(0.02)*

2,867

0.02
(0.03)
-0.05
(0.06)

2,748

0.08
(0.06)

2,832

2,840

2,691

Notes: This table presents statistics and estimated differences between laptop lottery winners (treatment) and
non-winners (control) within treatment schools. Baseline data collected in April 2011 restricted to students
observed at follow-up are used. Columns (1) and (2) present means, column (3) presents estimated coefficients
and standard errors from OLS regressions. Estimates in column (3) include class fixed-effects. Standard errors,
reported in parentheses, are clustered at the school level. Significance at the one, five and ten percent levels is
indicated by ***, ** and *, respectively.

Table 2. Effects on Laptop Winners: Computer Access and Use
Adjusted
Difference
(3)

Treatment
(1)

Control
(2)

0.89

0.50

0.40
(0.03)***

2,786

Last week

0.95

0.90

2,586

Yesterday

0.81

0.73

0.06
(0.01)***
0.09
(0.03)***

0.52

0.53

2,586

Home

0.82

0.50

Internet café

0.42

0.52

Friend's house

0.20

0.23

0.01
(0.03)
0.34
(0.02)***
-0.11
(0.02)***
-0.02
(0.02)

20.04

23.07

Home

63.04

44.72

Internet café

31.55

33.84

Friend's house

12.15

15.44

Type of use (last week)
Homework

0.75

0.74

Games

0.79

0.69

Music

0.67

0.64

Videos

0.38

0.42

0.38

0.37

0.81

0.81

Access
Computer or laptop at home

N
(4)

Use

Use by place (last week)
School

Use by place (minutes yesterday)
School

Internet Access
Internet at home
Used Internet last week

-1.20
(1.99)
19.15
(5.33)***
-3.08
(3.22)
-3.96
(2.34)
0.01
(0.02)
0.10
(0.03)**
0.05
(0.03)*
-0.05
(0.02)*
0.03
(0.02)
0.00
(0.02)

2,645

2,588
2,581
2,511

2,645
2,645
2,645
2,645

2,638
2,607
2,584
2,558

2,751
2,645

Notes: This table presents statistics and estimated differences between treatment and control students within
treatment schools. Columns (1) and (2) present means, column (3) presents estimated coefficients and standard
errors from OLS regressions. Estimates in column (3) include class fixed-effects and demographic controls as
detailed in the text. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the school level. Significance at the
one, five and ten percent levels is indicated by ***, ** and *, respectively.

Table 3. Average Daily Minutes of OLPC Laptop Use from Logs
All
(1)

Gender
Male
Female
(2)
(3)

Grade
3rd-4th
5th-6th
(4)
(5)

Baseline Computer Access
Access
No Access
(6)
(7)

Use
Overall

51

55*

46

50

53

44***

58

By month
July
August
September
October

61
54
49
39

66
59*
54*
42

58
48
43
37

65
54
46
36

62
53
51
45

52***
47*
41*
34*

74
61
56
44

By type of application
Music
Cognitive games
Utilities
Reading
Programming
Others
Math
Measurement

14
11
11
9
6
5
4
1

16***
11
11
10*
7
6*
4
2*

11
12
11
8
5
4
5
1

16***
11
11
9
6
5
4
2

12
11
11
9
6
6
5
1

11
10
9**
8*
5*
5
4
2

16
12
12
10
7
6
5
2

490

212

236

239

230

193

267

N

Notes : This table presents statistics on patterns of use by groups. It also indicates the statistical significance of differences
across sub-groups within dimensions analyzed.***, **,* denote differences at the one, five and ten percent level,
respectively. Column (1) represents overall average. Within each dimension, columns (3), (5) and (7) represent comparison
groups. XO applications were grouped in eight types Cognitive, Reading , Math, Measurement, Music, Programming,
Utilities and Others. Statistics are computed based on logs extracted from laptops for sessions lasting at most 12 hours. We
present statistics for July to October to focus on months where all students had laptops for the entire period.

Table 4. Effects on Laptop Winners: Time Use and Social Networks
Treatment
(1)

Control
(2)

0.56

0.51

Caring of household members

0.49

0.51

Shopping

0.39

0.41

Working in the street

0.04

0.03

Working at a store

0.15

0.15

Doing homework

0.94

0.95

Playing

0.80

0.83

Watching TV

0.88

0.89

Using a computer at home

0.72

0.37

Reading

0.59

0.65

Using an Internet café

0.31

0.31

3.44

3.48

Visiting other classmates homes

1.98

2.00

Homework partners

1.89

1.89

Total contacts

4.95

4.99

Use of time
Helping at home

Social Networks
Friends

Adjusted
Difference
(3)
0.04
(0.02)*
-0.03
(0.02)
-0.03
(0.02)
0.01
(0.01)
-0.01
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.01)
-0.04
(0.02)*
0.00
(0.01)
0.36
(0.02)***
-0.06
(0.03)*
0.00
(0.01)
-0.00
(0.06)
-0.00
(0.09)
0.04
(0.10)
-0.02
(0.09)

N
(4)
2,809
2,803
2,808
2,799
2,787
2,813
2,813
2,809
2,798
2,807
2,807

2,786
2,786
2,786
2,786

Notes: This table presents statistics and estimated differences between treatment and control students within
treatment schools. Columns (1) and (2) present means, column (3) presents estimated coefficients and standard
errors from OLS regressions. Estimates in column (3) include class fixed-effects and demographic controls as
detailed in the text. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the school level. Significance at the
one, five and ten percent levels is indicated by ***, ** and *, respectively.

Table 5. Effects on Laptop Winners: Computer and Cognitive Skills
Treatment
(1)

Control
(2)

1.21

0.39

Objective PC and Internet test

0.40

0.40

Self-reported PC and Internet skills

0.67

0.67

Cognitive skills
Raven's progressive matrices

-0.04

Teachers' perceptions
High skills in making friends
High academic effort in class

Computer skills
Objective OLPC test

Expected to complete University

Adjusted
Difference
(3)

N
(4)

0.88
(0.07)***
0.02
(0.01)
0.01
(0.01)

2,791

-0.07

0.05
(0.04)

2,756

0.51

0.54

2,724

0.42

0.46

0.61

0.64

-0.02
(0.02)
-0.05
(0.02)**
-0.01
(0.02)

2,800
2,800

2,725
2,719

Notes: This table presents statistics and estimated differences between treatment and control students within treatment
schools. Columns (1) and (2) present means, column (3) presents estimated coefficients and standard errors from OLS
regressions. Estimates in column (3) include class fixed-effects and demographic controls as detailed in the text. Scores
in the Raven's progressive matrices and the OLPC objective test have been normalized subtracting the mean and
dividing by the standard deviation of students in control schools. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered
at the school level. Significance at the one, five and ten percent levels is indicated by ***, ** and *, respectively.

Table 6. Effects on Laptop Winners and Spillovers on Friends: Computer Access and Use

Access
Computer or laptop at home
Use
Last week
Yesterday
Use by place (last week)
School
Home
Internet café
Friend's house
Use by place (minutes yesterday)
School
Home
Internet café
Friend's house
Type of use (last week)
Homework
Games
Music
Videos
Internet Access
Internet at home
Used Internet last week

Effects on Winners
(1)

Spill-Overs on Friends
(2)

N
(3)

0.41
(0.03)***

0.01
(0.02)

2,786

0.07
(0.02)***
0.10
(0.03)***

0.02
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)

2,586

0.01
(0.04)
0.34
(0.02)***
-0.12
(0.03)***
-0.02
(0.02)

0.01
(0.04)
0.01
(0.02)
-0.03
(0.02)
0.00
(0.02)

2,586

0.11
(2.93)
17.83
(4.10)***
-5.12
(3.82)
-1.99
(2.06)

2.23
(3.49)
-2.23
(3.99)
-3.53
(2.30)
3.45
(1.56)**

2,645

0.00
(0.03)
0.07
(0.03)**
0.05
(0.03)
-0.05
(0.02)**

-0.00
(0.03)
-0.04
(0.02)**
-0.01
(0.01)
-0.02
(0.02)

2,638

0.03
(0.03)
-0.00
(0.02)

0.01
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.02)

2,751

2,645

2,588
2,581
2,511

2,645
2,645
2,645

2,607
2,584
2,558

2,645

Notes: This table explores the effects on laptop winners and spill-overs on their friends. Each row correspond to an OLS
regression of the respective outcome on a dummy for lottery winner, a dummy for having a friend that won a lottery and
controlling for number of friends (the omitted category are non-winners that do not have friends that won the laptop
lottery). Column (1) presents estimated coefficients and standard errors for the effect on winners. Column (2) presents
estimated coefficients and standard errors for the spill-over effect on non-winners that have friends that won a laptop
lottery. Friendships are defined using baseline data. Estimates include class fixed-effects and demographic controls as
detailed in the text. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the school level. Significance at one, five and
ten percent levels is indicated by ***, ** and *, respectively.

Table 7. Effects on Winners and Spillovers on Friends: Time use and Social Networks

Use of time
Helping at home
Caring of household members
Shopping
Working in the street
Working at a store
Doing homework
Playing
Watching TV
Using a computer at home
Reading
Using an Internet café
Social Networks
Friends
Visiting other classmates homes
Homework partners
Total contacts

Effects on Winners
(1)

Spill-Overs on Friends
(2)

N
(3)

0.04
(0.02)*
-0.04
(0.03)
-0.05
(0.02)*
0.01
(0.01)
0.00
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.02)
-0.06
(0.02)**
0.00
(0.01)
0.37
(0.03)***
-0.05
(0.03)*
-0.00
(0.02)

0.00
(0.01)
-0.02
(0.03)
-0.03
(0.02)*
-0.00
(0.01)
0.01
(0.02)
0.01
(0.01)
-0.03
(0.02)
0.00
(0.01)
0.02
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)
-0.00
(0.01)

2,809

-0.02
(0.06)
-0.03
(0.07)
0.04
(0.11)
0.00
(0.10)

0.06
(0.09)
-0.05
(0.05)
-0.02
(0.07)
0.00
(0.08)

2,786

2,803
2,808
2,799
2,787
2,813
2,813
2,809
2,798
2,807
2,807

2,786
2,786
2,786

Notes: This table explores the effects on laptop winners and spill-overs on their friends. Each row correspond to an OLS
regression of the respective outcome on a dummy for lottery winner, a dummy for having a friend that won a lottery and
controlling for number of friends (the omitted category are non-winners that do not have friends that won the laptop
lottery). Column (1) presents estimated coefficients and standard errors for the effect on winners. Column (2) presents
estimated coefficients and standard errors for the spill-over effect on non-winners that have friends that won a laptop
lottery. Friendships are defined using baseline data. Estimates include class fixed-effects and demographic controls as
detailed in the text. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the school level. Significance at one, five and
ten percent levels is indicated by ***, ** and *, respectively.

Table 8. Effects on Winners and Spillovers on Friends: Computer and Cognitive Skills

Computer skills
Objective OLPC test
Objective PC and Internet test
Self-reported PC and Internet skills
Cognitive skills
Raven's progressive matrices
Teachers' perceptions
High skills in making friends
High academic effort in class
Expected to complete University

Effects on Winners
(1)

Spill-Overs on Friends
(2)

N
(3)

0.96
(0.09)***
0.02
(0.01)
0.01
(0.02)

0.14
(0.05)**
0.01
(0.01)
0.01
(0.01)

2,791

0.06
(0.05)

0.00
(0.04)

2,756

0.00
(0.02)
-0.05
(0.03)*
-0.01
(0.03)

0.03
(0.02)
0.00
(0.02)
0.01
(0.03)

2,724

2,800
2,800

2,725
2,719

Notes: This table explores the effects on laptop winners and spill-overs on their friends. Each row correspond to an OLS
regression of the respective outcome on a dummy for lottery winner, a dummy for having a friend that won a lottery and
controlling for number of friends (the omitted category are non-winners that do not have friends that won the laptop lottery).
Column (1) presents estimated coefficients and standard errors for the effect on winners. Column (2) presents estimated
coefficients and standard errors for the spill-over effect on non-winners that have friends that won a laptop lottery.
Friendships are defined using baseline data. Estimates include class fixed-effects and demographic controls as detailed in the
text. Scores in the Raven's progressive matrices and the OLPC objective test have been normalized subtracting the mean and
dividing by the standard deviation of students in control schools. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the
school level. Significance at one, five and ten percent levels is indicated by ***, ** and *, respectively.

Table 9. Spillovers on Classmates: Computer Access and Use
Non-Winners in
Treatment Schools
Baseline
Follow-up
(1)
(2)

All Students in Control
Schools
Baseline
Follow-up
(3)
(4)

Diff-in-Diff
(5)

N
(6)

Access
Computer or laptop at home

0.43

0.49

0.52

0.53

0.05
(0.02)**

10,100

Use
Last week

0.87

0.90

0.86

0.93

9,752

Yesterday

0.73

0.73

0.71

0.71

-0.03
(0.02)
-0.00
(0.03)

0.51

0.53

0.43

0.62

Home

0.45

0.49

0.50

0.52

Internet café

0.52

0.52

0.49

0.52

Friend's house

0.27

0.23

0.25

0.23

32.04

21.56

24.20

15.74

Home

53.88

43.85

59.98

44.45

Internet café

48.54

34.67

41.80

34.27

Friend's house

26.66

15.91

25.14

14.96

Type of use (last week)
Homework

0.71

0.73

0.72

0.74

Games

0.62

0.69

0.64

0.73

Music

0.58

0.64

0.58

0.65

Videos

0.45

0.44

0.42

0.43

0.34

0.37

0.40

0.43

0.84

0.81

0.84

0.84

Use by place (last week)
School

Use by place (minutes yesterday)
School

Internet Access
Internet at home
Used Internet last week

-0.17
(0.07)**
0.03
(0.03)
-0.03
(0.03)
-0.02
(0.01)
-2.02
(5.70)
5.50
(4.03)
-6.34
(4.24)
-0.57
(3.48)
0.01
(0.03)
-0.02
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.02)
-0.02
(0.03)
0.01
(0.02)
-0.03
(0.03)

9,800

9,752
9,741
9,724
9,636

9,800
9,800
9,800
9,800

9,861
9,792
9,759
9,708

10,045
9,800

Notes: This table presents statistics and estimated differences between non laptop winners in treatment schools and those in
control schools. Columns (1) to (4) present means, column (5) presents estimated coefficients and standard errors from
differences-in-differences estimators. Estimates in column (5) include class fixed-effects. Standard errors, reported in
parentheses, are clustered at the school level. Given the small number of clusters (28), the critical values for t-tests were
drawn from a bootstrapped-t distribution following the procedure suggested by Cameron et al. (2008). Significance at one,
five and ten percent levels is indicated by ***, ** and *, respectively.

Table 10. Spillovers on Classmates: Time Use and Social Networks
Non-Winners in
Treatment Schools
Baseline
Follow-up
(1)
(2)
Use of time
Helping at home

All Students in Control
Schools
Baseline
Follow-up
(3)
(4)

0.57

0.52

0.56

0.54

Caring of household members

0.61

0.51

0.60

0.52

Shopping

0.46

0.42

0.44

0.39

Working in the street

0.05

0.03

0.03

0.02

Working at a store

0.19

0.16

0.15

0.14

Doing homework

0.95

0.95

0.97

0.97

Playing

0.77

0.83

0.77

0.83

Watching TV

0.82

0.87

0.83

0.89

Using a computer at home

0.37

0.37

0.43

0.40

Reading

0.69

0.64

0.70

0.63

Using an Internet café

0.37

0.33

0.33

0.31

3.38

3.36

3.31

3.29

Visiting other classmates homes

2.52

1.91

2.06

1.73

Homework partners

1.88

1.77

1.53

1.77

Total contacts

5.22

4.82

4.84

4.60

Social Networks
Friends

Diff-in-Diff
(5)

N
(6)

-0.03
(0.03)
-0.02
(0.02)
0.01
(0.03)
-0.01
(0.01)
-0.02
(0.02)
-0.00
(0.01)
-0.00
(0.02)
-0.00
(0.01)
0.02
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)
-0.02
(0.02)

10,023

0.01
(0.06)
-0.28
(0.16)
-0.35
(0.15)**
-0.16
(0.18)

9,999
10,026
10,008
9,980
10,022
10,030
10,021
10,006
10,025
10,022

9,708
9,708
9,708
9,708

Notes: This table presents statistics and estimated differences between non laptop winners in treatment schools and those in
control schools. Columns (1) to (4) present means, column (5) presents estimated coefficients and standard errors from
differences-in-differences estimators. Estimates in column (5) include class fixed-effects. Standard errors, reported in
parentheses, are clustered at the school level. Given the small number of clusters (28), the critical values for t-tests were
drawn from a bootstrapped-t distribution following the procedure suggested by Cameron et al. (2008). Significance at one,
five and ten percent levels is indicated by ***, ** and *, respectively.

Table 11. Spillovers on Classmates: Computer and Cognitive Skills
Non-Winners in
Treatment Schools
Baseline
Follow-up
(1)
(2)
Computer skills
Objective OLPC test

n.a.

0.31

All Students in Control
Schools
Baseline
Follow-up
(3)
(4)
n.a.

0.00

Diff-in-Diff
(5)

N
(6)

0.27
(0.08)***
-0.02
(0.02)
0.00
(0.01)

4393

Objective PC and Internet test

0.33

0.39

0.34

0.42

Self-reported PC and Internet skills

0.55

0.66

0.57

0.68

Cognitive skills
Raven's progressive matrices

-0.25

-0.12

-0.01

0.00

0.12
(0.07)

9,991

Teachers' perceptions
High skills in making friends

0.52

0.52

0.59

0.65

9,625

High academic effort in class

0.43

0.42

0.47

0.51

Expected to complete University

0.60

0.59

0.68

0.68

-0.05
(0.03)
-0.05
(0.03)*
-0.01
(0.03)

10,137
10,137

9,624
9,617

Notes: This table presents statistics and estimated differences between non laptop winners in treatment schools and those in
control schools. Columns (1) to (4) present means, column (5) presents estimated coefficients and standard errors from
differences-in-differences estimators. Estimates in column (5) include class fixed-effects. Scores in the Raven's progressive
matrices and the OLPC objective test have been normalized subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation of
students in control schools. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the school level. Given the small number
of clusters (28), the critical values for t-tests were drawn from a bootstrapped-t distribution following the procedure suggested
by Cameron et al. (2008). Significance at one, five and ten percent levels is indicated by ***, ** and *, respectively.

Table 12. Effects on Winners by Selected Sub-Groups: Computer Access and Use
Males
(1)
Access
Computer or laptop at home
Use
Last week
Yesterday
Use by place (last week)
School
Home
Internet café
Friend's house
Use by place (minutes yesterday)
School
Home
Internet café
Friend's house
Type of use (last week)
Homework
Games
Music
Videos
Internet Access
Internet at home
Used Internet last week

N

Gender
Females
(2)

3rd-4th
(3)

Grade
5th-6th
(4)

Baseline Computer Access
Access
No Access
(5)
(6)

0.37
(0.03)***

0.41
(0.05)***

0.43
(0.03)***

0.36
(0.04)***

0.19
(0.03)***

0.57
(0.03)***

0.05
(0.01)***
0.09
(0.04)*

0.07
(0.02)***
0.11
(0.02)***

0.08
(0.03)**
0.09
(0.03)**

0.04
(0.02)**
0.10
(0.02)***

0.02
(0.02)
0.03
(0.03)

0.09
(0.02)***
0.15
(0.04)***

0.04
(0.03)
0.32
(0.04)***
-0.07
(0.05)
-0.02
(0.03)

-0.02
(0.03)
0.34
(0.04)***
-0.12
(0.03)***
-0.04
(0.02)

0.04
(0.03)
0.32
(0.04)***
-0.08
(0.03)**
-0.03
(0.03)

-0.02
(0.03)
0.35
(0.03)***
-0.13
(0.04)***
-0.02
(0.03)

-0.03
(0.03)
0.16
(0.03)***
-0.08
(0.04)*
-0.07
(0.031)**

0.03
(0.03)
0.47
(0.03)***
-0.13
(0.03)***
0.01
(0.04)

-7.25
(3.88)*
20.59
(7.71)**
1.18
(7.16)
-3.47
(2.89)

2.53
(2.52)
19.94
(6.51)***
-4.44
(3.18)
-5.45
(3.83)

-0.58
(2.55)
26.10
(5.18)***
-5.26
(3.52)
-3.94
(3.80)

-1.77
(2.42)
12.89
(6.36)*
-0.73
(5.87)
-3.81
(2.53)

1.36
(2.95)
11.70
(8.62)
5.71
(7.76)
-0.16
(3.78)

-2.27
(2.34)
26.77
(5.74)***
-10.23
(2.30)***
-6.27
(2.15)**

-0.02
(0.03)
0.08
(0.03)**
0.09
(0.03)**
-0.05
(0.04)

0.04
(0.04)
0.13
(0.06)*
0.02
(0.04)
-0.05
(0.04)

0.03
(0.02)
0.15
(0.05)**
0.07
(0.03)**
-0.04
(0.04)

-0.02
(0.04)
0.05
(0.03)
0.03
(0.04)
-0.05
(0.04)

-0.01
(0.02)
0.06
(0.04)
0.04
(0.03)
-0.09
(0.04)**

0.01
(0.04)
0.14
(0.05)**
0.04
(0.04)
-0.01
(0.03)

0.04
(0.02)*
0.01
(0.02)

0.01
(0.03)
0.00
(0.02)

0.01
(0.04)
0.02
(0.03)

0.05
(0.02)*
-0.01
(0.02)

0.03
(0.03)
0.01
(0.02)

0.03
(0.03)
0.02
(0.03)

1,384

1,458

1,353

1,513

1,249

1,680

Notes: This table presents evidence on heterogeneous impacts on laptop winners. Each cell corresponds to an OLS regression
of the respective outcome on a lottery winner dummy for certain sub-sample in treatment schools. Estimates include class
fixed-effects and demographic controls as detailed in the text. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the
school level. Significance at one, five and ten percent levels is indicated by ***, ** and *, respectively.

Table 13. Effects on Winners by Selected Sub-Groups: Time Use and Social Networks
Males
(1)
Use of time
Helping at home
Caring of household members
Shopping
Working in the street
Working at a store
Doing homework
Playing
Watching TV
Using a computer at home
Reading
Using an Internet café
Social Networks
Friends
Visiting other classmates
homes
Homework partners
Total contacts

N

Gender
Females
(2)

3rd-4th
(3)

Grade
5th-6th
(4)

Baseline Computer Access
Access
No Access
(5)
(6)

0.02
(0.04)
-0.03
(0.04)
-0.05
(0.04)
0.01
(0.01)
0.01
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.02)
-0.02
(0.03)
-0.02
(0.03)
0.38
(0.03)***
-0.10
(0.04)**
0.01
(0.03)

0.06
(0.03)*
-0.03
(0.05)
0.00
(0.03)
0.01
(0.01)
-0.02
(0.03)
-0.01
(0.01)
-0.05
(0.04)
0.02
(0.03)
0.35
(0.03)***
-0.02
(0.04)
-0.03
(0.02)

0.02
(0.03)
0.03
(0.04)
-0.02
(0.04)
0.02
(0.01)
-0.01
(0.02)
0.00
(0.02)
-0.03
(0.03)
-0.02
(0.02)
0.40
(0.04)***
-0.07
(0.03)*
0.02
(0.03)

0.05
(0.02)**
-0.08
(0.02)***
-0.04
(0.03)
0.00
(0.01)
0.00
(0.02)
-0.02
(0.01)
-0.05
(0.03)
0.02
(0.02)
0.32
(0.02)***
-0.05
(0.04)
-0.02
(0.02)

-0.01
(0.04)
-0.06
(0.05)
-0.03
(0.05)
0.00
(0.01)
0.00
(0.04)
-0.03
(0.03)
-0.04
(0.04)
0.00
(0.02)
0.23
(0.04)***
-0.07
(0.04)
0.00
(0.03)

0.08
(0.02)***
-0.01
(0.03)
-0.06
(0.03)
0.00
(0.01)
-0.02
(0.02)
0.01
(0.01)
-0.04
(0.04)
0.02
(0.02)
0.47
(0.02)***
-0.05
(0.03)
-0.01
(0.02)

0.04
(0.17)
-0.04
(0.14)
-0.02
(0.11)
-0.06
(0.22)

0.02
(0.11)
0.07
(0.17)
0.19
(0.16)
0.11
(0.13)

-0.04
(0.10)
0.13
(0.10)
0.20
(0.11)*
0.05
(0.13)

0.03
(0.13)

-0.11
(0.13)
-0.06
(0.17)

0.08
(0.11)
0.05
(0.16)
0.08
(0.17)
0.04
(0.19)

-0.01
(0.09)
-0.03
(0.10)
0.05
(0.13)
0.02
(0.14)

1,384

1,596

1,353

1,513

1,249

1,680

-0.13
(0.11)

Notes: This table presents evidence on heterogeneous impacts on laptop winners. Each cell corresponds to an OLS regression
of the respective outcome on a lottery winner dummy for certain sub-sample in treatment schools. Estimates include class
fixed-effects and demographic controls as detailed in the text. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the
school level. Significance at one, five and ten percent levels is indicated by ***, ** and *, respectively.

Table 14. Effects on Winners by Selected Sub-Groups: Computer and Cognitive Skills
Gender
Males
Females
(1)
(2)
Computer skills
Objective OLPC test
Objective PC and Internet test
Self-reported PC and Internet skills
Cognitive skills
Raven's progressive matrices
Teachers' perceptions
High skills in making friends
High academic effort in class
Expected to complete
university
N

Grade
3rd-4th
5th-6th
(3)
(4)

Baseline Computer Access
Access
No Access
(5)
(6)

0.98
(0.08)***
0.03
(0.01)**
0.01
(0.02)

0.74
(0.10)***
0.01
(0.02)
0.00
(0.02)

0.83
(0.09)***
0.03
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)

0.93
(0.07)***
0.01
(0.01)
-0.00
(0.01)

0.85
(0.09)***
0.03
(0.02)
0.00
(0.02)

0.89
(0.09)***
0.01
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)

0.06
(0.06)

0.04
(0.04)

0.03
(0.04)

0.08
(0.06)

0.05
(0.07)

0.08
(0.05)*

-0.02
(0.02)
-0.04
(0.02)**
0.00
(0.03)

0.01
(0.03)
-0.05
(0.04)
-0.02
(0.04)

-0.03
(0.02)
-0.07
(0.02)***
-0.05
(0.03)

-0.00
(0.03)
-0.00
(0.03)
0.03
(0.03)

-0.01
(0.03)
-0.03
(0.03)
0.02
(0.03)

-0.03
(0.03)
-0.07
(0.03)**
-0.04
(0.04)

1,384

1,596

1,353

1,513

1,249

1,680

Notes: This table presents evidence on heterogeneous impacts on laptop winners. Each cell corresponds to an OLS regression
of the respective outcome on a lottery winner dummy for certain sub-sample in treatment schools. Estimates include class
fixed-effects and demographic controls as detailed in the text. Scores in the Raven's progressive matrices and the OLPC
objective test have been normalized subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation of students in control schools.
Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the school level. Significance at one, five and ten percent levels is
indicated by ***, ** and *, respectively.

Table A1. Within-School Randomization Balance: Computer Access and Use
Adjusted
Difference
(3)

Treatment
(1)

Control
(2)

0.41

0.43

-0.01
(0.02)

2,867

Last week

0.87

0.86

2,728

Yesterday

0.71

0.74

0.01
(0.02)
-0.03
(0.02)

0.55

0.50

Home

0.41

0.44

Internet café

0.54

0.51

Friend's house

0.27

0.26

36.33

30.46

Home

49.76

52.36

Internet café

43.46

46.76

Friend's house

30.36

25.68

Type of use (last week)
Homework

0.68

0.70

Games

0.63

0.62

Music

0.57

0.58

Videos

0.43

0.43

0.30

0.34

0.82

0.83

Access
Computer or laptop at home

N
(4)

Use

Use by place (last week)
School

Use by place (minutes yesterday)
School

Internet Access
Internet at home
Used Internet last week

0.03
(0.02)*
-0.04
(0.02)*
0.03
(0.02)
0.00
(0.03)
2.56
(4.69)
-4.29
(4.64)
-5.09
(4.27)
2.56
(3.12)
-0.03
(0.03)
0.01
(0.02)
-0.00
(0.03)
-0.01
(0.03)
-0.04
(0.02)*
-0.02
(0.02)

2,712

2,728
2,726
2,709
2,673

2,712
2,712
2,712
2,712

2,770
2,733
2,711
2,693

2,840
2,712

Notes: This table presents statistics and estimated differences between laptop lottery winners (treatment) and nonwinners (control) within treatment schools. Baseline data collected in April 2011 are used. Columns (1) and (2)
present means, column (3) presents estimated coefficients and standard errors from OLS regressions. Estimates in
column (3) include class fixed-effects. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the school level.
Significance at the one, five and ten percent levels is indicated by ***, ** and *, respectively.

Table A2. Within-School Randomization Balance: Time Use and Social Networks
Treatment
(1)

Control
(2)

0.57

0.55

Caring of household members

0.62

0.60

Shopping

0.48

0.45

Working in the street

0.04

0.05

Working at a store

0.20

0.17

Doing homework

0.95

0.95

Playing

0.77

0.78

Watching TV

0.84

0.83

Using a computer at home

0.35

0.36

Reading

0.73

0.70

Using an Internet café

0.33

0.35

3.42

3.47

Visiting other classmates homes

2.69

2.58

Homework partners

1.99

1.93

Total contacts

5.40

5.31

Use of time
Helping at home

Social Networks
Friends

Adjusted
Difference
(3)
0.01
(0.03)
0.01
(0.03)
0.03
(0.03)
-0.01
(0.01)
0.03
(0.02)
-0.00
(0.01)
-0.02
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)
-0.02
(0.02)
-0.06
(0.13)
0.06
(0.06)
0.08
(0.06)
0.08
(0.15)

N
(4)
2,759
2,754
2,759
2,756
2,748
2,758
2,763
2,761
2,755
2,757
2,757

2,867
2,867
2,867
2,867

Notes: This table presents statistics and estimated differences between laptop lottery winners (treatment) and nonwinners (control) within treatment schools. Baseline data collected in April 2011 are used. Columns (1) and (2)
present means, column (3) presents estimated coefficients and standard errors from OLS regressions. Estimates in
column (3) include class fixed-effects. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the school level.
Significance at the one, five and ten percent levels is indicated by ***, ** and *, respectively.

Table A3. Within-School Randomization Balance: Computer and Cognitive Skills
Adjusted
Difference
(3)

Treatment
(1)

Control
(2)

0.32

0.33

0.56

0.56

-0.26

-0.23

-0.22

-0.14

Cognitive skills
Raven's progressive matrices

-0.13

-0.16

0.08
(0.06)

2,832

Teachers' perceptions
High skills in making friends

0.51

0.54

2,833

High academic effort in class

0.45

0.46

0.64

0.64

-0.02
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.02)
0.00
(0.02)

Computer skills
Objective PC and Internet test
Self-reported PC and Internet skills
Academic achievement
Math
Reading

Expected to complete University

N
(4)

-0.01
(0.01)
0.01
(0.01)

2,867

0.02
(0.03)
-0.05
(0.06)

2,748

2,867

2,691

2,834
2,835

Notes: This table presents statistics and estimated differences between laptop lottery winners (treatment) and nonwinners (control) within treatment schools. Baseline data collected in April 2011 are used. Columns (1) and (2)
present means, column (3) presents estimated coefficients and standard errors from OLS regressions. Estimates in
column (3) include class fixed-effects. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the school level.
Significance at the one, five and ten percent levels is indicated by ***, ** and *, respectively.

Table A4. Balance between Non-winners with and without Winner Friends
With Winner
Friends
(1)

Without
Winner
Friends
(2)

10.02

10.08

0.47

0.49

2.18

2.31

Father lives at home

0.78

0.77

Father works outside home

0.88

0.88

Mother works outside home

0.52

0.55

Phone

0.48

0.48

Electricity

0.92

0.91

Car

0.26

0.30

0.43

0.42

0.35

0.33

0.51

0.49

At home

0.46

0.42

At an Internet café

0.51

0.52

At other places

0.26

0.26

Student Characteristics
Age
Male
Household Characteristics
Number of siblings in household

Access
Computer or laptop at home
Internet at home
Use (last week)
At school

Adjusted
Difference
(3)

N
(4)

0.07
(0.04)*
-0.02
(0.03)

2,214

-0.07
(0.07)
-0.02
(0.02)
-0.02
(0.02)
-0.02
(0.03)
0.00
(0.02)
-0.02
(0.02)
-0.04
(0.03)

2,212

2,212

2,204
2,204
2,214
2,171
2,190
2,150

-0.02
(0.03)
-0.00
(0.03)

2,249

0.01
(0.03)
-0.00
(0.04)
-0.03
(0.03)
-0.01
(0.03)

2,143

2,226

2,136
2,127
2,104

Notes: This table presents statistics and estimated differences between non winner children with
laptop lottery winner friends and non-winners without laptop winner friends within treatment schools.
Baseline data collected in April 2011 are used. Columns (1) and (2) present means, column (3)
presents estimated coefficients and standard errors from OLS regressions. Estimates in column (3)
include class fixed-effects as well as total number of friends who participated in lottery as control
variables. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the school level. Significance at
the one, five and ten percent levels is indicated by ***, ** and *, respectively.

Table A5. School Randomization Balance
Treatment
(1)

Control
(2)

10.06

10.02

0.50

0.48

2.33

2.11

Father lives at home

0.77

0.77

Father works outside home

0.88

0.88

Mother works outside home

0.54

0.51

Phone

0.48

0.53

Electricity

0.91

0.95

Car

0.27

0.28

0.43

0.52

0.34

0.40

Use (last week)
At school

0.51

0.43

At home

0.44

0.50

At a Internet café

0.52

0.48

At other places

0.26

0.37

Student Characteristics
Age
Male
Household Characteristics
Number of siblings in household

Access
Computer or laptop at home
Internet at home

Adjusted
Difference
(3)

N
(4)

0.04
(0.07)
0.03
(0.02)

5,200

0.21
(0.13)
-0.00
(0.02)
0.00
(0.01)
0.03
(0.03)
-0.05
(0.05)
-0.05
(0.01)***
-0.00
(0.03)

5,200

-0.09
(0.04)**
-0.06
(0.04)

5,339

0.09
(0.07)
-0.06
(0.04)
0.04
(0.03)
0.01
(0.02)

5,202

5,188
5,184
5,198
5,087
5,131
5,030

5,291

5,079
5,097
5,054
5,008

Notes: This table presents statistics and estimated differences between treatment and control schools. Baseline
data collected in April 2011 are used. Columns (1) and (2) present means, column (3) presents estimated
coefficients and standard errors from OLS regressions. Estimates in column (3) include school pair fixedeffects. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the school level. Significance at the one, five
and ten percent levels is indicated by ***, ** and *, respectively.

