                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      HETEROGENEOUS ECONOMIC RETURNS TO POSTSECONDARY DEGREES:
                        EVIDENCE FROM CHILE

                                            Loreto Reyes
                                           Jorge Rodríguez
                                           Sergio S. Urzúa

                                        Working Paper 18817
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18817


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2013




We are indebted to the useful comments of Samuel Berlinksy, Matias Busso, Judy Hellerstein, Giordano
Palloni, Ricardo Mayer, Rodrigo Montero, Claudia Sanhueza, Miguel Sarsoza, Ken Ueda, and the
seminar participants at Universidad Diego Portales (January, 2012) and IADB (March, 2012). A previous
version of this paper circulated under the title "The Economic Returns to Postsecondary Degrees in
Chile". We thank the Ministry of Finance of Chile for providing us access to the data. The authors
did not have access to information leading to the identi˝cation of individuals. The data analysis was
carried out in a secure server. Sergio Urzúa thanks the support of Centro de Microdatos at the University
of Chile through the Millennium Science Initiative sponsored by the Chilean Ministry of Economics,
Development and Tourism, Project NS100041. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Loreto Reyes, Jorge Rodríguez, and Sergio S. Urzúa. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Heterogeneous Economic Returns to Postsecondary Degrees: Evidence from Chile
Loreto Reyes, Jorge Rodríguez, and Sergio S. Urzúa
NBER Working Paper No. 18817
February 2013
JEL No. C25,C38,I21,I24,J24

                                              ABSTRACT

We analyze the economic returns to different postsecondary degrees in Chile. We posit a schooling
decision model with unobserved ability, observed test scores and labor market outcomes. We benefit
from administrative records to carry out our empirical strategy. Our results show positive average
returns to postsecondary degrees, especially for five-year degrees. However, we also uncover a large
fraction of individuals with realized negative net returns. Although psychic benefits of postsecondary
education could rationalize this result, we argue this might also suggest that individuals lack information
at the time schooling decisions are made. Finally, our findings illustrate the importance of allowing
for heterogeneous treatment effects when making policy recommendations.


Loreto Reyes                                         Sergio S. Urzúa
Ministry of Finance, Chile                           Department of Economics
Teatinos 120, Piso 12                                University of Maryland
Santiago, Chile                                      3105 Tydings Hall #3115C
lreyes@hacienda.gov.cl                               College Park, MD 20742
                                                     and NBER
Jorge Rodríguez                                      urzua@econ.umd.edu
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, Illinois 60637
jorger@uchicago.edu
       1     Introduction
       The vast evidence suggesting average positive returns to postsecondary education has con-

       tributed to the rapid worldwide expansion of the higher education sector.1 However, concerns

       about the weak labor market performance of recent college graduates in developed and de-

       veloping countries, uncertainty about the quality of institutions of higher education, the

       climbing tuition costs, and the accumulation of large student debts are challenging the pre-

       sumption that a postsecondary degree confers financial security.2 In this paper, we analyze

       this phenomenon by estimating heterogeneous treatment effects within and across postsec-

       ondary degrees using data from Chile. Our intuition is simple: investing in higher education

       can deliver positive average returns, while still yielding a negative economic return for many

       individuals.

           We study Chile’s highly competitive postsecondary education system. Our empirical

       model allows observationally equivalent individuals to face different returns to education

       depending on their unobserved endowments. Chile is particularly interesting because until

       recently its schooling system was regarded a success. However, over the past few years the

       system has received criticisms form a number of different sources. Many of the criticisms

       could also be applied to the postsecondary educational system in a variety of developed and

       developing countries.

           This paper contributes to the literature analyzing the returns to education in the context

       of models with unobserved heterogeneity (Willis and Rosen, 1979; Card, 1993, 2001; Kane

       and Rouse, 1995; Taber, 2001; Heckman, Urzua, and Vytlacil, 2006; Carneiro, Heckman, and

       Vytlacil, 2011). It also contributes to the literature estimating schooling choices in complex

   1
      Between 1998 and 2010, the number of students in tertiary education increased by 53% in the United States,
46% in Australia, 65% in Mexico (source: OECD). In China the figure has soared to more than 31 millions in 2010,
up from 23 million students in 2005 (source: National Bureau of Statistics of China), with the numbers of private
universities increasing from 20 in 1997 to 630 in 2010 (source: Center for International Higher Education at Boston
College).
    2
      In 2010 the unemployment rate among recent college graduates in the US ranged between 5.4 and 13.9%.
The large dispersion can be explained by major, illustrating the potential risk of unemployment (source: American
Community Survey, 2009 and 2010). In China, 6.4% of the urban population between the ages of 21 and 25 with an
undergraduate degree or higher were unemployed (source: Chinese Household Finance Survey Center of Chengdus
Southwestern University of Finance and Economics). Average published tuition and fees at public four-year colleges
and universities in the US increased by 31% beyond the rate of inflation over the five years from 2002 to 2007, and
by another 27% between 2007 and 2012 (source: The College Board, Annual Survey of Colleges; NCES, IPEDS).
Finally, two-thirds of U.S. college seniors graduated in 2011 with an average student loan debt of $26,600, a 5.3%
increase relative to 2010 (source: Project on Student Debt).

                                                        2
       settings (Kane, 1996, 1999; Keane and Wolpin, 1997; Cameron and Heckman, 1998). While

       a few prior studies have analyzed the economic returns to tertiary education in developing

       countries, our approach represents a significant improvement from previous work in three

       critical dimensions.3 First, we explicitly model the schooling decision of high school grad-

       uates over all available educational alternatives. We assume individuals decide on a type

       of postsecondary degree using an unordered discrete choice model. Second, our model al-

       lows for the presence of unobserved heterogeneity, which is interpreted as unobserved ability.

       More precisely, we assume that schooling decisions depend on an individual’s observed char-

       acteristics and latent ability (Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua, 2006; Urzua, 2008). We also

       investigate the role of short-term credit constraints within this framework. Third,

          our results show the importance of understanding the structure of the economic agent’s

       schooling decision process when determining the returns to education (Card, 2001; Heckman,

       Lochner, and Todd, 2006; Heckman, Urzua, and Vytlacil, 2008). We estimate returns to

       postsecondary degrees while taking into account the structure of the underlying schooling

       decision model. In particular, we generate two different returns for each type of postsecondary

       degree. First, we compare the economic benefits of each postsecondary degree to those

       obtained when not continuing to postsecondary studies. We also exploit the structure of our

       schooling choice model to compare the returns to each type of degree with the predicted

       returns to the second-best alternative We document large heterogeneity for both types of

       returns.

          The empirical strategy is implemented with longitudinal data containing administrative

       information from several sources. Our initial sample contains information on the universe

       of graduates from higher education institutions in Chile in 2008. We integrate this data

       with information from the national college admission system (2001-2007) which contains rich

       information on test scores and individual demographic and socio-economic variables. Finally,

       we observe each student’s labor market outcomes through 2011 using administrative registers

       of earnings.

          Our main results can be summarized as follows:
   3
    For a review of evidence on returns to education in Latin America see Behrman, Birdsall, and Szekely (2007);
Manacorda, Sanchez-Parama, and Schady (2010); Lustig and Lopez-Calva (2010); Bassi, Busso, Urzua, and Vargas
(2012). For Chile see Arellano and Braun (1999); Sapelli (2003); Contreras, Melo, and Ojeda (2005); Meller and
Rappoport (2006); Meller (2010); Rau (2013).

                                                       3
  1. We find substantial heterogeneity in the returns to postsecondary degrees. We show

     that the average economic returns to five-year postsecondary degrees are highest among

     all the available alternatives. However, a significant fraction of individuals face negative

     net returns: between 35% and 42% depending on the type of degree and institution.

     These individuals would have been financially better off if choosing not to attend tertiary

     education. The likelihood of observing negative returns is higher when analyzing the

     return that compares the first-best versus the second-best option. Furthermore, our

     findings indicate that, conditional on type of degree, individuals endowed with larger

     stocks of unobserved ability obtain higher economic returns relative to lower ability

     individuals. Also, we find that individuals with higher latent ability are more likely to

     enroll in institutions with higher labor market returns.

  2. We use our model to carry out policy simulations. In particular, we analyze the effects

     of a reduction in postsecondary tuition costs. We find that a 10% reduction in all tuition

     costs has minimal impact on overall enrollment, but it produces important composition

     effects. This confirms the importance of allowing for heterogeneity between types of

     postsecondary degrees. Furthermore, the small change in overall employment suggests

     that short-term financial constraints might not be binding in the Chilean case. This

     result is consistent with evidence for the United States (Cameron and Heckman, 2001;

     Carneiro and Heckman, 2002), but is new in the context of developing countries.

  3. We provide empirical evidence that sources of observed and unobserved heterogeneity

     must be understood and treated as distinct but connected phenomena (Hansen, Heck-

     man, and Mullen, 2004; Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua, 2006). Indeed, we show that the

     sorting patterns into postsecondary schooling alternatives differ depending on whether

     they are generated using observed tests scores or the underlying latent ability.

   The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the main features of

the Chilean postsecondary education system. Section 3 describes our economic model and

empirical strategy and presents a detailed analysis of our data. This section also defines the

treatment effects of interest. Section 4 discusses the main empirical findings. Finally, section

5 concludes.



                                               4
       2     The Postsecondary Education System in Chile
       Chile’s postsecondary education system has experienced rapid development over the last

       thirty years. The process began in 1981 with a reform that stimulated the entry of pri-

       vate institutions to the tertiary education system. As a result, the country transitioned

       from a postsecondary educational system dominated by public providers to one driven by

       competition between public and private institutions. The reform also increased the range of

       available postsecondary degrees. Before 1981, the vast majority of college graduates obtained

       five-year college degrees. After 1981, postsecondary institutions started offering two-, four-,

       and five-year degrees. The institutions offering two-year postsecondary degrees are known

       as Technical Institutes (TI or Centros de Formación Técnica), those offering four-year post-

       secondary degrees are know as Professional Institutes (PI or Institutos Profesionales), while

       universities continue offering five-year college degrees.4 Additionally, depending on the source

       of funding, universities can be further divided in three subcategories: Public, Private with

       access to public funding (PPF) and Private without access to public funding (Private).

           More than thirty years after the original reform, Chile’s postsecondary system is again

       under fire (OECD, 2009). Recently, the system has been criticized for a number of reasons.

       Arguably excessive tuition costs fueled an intense public debate, with many groups advo-

       cating for more tuition subsidies.5 At the same time, the quality of many higher education

       institutions has been questioned by students, public media, and even the government. Even

       though a large fraction of the students finance their education using private loans, the system

       is characterized by serious information problems. In fact, until recently, students did not have

       information on the employment prospects associated with different careers and postsecondary

       institutions when deciding where or whether to enroll. As a result of this, nothing prevented

       students (and their families) from making poorly informed financing decisions, which could

       lead to non-optimal outcomes from public and private perspectives. Our findings are con-

       sistent with this intuition. Many of these criticisms apply to the postsecondary schooling


   4
      The number of postsecondary institutions in Chile rose from eight universities in 1980 to almost two hundred
institutions in 2008 (61 universities, 45 PIs and 90 TIs). Also, the reform had an enormous impact in enrollment.
Between 1984 and 2009, the enrollment in postsecondary institutions grew almost 363% (from 189,151 to 876,243
students).
    5
      Between 2005 and 2011, the average tuition had a real growth of 15%, from US$3,292 to US$3,785.

                                                        5
       systems in other developed and developing countries.6

          In Chile, access to postsecondary education is merit-based. Students who wish to attend

       college must take a national college admission test known as the PSU (Prueba de Selección

       Universitaria). Conditional on their PSU scores, high school graduates choose between

       enrolling in a postsecondary institution or entering directly into the labor market. Students

       are required to score a minimum of 450 points on the PSU to apply to PI (leading to four-

       year degrees) and universities (five-year degrees).7 The only requirement for applying to TI

       (two-year degrees) is to have taken the PSU. Therefore, students with PSU scores higher

       than 450 points can choose among a wider variety of careers and postsecondary institutions.

       In addition to the general score guideline, each tertiary institution can choose to set an even

       more restrictive minimum score requirement. This is usually determined by the number of

       spots available.

          This process produces positive sorting between academic performance, as measured by

       PSU scores, and enrollment by type of degree and institution. Figure 1 shows that most

       of the students with high PSU scores have higher unconditional probabilities of attending a

       university. The sorting profile is strongly influenced by students’ socioeconomic background.

       As figure 2 documents, over 60% of the students whose gross family income is higher than

       2,800 dollars per month (the average family income in 2008) enroll in private universities.

       Students with more educated mothers are also more likely to attend private and public

       universities (figure 3).

          There are also significant differences in the labor market performance across postsec-

       ondary degrees and institutions (within a degree type). Figure 4 presents the average annual

       earnings received one and two years after graduation. The average earnings premium to

       graduating from PPF is the highest among the available degrees. Two- and four-year degrees

       present the lowest average premia. These results are confirmed in table 1, which presents the




   6
      In april of 2012, The Economist published an article discussing some of these issues
(http://www.economist.com/node/21552566).
    7
      This motivates the regression discontinuity (RD) strategy used in Hastings, Neilson, and Zimmerman (2012),
a recent study that came out to our attention after the first draft of this paper. The RD approach identifies the
local return to education for those individuals above and below the cutoff. Our paper seeks to trace out the whole
distribution of returns to education.

                                                        6
       OLS results from different Mincer-type regression specifications:


                                                 0      0
                                                                X
                                      ln wi = Xi β + Ti δ +           γs Di,s + ui
                                                                s∈J


       where wi represents monthly earnings, Xi contains several demographic and socio-economic

       characteristics (gender, age, mother’s education, family income), Ti is the vector of test

       scores (language, math, among others), Di,s is a binary indicator taking a value of one if

       the individual reports s as his postsecondary degree, and zero otherwise; J is the set of all

       available degrees, and ui is the error term. The information on postsecondary degrees (2008)

       and monthly earnings (2010) come from the Chilean postsecondary schooling system and the

       unemployment insurance system, respectively. We describe our data in more detail in section

       3.5.8

          After accounting for individual characteristics, PPF and public universities exhibit the

       highest economic returns: 112.2% and 101.6%, respectively (first column in table 1). These

       estimated returns decrease when we control for family background characteristics (columns

       2 and 3) but they remain higher for PPF and Public universities than for TI and PI. When

       we add measures of academic performance (college admission tests and high school GPA),

       the estimated returns decrease further, but are still larger for PPF and public universities

       (columns 4 and 5).

          However, to interpret these estimates as the causal effects of postsecondary degrees on

       earnings, we would need to make the strong assumption that, conditional on observed test

       scores Ti and Xi , the set of dummy variables {Di,s }j∈J is independent from ui . In other

       words, we would need to assume that selection is based exclusively on observed characteristics.

       Cameron and Heckman (2001) and Hansen, Heckman, and Mullen (2004) provide evidence

       that this is not a reasonable assumption. Individuals consider both observed and unobserved

       characteristics when sorting into schooling levels. On the other hand, labor market outcomes


   8
     As described below, we analyze administrative academic records from the total population of graduates from
higher institutions in Chile in 2008. This information contains standardized test scores (from PSU database), high
school GPA and socio-economic variables for individuals who graduated from postsecondary institutions in 2008.
Our sample includes individuals obtaining two-year TI degrees, four-year PI degrees and five-year university degrees
(Public, PPF and Private). Additionally, we have information on individuals who took PSU in 2007 and decided
not to enroll in postsecondary institutions, in 2008 or 2009. This sample defines the baseline category in table 1.
We link the academic records to monthly earning information from 2010.

                                                            7
       are also determined by latent abilities (Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua, 2006). Therefore,

       to the extent that observed test scores are not perfect proxies for latent ability, we can

       not provide a causal interpretation to the results in table 1. Furthermore, these results do

       not account for the direct tuition costs of education. As table 2 shows, these costs can

       be substantial.9 Consequently, we follow a different strategy in which we explicitly model

       schooling choices as a function of observed and unobserved characteristics, and compute the

       returns to postsecondary degrees net of tuition costs.



       3     The Economic Model and Empirical Strategy
       We posit a model of unordered schooling decisions. Conditional on unobserved ability, agents

       make schooling choices based on the comparison of the net expected utility associated with

       each postsecondary degree.10 This utility includes the potential economic benefits as well as

       monetary and psychic costs. The inclusion of psychic costs (or benefits) allows students to

       select alternatives that might not be optimal from a financial perspective.

           We supplement the previous framework with a model of labor market outcomes (earnings)

       by type of degree. We assume that these outcomes are determined by the agent’s observed

       and unobserved characteristics. Unobserved components, which we interpret as latent ability,

       generate a correlation between schooling choices and individual labor market outcomes. This

       delivers a model with essential heterogeneity, which allows for observationally equivalent in-

       dividuals to experience different treatment effects even if they are making the same schooling

       decisions (Heckman, Urzua, and Vytlacil, 2006). We estimate a variety of treatment effects

       and analyze how they change with the level of unobserved ability.



       3.1     The Schooling Choice Model

       After graduating from high school, individuals decide between enrolling in one of the available

       higher education institutions, which leads to a specific degree, or entering the labor market.


   9
     See Heckman, Lochner, and Todd (2008) for a precise discussion of the assumptions behind the Mincer model
and their empirical justification.
  10
     See Willis and Rosen (1979), Cameron and Heckman (1998, 2001), Carneiro, Hansen, and Heckman (2003)
and Cameron and Taber (2004) for models with similar characteristics.

                                                      8
       Let J denote the set of all choices, and j be a specific degree type, i.e., j ∈ J .11 Schooling

       choices depend on observed and unobserved characteristics. Let θ denote the unobserved

       individual endowment, which we interpret as latent ability. We assume θ is known to the

       agent.

           We setup our choice model as in Cameron and Heckman (2001) and Heckman, Humphries,

       Urzua, and Veramendi (2011). Let Vij be the utility for student i of choosing option j. This

       incorporates the economic returns as well as monetary and psychic costs for each alternative.

       We approximate Vij using the following linear function (for simplicity, we suppress the i

       index):

                                          Vj = XjV βjV + αjV θ + νjV ,                               (1)


       where Xj presents the vector of exogenous characteristics, θ is unobserved ability and νjV is

       the error term. We assume that conditional on individual characteristics, schooling choices

       are unordered. More precisely, agents choose the alternative that yields the highest expected

       utility:

                                            j ∗ = arg max E(Vj |Ω)
                                                      j∈J


       where Ω denotes the information set available to the individual. It includes observed and un-

       observed variables as well as the structure of the model. Later, we analyze the consequences of

       using unordered choices in the estimation of the returns to education in traditional structural

       schooling models (Heckman, Urzua, and Vytlacil, 2008).

           Let Dj denote an indicator function for option j defined as:

                                         
                                          1 if j = arg maxk∈J E(Vk |Ω)
                                         
                                  Dj =
                                          0 otherwise
                                         


           We utilize Dj to define the treatment effects of postsecondary degrees.

           Finally, we assume that agents graduate from high school at t = 0, and that each post-

       secondary degree has a specific duration. We denote by Sj the duration associated with

       postsecondary degree j. For students who decide not to continue on to postsecondary edu-

       cation, Sj = 0. For the rest of the alternatives, Sj > 0.
  11
     We exclude from our model schooling decisions beyond postsecondary degrees and any possibility of dropping
out after enrolling.

                                                       9
        3.2      Labor Market Outcomes

        Let yj (Sj ) denote annual initial earnings after obtaining a degree of type j. Likewise, let

        gj (t, t + 1) denote the associated growth rate of earnings between t and t + 1. We can

        characterize the earnings profile for an agent graduating from degree j as:


                 yj (t) = 0                                                                     0 < t < Sj         (2)

                 yj (t) = yj (Sj ) × (1 + gj (Sj , Sj + 1)) × . . . × (1 + gj (t − 1, t))       Sj ≤ t ≤ T         (3)


        where T denotes the retirement period, which we assume is common to all individuals.

        These expressions represent our model of counterfactual labor market outcomes and, as

        discussed below, they are the critical ingredients behind our estimated economic returns to

        postsecondary degrees.12

           In the empirical implementation of the counterfactual outcome models, we assume that

        labor market outcomes are determined by observed characteristics as well as unobserved

        ability in the following manner:13


                                                      yj (Sj ) = Xjy βjy + αjy θ + νjy                             (4)

                                         gj (Sj , Sj + 1) = Xjg (Sj )βjg + αjg θ + νjg                             (5)

                                                                                        
        where        Xjy , Xjg (Sj ) represent vectors of exogenous controls, and νjy , νjg are the error

        terms.

           We use a conventional switching regression framework to define observed initial earnings

        y(Sj ) and growth rates g(Sj , Sj + 1):

                                                            X
                                                 y(Sj ) =         Dj × yj (Sj )
                                                            j∈J
                                                            X
                                        g(Sj , Sj + 1) =          Dj × gj (Sj , Sj + 1)
                                                            j∈J

   12
      Given a specific degree type, individuals could enroll into different fields or disciplines (social sciences, biological
sciences, computer science, etc). To the extent our schooling decision model captures the selection into types, and
our labor market equations capture the heterogeneity between and within degree types, the selection into disciplines
should not affect our identification strategy and the interpretation of the main results.
   13
      This is similar to the empirical strategy in Willis and Rosen (1979), although we relax the assumption of
normality.

                                                              10
   Note that θ affects labor market productivity as well as schooling choices. This unobserved

factor is what drives the endogeneity of schooling decisions in our model.



3.3    Measurement System for Unobserved Endowments

The identification of the model of schooling choices and counterfactual labor market outcomes

hinges on the identification of the distribution of unobserved ability θ, fθ (·). We follow the

strategy in Carneiro, Hansen, and Heckman (2003) and Hansen, Heckman, and Mullen (2004),

and obtain this distribution using the information from a set of measurements (test scores).

Let T be a vector of individual-level test scores (with at least three components) observed

before the agent faces the postsecondary education decision problem. We assume a system

of linear equations of the form:


                                   T = XT β T + α T θ + ν T                                   (6)


where XT represents a vector of exogenous controls, and ν T is the vector of residuals. Notice

that the link between test scores and θ supports our interpretation of θ as latent ability.

   Carneiro, Hansen, and Heckman (2003) show that in this context, the distribution of θ is

non-parametrically identified up to a normalization of a single coefficient in αT . We rely on

their theory to develop our empirical analysis. For further details on the identifying assump-

tions of discrete-continuous factor models of endogenous decisions, labor market outcomes

and test scores, see also Hansen, Heckman, and Mullen (2004).



3.4    The returns to postsecondary degrees

As mentioned earlier, the model allows for the identification of average and distributional

treatment effects (Aakvik, Heckman, and Vytlacil, 2005). We focus on the impact of postsec-

ondary degrees on labor market outcomes as defined by equations (4) and (5). Specifically,

we use the models of initial earnings and growth rates to simulate the net economic benefits




                                              11
      of each degree type j ∈ J using the following expression:

                                              T                 Sj −1
                                              X       ŷj (t)   X Cj (t)
                                     P Vj =                   −                                      (7)
                                                     (1 + r)t         (1 + r)t
                                              t=Sj               t=0


      where ŷj (t) represents the predicted earnings in period t for degree type j (see expression

      (3)) and Cj (t) denotes the respective annual tuition costs.

          It is worth mentioning that P Vj is not necessarily an estimate of Vj . In our model, an

      individual may not choose the alternative that yields the highest economic returns. Allowing

      for Vj to include psychic costs rationalizes a model in which individuals make optimal choices

      based on expected net utility, but may not make the best financial decision (Cameron and

      Heckman, 2001; Cunha, Heckman, and Navarro, 2005). Differences between P Vj and Vj

      could also be due to individual having a distorted information set available at the time of the

      decision and/or forecast errors. However, Cunha, Heckman, and Navarro (2006) find that

      forecast errors explain only a small portion of the gap between Vj and P Vj in the United

      States.14

          We use this methodology to analyze two alternative definitions of the net economic returns

      to postsecondary degrees. First, we compare each option against the alternative of not

      continuing onto postsecondary studies. This is the traditional definition of the individual’s

      return to postsecondary education. Individuals choosing not to continue to postsecondary

      education have a stream of earnings defined by y0 (t) and g0 (t, t + 1), while C0 (t) = 0 for all

      t. The present discounted value of the no postsecondary schooling choice is given by:

                                                        T
                                                        X  ŷ0 (t)
                                              P V0 =                                                 (8)
                                                          (1 + r)t
                                                         t=0


      where r denotes the relevant interest rate.

          Let ∆0j represent the purely financial benefit or loss (that is, excluding psychic costs or

      benefits) to choosing option j instead of no postsecondary education. ∆0j is defined at the

      individual-level as:


                                                ∆0j = P Vj − P V0                                    (9)

14
     In this paper we do not decompose the gap between Vj and P Vj into uncertainty and psychic costs.

                                                         12
          However, in analyzing the costs and benefits of a particular choice j, the agent compares

      its associated benefits and costs against those from all alternatives in J , not just to the no

      postsecondary schooling option. In particular, if for some j, k both in J , ∆0j > 0 and ∆0k > 0,

      then the relevant comparison is between P Vj and P Vk . Following this intuition, our second

      definition for the return to postsecondary degrees is based on the comparison of the benefits

      and costs associated with the first-best versus second-best alternatives. Specifically, let j ∗

      and k ∗ be the first and second best options, respectively. That is:


                                               j ∗ = argmaxj∈J {Vj }

                                               k ∗ = argmaxk∈J |−j ∗ {Vk },


      and let P Vj ∗ and P Vk∗ be the corresponding net economic benefits. We define the following

      individual-level treatment parameter:


                                                      ∗
                                                  ∆kj ∗   = P Vj ∗ − P Vk∗ ,                                (10)


      which identifies the economic benefits of graduating from the first-best option, j ∗ , versus the

      second-best alternative k ∗ With ∆0j and ∆kj , we can estimate the average treatment on the

      treated effect as follows:

                  ZZ
      T Tj0 ≡          ∆0j [(Xjy (t), Xjg (t)) = x, θ = z]dFX,θ|Dj =1 (x, z)                                (11)
                  ZZ  X
                                                                                                
      T Tjk                        ∆kj [(Xjy (t), Xjg (t)) = x, θ = z] × Pr Dk∈J |−j = 1 |Dj = 1 dFX,θ|Dj =1,Dk∈J |−j =1 (x, z)
                                                                           
              ≡
                         k∈J |−j

                                                                                                            (12)


      where the indicator function Dk∗ ∈J |−j ∗ takes a value of 1 if k ∗ is the optimal choice in J

      when j ∗ is excluded, and 0 otherwise.

          Equation (11) is the usual expression for estimating treatment on the treated effects for

      a particular schooling level.15 T Tj0 assumes that the relevant counterfactual for estimating

      average treatment effects is the alternative of not graduating from any postsecondary alter-

      native. Equation (12) is a modification of the conventional definition. Given that we are

15
     See, e.g., Aakvik, Heckman, and Vytlacil (2005) and Heckman, Humphries, Urzua, and Veramendi (2011).

                                                              13
       considering different choices within a particular set of options, our average treatment on the

       treated effect should be averaged over the probability of k being the second-best choice given

       that Dj = 1. In this way, T Tjk offers a different and potentially more realistic perspective to

       the returns to education.



       3.5     Empirical Implementation

       Data. Our data include administrative records on individual-level postsecondary degrees,

       test scores and earnings. The information on postsecondary degrees comes from administra-

       tive registers from the Chilean Ministry of Education. Table 3 presents the list of institutions

       from which we observe the universe of postsecondary degrees granted in 2008. We have in-

       formation from 69 TIs, 36 PIs, 16 Public universities and 30 Private universities. We gather

       information on PSU test scores from the postsecondary admission test system for the pe-

       riod 2001-2007 (PSU).16 The PSU evaluates students’ proficiency in the subjects of math,

       language, geography and science. This data also contains a rich set of individual-level in-

       formation, including each student’s socio-economic characteristics and average GPA during

       high school.

          Information on labor market outcomes comes from the Ministry of Labor’s Unemploy-

       ment Insurance System (UIS). The UIS records monthly earnings for all workers with formal

       contracts in the country since November 2002. By 2010, the data contains information from

       more than 7 million workers.17,18

          In order to estimate the economic benefits to not graduating from a postsecondary in-

       stitution, we build a comparison group (control group) using individuals entering the labor

       market right after finishing high school in 2007. We construct this group by gathering in-

       formation from administrative records on those enrolled in higher education institutions and

       the college admission system. Specifically, we identify individuals that took PSU in 2007, but
  16
      Between 2001 and 2003, PAA (Prueba de Aptitud Academica) was the national college admission test. The
data description applies for both PAA and PSU.
   17
      According to the Chilean Bureau of Statistics, average quarterly employment in the country was 7,1 million
in 2010.
   18
      The total number of individuals obtained a postsecondary degree in 2008 is 50,0041. After deleting observations
with missing information on exogeneous controls and monthly earnings, we end up with 31,045 observations. On
the other hand, 51,031 individuals participated in the college admission process in 2007 (took PSU) but did not
enroll in any postsecondary institution in 2008 or 2009. After deleting observations with missing information on
exogeneous controls and monthly earnings, we end up with 26,114 observations.

                                                         14
       did not appear enrolled in 2008 or 2009. In this way, we compare the labor market outcomes

       of those graduating from postsecondary institutions in 2008 to individuals entering the labor

       market at the same time, without any postsecondary schooling.19

          We use the math, language and geography PSU scores to estimate the measurement

       system described in equation (6). We include average high school GPA (obtained from PSU

       records) as part of the measurement system. Because 2008 graduates might come from

       careers with different durations, we obtain their PSU test scores from several different years.

       We look for PSU scores in administrative records over the period 2001 to 2005. Because the

       PSU scores are not comparable over time, we use year-specific percentiles as our measures of

       academic performance. The list of covariates in the measurement system includes age, gender,

       and mother’s education, all of which are obtained from the PSU administrative records.

          In our multinomial choice estimations, we include as exogenous controls gender, age

       (2008), mother’s education and family income (from PSU records). We also incorporate

       average regional tuition costs for each potential postsecondary degree. This information

       contributes to the identification of our schooling choice model (Card, 1999; Heckman and

       Navarro, 2007).

          For labor market outcomes, we use the monthly earnings between August 2008 and July

       2009 to construct average monthly earnings in 2008. This is our dependent variable in

       equation (4).20 Analogously, we use earnings between August 2010 and July 2011 to construct

       the average monthly earnings for 2010. We compute the growth rate of earnings gj (Sj , Sj +1)

       using the individual-level information for the years 2008 and 2010. In equations (4) and (5)

       we include age and gender covariates.

          Tables 4 and 5 present the explanatory variables included in the educational multinomial


  19
      Each agent in our model selects the schooling level that maximizes his expected utility. We assume that
in forming these expectations he uses all available information. In this way, recent high school graduates should
consider the labor market outcomes of recent college graduates to decide whether or not to continue their education.
This logic justifies our control group in the context of our schooling choice setup. We recognize that the cohort of
recent high school graduates might underestimate the counterfactual labor market outcomes for college graduates,
and overestimate the returns to postsecondary education. But since we find a large fraction of individuals with
negative net returns to postsecondary degrees, our main conclusion is robust to the definition of the control group.
   20
      We assume zero earnings for months of unemployment or inactivity. We then compute average monthly
earnings using 12 observations per individual. For those individuals with average monthly earnings below the legal
minimum wage divided by 12, we assume zero earnings. We do this to make sure we are considering earnings
coming from at least one month of formal full time employment during the year. The minimum wage was set to
US$ 318 between July 2008 and June 2009 and US$ 344 per month between July 2010 and June 2011.

                                                        15
      choice model, the test score measurement system and the labor market outcome equations.

      Summary statistics of the variables are presented in table 6.

          Estimation. We assume that the distribution of θ, f (θ), can be approximated as a

      mixture of two normal distributions with means (µ1 , µ2 ) (with the overall mean of θ restricted

      to zero), probabilities (p1 , p2 ), and variances (Σ1 , Σ2 ):


                                          θ ∼ p1 Φ(µ1 , Σ1 ) + p2 Φ(µ2 , Σ2 )


      with p1 + p2 = 1. Therefore, we use flexible distributional assumptions to estimate the

      distribution of unobserved ability.

          The likelihood function of the model is given by the following expression:

                                     Y
                             L =          f (Yi , Di , Ti |Xi )
                                      i
                                     YZ
                                 =           f (Yi |Di , Xi , θ)f (Di , Ti |Xi , κ)fθ (κ)dθ
                                      i


      where Yi is a vector containing individual i’s labor market outcomes (Yi = [yj (Sj ), gj (Sj , Sj +

      1)]), Xi contains his observed exogenous characteristics (Xi = [XjV (t), Xjy (t), Xjg (t)]), Di de-

      notes observed schooling choice and Ti contains test scores. We assume that the idiosyncratic

      errors in equation (1) are distributed according to independent standardized normal distri-

      butions. We follow Hansen, Heckman, and Mullen (2004) and assume that X and θ are

      independent. The disturbances in equations (4), (5) and (6) are also assumed to be drawn

      from independent normal distributions with mean zero. The associated variances are esti-

      mated by our empirical strategy. Given θi and Xi , the distribution of counterfactuals is

      identified and all errors in the model are independent from each other.

          The empirical implementation follows a Bayesian Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)

      method.21 The model’s estimates are used to simulate 100,000 draws. For each draw, we

      predict schooling choices and labor market outcomes for each counterfactual.




21
     For more details see Carneiro, Hansen, and Heckman (2003) and Hansen, Heckman, and Mullen (2004).

                                                           16
4     The Returns to Postsecondary Degrees
We use the model’s estimated parameters to generate the returns to postsecondary degrees

in Chile. Figure 5 presents the estimated distribution of unobserved ability. It confirms

previous findings documenting that unobserved ability might not be normally distributed

(Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua, 2006).

    Table 7 shows the estimates of our multinomial probit model. Estimated coefficients sug-

gest that students coming from a rich home environment (high-income families and educated

mothers) have a higher probability of obtaining a postsecondary degree, particularly from

Public and Private universities (five-year degrees).

    Our results also indicate that an increase in annual tuition reduces the probability of

graduating from Public and PPF universities. In contrast, it increases the likelihood of

choosing TI and PI. Initially, these results might seem counterintuitive. However, one possible

explanation is that tuition costs are interpreted as proxies of quality. In other words, these

costs could contribute to information asymmetries in the postsecondary schooling market if

there is lack of reputational mechanisms identifying institutions that do not provide good

quality services. It implies that individuals who are more likely to choose PI and TI, perceive

a positive relation between provided quality and tuition costs.

    Conditional on observed individual characteristics and the costs of postsecondary educa-

tion, we obtain a positive relationship between unobserved abilities and the probability of

graduating from PI and university (including public and private institutions). In contrast,

estimates show a negative relationship between our measure of unobserved individual ability

and the probability of obtaining a two-year postsecondary degree from a TI. Our results also

indicate heterogeneity among the individuals choosing universities. In particular, we find

that high-ability individuals are more likely to choose PPF compared to public, private and

PI institutions.

    Table 8 presents estimates from the test score equations. The coefficients on age and

gender are statistically significant and show the expected signs. In particular, males perform

better in math and geography, while females obtain higher scores in language and have

better grades during high school (measured by GPA). Also, the coefficients associated with

unobserved ability all have positive signs and they all are statistically significant at the 1%


                                              17
       level.

           Estimates of the equations for labor market outcomes are presented in table 9. Coeffi-

       cients from initial earning equations (columns 1 to 6) show that unobserved endowments are

       positively correlated with initial earnings. The male and age coefficients have positive signs

       and are statistically significant at 1% level. The earnings growth estimates are presented in

       columns 7 to 12. Here, the age coefficients have negative signs, suggesting, on average, earn-

       ings profiles are concave (except for graduates from two-year degrees - TI). Our estimates

       suggest that higher ability individuals would have a flatter earnings profile if they chose to

       graduate from private universities or not to continue on to any postsecondary studies.

           In order to evaluate the goodness of fit our model, we compare the distribution of choices

       between the observed data and the model samples. We do this by simulating data from our

       estimated parameters. As figure 6 shows the simulated data closely resembles the distribution

       of choices. Additionally, we compare average monthly earnings and the associated growth

       rates between the observed data and the model simulated sample. Figures 7 and 8 show that

       our model mimics the observed patterns in the data despite slightly overestimating growth

       rates of earnings.22

           Figure 9 presents the variance decomposition of test scores as a function of observables

       (gender, age, mother’s education and family income), the individual’s latent ability, and the

       error term. For language, math and geography; unobserved ability explains a significant

       fraction of the overall variances (between 42.2% and 50.1% depending on the specific test).

       The observed regressors and the error terms explain approximately 25% of the variance. In

       the case of high school GPA, a significant percentage of the variance is explained by the error

       term (58%), 32.9% is explained by the factor, and only a small fraction (9%) is attributed

       to observable elements.

           It is interesting to compare the simulated sorting profile on the different degrees implied

       by the latent ability (θ) and the error-contaminated measurement of θ (PSU scores). This

       exercise shed lights on the importance of distinguishing between the two. Figures 10 and 11

       present these results. For high-ability individuals both the PSU and θ produce similar sorting.

       The highest ability individuals are more likely to choose PPF, Public and Private universities
  22
    Tables A1-A3 in the appendix compare means, variances and distributions for test scores and labor market
outcomes between the observed data and the model simulated sample.

                                                     18
        (in that order). Surprisingly, for lower ability individuals θ and PSU scores produce different

        sortings. According to the estimated PSU distribution, low-scoring students tend to choose to

        not graduate from postsecondary education or to graduate from two-year degrees. However,

        if we use the estimated θ distribution, TI and PI graduates tend to have lower latent ability.

        This suggests that estimates based only on observable measurements –such as PSU scores–

        lead to a different sorting structure than the actual latent factor. Thus, OLS estimates using

        PSU as proxies for latent ability, are potentially biased.

            Following equation (3), we estimate the average stream of annual earnings ŷj (t) for each

        schooling choice j. We compute yearly earnings, for this age range. Figure 12 displays

        the conditional earnings profiles, starting at age 18 and ending at 35. There is significant

        heterogeneity across alternatives. Moreover, the estimated earnings profiles are not parallel

        across the different alternatives. For example, on average, the profile of people with degrees

        from private universities has higher initial earnings than one for PI graduates, but this gap

        reduces with age.

            Treatment Effects. We use the results from our model and administrative data on

        tuition costs to compute the individual-level net present value of earnings P Vj for each

        degree type j as well as the treatment effects defined in equations (8) and (7). We assume a

        constant discount rate of 0.04.

            Table 10 presents our estimates for T Tjk (first best versus second best options) and T Tj0

        (first best option versus not pursuing a postsecondary degree). The results confirm that,

        on average, obtaining a postsecondary degree would lead to net positive economic returns.

        For T Tj0 , five-year postsecondary degrees (universities) have the highest returns among all

        alternatives, particularly when obtained from PPF universities. Nevertheless, our results also

        document the existence of substantial heterogeneity in the returns. Specifically, we find that

        the portion of individuals receiving negative returns to their postsecondary degree ranges

        from 35% to 42% (third column in table 10).23 Even if we disregard individuals at the

  23
       We calculate rates of return as:

                                             rj0 = (P Vj − P V0 )/P V0
                                            rjk = (P Vj − P Vk )/P Vk ,

where P V0 and P Vk are defined in the main text. Treatment effects are calculated according to equations (11) and
(12).

                                                        19
      margin (fourth column), we still find a large number of individuals with negative returns.

      These individuals would have been financially better-off not continuing schooling beyond high

      school. This might suggest the existence of psychic benefits to postsecondary education. This

      is in line with the findings of Carneiro, Hansen, and Heckman (2003); Cunha, Heckman, and

      Navarro (2005, 2006); Heckman, Lochner, and Todd (2006). Alternatively, this may be the

      result of a lack of information at the time the schooling decisions are made. Although we

      do not decompose the treatment effects variance into the these two components, Carneiro,

      Hansen, and Heckman (2003) find that uncertainty coming from forecast errors has little

      effect on schooling choices. Furthermore, we find that individuals with a higher stock of

      unobserved abilities also have higher values of T Tjk (figure 13).

          Next, we analyze the results for T Tjk . Estimated returns fall drastically and the portion

      of individuals realizing negative economic returns rises considerably. It is interesting to note

      that private universities have the highest economic returns. Moreover, as the differences

      between the first- and second-best option shrink, T Tjk becomes now lower for PPF than for

      private universities.

          To understand this result, we look at the distribution of first and second best choices.

      Table 11 presents these results. The second best choice distribution follows the rank-order

      of economic benefits closely. For individuals choosing TI, the most popular second choice is

      not enrolling in a tertiary institution. The distribution of second-best choices for individuals

      choosing private universities is roughly uniform across the other alternatives. PPF institu-

      tions, on the other hand, the vast majority of second best choices are concentrated in public

      universities.24

          T Tjk also varies with our measure of latent ability θ. For example, for two-year degrees

      (TIs) T Tjk is decreasing in θ (figure 14). This implies that high-skilled individuals graduating

      from a TI would have been better-off financially selecting their second best alternative. For

      Public universities there is a similar phenomenon: as θ rises, T Tjk decreases because the

      second best alternative starts to increase in economic value. For the other postsecondary

      degrees (Private, PI and PPF) higher θ produces greater economic benefit according to our

      measure T Tjk .


24
     In table A.4 we show estimated T Tjk by second choices.

                                                       20
           Overall, our findings suggest that a substantial fraction of individuals make schooling de-

        cisions that lead to negative net economic returns. As explained above, we cannot determine

        if these “mistakes” are due to a lack of information or to individual preferences (psychic ben-

        efits). We can, however, show that our estimated treatment effects are directly affected by

        latent ability. This confirms the important role of unobserved heterogeneity in determining

        individual’s expectations and/or psychic costs/benefits.

           Policy experiment: The effect of tuition subsidies. We utilize our model to inves-

        tigate the effects of a reduction in tuition costs on schooling decisions. We follow the analysis

        presented in Carneiro, Hansen, and Heckman (2003) and simulate the impact of a uniform

        reduction in tuition for all institution types. Then, we extend the analysis and simulate a

        relative reduction in costs for each postsecondary institution type. This enables us to trace

        out the behavioral responses to heterogeneous changes in tuition costs across institutions.

           Table 12 shows the distribution of school choices after a 10% reduction in tuition costs

        for all institution types.25 Contrary to what we expected, total enrollment in postsecondary

        institutions is essentially unaffected by the change (a reduction of only 0.94%). However,

        disguised by the stable overall enrollment, we observe significant changes in the composition

        of enrollment across degrees and institutions.

           Specifically, we observe a reduction in PI enrollment (17,34% - i.e, from 9,158 to 7,570)

        and Private enrollment (6,9% - i.e, from 17,940 to 16,700), and an increase in enrollment

        for the other institution types. TI, Public and PPF experience an increase in enrollment

        of 2.25% (from 5,537 to 5,662), 8.83% (from 13,408 to 14,590) and 12.62% (from 8,028 to

        9,041), respectively.

           These findings confirm the importance of allowing for heterogeneity across types of higher

        education institutions. They also suggest that changes in tuition costs produce no signifi-

        cant effects on overall enrollment, after controlling for family background characteristics and

        ability. This suggests that short-term credit constraints might not play a major role in the

        Chilean postsecondary education system (at least in terms of the probability of obtaining a

        degree).



   25
     We allow the direct costs differ across different types of institutions, so the 10% reduction modifies the relative
costs. Table 2 presents average values per institution.

                                                          21
5     Conclusions
In this paper we estimate heterogeneous returns to different types of postsecondary insti-

tutions in Chile. We account for observed and unobserved selection across the available

alternatives. Our identification strategy is based on the presence of an unobserved endow-

ment (ability), which generates the correlation between schooling choices and future labor

market outcomes. Our model is capable of producing a variety of treatment effects. Our re-

sults demonstrate an important sorting component based on unobserved ability, confirming

the advantages of our approach over more traditional empirical strategies.

    Compared to the alternative of graduating from high school and not pursuing a post-

secondary degree, on average, all postsecondary degrees have positive economic returns.

However, there is significant heterogeneity in our estimates. We document that a large pro-

portion of students are willing to accept negative monetary returns to postsecondary degrees.

Moreover, we exploit the structure of our schooling choice model and compute a treatment

effect that compares the economic returns to the first-best versus the second-best alterna-

tive. In this case we find an even larger fraction of individuals experiencing negative returns.

These findings might be due to either the presence of psychic benefits (Cunha, Heckman,

and Navarro, 2005, 2006) or informational asymmetries.

    Finally, we estimate that a reduction in tuition costs produces non-trivial changes in the

composition of postsecondary graduates, but does not affect overall enrollment levels. This

highlights the importance of allowing for heterogeneous returns to postsecondary degrees.

Furthermore, consistent with the results in Cameron and Heckman (2001) and Carneiro and

Heckman (2002), this suggests that financial constraints are not playing a major role in the

Chilean postsecondary education system.




                                              22
References
Aakvik, A., J. J. Heckman, and E. J. Vytlacil (2005): “Estimating Treatment Effects

  for Discrete Outcomes When Responses to Treatment Vary: An Application to Norwegian

  Vocational Rehabilitation Programs,” Journal of Econometrics, 125(1-2), 15–51.

Arellano, S., and M. Braun (1999): “Rentabilidad de la Educación Formal en Chile,”

  Cuadernos de Economı́a, (107), 685–724.

Bassi, M., M. Busso, S. Urzua, and J. Vargas (eds.) (2012): Disconnected: Skills,

  education and employment in Latin America. Inter-American Development Bank, Philadel-

  phia, PA.

Behrman, J., N. Birdsall, and M. Szekely (2007): “Economic Policy and Wage Dif-

  ferentials in Latin America,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 56(1).

Cameron, S. V., and J. J. Heckman (1998): “Life Cycle Schooling and Dynamic Selection

  Bias: Models and Evidence for Five Cohorts of American Males,” Journal of Political

  Economy, 106(2), 262–333.

        (2001): “The Dynamics of Educational Attainment for Black, Hispanic, and White

  Males,” Journal of Political Economy, 109(3), 455–99.

Cameron, S. V., and C. Taber (2004): “Estimation of Educational Borrowing Constraints

  Using Returns to Schooling,” Journal of Political Economy, 112(1), 132–182.

Card, D. (1993): “Using Geographic Variation in College Proximity to Estimate the Return

  to Schooling,” Discussion Paper 4483, National Bureau of Economic Research.

         (1999): “The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings,” in Handbook of Labor

  Economics, ed. by O. Ashenfelter, and D. Card, vol. 5, pp. 1801–1863. North-Holland,

  New York.

        (2001): “Estimating the Return to Schooling: Progress on Some Persistent Econo-

  metric Problems,” Econometrica, 69(5), 1127–1160.




                                            23
Carneiro, P., K. Hansen, and J. J. Heckman (2003): “Estimating Distributions of

  Treatment Effects with an Application to the Returns to Schooling and Measurement

  of the Effects of Uncertainty on College Choice,” International Economic Review, 44(2),

  361–422.

Carneiro, P., and J. J. Heckman (2002): “The Evidence on Credit Constraints in Post-

  Secondary Schooling,” Economic Journal, 112(482), 705–734.

Carneiro, P., J. J. Heckman, and E. J. Vytlacil (2011): “Estimating Marginal and

  Average Returns to Education,” American Economic Review, 101(773), 2754–2781.

Contreras, D., E. Melo, and S. Ojeda (2005): “Estimando el Retorno a la Educación

  o a los no Observables?: Evidencia de Datos de Danel,” Estudios de Economı́a, 32(2),

  187–199.

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, and S. Navarro (2005): “Separating Uncertainty from

  Heterogeneity in Life Cycle Earnings, The 2004 Hicks Lecture,” Oxford Economic Papers,

  57(2), 191–261.

         (2006): “Counterfactual Analysis of Inequality and Social Mobility,” in Mobility

  and Inequality: Frontiers of Research in Sociology and Economics, ed. by S. L. Morgan,

  D. B. Grusky, and G. S. Fields, chap. 4, pp. 290–348. Stanford University Press, Stanford,

  CA.

Hansen, K. T., J. J. Heckman, and K. J. Mullen (2004): “The Effect of Schooling and

  Ability on Achievement Test Scores,” Journal of Econometrics, 121(1-2), 39–98.

Hastings, J., C. Neilson, and S. Zimmerman (2012): “Determinants of causal re-

  turns to postsecondary education in Chile: What’s luck got to do with it?,” unpublished

  manuscript.

Heckman, J. J., J. Humphries, S. Urzua, and G. Veramendi (2011): “The Effects

  of Schooling on Labor Market, Health, and Social Outcomes,” Working Papers 2011-002,

  Human Capital and Economic Opportunity Working Group.



                                            24
Heckman, J. J., L. J. Lochner, and P. E. Todd (2006): “Earnings Equations and Rates

  of Return: The Mincer Equation and Beyond,” in Handbook of the Economics of Education,

  ed. by E. A. Hanushek, and F. Welch, chap. 7, pp. 307–458. Elsevier, Amsterdam.

          (2008): “Earnings Functions and Rates of Return,” Journal of Human Capital, 2(1),

  1–31.

Heckman, J. J., and S. Navarro (2007): “Dynamic Discrete Choice and Dynamic Treat-

  ment Effects,” Journal of Econometrics, 136(2), 341–396.

Heckman, J. J., J. Stixrud, and S. Urzua (2006): “The Effects of Cognitive and Noncog-

  nitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior,” Journal of Labor Eco-

  nomics, 24(3), 411–482.

Heckman, J. J., S. Urzua, and E. J. Vytlacil (2006): “Understanding Instrumental

  Variables in Models with Essential Heterogeneity,” Review of Economics and Statistics,

  88(3), 389–432.

          (2008): “Instrumental Variables in Models with Multiple Outcomes: The General

  Unordered Case,” Les Annales d’Economie et de Statistique, Forthcoming.

Kane, T. J. (1996): “College Cost, Borrowing Constraints and the Timing of College Entry,”

  Eastern Economic Journal, 22(2), 181–194.

          (1999): The Price of Admission: Rethinking How Americans Pay for College. Brook-

  ings Institution, Washington, D.C.

Kane, T. J., and C. E. Rouse (1995): “Labor-Market Returns to Two- and Four-Year

  College,” American Economic Review, 85(3), 600–614.

Keane, M. P., and K. I. Wolpin (1997): “The Career Decisions of Young Men,” Journal

  of Political Economy, 105(3), 473–522.

Lustig, N., and L. Lopez-Calva (eds.) (2010): Declining inequality in Latin America:

  A decade of progress? Brookings Institution Press, Baltimore, MD.




                                            25
Manacorda, M., C. Sanchez-Parama, and N. Schady (2010): “Change in the returns

  to education in Latin America: The role of demand and supply of skills,” Industrial and

  Labor Relations, 63(2).

Meller, P. (2010): Carreras Universitarias, Rentabilidad, Selectividad y Discriminación.

  Editorial Uqbar.

Meller, P., and D. Rappoport (2006): “Son siempre las Universidades la mejor opción

  para un Tı́tulo Profesional? Evidencia chilena,” Banco Central de Chile, 2(389), 311–332.

OECD (2009): “The Postsecondary Education in Chile: A Review of National Policies in

  Education,” Technical Report.

Rau, T. (2013): “Modeling structural equations with endogenous regressors and heterogene-

  ity through derivative constraints,” Quantitative Econometrics, Forthcoming.

Sapelli, C. (2003): “Ecuaciones de Mincer y Las Tasas de Retorno a la Educación en Chile:

  1990-1998,” Pontificia Universidad Católica, Instituto de Economı́a, Working Paper 254.

Taber, C. R. (2001): “The Rising College Premium in the Eighties: Return to College or

  Return to Unobserved Ability?,” Review of Economic Studies, 68(3), 665–691.

Urzua, S. (2008): “Racial Labor Market Gaps: The Role of Abilities and Schooling

  Choices,” Journal of Human Resources, 43(4), 919–971.

Willis, R. J., and S. Rosen (1979): “Education and Self-Selection,” Journal of Political

  Economy, 87(5, Part 2), S7–S36.




                                            26
                   Table 1: OLS estimates from Mincer-type regression

                       Variable                 (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)
                Two-year degree (TI)         0.453***   0.446***   0.439***   0.436***   0.380***
                                              (0.022)    (0.022)    (0.022)    (0.022)    (0.022)
                Four-year degree (PI)        0.678***   0.663***   0.648***   0.616***   0.564***
                                              (0.019)    (0.019)    (0.019)    (0.019)    (0.019)
                Five-year degree (Public)    1.016***   0.993***   0.976***   0.777***   0.687***
                                              (0.019)    (0.019)    (0.019)    (0.021)    (0.021)
                Five-year degree (PPF)       1.122***   1.088***   1.030***   0.790***   0.705***
                                              (0.021)    (0.022)    (0.022)    (0.024)    (0.024)
                Five-year degree (Private)   0.946***   0.911***   0.837***   0.753***   0.702***
                                              (0.018)    (0.019)    (0.019)    (0.019)    (0.019)
                Male                           Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
                Age                            Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
                Mother’s Education              No        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
                Family Income                   No         No        Yes        Yes        Yes
                PSU                             No         No         No        Yes        Yes
                GPA                             No         No         No         No        Yes
                Observations                  28,447     28,447     28,447     28,447     28,447

    Notes: The dependent variable is (log) average monthly earnings in 2010. Postsecondary degrees
are defined as: two-year degrees obtained in Technical Institutes (TI), four-year degrees obtained in
Professional Institutes (PI) and five-year degrees obtained in Public Universities (Public), Private
universities receiving public funding (PPF) and Private universities without public funding (Private).
Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01. ** p<0.05. * p<0.1.




                                                        27
  Table 2: Annual Tuition by Type of Institution and Region (US per year, 2007)

                       Region            TI       PI     Public PPF        Private
                           I            1,770    1,906    2,646 2,341       2,341
                          II            1,914    1,901    3,058 1,642       2,607
                         III            1,537    1,763    2,718 2,262       2,262
                         IV             1,505    1,775    2,991 4,018       2,955
                         V              1,559    1,927    2,152 3,353       3,183
                         VI             1,867    1,945    2,177 2,318       2,318
                        VII             1,536    1,696    3,895 2,492       2,492
                        VIII            1,606    1,713    2,826 2,952       3,222
                         IX             1,537    1,971    2,813 3,401       2,941
                         X              1,548    1,658    2,133 3,939       2,944
                         XI             1,927    1,789    2,021 2,021       2,021
                        XII             1,747    1,728    3,067 2,211       2,211
                        RM              1,538    1,969    3,322 5,473       3,662
                  National Average      1,661    1,826   2,755 2,956        2,705

    Source: Chilean Ministry of Education. Notes: (a) We only consider tuition costs for undergrad-
uate careers. (b) Categories of degrees by institution types are define as: two-year degrees obtained
in Technical Institutes (TI), four-year degrees obtained in Professional Institutes (PI) and five-year
degrees obtained in Public Universities (Public), Private universities receiving public funding (PPF)
and Private universities without public funding (Private).




                                                 28
                                                                                    Table 3: Postsecondary institutions included in our analysis
                              Technical Institutes (TI)                                          Professional Institutes (PI)               Public Universities (Public)   Private with public funding Universities (PPF)   Private without public funding Universities (Private)
      Acuario Data de Santiago            INACAP                                    Arturo Prat                            Santo Tomás     Arturo Prat                    U. Católica de Chile                            Academia del Humanismo Cristiano
      Alexander Von Humbodt               Instituto Chileno Británico de Cultura   Adventista                             Teatro La Casa   Univ. de Antofagasta           U. Católica de Valparaı́so                      Adolfo Ibáñez
      Alpes                               Luis Albe                                 Agrario Adolfo Matthei                                  U. de Chile                    U. Católica de la Santı́sima Concepción        Adventista de Chile
      Andrés Bello                       Instituto de Secretariado                 Alemn Wilhelm H                                         U. de La Frontera              U. Católica de Temuco                           Alberto Hurtado
      Austral                             CFT. Alemán de Comercio                  Alpes                                                   U. de La Serena                U. Católica del Norte                           Autónoma de Chile
      Barros Arana                        Gamma                                     Carlos Casanueva                                        U. de Los Lagos                U. de Concepción                                Bernardo O’Higgins
      Cámara de Comercio de Santiago     Instituto de Estudios Jurı́dicos          Chileno Británico de Cultura                           U. de Magallanes               U. Técnica Federico Santa Marı́a                Bolivariana
      CEDUC-UCN                           Instituto Tecnológico de Chile           CIISA                                                   U. de Playa Ancha                                                               Católica Silva Henrı́quez
      CEITEC                              IPROSEC                                   ARCOS                                                   U. de Santiago de Chile                                                         Central de Chile
      CENCO                               ITPUCH                                    IP de Chile                                             U. de Talca                                                                     U. de Aconcagua
      Empresarial IFE                     LAPLACE                                   Acuario                                                 U. de Tarapacá                                                                 ARCIS
      INFOMED                             Javiera Carrera                           INACEA                                                  U. de Valparaı́so                                                               U. de Ciencias de la Informática
      CEPA                                Jorge Álvarez                            Hellen Keller                                           U. de Bı́o Bı́o                                                                 U. de Artes, Ciencia y Comunicación
      CEPONAL                             Juan Bohon                                ENAC                                                    U. de Los Lagos                                                                 U. de Las Américas
      CRECIC                              La Araucana                               IP de Los Ángeles                                      Metropolitana de Ciencias                                                       U. de Los Andes
      CROWNLIET                           Los Fundadores                            Valle Central                                           Tecnológica Metropolitana                                                      U. de Viña del Mar
      ENAC                                Los Leones                                Diego Portales                                                                                                                          U. del Desarrollo
      CFT de Tarapacá                    Lota-Arauco                               Dr. Virginio Gómez                                                                                                                     U. del Mar
      TEC                                 MAGNOS                                    DOUC UC                                                                                                                                 U. del Pacı́fico




29
      CFT del Medio                       Massachusetts                             EATRI                                                                                                                                   U. Diego Portales
      CFT Ambiente                        Osorno                                    Escuela de Contadores Auditores                                                                                                         U. Finis Terrae
      CFT Diego Portales                  PRODATA                                   Escuela Moderna de Música                                                                                                              U. Iberoamericana
      DUOC UC                             PROFASOC                                  ESUCOMEX                                                                                                                                U. SEK
      EACE                                PROTEC                                    Hogar Catequı́stico                                                                                                                     U. Marı́tima de Chile
      EDUCAP                              Salesianos Don Bosco                      INACAP                                                                                                                                  U. Miguel de Cervantes
      ESANE del Norte                     San Agustı́n de Talca                     Estudios Bancarios                                                                                                                      U. Nacional Andrés Bello
      Escuela de Artes Aplicadas Oficios Santo Tomás                               Instituto Nacional del Fútbol                                                                                                          U. Pedro de Valdivia
      Escuela de Intérpretes             Simón Bolı́var                           IPROC GAMMA                                                                                                                             U. Regional San Marcos
      ESI                                 SOEDUC Aconcagua                          La Araucana                                                                                                                             U. San Sebastián
      Esperanza Joven                     Teodoro Wickel                            Latinoamericano de Comercio Exterior                                                                                                    U. Santo Tomás
      Estudio Profesor Valero             U. Valparaı́so                            Libertador de Los Andes                                                                                                                 U. Tecnológica de Chile INACAP
      ESUCOMEX                            UCEVALPO                                  Los Lagos
      FONTANAR                            UPA                                       Los Leones
      ICEL                                UTEM                                      Providencia
      Ignacio Domeyko

     Source: Graduated Records 2008. Notes: (a) Our sample only considers undergraduate programs. (b) Categories of institution types are define as:
     Technical Institutes (TI), Professional Institutes (PI), Public Universities (Public), Private universities receiving public funding (PPF) and Private
     universities without public funding (Private).
Table 4: Variables included in the empirical implementation of Multinomial Choice and Test
                                     Scores Equations

                                             Educational Multinomial Choice Model        Test   Scores Equations
                Variable                     TI PI Public PPF Private C.Group       Language    Math Geography     GPA
 Age (2008)                                  Yes Yes   Yes    Yes    Yes     -        Yes        Yes     Yes       Yes
 Gender                                      Yes Yes   Yes    Yes    Yes     -        Yes        Yes     Yes       Yes
 Mother with less than 8 years of schooling   -   -      -     -      -      -         -          -       -         -
 Mother with 8-11 years of schooling         Yes Yes   Yes    Yes    Yes     -        Yes        Yes     Yes       Yes
 Mother with 12 years of schooling           Yes Yes   Yes    Yes    Yes     -        Yes        Yes     Yes       Yes
 Mother with more than 12 years of schooling Yes Yes   Yes    Yes    Yes     -        Yes        Yes     Yes       Yes
 Family Income between 0-556 US/month        Yes Yes   Yes    Yes    Yes     -        Yes        Yes     Yes       Yes
 Family Income between 557-1668 US/month Yes Yes       Yes    Yes    Yes     -        Yes        Yes     Yes       Yes
 Family Income between 1669-2800 US/month Yes Yes      Yes    Yes    Yes     -        Yes        Yes     Yes       Yes
 Family Income between 2801-3900 US/month Yes Yes      Yes    Yes    Yes     -        Yes        Yes     Yes       Yes
 Family Income between >3900 US/month         -   -      -     -      -      -         -          -       -         -
 Average Tuition Cost TI (2007)              Yes  -      -     -      -      -         -          -       -         -
 Average Tuition Cost PI (2007)               -  Yes     -     -      -      -         -          -       -         -
 Average Tuition Cost Public (2007)           -   -    Yes     -      -      -         -          -       -         -
 Average Tuition Cost PPF (2007)              -   -      -    Yes     -      -         -          -       -         -
 Average Tuition Cost Private (2007)          -   -      -     -     Yes     -         -          -       -         -
 Unobserved Ability                          Yes Yes   Yes    Yes    Yes     -        Yes         -      Yes       Yes
 Constant                                    Yes Yes   Yes    Yes    Yes     -        Yes        Yes      -        Yes

        Notes: (a) Categories of institution types are define as: Technical Institutes (TI), Professional
    Institutes (PI), Public Universities (Public), Private universities receiving public funding (PPF) and
    Private universities without public funding (Private). (b) Control group corresponds to students who
    took PSU in 2007 but who do not appear in enrollment records (2008 and 2009). (c) Gender is equal
    to 1 for male, 0 for female. (d) PSU scores are expressed as centiles of the whole distribution of PSU
    scores for each one of the years considered in the sample. As we described in the text, our sample
    considers individuals who took PSU during 2001 and 2005. Due the fact that PSU scores are not
    comparable across the time, we use a measure of relative academic performance of the students who
    took the test each year.




                                                        30
Table 5: Variables included in the empirical implementation of Labor Market Outcome
                                     Equations

                            Initial Earnings                             Growth Rates
     Variable       TI PI Public PPF Private C.Group          TI    PI Public PPF Private C.Group
 Age (2008)         Yes Yes Yes    Yes    Yes  Yes            Yes   Yes Yes   Yes  Yes      Yes
 Gender             Yes Yes Yes    Yes    Yes  Yes            Yes   Yes Yes   Yes  Yes      Yes
 Unobserved Ability Yes Yes Yes    Yes    Yes  Yes            Yes   Yes Yes   Yes  Yes      Yes
 Constant           Yes Yes Yes    Yes    Yes  Yes            Yes   Yes Yes   Yes  Yes      Yes

     Notes: (a) Categories of institution types are define as: Technical Institutes (TI), Professional
 Institutes (PI), Public Universities (Public), Private universities receiving public funding (PPF) and
 Private universities without public funding (Private). (b) Control group corresponds to students who
 took PSU in 2007 but who do not appear in enrollment records (2008 and 2009). (c) Gender is equal
 to 1 for male, 0 for female. (d) PSU scores are expressed as centiles of the whole distribution of PSU
 scores for each one of the years considered in the sample. As we described in the text, our sample
 considers individuals who took PSU during 2001 and 2005. Due the fact that PSU scores are not
 comparable across the time, we use a measure of relative academic performance of the students who
 took the test each year.




                                                  31
                                  Table 6: Summary Statistics

                        Variable                              Mean      Std. Dev. Min. Max.
Language PSU                                                  0.385       0.676   -1.476 3.993
Math PSU                                                       0.439      0.832   -1.851 4.514
Geography PSU                                                  0.416      0.706   -1.438 4.513
High school GPA                                                0.747      0.656   -1.088 6.715
Age (2008)                                                     22.62      2.523      18    30
Male                                                           0.425      0.494       0     1
Mother with less than 8 years of education                     0.151      0.358       0     1
Mother with 8-11 years of education                            0.278      0.448       0     1
Mother with12 years of education                               0.327      0.469       0     1
Mother with more than 12 years of education                   0.241       0.428      0      1
Family Income (0 - 556 dollars per month)                     0.622       0.484      0      1
Family Income (557 - 1668 dollars per month)                   0.258      0.437       0     1
Family Income (1669 - 2800 dollars per month)                 0.055       0.228      0      1
Family Income (2801 - 3900 dollars per month)                 0.022       0.147      0      1
Family Income (more than 3900 dollars per month)               0.040      0.198       0     1
Choice Indicator: TI                                          0.056       0.231      0     1
Choice Indicator: PI                                          0.091       0.288      0     1
Choice Indicator: Public                                      0.139       0.346      0     1
Choice Indicator: PPF                                         0.086       0.280      0     1
Choice Indicator: Private                                      0.169      0.374       0     1
Choice Indicator: Control Group                                0.456      0.498       0     1
Annual Tuition: TI                                            0.792       0.050    0.752 0.963
Annual Tuition: PI                                            0.941       0.056    0.829 0.985
Annual Tuition: Public                                        1.476       0.252   10.105 19.474
Annual Tuition: PPF                                           2.026       0.653    0.821 2.736
Annual Tuition: Private                                        1.604      0.237   10.105 1.830
Monthly Average Earnings (2008)                               12.062      0.965    9,510 14.455
Monthly Average Earnings (2010)                               12.531      0.997    9.598 14.566
Growth Rate of Earnings 2008-2010                              0.042      0.079   -0.298 0.462
    Notes: Sample size 57,159. As described in the text, our sample considers individuals who took
PSU during 2001 and 2005. Due the fact that PSU scores are not comparable across the time, we
use a measure of relative academic performance: percentiles within each year. Also, considering that
PSU scores are used as dependent variable in linear equations we use the following transformation.
Let x denote the PSU percentile. Thus, we use g(x) = ln(x/1 − x). Categories of institution types
are define as: Two-year degrees provided by Technical Institutes (TI), four-year degrees obtained in
Professional Institutes (PI) and five-year degrees from Public Universities (Public), Private universities
receiving public funding (PPF) and Private universities without public funding (Private). Control
Group corresponds to students who took PSU in 2007 but who do not appear in enrollment records
(2008 and 2009). Annual Tuition costs correspond to the annual cost of each one of the institution
types conditional on the alternative chosen by the individuals (in million of chilean pesos).




                                                   32
                        Table 7: Schooling Choice Model Estimates

                    Variable                            TI        PI       Public    PPF       Private
                                                        (1)       (2)        (3)      (4)        (5)
Age (2008)                                             0.553     0.635      0.862    0.883      0.748
                                                       (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.008)   (0.009)    (0.006)
Male                                                   -0.314    -0.157    -0.701    -0.672     -0.705
                                                       (0.027)   (0.025)   (0.028)   (0.034)    (0.024)
Mother with 8 -11 years of education                   0.259     0.317     0.380     0.436      0.474
                                                       (0.042)   (0.041)   (0.050)   (0.061)    (0.045)
Mother with 12 years of education                      0.234     0.374     0.641     0.728      0.780
                                                       (0.042)   (0.040)   (0.048)   (0.057)    (0.042)
Mother with more than 12 years of education            0.183     0.426     1.002     1.339      1.100
                                                       (0.052)   (0.049)   (0.056)   (0.067)    (0.049)
Family Income (0 - 556 dollars per month)              0.093     -0.117    -0.209    -1.422     -1.809
                                                       (0.112)   (0.088)   (0.096)   (0.096)    (0.073)
Family Income (557 - 1668 dollars per month)           0.403     0.390     0.382     -0.769     -0.836
                                                       (0.112)   (0.087)   (0.095)   (0.094)    (0.072)
Family Income (1669 - 2800 dollars per month)          0.209     0.350     0.413     -0.486     -0.389
                                                       (0.131)   (0.103)   (0.110)   (0.111)    (0.087)
Family Income (2801 - 3900 dollars per month)          0.236     0.400     0.142     -0.319     -0.182
                                                       (0.166)   (0.128)   (0.134)   (0.137)    (0.106)
Annual Tuition Costs                                   0.190     1.620     -0.511    -0.608     0.437
                                                       (0.217)   (0.187)   (0.041)   (0.020)    (0.041)
Unobserved Ability                                     -0.108    0.167     2.984     3.421      1.187
                                                       (0.046)   (0.039)   (0.044)   (0.047)    (0.036)
Constant                                               -12.851   -15.857   -18.884   -18.599   -16.043
                                                       (0.291)   (0.290)   (0.265)   (0.296)    (0.238)

    Notes: (a) Annual Tuition corresponds to the annual cost of each one of the choices conditional to
the alternative selected by the individuals. (b) Categories of institution types are define as: Two-year
degrees provided by Technical Institutes (TI), four-year degrees obtained in Professional Institutes
(PI) and five-year degrees from Public Universities (Public), Private universities receiving public
funding (PPF) and Private universities without public funding (Private). (c) CG corresponds to our
control group (students who took PSU in 2007 but who do not appear in enrollment records in 2008
and 2009). Standard errors in parentheses.




                                                  33
                                Table 8: Measurement system

                      Variable                        Language      Math      Geography     GPA
                                                         (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)
   Age (2008)                                           0.078       0.090       0.080       0.039
                                                         (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
   Male                                                  -0.025     0.132       0.105       -0.200
                                                         (0.004)    (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)
   Mother with 8-11 years of education                   0.064      0.051       0.039       -0.035
                                                         (0.007)    (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)
   Mother with 12 years of education                     0.157      0.132       0.107       -0.027
                                                         (0.007)    (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)
   Mother with more than 12 years of education           0.365      0.361       0.295       0.091
                                                         (0.008)    (0.010)     (0.009)     (0.009)
   Family Income (0 - 556 dollars per month)             -0.483     -0.809      -0.472      -0.296
                                                         (0.014)    (0.016)     (0.014)     (0.015)
   Family Income (557 - 1668 dollars per month)          -0.342     -0.634      -0.347      -0.239
                                                         (0.013)    (0.016)     (0.014)     (0.014)
   Family Income (1669 - 2800 dollars per month)         -0.174     -0.375      -0.173      -0.104
                                                         (0.015)    (0.019)     (0.016)     (0.017)
   Family Income (2801 - 3900 dollars per month)         -0.097     -0.172      -0.097      -0.058
                                                         (0.019)    (0.023)     (0.021)     (0.021)
   Unobserved Ability                                    1.000      1.134       1.042       0.807
                                                         (0.000)    (0.006)     (0.005)     (0.006)
   Constant                                              -1.114     -1.107      -1.151      0.198
                                                         (0.026)    (0.032)     (0.027)     (0.029)

    Notes: PSU scores are expressed as percentiles of the year-specific distribution of PSU scores. As
we described in the text, our sample considers individuals who took PSU during 2001 and 2005. Due
the fact that PSU scores are not comparable across the time, we use a measure of relative academic
performance of the students who took the test each year. Also, considering that PSU scores are used
as dependent variables in linear equations we the following transformation. Let x a variable that took
values in the range [0.1] and g(·) a monotonic transformation, then g(x) = ln(x/1 − x). Standard
errors in parentheses.




                                                 34
       Table 9: Labor Market Outcomes Estimates. Initial Earnings and Growth Rates

                                               Level                                               Growth rate
Variable
                      TI        PI       Public PPF          Private      CG        TI         PI    Public PPF Private               CG
                      (1)       (2)        (3)     (4)         (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)     (9)    (10)  (11)              (12)
Age (2008)           0.021     0.050      0.033   0.016       0.044      0.010     0.000     -0.002 -0.002 -0.002  -0.007            -0.002
                     (0.011)   (0.009)   (0.008)   (0.010)    (0.008)    (0.004)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.000)
Male                 0.342     0.297     0.300     0.271      0.096      0.297     0.001     0.004     0.003     0.006     0.001     0.005
                     (0.037)   (0.029)   (0.026)   (0.031)    (0.024)    (0.013)   (0.004)   (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.004)   (0.003)   (0.001)
Unobserved ability   0.257     0.328     0.314     0.343      0.369      0.072     0.000     0.001     0.004     0.004     -0.002    -0.006
                     (0.069)   (0.050)   (0.030)   (0.035)    (0.034)    (0.025)   (0.007)   (0.005)   (0.003)   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.003)
Constant             11.934    11.441    12.029    12.513    11.864      11.677    0.050     0.101     0.108     0.097     0.232     0.056
                     (0.252)   (0.219)   (0.205)   (0.260)    (0.186)    (0.084)   (0.029)   (0.023)   (0.021)   (0.027)   (0.021)   (0.009)

       Notes: (a) We estimate labor marker outcomes linear regressions taking as dependent variables
   the natural logarithm of the average wage observed in 2008 (equation (4)) and the growth rate of
   average wage between 2008 and 2010 (equation (5)). (b) Categories of institution types are defined as:
   Technical Institutes (TI), Professional Institutes (PI), Public Universities (Public), Private Universi-
   ties with access to public funding (PPF) and Private Universities without public funding (Private).
   (c) CG corresponds to the control group (students who took PSU in 2007 but who do not appear in
   enrollment records in 2008 and 2009). Standard errors in parentheses.




                                                                    35
                  Table 10: Estimated treatment effect on the treated: T Tj0 and T Tjk
                                                  T Tj0                                            T Tjk
         Choice              ∆0      rj0    Pr(rj0 < 0)    Pr(rj0 < −10%)     ∆k      rjk    Pr(rjk < 0)   Pr(rjk < −10%)
                              j                                                j
Two-year degree (TI)         26.6   29.0%      41.9%             38.2%        2.6    13.8%      46.4%            43.1%
Four-year degree (PI)        37.5   31.0%      42.1%             39.0%         8.3    6.8%      48.1%            45.1%
Five-year degree (Public)    62.5   54.5%      37.2%             33.9%        4.7     3.8%      48.9%            46.1%
Five-year degree (PPF)       75.7   71.3%      34.9%             32.2%         6.2    9.2%      47.7%            45.0%
Five-year degree (Private)   48.3   34.5%      41.9%             39.1%        14.3    3.8%      49.1%            46.4%

         Notes: T Tj0 and T Tjk in thousands of dollars. (a) Categories of institution types are defined as:
     Technical Institutes (TI), Professional Institutes (PI), Public Universities (Public), Private Universi-
     ties with access to public funding (PPF) and Private Universities without public funding (Private).
         (b)Let P V0 corresponds to the financial benefits or losses (that is, excluding psychic costs or
     benefits) of choosing not enrolling in any postsecondary degree and P Vj the economic net benefits of
     choosing degree j ∈ J (see equations 9 and 10). One way of estimating agent’s economic benefits of
     postsecondary education is given by:

                                             ∆0j = P Vj − P V0
                                              rj0 = (P Vj − P V0 )/P V0

         On the other hand, let

                                            j ∗ = argmaxj∈J {Vj }
                                            k ∗ = argmaxk∈J |−j ∗ {Vk }

     be the first and second choice, respectively. Then Dk∈J |−j = 1 if k is the first choice in J excluding
     j ∗ . Let P Vj and P Vk the corresponding net economic benefits. Therefore, it is possible to define the
     following expressions:

                                             ∆kj = P Vj − P Vk
                                              rjk = (P Vj − P Vk )/P Vk

         Finally, Pr(A) denotes the probability of event A.




                                                          36
                                             Table 11: Distribution of First and Second Best Decisions (%)
                                                                                             First Best
              Second Best
                                       Two-year degree       Four-year degree       Five-year degree    Five-year degree        Five-year degree      Control
                                            (TI)                   (PI)                 (Public)             (PPF)                 (Private)          Group
      Two-year degree (TI)                                         16.8                    6.7                 4.4                    12.1             31.8
      Four-year degree (PI)                   22.3                                        13.5                 8.9                    22.9             31.1
      Five-year degree (Public)               11.8                   15.8                                     47.0                    26.3             12.1
      Five-year degree (PPF)                   5.7                   6.9                  32.0                                        18.2              4.9
      Five-year degree (Private)              23.3                   30.0                 32.8                29.6                                     20.2




37
      Control group                           36.9                   30.5                 15.0                10.1                     20.5
      Total                                   100                    100                   100                 100                     100               100
     Notes: (a) Categories of institution types are defined as: Technical Institutes (TI), Professional Institutes (PI), Public Universities (Public), Private
     Universities with access to public funding (PPF) and Private Universities without public funding (Private). (b) Control Group corresponds to students
     who took PSU in 2007 but who do not appear in enrollment records (2008 and 2009). (c) First- and second-best options are defined as:

                                                            j∗   =   argmaxj∈J {Vj } (First Best)
                                                            k∗   =   argmaxk∈J |−j ∗ {Vk } (Second Best)
Table 12: Distribution of schooling choices after a 10% reduction in annual tuition costs

                Choice         TI      PI     Public PPF        Private  CG            Total
             (Original/New)    (1)     (2)      (3)   (4)          (5)   (6)            (7)
             TI               5,339     0       94     55           0     49          5,537
             PI                204    7,570    428    222         231    503          9,158
             Public             0       0     13,262  144           0      0          13,406
             PPF                0       0        9   8,019          0      0          8,028
             Private           110      0      618    479        16,469  268          17,940
             CG               5,662     0      179    126           0   45,617        45,931
             Total            5,662   7,570   14,590 9,041      16,700 46,437        100,000

      Notes: (a) We present the number of graduates coming from different types of postsecondary
  degrees (and individuals not pursuing postsecondary education) before (in columns) and after (in
  rows) the reduction in tuition. (b) Categories of institution types are defined as: Technical Institutes
  (TI), Professional Institutes (PI), Public Universities (Public), Private Universities with access to
  public funding (PPF) and Private Universities without public funding (Private). (c) CG corresponds
  to our control group (students who took PSU in 2007 but who do not appear in enrollment records
  in 2008 and 2009).




                                                    38
 adas No MatriculadosTOTAL
          16.691        26.028
          11.174        23.241
          6.452         23.374
          3.839         25.821
          2.146         30.298

e (Private)
       Control Group                                     Figure 1: Distribution of Enrollment by PSU Quintiles
          64,13%                                             Matriculados y No Matriculados 2007 por Quintil PSU
%         48,08%
%         27,60%
%         14,87%              100%!
%          7,08%
                                                                                                                                           7.08%!
                                                                                                                    14.87%!
                              90%!                                                           27.6%!


                              80%!
                                                                      48.08%!


                              70%!             64.13%!                                                                                     50.31%!
                                                                                                                    41.95%!

                              60%!                                                           30.02%!
                         %!




                              50%!
                                                                      14.8%!

                              40%!
                                                                      4.17%!                 17.32%!
                                                7.84%!
                              30%!              1.76%!                                                              31.39%!

                                                                      23.47%!                                                              40.5%!
                              20%!             17.61%!
                                                                                             18.91%!

                              10%!                                                                                  9.26%!
                                                8.66%!                9.48%!
                                                                                             6.14%!                                        1.65%!
                                                                                                                    2.53%!
                                 0%!                                                                                                       0.46%!
                                               1!                     2!                     3!                     4!                     5!
                                                                                      Quintile PSU!
                                            Two-year degree (TI)!                    Four-year degree (PI)!                   Five-year degree (Public)!
                                            Five-year degree (Private)!              Control Group!
                       Source: PSU 2007. Notes: (a) Control Group corresponds to those students who took PSU in 2007 but who do not appear in enrollment records (2007
                       and 2008). Quintiles PSU correspond to: q1: <409 pts., q2: 410-470 pts., q3: 470-526 pts., q4: 526-590 pts, q5: 590-838 pts.
                                     Source: Universe of individuals taking PSU 2007. Enrollment status in 2008 is obtained from
                                 administrative records from the tertiary education system. Notes: (a) Categories of institution types
                                 are defined as: Technical Institutes (TI), Professional Institutes (PI), Public Universities (Public),
                                 Private Universities with access to public funding and Private Universities without public funding
                                 (Private). (b) Control Group corresponds to students who took PSU in 2007 but who do not appear
                                 in enrollment records (2008 and 2009). (c) PSU’s quintiles correspond to: 1: <409 pts., 2: 410-470
                                 pts., 3: 470-526 pts., 4: 526-590 pts, 5: 590-838 pts.




                                                                                                  39
         12.690          6.716           35.326
         3.975           1.075           7.958
         1.859            405            3.195
         3.947            630            5.744

Five-year
 (Public) degree (Private)
                      Control Group
         21,04%          41,12%
         35,92%          19,01%
         49,95%          13,51%
         58,18%
         68,72%
                         12,68%
                         10,97%
                                         Figure 2: Enrollment by Type of Postsecondary Institution and Family Income
                                          Matriculados y No Matriculados 2007 por Ingreso Bruto Familiar e Institución de Educación Superior


                                 100%!
                                                                                                     13.51%!                   12.68%!                   10.97%!
                                                                          19.01%!
                                 90%!

                                                   41.12%!
                                 80%!


                                 70%!
                                                                           35.92%!                   49.95%!
                                 60%!                                                                                          58.18%!
                                                                                                                                                         68.72%!
                          %!




                                 50%!              21.04%!


                                 40%!
                                                                           26.13%!
                                                   16.98%!
                                 30%!
                                                                                                     25.50%!

                                 20%!                                                                                          22.07%!
                                                   14.77%!                                                                                               15.51%!
                                                                            14%!
                                 10%!                                                                8.73%!
                                                    6.09%!                                                                     5.54%!                    3.92%!
                                                                           4.93%!                    2.31%!
                                                                                                                               1.53%!                    0.89%!
                                  0%!
                                                  0-556!               557-1668!                1669-2800!                2801-3900!                   >3900!
                                                                                       Family Income (Dollars per month)!
                                         Two-year degree (TI)! Four-year degree (PI)! Five-year degree (Public) ! Five-year degree (Private)! Control Group!

                    Fuente: PSU 2007. Notas: (a) No matriculados corresponde al grupo de estudiantes que rinde PSU 2007 pero no que no aparecen en los registros de matrículas 2007
                    y 2008. (b) Ingreso Bruto Familiar corresponde al ingreso mensual del hogar reportado en FUAS.
                                          Source: Universe of individuals taking PSU 2007. Enrollment status in 2008 is obtained from
                                      administrative records from the tertiary education system. Notes: (a) Categories of institution types
                                      are defined as: Technical Institutes (TI), Professional Institutes (PI), Public Universities (Public),
                                      Private Universities with access to public funding and Private Universities without public funding
                                      (Private). (b) Control Group corresponds to students who took PSU in 2007 but who do not appear
                                      in enrollment records (2007 and 2008). (c) Family Income corresponds to the monthly income self-
                                      reported by the students at the moment of PSU.




                                                                                                          40
    > 12 años       1.144           3.697       9.718        17.592         5.612        37.763

greso Bruto Familiar
             Two-year degree
                          Four-year
                             (TI) degree
                                      Five-year
                                           (PI) degree
                                                    Five-year
                                                       (Public)degree (Private)
                                                                         Control Group
     <8 years       6,10%        12,89%        13,01%        14,99%          53,01%
    8-11 years      6,27%        14,86%        15,41%        20,05%          43,41%
     12 years       5,96%        15,90%        21,11%        28,16%          28,88%
    > 12 years      3,03%         9,79%        25,73%        46,59%          14,86%
                               Figure 3: Enrollment Type of Postsecondary Institution and Mother’s Education
                            Matriculados y No Matriculados 2007 por Educación de la Madre e Institución de Educación Superior



                            100%!
                                                                                                                                     14.86%!
                            90%!                                                                          28.88%!

                            80%!                                              43.41%!
                                                53.01%!

                            70%!
                                                                                                                                     46.59%!
                            60%!                                                                          28.16%!
                     %!




                            50%!                                              20.05%!

                                                14.99%!
                            40%!
                                                                                                          21.11%!
                                                                              15.41%!
                            30%!                13.01%!                                                                              25.73%!

                            20%!
                                                12.89%!                       14.86%!                     15.90%!

                            10%!                                                                                                      9.79%!
                                                 6.10%!                       6.27%!                       5.96%!                     3.03%!
                             0%!
                                            <8 years!                    8-11 years!                   12 years!                 > 12 years!

                                                                            Mother's Education!
                                            Two-year degree (TI)!               Four-year degree (PI)!              Five-year degree (Public)!
                                            Five-year degree (Private)!         Control Group!

                Fuente: PSU 2007.
                                 Source: Universe of individuals taking PSU 2007. Enrollment status in 2008 is obtained from
                             administrative records from the tertiary education system. Notes: (a) Categories of institution types
                             are defined as: Technical Institutes (TI), Professional Institutes (PI), Public Universities (Public),
                             Private Universities with access to public funding and Private Universities without public funding
                             (Private). (b) Control Group corresponds to students who took PSU in 2007 but who do not appear
                             in enrollment records (2008).




                                                                                                  41
                         Figure
             Salarios Promedio 20084:y 2010
                                        Average   monthly earnings
                                            para Matriculados          by typeenofInstituciones
                                                              y No matriculados     degree, 2008     and 2010
                                                                                                de Educación Superior

             1,800!

             1,600!                                                                                                1,554!

                                                                                                         1,387!
             1,400!
                                                                                                                            1,285!

             1,200!
                                                                                                1,038!
             1,000!
   $ (US)!




                                                   888!
                                            819!                                         795!
               800!                                       710!
                                   615!
               600!        506!
                                                                                                                                     487!

               400!                                                  363!


               200!

                 0!
                                               2008!                                                         2010!

                                                                              Year!
                  Two-year degree (TI)!                          Four-year degree (PI)!                           Five-year degree (Public)!
                  Five-year degree (PPF)!                        Five-year degree (Private)!                      Control Group!

 Fuente: PSU 2005-2007 y Seguro de Cesantía 2008 y 2010. Notas: No Matriculados corresponden a aquellos alumnos que rindieron PSU 2007
pero que no aparecen en los registros de matrículas 2007 y 2008.
                   Source: Data from the Unemployment Insurance system. Individual-level data on postsecondary
               degrees from the Chilean Ministry of Education. Notes: (a) We show average earnings at graduation
               year (2008) and two years later (2010). (b) Categories of institution types are defined as: Technical
               Institutes (TI), Professional Institutes (PI), Public Universities (Public), Private Universities with
               access to public funding (PPF) and Private Universities without public funding (Private). (c) Control
               Group corresponds to students who took PSU in 2007 but who do not appear in enrollment records
               (2007 and 2008).




                                                                                42
                             Figure 5: Estimated Distribution of Latent Ability

          1
          .8
          .6
Density
          .4
          .2
          0




               −2            −1                0               1                  2          3
                                                     Latent Ability




                                        f ∼ p1 N (µ1 , σ12 ) + p2 N (µ2 , σ22 )

                                                           where

                                             (µ1 , µ2 )    = (0.406, −0.141)
                                         (1/σ1 , 1/σ22 )
                                             2
                                                           = (3.464, 9.177)
                                               (p1 , p2 ) = (0.259, 0.741)
                                                     σ 2 = 0.212


             Notes: The factor is simulated from the estimates of the model. Simulated data contains 100,000
          observations.




                                                            43
ada                                                   Figure 6: Goodness of Fit: Schooling decisions
 4
 9                                                        Actual versus model simulated samples
78                                                            Bondad de Ajuste Muestra Verdadera y Simulada
 0
92                50%!
27
                                                                                                                                                  45.93%!
70
                  45%!                                                                                                                      45.69%!
el      P-value
%        0,559
%         0,64    40%!
%         0,1
%       0,0347
%        0,011    35%!
%        0,625

67345             30%!
00682
88403             25%!
84655
32465
26451             20%!
                                                                                                                                17.93%!

                  15%!                                                              13.41%!                               16.92%!

                                                                          13.96%!
                  10%!                                     9.16%!
                                                                                                            8.03%!
                                       5.54%!        9.15%!                                        8.61%!
                  5%!         5.67%!


                  0%!
                          Two-year degree (TI)! Four-year degree (PI)!   Five-year degree      Five-year degree (PPF)!   Five-year degree   Control Group!
                                                                             (Public)!                                       (Private)!

                                                                                Actual!        Model!


                              Notes: (a) Categories of institution types are defined as: Technical Institutes (TI), Professional
                         Institutes (PI), Public Universities (Public), Private Universities with access to public funding (PPF)
                         and Private Universities without public funding (Private). (b) Control Group corresponds to students
                         who took PSU in 2007 but who do not appear in enrollment records (2008 and 2009). (c) Goodness-
                         of-fit tests for the Null Hypothesis M odel = Data are presented in appendix.




                                                                                              44
                                                                     Bondad de Ajuste Muestra Verdadera y Simulada SALARIOS
                                                             Figure 7: Goodness of Fit: Average Monthly Earnings (US 2010)
                                                                        Actual versus model simulated samples
P-value
 0,559                                                                                                                  1554! 1580!
  0,64
  0,1                                    1500!                                                         1409!
0,0347
 0,011                                                                                         1279!                                    1285! 1303!
 0,625
          Average Wage (2010, US=500)!




                                         1200!
                                                                          1038! 1020!

                                          900!
                                                      795!    754!


                                          600!
                                                                                                                                                          487!   472!


                                          300!



                                            0!
                                                 Two-year degree (TI)!Four-year degree (PI)! Five-year degree      Five-year degree   Five-year degree   Control Group!
                                                                                                 (Public)!              (PPF)!            (Private)!

                                                                                                   Actual!     Model!



                                              Notes: (a) Categories of institution types are defined as: Technical Institutes (TI), Professional
                                          Institutes (PI), Public Universities (Public), Private Universities with access to public funding (PPF)
                                          and Private Universities without public funding (Private). (b) Control Group corresponds to students
                                          who took PSU in 2007 but who do not appear in enrollment records (2008 and 2009). (c) The
                                          actual data (Actual) contains 57,159 observations while the simulated data (model) contains 100,000
                                          observations generated from Model’s estimates.




                                                                                                             45
                                                         Figure 8: Goodness of Fit: Annual growth rates of monthly earnings
                                                                      Actual versus model simulated samples

 l                                          8%!
%
                                                                                                                                                  7.20%!
%
%                                           7%!
%                                                                                                                                        6.39%!
     Annual Growth Wage Rate (2008-2010)!




%
%                                           6%!                                                                               5.90%!
                                                                                    5.54%!              5.51%!       5.65%!
                                                                                               5.24%!
                                                                           5.01%!
                                            5%!
                                                               4.43%!
                                                      4.30%!
                                            4%!

                                                                                                                                                                    2.97%!
                                            3%!                                                                                                            2.67%!


                                            2%!


                                            1%!


                                            0%!
                                                  Two-year degree (TI)!Four-year degree (PI)! Five-year degree     Five-year degree    Five-year degree    Control Group!
                                                                                                  (Public)!             (PPF)!             (Private)!

                                                                                                    Actual!      Model!


                                                 Notes: (a) Categories of institution types are defined as: Technical Institutes (TI), Professional
                                             Institutes (PI), Public Universities (Public), Private Universities with access to public funding (PPF)
                                             and Private Universities without public funding (Private). (b) Control Group corresponds to students
                                             who took PSU in 2007 but who do not appear in enrollment records (2008 and 2009). (c) The
                                             actual data (Actual) contains 57,159 observations while the simulated data (model) contains 100,000
                                             observations generated from Model’s estimates.




                                                                                                            46
                Figure 9: Variance decomposition of test scores in measurement system
                         Descomposición de la Varianza para PSU y NEM


     100%!
                                                                                             9%!
 2                                                                   23.5%!
3
     90%!             27.7%!                 28.0%!
7
99   80%!
                                                                                           32.9%!

     70%!


     60%!
                                             42.2%!                  49.7%!
     50%!             50.1%!


     40%!

                                                                                           58.0%!
     30%!


     20%!
                                             29.8%!                  26.8%!
                      22.3%!
     10%!


      0%!
                 Language!                Math!                  Geography!              GPA!

                                       Error Term!     Ability     Observables!

                                                                                                           0
             Notes: Bars indicate the percentage of the variance of test scores explained by observables (X β),
         latent endowments (αθ) and unobservables components (ε). Tests scores include the subjects of Math,
         Language and Geography.




                                                          47
                                Figure 10: Distribution of θ by type of degree

         1          .8
Cumul. distribution
   .4    .2
         0   .6




                         −1           −.5                     0                       .5                      1
                                                            Ability

                              Two−year degree (TI)                              Four−year degree (PI)
                              Five−year degree (Public)                         Five−year degree (PPF)
                              Five−year degree (Private)                        Control group


              Notes: (a) Categories of institution types are defined as: Technical Institutes (TI), Professional
          Institutes (PI), Public Universities (Public), Private Universities with access to public funding (PPF)
          and Private Universities without public funding (Private). (b) Control Group corresponds to students
          who took PSU in 2007 but who do not appear in enrollment records (2008 and 2009).




                                                            48
                          Figure 11: Distribution of average PSU score by type of degree

           1        .8
Cumul. distribution
   .4      .2
           0 .6




                         .2               .4                  .6                       .8                    1
                                                            PSU

                                Two−year degree (TI)                           Four−year degree (PI)
                                Five−year degree (Public)                      Five−year degree (PPF)
                                Five−year degree (Private)                     Control group


             Notes: (a) Categories of institution types are defined as: Technical Institutes (TI), Professional
         Institutes (PI), Public Universities (Public), Private Universities with access to public funding (PPF)
         and Private Universities without public funding (Private). (b) Control Group corresponds to students
         who took PSU in 2007 but who do not appear in enrollment records (2008 and 2009).




                                                           49
                              Figure 12: Earnings profiles by type of degree and institution

              30
Earnings (thousands of USD)
         10   0     20




                                20                     25                           30                          35
                                                               Age

                                     Two−year degree (TI)                         Four−year degree (PI)
                                     Five−year degree (Public)                    Five−year degree (PPF)
                                     Five−year degree (Private)                   Control group


              Notes: (a) We show estimates of E[yj (t)|Dj = 1], where yj (t) correspond to annual earnings. (b)
           Categories of institution types are defined as: Technical Institutes (TI), Professional Institutes (PI),
           Public Universities (Public), Private Universities with access to public funding (PPF) and Private
           Universities without public funding (Private). (c) Control Group corresponds to students who took
           PSU in 2007 but who do not appear in enrollment records (2008 and 2009).




                                                             50
                                Figure 13: Treatment on treated effects and unobserved heterogeneity
                                                          (based on ∆0j )
             100      80
TT (thousands of USD)
40         6020




                           −1                 −.5                  0                     .5      1
                                                                 Factor

                 Notes: ∆0j corresponds to the financial benefits or losses (that is, excluding psychic costs or
             benefits) of choosing j institution against earnings from the control group. Therefore, the present
             value of this choice is given by the following expression (see equations (8) and (9)):
                                                                           T
                                                                          X    ŷ0 (t)
                                                             P V0   =
                                                                          t=0
                                                                              (1 + r)t

                           Agent’s economic benefits of postsecondary education are given by:

                                                              ∆0j   = P Vj − P V0




                                                                        51
                              Figure 14: Treatment on treated effects and unobserved heterogeneity
                                                        (based on ∆kj )
           20      10
TT (thousands of USD)
 −10       0
           −20




                        −.5                                  0                                       .5
                                                           Factor

                                    Two−year degree (TI)                      Four−year degree (PI)
                                    Five−year degree (Public)                 Five−year degree (PPF)
                                    Five−year degree (Private)


                Notes: Categories of institution types are defined as: Technical Institutes (TI), Professional Insti-
            tutes (PI), Public Universities (Public), Private Universities with access to public funding (PPF) and
            Private Universities without public funding (Private). (b) In this figure, we compare the first-best
            and the second-best choices. Let,

                                                      j ∗ = argmaxj∈J {Vj }
                                                      k ∗ = argmaxk∈J |−j ∗ {Vk }

            be the first and second choice, respectively. Then Dk∈J |−j = 1 if k is the first choice in J excluding
            j ∗ . Let P Vj and P Vk the corresponding net economic benefits. Then:

                                                       ∆kj = P Vj − P Vk
                                                       rjk = (P Vj − P Vk )/P Vk




                                                                  52
 A      Appendix

          Table A.1: Goodness of Fit - Average Wages by Type of Institution

                                                      TI         PI    Public     PPF      Private   C. Group
A. Means
                                        Actual    12.151    12.307     12.577    12.642    12.377     11.866
                                        Model     12.465    12.729     13.068    13.183    12.961     12.017

B. Standard Deviations
                                        Actual    0.846      0.909      0.930     0.959     1.004      0.766
                                        Model     0.860      0.909      0.892     0.892     0.919      0.838

C. Goodness of Fit Test (p-value)                 0.0000    0.0000     0.0000    0.0000    0.0000     0.0000
     Notes: (a) Categories of institution types are define as: Two-year degrees provided by Technical
 Institutes (TI), four-year degrees obtained in Professional Institutes (PI) and five-year degrees from
 Public Universities (Public), Private with public funding Universities (PPF) and Private without
 public funding Universities (Private). (b) Control Group corresponds to those students who took
 PSU in 2007 but who do not appear in enrollment records (2008 and 2009). (c) Goodness of fit is
 tested using χ2 test where the Null Hypothesis is M odel = Data.




  Table A.2: Goodness of Fit -Growth Wage Rate 2008-2010 by Type of Institution

                                                 TI         PI        Public    PPF       Private    C. Group
A. Means
                                     Actual    0.043       0.050      0.052     0.056     0.063       0.026
                                     Model     0.044       0.055      0.055     0.059     0.072       0.029

B. Standard Deviations
                                     Actual    0.074       0.078      0.077     0.076     0.085       0.075
                                     Model     0.082       0.081      0.079     0.081     0.087       0.076

C. Goodness of Fit (p-value)                   0.2056 0.0000          0.0001    0.0057    0.0000      0.0000
     Notes: (a) Categories of institution types are define as: Two-year degrees provided by Technical
 Institutes (TI), four-year degrees obtained in Professional Institutes (PI) and five-year degrees from
 Public Universities (Public), Private with public funding Universities (PPF) and Private without
 public funding Universities (Private). (b) Control Group corresponds to those students who took
 PSU in 2007 but who do not appear in enrollment records (2008 and 2009). (c) Goodness of fit is
 tested using χ2 test where the Null Hypothesis is M odel = Data.




                                                  53
            Table A.3: Goodness of Fit - Test Scores by Type of Institution

                                                 TI       PI     Public    PPF      Private   C. Group
A. Means
Language                             Actual    0.109    0.247     0.958    1.184     0.641      0.027
                                     Model     0.159    0.277     0.899    1.113     0.627      0.059
Math                                 Actual    0.066    0.227     1.147    1.561     0.687      0.008
                                     Model     0.166    0.329     1.015    1.288     0.735      0.062
Geography                            Actual    0.152    0.257     0.987    1.195     0.629      0.080
                                     Model     0.177    0.304     0.934    1.158     0.628      0.096
NEM                                  Actual    0.617    0.623     1.289    1.390     0.833      0.469
                                     Model     0.545    0.618     1.124    1.272     0.857      0.551


B. Standard Deviations
Language                             Actual    0.467    0.480     0.604    0.624     0.590      0.479
                                     Model     0.481    0.489     0.565    0.600     0.527      0.521
Math                                 Actual    0.475    0.535     0.863    0.962     0.771      0.430
                                     Model     0.623    0.629     0.712    0.756     0.697      0.654
Geography                            Actual    0.445    0.453     0.731    0.749     0.628      0.502
                                     Model     0.517    0.530     0.603    0.637     0.564      0.557
NEM                                  Actual    0.506    0.505     0.686    0.720     0.564      0.496
                                     Model     0.564    0.571     0.617    0.626     0.588      0.592

C. Goodness of Fit (p-value)
Language                                       0.0000   0.0000   0.0000   0.0000    0.0006     0.0000
Math                                           0.0000   0.0000   0.0000   0.0000    0.0000     0.0000
Geography                                      0.0004   0.0000   0.0000   0.0000    0.8386     0.0000
NEM                                            0.0000   0.3739   0.0000   0.0000    0.0000     0.0000
     Notes: (a) Categories of institution types are define as: Two-year degrees provided by Technical
 Institutes (TI), four-year degrees obtained in Professional Institutes (PI) and five-year degrees from
 Public Universities (Public), Private with public funding Universities (PPF) and Private without
 public funding Universities (Private). (b) Control Group corresponds to those students who took
 PSU in 2007 but who do not appear in enrollment records (2008 and 2009). (c) Goodness of fit is
 tested using χ2 test where the Null Hypothesis is M odel = Data.




                                                  54
                                             Table A.4: Decomposition of Treatment on Treated Effects (%)
                                                                                               First Best
                Second Best                Two-year degree         Four-year degree         Five-year degree        Five-year degree         Five-year degree
                                                (TI)                     (PI)                   (Public)                 (PPF)                   (Private)
        Two-year degree (TI)                                             3.07                     21.35                   5.35                     6.95
        Four-year degree (PI)                     -1.98                                           3.74                    11.55                    6.52
        Five-year degree (Public)                -13.61                   -10.10                                          -0.97                    9.22
        Five-year degree (PPF)                     0.96                    -8.24                   -4.94                                           0.67
        Five-year degree (Private)               -22.59                    -2.57                  -17.82                   -11.17




55
        Control group                             26.71                   35.29                   67.64                    86.05                   46.14
        Total                                      2.59                    8.34                    4.65                     6.20                   14.32
     Notes: (a) Categories of institution types are defined as: Technical Institutes (TI), Professional Institutes (PI), Public Universities (Public), Private with
     public funding Universities (PPF) and Private without public funding Universities (Private). (b) Control Group corresponds to students who took PSU in
     2007 but who do not appear in enrollment records (2008 and 2009). (c) As we describe in the text, the definition of treatment on treated effects (T Tj ) is
     given by the following expression (see equation (12)):
                                                         X                                                              
                                             T Tj =         E V Pj−k Dj = 1, Dk∈J |−j = 1 × Pr Dk∈J |−j = 1 |Dj = 1
                                                          k
