NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MARKET POTENTIAL AND THE RISE OF US PRODUCTIVITY LEADERSHIP
Dan Liu
Christopher M. Meissner
Working Paper 18819
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18819

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013

We are grateful to Steve Broadberry, Giovanni Federico, David Greasley, Michael Huberman, David
Jacks, Ian Keay, Alex Klein, Aldo Musacchio, and Dennis Novy, who supplied advice on data, gave
us the green light to use some of it, and warned us against potential mis-use of various data series.
Special thanks to Pierre van der Eng who graciously provided access and advice on Indonesian trade
and GDP data. Lionel Fontagné, Peter Jensen, Thierry Mayer, Dennis Novy, Max Schulze, Paul Sharp,
and Jose de Sousa gave us many helpful comments and suggestions. We also thank conference and
seminar participants at the NBER Summer Institute, Berkeley, Madrid, Odense, Essex, Paris, and Bologna
for comments and suggestions. Remaining errors are the responsibility of the authors. Neither of the
co-authors had any significant outside financial relationships nor was this research externally funded.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Dan Liu and Christopher M. Meissner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Market Potential and the Rise of US Productivity Leadership
Dan Liu and Christopher M. Meissner
NBER Working Paper No. 18819
February 2013
JEL No. F12,F15,N10,N21
ABSTRACT
The US advantage in per capita output, apparent from the late 19th century, is frequently attributed
to its relatively large domestic market. We construct market potential measures for the US and 26
other countries between 1880 and 1913 based on a general equilibrium model of production and trade.
When compared to other leading economies in 1900, the year around which the US overtakes Britain
in productivity leadership, the US does not have the overwhelming lead in market potential that it
has in GDP per capita. Still, market potential is positively related to the cross-country distribution
of income per capita, but the impact of market potential is likely to be very heterogeneous. We illustrate
this in a quantitative calculation of the welfare gains from removing international borders in 1900
within a parsimonious general equilibrium trade model. While there are gains from trade for all nations,
the largest European countries do not close their per capita income gaps with the US after this hypothetical
rise in market potential. On the other hand, many small countries could have done so.

Dan Liu
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
421, School of Economics
111 Wuchuan Rd
Shanghai, 200433 CHINA
liu.dan@shufe.edu.cn
Christopher M. Meissner
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
cmmeissner@ucdavis.edu

I. Introduction
A prominent view in the growth literature holds that the United States of America
was uniquely blessed by its large domestic market. Paul Romer (1996) suggests that
America’s internal market and its natural resources allowed the US to assume
productivity leadership over Great Britain by the late 19th century. Romer follows a large
tradition in economic history that attributes US dominance in income per capita to its
market size. Abramovitz and David (1996), Rosenberg (1963, 1981) and Sokoloff (1988),
amongst many others, have argued that a large market incentivized inventive activity
ostensibly leading to productivity advance. These scholars echo earlier observations by
Marshall (1920) that market size mattered. Even earlier, the contemporary observations of
Andrew Carnegie held that:
“The American has constantly expanding home demand…justifying costly
improvements and the adoption of new processes…a Continent under one
government…it is free unrestricted trade in everything under the same
conditions, same laws, same flag, and free markets everywhere. The
European manufacturer finds obstacles to such varied expansion, in a
continent divided into hostile and warring States, with different laws and
exactions and tariffs at every boundary,”1

As Carnegie noted, the corollary to the “Great America” literature is that the
internal market for European producers was small. International borders also imposed
significant restrictions on demand and productivity. If European incomes and wages were
lower than in America, then it has often been maintained that international borders were
a key factor.
But this view heavily discounts two features of the data which are not easily
dismissed. One is the strong productivity growth and high standards of living in
northwestern Europe in the late nineteenth century when compared to other parts of
Europe and other areas of the world. The other is the relatively high density of
northwestern Europe and the high level of intra-European market integration. Leslie
Hannah (2008) describes the facility with which 19th century Europeans transacted with
nearby neighbors despite the international borders they faced, and oppositely, how large
distances in the United States provided natural barriers to trade. Hannah surveys
1

Andrew Carnegie (1902) Rectorial Address at St. Andrews, 1902, pp. 31-32

2

evidence from plant size and suggests that scale economies were as prevalent in Europe as
the US. We go further than Hannah, and the rest of the existing literature, by precisely
measuring the ‘size of the market’ and also by asking whether market size mattered for
relative economic performance.
After several decades, the economic history literature is still debating whether
tariffs and trade influenced nineteenth century economic performance.2 Unfortunately, the
results from this line of empirical enquiry have not provided a uniform conclusion on the
relationship in question. Some authors find a positive relationship between openness to
trade and incomes while others find that tariffs boosted growth and raised productivity. A
notable recent finding by Lehmann and O’Rourke (forthcoming) is consistent with the
idea that industrial tariffs actually raised growth rates in domestic industry.
By contrast, the literature covering the experience of the past several decades
shows a large amount of support for the idea that market size is important for raising
incomes. Theoretical models in international trade and the new economic geography
predict several channels. Market potential allows firms to sell more output at higher prices
raising payments to the factors of production. Market potential also allows firms to
decrease their production costs when a greater range of intermediates from foreign
suppliers is available. Finally, market potential raises real income by expanding the range
of goods available and lowering the consumer price level. Market size can also incentivize
human capital accumulation and investment in new technologies as has also been
highlighted in the broader growth literature. Two highly influential empirical
investigations making strong use of theoretical advances in new economic geography find
that market potential is associated with higher incomes in the late twentieth century
(Hanson, 2005; Redding and Venables, 2004).
Two questions immediately arise in the historical context. First, what was the
relative “size of the market” for the economically most advanced countries in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth century? Second, can market size or market potential,
explain any significant fraction of the cross-national distribution of income per person at
that time?
2

Some prevalent examples include: Bairoch (1972); O’Rourke (2000); Irwin (2002); Irwin and Tervio (2002);
Vamvakidis (2002); Clemens and Williamson (2004); Jacks (2006); Tena-Junguito (2010); Schularick and
Solomou (2011).

3

We proceed in two steps. First we measure interactions with foreign markets by
providing a theoretically consistent measure of market potential for 27 countries for two
benchmark years 1900 and 1910.3 Market potential is a function of trade barriers including
international borders, but also of real foreign purchasing power. This is a different
approach from the rest of the literature which uses tariffs, ad hoc openness ratios, or price
differentials for a limited set of commodities to infer how integrated an economy is. To
build our measure, we pair a theoretical model of international trade with new historical
bilateral trade data. For theory we rely on Fujita, Krugman and Venables (1999) and
Anderson and van Wincoop (2003). For data we have added here significantly to the
trade data underlying Jacks, Meissner and Novy (2011), so that for the years 1900 and
1910 our dyadic data are the most complete available.
Next, we use our measure of market potential to help explain cross-country income
differences in the first wave of globalization. We find that market potential is a robust
and economically significant determinant of income per capita in the early 20th century.
This is consistent with recent empirical research such as Redding and Venables (2004).
Still, the reduced form elasticities suggest that market size alone cannot account for the
sizable gaps in output per person between the US, UK, Germany, and France.
We also explore a counterfactual in the general equilibrium model in order to
gauge the welfare consequences of international borders that limit market potential. If the
notion that the domestic market mattered has any force, it should be the case that
removing international borders brings about large welfare gains for those unfortunate to
have been trapped behind national frontiers in the world’s smallest countries. Our findings
here demonstrate that this is indeed the case. However, for the largest European countries
(France, Germany, UK), the gains were significantly smaller than for small countries.
Market potential (domestic and foreign) in large parts of Europe was already comparable

3

We use the term countries even though the Australian colonies (Western Australia, South Australia,
Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria, and Tasmania), New Zealand, India, Ceylon, and Canada were all
British colonies. We also combine the Australian colonies into one unit called Australia which roughly
conforms to modern boundaries and our data on national GDP. The set of countries we look at is
Argentina, Austria-Hungary, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece,
India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, UK, Uruguay, USA. For our income regressions, we drop Sri Lanka and the
Philippines due to a lack of income data.

4

to the US or even larger. The negative consequences of the ubiquitous border barriers in
Europe appear to have been overstated in the historical literature. At the same time, it is
true that for smaller nations like Belgium, Canada, Denmark, and Switzerland fewer
borders could have eliminated their income gaps against the US. Oppositely there is
evidence that large internal distances in the American economy significantly offset the
advantage of having a “large” internal market and that there must have been other forces
promoting America’s ascent besides market potential.

II. Cliometric Viewpoints
Market activity and exchange, whether across or behind the border, is the natural
basis for the welfare gains from trade. It is obvious then why economic historians have
long been interested in measuring the size of the gains from trade between nations. What
is less obvious is why the economic history literature has so far come to no decisive
conclusion as to the size or even the existence of such gains from trade.
One widely cited collection of results in quantitative economic history reports a
positive relationship between tariffs and productivity growth. The seminal study in the
comparative economic history literature, Bairoch (1972), studies the experience of several
European countries finding that tariffs were not associated with slower growth. It might
be argued that a univariate association on poorly measured data in a highly selected
sample could give misleading results. Therefore, O’Rourke (2000) looks at a larger sample,
includes more control variables, and uses better econometric techniques. He also finds a
“tariff-growth paradox”. Jacks (2006) presents parallel evidence from an even larger
sample.

Lehmann

and

O’Rourke

(forthcoming)

and

Tena-Junguito

(2010)

use

disaggregated data finding evidence that industrial tariffs were associated with higher
productivity growth in the industrial sector in the late nineteenth century especially in
the most economically advanced countries. This literature argues that the historical
evidence is consistent with learning-by-doing and other non-convexities. If this were true,
then the overall gains from international trade may be limited or even negative in certain
cases. On the other hand, standard theory suggests that if tariffs impede specialization
they decrease productivity, raise prices, appreciate the real exchange rate, limit exports as
well as imports and diminish the range of goods available for consumption and
5

production. If this is true, then greater international trade should be associated with
higher real incomes.
Clemens and Williamson (2004) argue for an interaction between tariffs and other
national characteristics. A positive link between tariffs and growth is evident in the 18701913 data but typically only when a nation has a large domestic market and is ready for
industrialization, accumulation, and human capital deepening. Without these, gains from
trade are lost and there are unlikely to be positive tariff-induced dynamic effects on
productivity. Domestic market potential is a partial substitute for access to foreign
markets in this view.
Contrary to the above studies, Schularick and Solomou (2011) show there is no
significant relationship between tariffs and income prior to 1913 using GMM techniques
for dynamic panel models and aggregate data. Irwin (2002) also disputes the notion that
higher tariffs caused higher growth. Canada and Argentina, both high tariff countries,
relied on capital imports to create export-led commodity-based growth. Oppositely,
Russia, Portugal, and Brazil implemented high tariffs which were insufficient to raise
growth dramatically. In an interesting industrial level case study, Head (1994) notes that
there were strong learning effects in the heavily protected US steel rails industry, but that
tariffs brought losses to the consumers of steel rails and that the overall welfare impact
was small. Irwin (2000), in a careful case study of the American tinplate industry, denies
the importance of tariffs for promoting industrial development.
Another strand of the literature focusses on the relationship between
productivity and trade openness. Irwin and Terviö (2002) and Jacks (2006) find a
positive and significant relationship between international trade and output per capita.
This is in contrast with earlier results from Vamvakidis (2002) which showed no strong
positive link between trade and growth prior to 1970.
The conclusion from the body of mainstream economic history literature seems to
be that the relationship between greater integration and productivity is very sensitive to
methodology, measurement, and sample.4 There is also a notable lack of a theoretically
4

Kim (1995) and Rosés (2003) use new economic geography and trade theory to motivate empirical models
that explain the regional distribution of industrial activity in the US and Spain. Rosés argues that home
market effects/market potential mattered in Spain while Kim finds mixed evidence for these forces. Crafts

6

grounded estimating equation in many studies. One exception is Donaldson (2010) which
provides strong support for the idea that market potential raised real incomes of regions
in India in the 19th century. Without the discipline of such a theoretical model, arbitrary
regularity conditions can easily shroud the relationship between market activity and
outcomes. We return to this issue below. A second problem is that ad hoc proxies of
market activity and exposure to foreign markets have been used. We seek to remedy this
issue here even though we recognize the limitations of economic theory in a complex
world.

III. Trade costs in history
A limited number of measures of market potential and exposure to trade have
been used in the economic history literature. The studies above rely largely on two.
Again, the exception is Donaldson (2010). These are the average tariff rate and the ratio
of foreign trade to total output. Tariffs, as proxied by the ratio of tariff revenue to total
imports have their drawbacks as is well known. Prohibitive tariffs can give the
appearance of low protection. The existence of non-tariff barriers can raise protection
without raising this ratio. The ratio of total trade, the sum of exports plus imports, to
total GDP is also problematic. Standard international trade theory suggests scaling not
by GDP but by total expenditure and using either only exports or imports (see
Arkolakis, Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare, 2012 or Feenstra, 2010). Moreover, trade
intensity must be measured relative to some theoretically defined benchmark to be
useful.
More generally the outcome- the size of cross-border trade flows – is influenced
by relative productivity, overall size, the degree of competition, and total trade costs.
The latter encompass not just tariffs but many other frictions or barriers to
international trade (Anderson and van Wincoop, 2004 and Jacks, Meissner, and Novy,
2010). These other frictions include transportation, financing charges, information
and Klein (2011), however, show that market potential was an important determinant of industrial location
in the USA prior to 1913. Schulze (2007) studies the Habsburg Empire in the 19th century and finds little
evidence that market potential mattered for regional income per capita. Crafts and Mulatu (2006) observe a
minor role for market potential in the UK in pre-World War I Britain. Mitchener and McLean (2003) find
that access to a waterway is positively related to state level per capita incomes in the 19th century.

7

acquisition, the fixed beachhead costs of establishing sales in a new market, property
rights, long-distance contracting problems, and so forth. The “openness ratio” tells us
nothing about how various trade policies and trade costs matter for economic outcomes.
The relationship between these policies and trade flows is theoretically predicted to be
highly heterogeneous at the country level and dependent upon many factors including
general equilibrium forces (Anderson and van Wincoop, 2003).
One view in the history literature is that the USA forged a large internal market.
High incomes in the US were due in part to low internal trade costs in America. This
argument in comparative perspective has become very hard to maintain as Hannah
(2008) recently demonstrated. Once one looks past national borders and thinks more
broadly about market activity that includes cross-border trade and one thinks more
carefully about trade costs it is not at all apparent that the US had any decisive
advantages in market size. While European nations were on average smaller and
international borders had to be crossed more frequently, distances between points of
economic activity and demand were significantly smaller, transportation networks were
denser and other frictions such as legal and informational problems within Europe were
arguably decreasingly significant. According to our data, the population weighted
average distance between the ten largest states in the US (898 km.) was three to four
times that of the weighted distance between the top ten cities in Great Britain (222
km.), France (212 km.), and Germany (284 km.).5 While it might be true that American
railroads were highly efficient at long-hauls, the productivity gaps in the transportation
sector would have to have been immense to make up for this difference. In 1909 average
freight revenues per ton-mile in the US was 65 cents, $1.21 in France, $1.24 in Prussia
and $2.30 in the UK (Bureau of Railway Statistics, 1911) suggesting significant
advantages although less than the four-to-one ratio required to offset the average
distance.6

5

Bilateral great circle distances between the ten most populous cities were calculated and corresponding
population weights were used to calculate these average internal distances. We used the distance between
the ten the largest cities in the ten most populous states in the case of the US. This is likely to understate
domestic distance in the US. See the data appendix for more information.
6
The UK numbers are not strictly comparable according to the source since they include “high-class”
freight services and other charges. The figures for the US refer to several mid-Atlantic states officially
referred to as Group II (New York, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Maryland, and Delaware).

8

It is certainly true that the US had no internal tariffs during the period of
interest. But in northwestern Europe, Britain, Belgium, France and Germany
maintained low average tariff rates of not more than 10 percent. The commitment to
Free trade was strong and stable in the first two nations as well. The distances to be
overcome between were obviously much smaller than within North America as well. In
terms of great circle distances, the north of England lies roughly 600 kilometers from
northern France and 855 kilometers separate Liverpool from Hamburg. The former is
roughly the distance from New York to Pittsburgh while the latter is the distance from
Boston to Pittsburgh. American economic activity and market interactions expanded
westward after the mid-nineteenth century encompassing Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois.
The distance between Chicago and New York is nearly 1,200 kilometers.
Distance mattered insofar as it increased the resource costs of shipping goods to
the consumers and producers that demanded them. Some indications are given in
Hannah (2008), and they show that it is not at all clear that the average transaction
incurred lower freight costs within the US than in Northwestern Europe. Europe relied
more heavily on water-based transportation than the US because it made economic
sense to do so not because it was an inefficient market outcome. Although raw railway
freight rate comparisons make it appear that the US had a transport cost advantage,
the European substitution of more efficient methods of transport made it so that the
overall average freight rates per ton-kilometer were not that far apart (Hannah, 2008, p.
53). Hannah argues that the average consumer was further away from railway transport
than the average European consumer or producer. In the UK, traffic along the rail
network was more intensive than in the US with twice as many locomotives per 1,000
miles of line. Within the most populous mid-Atlantic states (Group II or New York,
Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Delaware, and Maryland) the density of railways per square
mile was the same as the UK, 1.83 times that of the France, and 1.33 that of PrussiaHesse (Bureau of Railway Statistics, 1911).

However, when compared to the UK,

Group II had a freight car density only ¾ that of the UK. It is also true that railway
gauges were standardized by treaty from 1886 in 13 principal continental countries, but
that nations like Spain, Russia and Portugal refrained from doing so. Europe’s railway
network for inland transportation and its system of maritime connections rivaled the US
distribution system in most sensible comparisons.
9

Hannah summarizes the course of other potential trade costs writing many of
them off as serious barriers to trade within northwestern Europe. Linguistic diversity
was cured by multi-lingual inhabitants and close proximity of other “languages”. The
gold standard and fixed exchange rates reigned in Europe, uniformity of coinage had
been established by the 1880s and financial transactions through the capitals of London,
Paris and Berlin were eased by cross-border international financial operations. In the
US, cross-state branching restrictions and limitations on international financial activity
were expressly forbidden making for a highly fragmented and unstable financial system
when compared to the British, Belgian, Dutch, or German systems.
Of course, a proper treatment of this issue based on a careful historical
accounting of the innumerable real trade costs is beyond the scope of this paper. The
difficulties inherent in such a project are obvious since it is nearly impossible to
enumerate completely the myriad trade costs faced by consumers and producers.
Aggregation is also a problem. Relative price calculations have many pitfalls. An
alternative, but more precise approach than previous attempts is to use theory along
with the aggregate data at hand to reveal the extent of market potential. This
approach, outlined in the next section, has a strong track record in both the trade and
economic geography literature.

IV. Theory and Data
New trade theory provides one justification for the long-held intuition that “market
potential” can explain the cross country income distribution. The model presented here,
based on Redding and Venables (2004) and Fujita et al. (1999) assumes consumers love
variety. A fixed cost to production underpins the outcome of monopolistic competition
and gives rise to a range of goods being produced -- each one unique to a local firm. This
approach allows for the interaction between trade costs and demand to influence the
supply side. Market potential is one key determinant of factor incomes in this simple
model.

10

A representative consumer in a particular destination d loves variety and so
maximizes the following CES utility function defined over (all) goods

from all countries

∈ . Direct utility is given by

,
where

1

(1)

is the (constant) elasticity of substitution between varieties and

is the

number of varieties produced in country s. Maximization is subject to the standard
budget constraint

Demand in value is given by
(2)

where t is a trade cost factor such that importers incur a trade cost in tariff equivalent
terms to import from country s equal to  = t – 1 of country ’s goods. This implies
. Also P is the CES consumer price index or the minimum expenditure
necessary to purchase one unit of the consumption bundle or

/

.

The representative firm for each country

(3)

has profits given by

∑

.

In this model firms use a composite input with price

(4)

. Firms incur a fixed

cost of production in terms of the composite input equal to C, and they have a marginal
11

input requirement of

. Three types of inputs are used here, and they are aggregated in

a Cobb-Douglas function. The first input is labor which we assume to be an
internationally immobile factor of production. Despite the historically large volume of net
migration for certain countries during the nineteenth century this assumption is valid so
long as labor is not fully and instantaneously mobile across countries. An alternative
assumption is that labor is perfectly mobile but that there is a constrained sector or a
non-tradeable such as in Helpman (1998) and Hanson (2005). Since we will use total
factor payments or GDP as a proxy for wages, all that is needed is that there be one
immobile factor of production or a non-tradeable factor that relies on a fixed endowment
so that total real incomes diverge. A mobile factor of production, is paid m, and these
returns are equalized across countries in this model. This input could be construed to be
capital. The final input is a composite index of final goods used as “intermediates”.
The first order condition for the firm, together with the demand function given
above, lead to price being a constant markup over marginal cost equal to
. The zero profit condition implies that there is a level of output ̅ at which
firms break even such that their price satisfies
̅

∑

(5)

.

Since prices are a markup over marginal cost, we see immediately that
̅

∑

(6)

.

Rearranging this equation we find
ψ

,ψ

1
̅

/

.

(7)

This condition shows that, in a long-run equilibrium, nominal payments to the factors of
production are a function of a term related to the source country’s productivity parameter
as well as a real trade cost-weighted sum of all destination countries’ market sizes. This
sum is what we refer to as market potential. It is worth emphasizing that this new
economic geography model includes a third force in the market potential variable beyond
12

the intuitive trade-cost weighted expenditures. This third force is represented by the
destination country price index. When foreign markets are less competitive, and hence
their price indexes are higher, it is easier to sell into such a market and consequently
wages are higher. Finally with the addition of intermediates, proximity to foreign and
domestic suppliers reduces costs and increases factor payments. 7
The theoretical model gives us a justification for why incomes would then be larger
in a country with greater market potential. The question now is empirical. Which
countries had the largest markets in practice? How much did international borders reduce
trade? How much of the variance in GDP per capita across countries is explained by these
differences?

V. Estimation
To proceed, we follow a two-step approach similar to Redding and Venables
(2004). First we use an equilibrium gravity equation for the value of exports which allows
us to recover the market potential variable. Using the result due to Anderson and van
Wincoop (2003) gravity in the model given above is given by the following system of
equations
(8)

1

∀

The gravity equation illustrates that bilateral trade is a function of a dyad’s
incomes, bilateral trade barriers (i.e., trade costs), t, and the “multilateral” terms

and

. After a normalization, these terms can be solved for a unique solution for the price
vector as a function of all bilateral trade costs, income shares and one parameter, the
elasticity of substitution.

7

As it turns out, foreign market potential and supplier access are strongly positively correlated so we focus
only on foreign market potential in the empirical analysis.

13

With the gravity equation, it becomes possible to obtain estimates of total foreign
market potential--the sum of foreign market capacities--defined as
∑

.

Although one can estimate and solve the entire system of equations defined in (8), one
can also recover consistent estimates of the market potential terms by using a dummy
variables approach with the gravity equation. Since we have dyadic data, we use exporter
and importer intercepts which subsume the ratio of GDP and the unobservable scaled
price indexes.
To build market potential,

we need an estimate of trade costs. We assume, as is

standard that the trade cost function is given by
.
Here, dist, is the harmonic mean of

the population-weighted great circle distance in

kilometers between each pair of the ten most populous cities in each nation.8 For domestic
distances we use the harmonic weighted average of distances between these top ten cities.9
We use data for international bilateral trade as well as “domestic” trade as proxied
by gross production minus exports. An appendix explains our methodology and sources.
An estimate of total expenditure on domestic goods allows us to estimate the penalty
imposed by international borders. The indicator variable

is one when trade takes

places between two separate countries (or a colony and the center country) and zero for
intra-national trade. This yields an estimate, b, of the “border effect” which is equal to
one plus the tariff equivalent of the transaction cost of moving goods across an
international border. Likewise,

is one when trade takes place between two countries

which do not share a common language, so that

8

provides an estimate of one plus the

Head and Mayer (2010) suggest the harmonic mean. We use an exponent of -1. An arithmetic (weighted)
mean may bias domestic distance upward which would bias the border coefficient downward.
9
We use the populations of the ten most populous states for the US and the distance between the largest
city in each state and other cities. We make the “internal distance” of a city equal to 5 kilometers. This
implies a radius for a “disk-shaped” city of 7.5 kilometers when using the rule that average distance between
a producer and a consumer, when production is concentrated at the center of a disk and consumers
uniformly distributed around the disk, is 2/3 of the radius. See the data appendix for cities and more on
these calculations.

14

tariff equivalent of the trade cost when two nations do not share a common language.
Finally, the indicator

is one when nations are neighbors (i.e., they share a land

border). We discuss alternative approaches to proxying trade costs below.
We estimate our gravity equation using the Poisson pseudo-maximum likelihood
model suggested by Santos Silva and Tenreryo (2006). This model provides predicted
values at the extremes of the distribution that are much closer to actual values than the
standard log-linear model. Since we are interested in measuring the importance of
domestic trade, this methodology turns out to be crucial when barriers to international
trade are significant. The Poisson model is estimated using the exponentiated log of the
gravity relationship from (8) as follows:
exp

ln orig

ln imp

ln

.

The constant, , turns out to be the product of supplier and market potential for one
reference nation (we choose the US). For the remaining N-1 countries,
exporter indicator and

is a country-importer indicator. The model estimates orig and

imp the building blocks of the market potential terms. We also see that
1

1

,

is a country-

1

, and

1

,

, so that we are unable to

identify the tariff equivalents of the trade costs and the elasticity of substitution
separately. We recover estimates for total market potential for country s as the sum of
domestic and foreign market potential as follows:

imp

imp

.

The split into domestic market potential (DMP) and foreign market potential (FMP)
depends upon a different trade cost vector for trade within countries than that which
applies for international trade. To proxy for these trade costs, we use internal distance as
described above. Although it is possible to retrieve an estimate of supplier potential, we
do not rely on it for our baseline regressions as it is turns out to be very highly correlated
with foreign market potential.
The second step is to estimate an income or wage equation. Our regressions are
based on the following basic functional form
15

ln

ln

(9)

Where we use nominal GDP per capita converted to US dollars using annual average
exchange rates,

is a constant, Z is a vector of other included regressors, and

is an

error term. As equation (7) shows, factor productivity matters. As a consequence we
include observables that are likely to be correlated with this variable in the vector Z while
also allowing for an unobservable component to productivity in the error term.
Throughout, we use robust standard errors or standard errors clustered on the country
when we run models for panel data. The data sources we rely on are described in a data
appendix below.
We have nominal GDP data for 25 of the 27 countries listed above for two
benchmark years from 1900 and 1910. For our trade matrix, we make use of trade flows in
both directions (including domestic trade) there are a total of 729 observations possible in
each year. We use contemporary aggregators of data like the British Board of Trade
statistics as well as every sample country’s official published trade statistics. For a
balanced panel of data for 1900 and 1910 we have 523 observations. There are 65
observations that, according to sources, had zero trade in 1900. There are 7 such
observations in 1910. We also have 3 unused non-zero trade observations for 1900 and 63
for 1910 since these pairs are not available in both years. We surmise that for the
observations where no data were reported there are a substantial number of zero trade
values in the remaining observations (138 in 1900 and 136 in 1910). Because of indirect
trade routes, or varying thresholds for reporting data, we leave these values as missing.
Wherever possible, we have relied on statistics published by the importer rather than an
exporter since imports were more often subject to customs house inspection for tariff
reasons and therefore were likely to be more accurate.

10

We make no correction for

source or destination bias.

10

Platt (1971) records several memorable observations on the reliability of trade statistics including: “you
require to have a great deal of faith in order to feel that you are reasoning on a secure basis; and
“comparison of trade statistics, for a historical analysis of economic relations between two countries, must
be abandoned”. Platt suggests that the largest problems are for smaller American Republics where official
valuations were quite frequently non-reality based. By the early twentieth century many of the advanced
nations had started to record imports according to the place of consignment rather than the port of
shipment and likewise for exports.

16

We also ignore zero trade relationships in the rest of what follows. The reason is
three-fold. First, no explicit wage equation is easily recovered from a framework like that
of Helpman, Melitz and Rubinstein who model zero trade flows. Second, most zeros within
the confines of our 27 x 27 trade matrix are for pairs of very small countries, and the
welfare gains from adding in trade with such countries in a counterfactual world would
likely be very small. Finally, serious challenges to identification of fixed costs of trade as
opposed to ad valorem tariff equivalents exist. Moreover, it is impossible to identify the
border impact in a limited dependent variable setting since all nations trade with
themselves.
Two other issues are worth noting. First, for domestic “exports,” we use the value
of total gross production minus exports. Our sources and methods for reconstructing gross
production for each country are described in an appendix. Second, we construct market
potential figures only for country-pairs that have positive trade. The same is true for our
welfare calculations where we only allow partners with which there is non-zero trade to
enter the price index.
Several threats to the identification of

exist when estimating of equation (9).

First, if market potential is simultaneously determined with income per capita, our
estimate of the coefficient on market potential will be biased, and the bias is likely to be
upwards if richer countries also trade more. Also, market potential, itself a function of
foreign incomes, might be correlated with the domestic income shock due to spatial
correlations in the error terms. To deal with these issues, we have several strategies.
First we compare an instrumental variables estimator to standard OLS estimates.
Our excluded instrument which predicts market potential is the bilateral estimated trade
cost function multiplied by partner population. This function uses geographic and predetermined cultural and demographic information to predict current year market potential
but excludes the portion of the market potential variable related to GDP. There is no
reason to believe this type of geographic positioning of a country is related to
unobservables that determine income per capita in a given year. Second, we lag market
potential by two years when we estimate the model, so that we have market potential and
other control variables for 1900 and 1910 while information on GDP per capita is for 1902
and 1912. Finally, in some specifications, we control only for foreign rather than domestic

17

plus foreign market potential. Finally we estimate a panel model over 34 years including
country fixed effects, and country-specific time-trends to eliminate time-invariant
unobservables at the country level and any remaining country-specific trends which are
highly visible in the data.11
Correlation between variables we include in Z and the error term can also cause
bias. On the other hand, there is an obvious benefit to controlling for other variables that
influence income per capita via their impact on factor productivity. We include three key
variables in Z. The first is a control for institutions and is a dummy equal to 1 when a
nation is located in a tropical region. Next we include the logarithm of the ratio of
population to total land area. Factor endowments will determine the marginal product of
labor and land which can affect total factor payments via wages and land-rental rates.
Finally, we also control for the skill level of the labor force with a measure of human
capital. Specifically we rely on the data set underlying Morrisson and Murtin (2009)
which measures educational attainment.

VI. Empirical Results
In Table 1 we present results from gravity regressions for 1900 and 1910. . Distance
is negatively correlated with exports in all years and the coefficient shows a slight
tendency to decrease in absolute magnitude over time. At the average distance in the
sample, and with an assumed elasticity of substitution of 7, the tariff equivalent of
distance is estimated as 86 percent in 1900 and 66 percent in 1910.12 The international
11

Head and Mayer (2011) make the case for this strategy.
Anderson and van Wincoop (2004) show that the elasticity of trade with respect to distance equals the
product of the ad valorem freight-rate, the elasticity of freight costs per ton mile with respect to distance
and 1 minus the elasticity of substitution. We used information on product level freight rates in British
pence per ton and commodity prices underlying Jacks and Pendakur (2010) to estimate the elasticity of
freight costs with respect to distance. Specifically we run a regression of the log of the freight cost in 1910
in pence per ton on the logarithm of distance and a set of commodity dummies. The data are for Britain
and a large set of its trade partners over 21 commodities. From the gravity model an estimate of the
distance elasticity of trade is available. With these we solve for the elasticity of substitution. When
freight on coal is included in the regressions we obtain an elasticity of 5.5. Coal was expensive to ship and
it makes up over half of the observations which is certainly non-representative of global trade. We
checked the distance elasticity of freight without coal and it is much higher at 0.67 (versus 0.49). Without
coal our estimate of the elasticity of substitution is 11. We think 7, an intermediate value, is a reasonable
12

18

border and language differences represent significant barriers to trade as well. In 1900
crossing a border is equivalent to imposing an ad valorem tariff of 56 percent while not
sharing a language gives rise to lower trade as if a tariff of 15 percent had been imposed.
Figure 1 plots these values for 1900 and 1910.
In Figures 2 through 4 we plot total, foreign and domestic market potential for 27
countries for 1900 and 1910. The largest values of market potential are in the industrial
leaders: the UK, France, USA, and Germany. What is interesting here is that in 1900
total market potential for the UK is much larger than that for the US and all other
countries. The values are much more similar in the US, France, Germany, and Austria.
By this measure, German total market potential was only six percent smaller than that of
the US in 1900. This would seem to call into question the primacy of market size for the
US productivity advantage. It also highlights the higher density of the European economic
space in the late nineteenth century.
For foreign market potential, small nations located near larger countries have the
largest foreign market potential variables. These include Belgium, Switzerland, Canada,
and the Netherlands. Larger countries such as France, Germany and the UK have high
foreign market potential as well. The US is below the median level of foreign market
potential. The lower end consists of nations far from Europe in our data like Japan, the
Philippines and Indonesia.
The results for domestic market potential show two crucial aspects of the data. In
1900, the US is not at the top of the distribution but rather it is a close race for second
with Germany and France. In 1910 the US leaps clearly ahead of France and Germany
but is not all that far ahead of Britain. Despite the fact that the US total income level
was 50% larger than that of the Britain, distances were on average four times higher in
the US imposing considerable constraints on achieving high domestic market access. This
contrasts with the largest European nations in our sample which have smaller GDPs but
nearly as much market potential as the US.
As a robustness check that avoids using the trade cost estimates from the gravity
model, we can look at domestic market access by using available figures on freight rates.
baseline. We note that O’Rourke and Williamson (1994) assume a price elasticity of demand of 1 for
manufactures and 0.3 for tradeable “food” products.

19

By necessity, recorded freight rates are highly mis-measured since rates varied by
commodity, specific route and season. Nevertheless, based on data from Jacks and
Pendakur (2010) for sea freight rates and Bogart (2010) for railway freight weights, we
can adjust domestic market access using an imprecise measure of freight rates. Instead of
scaling by the gravity-adjusted domestic distance value, we divide the country-specific
intercept from the gravity model by the product of distance and the freight rate per ton
mile. Nations used a mix of rail, ship, and road. We ignore road-way traffic and use the
coefficients on the mix of transportation services given in Table 1 of Hannah (2008).
Bogart’s data show a significant cost advantage for the US in railway freight rates
compared to European countries: 0.41 pence per ton mile for the US versus 1.13 in the
UK, 0.73 in Germany and 0.78 in France. However, average US internal distance is
respectively 5.3, 3.12 and 4.2 times larger. Hannah reports that the US relied on the
railway for 45% of its freight (in 1906) while the UK reported 3%, Germany 21% and
France 7%. With these input weights, the US cost advantage is not at all as large as it
might seem. Two forces - higher distances and a higher reliance on railway over water
transport - work to offset the unit cost advantage.13 When calculating domestic market
access as the gravity estimated GDP value divided by these freight rates, the US has the
7th highest domestic market access out of the 8 countries for which we have comparable
data. Leading the US are in order: UK, Japan, Belgium, France, Italy, and Germany.
We also looked at the atheoretical measure of market potential first suggested by
Harris (1954). We calculated this for our countries and found that, by this metric, the
USA is only a middle-ranked country in market access. Nations in Europe located close to
other rich European nations have decidedly more market access with the Harris measure.
The Harris metric does not however take on board the trade-reducing impact of
international borders. If borders are an important barrier to trade then the Harris measure
may be heavily biased. Neither does the Harris measure take into account the price index
term which can be important.
13

We divide the importer fixed effect given in the gravity model by the average total domestic freight rate.
To obtain this freight rate, we multiply internal distance by the freight rate per ton mile. We use bilateral
international ocean shipping values from Jacks and Pendakur’s dataset for selected bilateral pairs and then
average these across all destinations for each country to get an “average” ocean shipping freight rate per ton
mile. We then use a geometric average of these values and Bogart’s railway shipping rates with the weights
given by the values in Table 1 of Hannah (2008). We have no systematic data on terminal charges nor for
inland shipping rates.

20

VII. Market potential and the International Distribution of Income
Before looking at the relationship between theoretically appropriate market access
and relative incomes, we look at more standard measures in our sample. Table 2 relates
income per capita to an export to GDP ratio and the Harris measure of market access. In
column 1 we see that OLS estimates suggest that the ratio of exports to GDP is
significantly related to income. This relationship disappears when using two-stage least
squares in column 2. Here our instrument is the trade cost vector and its estimated
coefficients from our gravity regression. There is considerable variation in income per
capita while export/GDP ratios are much less variable even when the outliers of the
Netherlands (very open, not so rich) and Argentina are included. After throwing out
Argentina and the Netherlands, the relationship in column 1 is even weaker which
confirms the conjecture. There is a positive relationship between income and the Harris
measure in our data but the coefficient is not statistically significant.
In Table 3 and in Figure 5 we explore the relationship between total market
potential and GDP per capita. Here we find a positive and significant relationship. Figure
5 shows a scatter plot of the data and the OLS regression line that regresses GDP per
capita on a constant and the log of market access. The coefficient on market potential is
not statistically significant when it is the only variable included in the regression. The
elasticity of income with respect to total market potential is estimated at about 0.35
implying an elasticity of substitution of about 3 with a 95 percent confidence interval of
[0.25, 5.07]. There is a 1/3 standard deviation rise in the log of income per capita (equal
to 0.32) associated with a one standard deviation rise in the logarithm of market
potential.
Our instrumental variables regressions provide little evidence of endogeneity
problems. Our excluded instrument, the level of the summation of trade-cost weighted
populations is strongly related to the log of marker access as our F-tests show. In both
1900 and 1910, the coefficient on market potential falls somewhat in size and in statistical
significance. However, we have tested the null hypothesis of exogeneity by including
residuals from the first stage regressions in our second stage regressions and via a
Hausman test. In neither case can we reject the null hypothesis of exogeneity. A final
21

regression pools the data for 1900 and 1910 in column 5 of Table 3. Here we include
country fixed effects and a year indicator for 1910. The coefficient on market access is
slightly higher and it is also statistically significant suggesting that unobserved
heterogeneity is not a major problem.
In Table 4 we present cross-sectional regressions that relate the logarithm of GDP
per capita to the logarithm of foreign market access. This substitution may alleviate some
of the access simultaneity bias inherent in total market potential. That variable includes
the domestic market potential variable which is itself a function of domestic incomes.
However, it does not totally alleviate this problem since foreign price indexes are a
function of all countries’ income shares including the domestic income share.
In any case, foreign market access is positively associated with income per capita in
Table 4. Figure 6, shows an unconditional scatter of foreign market access and income per
capita in 1900. There is a wide variety of outcomes. India has a foreign market access only
5% smaller than the US but an income per capita that is 16% of the US level. India is
well below the regression line while the US is an outlier above it. Market access alone does
not account for a significant fraction of the cross-country income distribution since the Rsquared is only 0.1. Overall the evidence of a positive relationship between foreign market
access and GDP per capita in this sample is weaker. OLS coefficients are positive but only
significant at the 25 and 20 percent level. In our 2 stage least squares estimates, the
coefficients on market potential grow in size somewhat and they are significant at the 6
percent and 11 percent level. Again we could not reject exogeneity of the market potential
variable. With country fixed effects the coefficient on foreign market potential is 0.698
and it is significant at the 7 percent level. The OLS coefficient on foreign market access
in 1900 suggests that a one standard deviation rise of the log of foreign market access
would be associated with a rise of 0.20 standard deviation in the log of GDP per capita.
In Table 5 we present results using domestic market access. Domestic market
access is positively associated with GDP per capita and it is statistically significant.
Figure 7 provides an accompanying scatter plot like those above. Here our findings are
more in line with those of Table 3 using total market potential. The relation between
domestic market potential and GDP per capita is quite robust. In both instrumental

22

variables specifications, and when including fixed effects, the point estimate hardly
changes.
Table 6 investigates these same relationships in a panel data setting. In order to
avoid compositional effects from pooling all available data we chose to use a balanced
panel representing 13 countries between 1880 and 1913. We present only specifications
that include country-fixed effects along with country specific time trends. We run pairs of
these panel models for total, foreign and then domestic market access. The first regression
in each pair does not use any excluded instrumental variables, while the second regression
uses the sum of trade-cost weighted populations of trade partners.
All of the regressions in Table 6 report positive coefficients on the three market
access variables. The point estimates are generally smaller than in the cross-section
regressions. However, in column 2, we can see that a one standard deviation rise in the
logarithm of total market access is again associated with a .2 standard deviation rise in
the logarithm of GDP per capita. The instrumental variables coefficients imply an
elasticity of substitution on the order of 5 (column 2 and column 6) or 10 (column 4).

VIII. Borders, Trade and Welfare: A Simulation
The econometric results show strong evidence that market potential was positively
correlated with incomes prior to World War I. The drivers of market potential in our
model are GDPs, trade costs, and the level of market competition (i.e., the price indexes).
One branch of the literature such as Hanson (2005) has gone on to estimate the impact of
a rise in one nation’s or one region’s GDP on all other GDPs. We follow a different path
and instead ask what would have happened to consumer welfare had the trade costs
arising from international borders been eliminated in a given year.
The experiment gives an indication of the benefit received by a large nation like
the US from trading largely with itself. Put another way, we can now examine the impact
of borders (e.g., on European nations) to see whether the observed gap in real incomes
against the US could have been eliminated by abolishing international borders and
granting the “same flag” to all trade partners. When borders fall, common languages,
proximity, and distance are the only remaining barriers to trade in our model. All of these
23

are obviously rough proxies for transport and information costs. At the same time, the
international border is a proxy for many institutional and technical barriers to trade such
as legal systems and contract enforcement, monetary regimes, health and safety
requirements for products, labor standards etc. We are assuming these are all eliminated
when the border disappears.
To gauge the impact on welfare of a removal of the borders, we follow Anderson
and van Wincoop (2003) and Rose and van Wincoop (2001) who calculate the change in
the consumer price index/multilateral resistance terms after a removal of international
borders. In this model, real output is held constant. Real incomes and hence welfare
change when trade costs change due terms of trade effects and changes in the price index
or cost-of-living.14
The general equilibrium model outlined above allows one to find a solution to the
change in price indexes once we solve for price changes after removal of the border
barrier. We assume throughout that the elasticity of substitution is 7. Results in levels are
sensitive to the assumed value of this elasticity. The magnitude of welfare gain is
negatively related to this parameter. These levels however are not overly sensitive when
moving from an elasticity of 5 up to 12. Still, as the elasticity of substitution rises, the
welfare gain is intuitively smaller since local goods become better substitutes for foreign
goods. It is obvious that imposing a unique and constant elasticity of substitution across
all countries, all goods and all markets there may be a significant bias to our analysis. We
therefore consider our results below as a preliminary benchmark. Finally we assume, as
above that labor is immobile across borders. In the long-run any labor mobility would act
to erase real income differentials. Indeed while some sigma convergence in GDP per capita
and wages took place as documented by O’Rourke and Williamson (1994) and O’Rourke,
Taylor and Williamson (1996) absolute convergence was not observed in this period.
Figure 8 displays our results for welfare changes in 1900 when we remove all
international borders. The values on the left hand y-axis give the percentage rise in real
income of the representative consumer in each country when borders are eliminated.
These are compared to the ratio Maddison’s real GDP per capita figures for the US and

14

We refer the reader to the appendix for details.

24

each country. Finally, we plot the un-weighted average rise in exports for each country
after removal of border barriers. Since borders apparently imposed significant frictions to
trade, the nations that trade most heavily with foreign countries and which are smallest
are those most likely to see the largest gains in welfare. The un-weighted average rise in
trade is on the order of 250%. This is much smaller than the point estimate from the
gravity model which predicts an eleven-fold rise in bilateral trade. Consistent with
Anderson and van Wincoop (2003), large countries see larger rises such that trade would
have increased more than six-fold. Smaller countries are closer to the average or below it.
In terms of welfare gains, the smaller, centrally located economies in our sample
achieve the largest gains in Figure 8. The percentage increase in welfare is just over 25
percent for countries like Belgium, Denmark and the Netherlands. The welfare gains reach
32 percent for Canada and 42 percent for Switzerland. The welfare gains are smaller for
countries that are large and inwardly oriented. The US receives a rise of 4.8 percent in
real income. The UK has an 8.5 percent gain. Germany sees a 7.9 percent improvement.
France receives a boost to real incomes of 9,25 percent. This end of the distribution
highlights that although nations like the UK, Germany, and France have welfare gains
almost double that of the US, the impact of removing borders is relatively small.
In terms of income gaps against the US we find the following. About 1/7 of the
real income differences between France and the US and less than 1/10 of the Germany-US
gap are closed following the removal of borders. On the other hand, we see that the small
nations reliant on international trade could have benefitted enormously from open access
to larger markets. Belgium, the Netherlands, and Switzerland all overcome their income
gaps with the US in this counterfactual. Canada and Denmark close more than 2/3 of
their gaps. According to our calculations, Great Britain is still ahead of the USA in 1900.
In terms of robustness, using a higher elasticity of substitution of 12 does not eliminate all
of these findings. In general the welfare gains are smaller than those calculated in Figure 8
and yet Belgium, Australia, New Zealand, Switzerland and still close their real income
gap. On the other hand the Netherlands fails to do so while the welfare gains are about 25
percent lower for Canada and Denmark.
The bottom line from this exercise is that market potential, while important for
explaining the cross-country variation in income, does not seem to have been decisive for

25

explaining differences in economic outcomes between the largest continental European
countries and the US. When we compare income per capita between Germany or France
and the US we see a gap of roughly 30 percent. But interestingly, the lack of a significant
national market cannot account for this gap. In fact, these nations had a level of domestic
market potential that was comparable to that of the US. Further integration, even a
dramatic decline in international trade costs with the disappearance of international
borders, could have raised real incomes but not enough to close these gaps. This suggests
that the explanation for these gaps can be found in other forces. A list of potential
explanations, which merit further study, might include differences in formal and informal
institutions, financial forces, resource endowments, human capital, market structure and
firm-level organization.
Our counterfactuals suggest that other forces besides market integration account
for the income gap between the US and the continental leaders. At the very least, the
static gains from trade, cannot account for such large gaps. There may also be limits to
the gains from domestic market access perhaps due to congestion. In Britain, despite its
density, income per capita was not commensurately higher than in the US where
comparatively large distances had to be overcome. Marshall (1920) noted that space and
congestion constraints were a problem in England near the turn of the 20th century whilst
in the US company towns and inexpensive transportation allowed for greater dispersion
with no negative impact on productivity.
On the other hand, a dramatic difference in results is available for small countries.
For a nation like Canada, our data show a difference in per capita income against the
USA (or the UK) of 37 percent. Our experiment shows that a significant proportion of
this gap may have been due to the handicap its southern border imposed. In Europe, the
Netherlands, Belgium and Switzerland also suffered in a similar way. In terms of where we
started, it would appear correct to conclude that the European nations lay close together
and they did in fact establish a dense and efficient system of transportation infrastructure.
These forces may have allowed them to reap the advantages of scale production and
proximity despite the ubiquitous borders. But this was not sufficient to overcome their
income gap with the US. It must have been the case for the small open economies that
borders mattered.

26

It is also enticing to run a further experiment that looks more closely at the limits
of European integration. Here we imagine a world where borders fall--but only for the
European countries in our sample. Essentially we impose the “single market” in 1900.
Figure 9 shows the results. This figure reveals similar magnitudes of welfare gains as in
Figure 8 for countries within Europe. When we aggregate across all European countries,
the welfare gain is 16.35 percent compared to a gap in total real GDP per capita of 52
percent. Approximately one-third of the gap between “European” and American incomes
could have been closed by integrating the continent.
Clearly, France and Germany are driving this result down towards zero. Had the
gains for these two nations been larger, the counterfactual gap would be much smaller. It
appears that the high level of pre-existing domestic integration in these two nations offset
the large negative impact of international borders. Anderson and van Wincoop (2003)
showed that a fall in the border between the US and Canada mattered little for US
welfare in their counterfactual experiments. The bottom line has to be that France and
Germany very likely failed to squeeze as much income out of their ostensibly significant
domestic markets as the US did. The logic, however, does not translate directly to other
smaller countries which still appear to have been stifled by international borders.

IX. Conclusion and Discussion
Our exploration of market size in the nineteenth century has made the following
points. First, US total market access was not exceptional when compared to the largest
European economies. The American internal market might have been free of Zollen and
Douanes, and it might not have suffered from the bad case of Zersplitterung evident in
Europe, but still, distance and (a lack of) density may have proved to be persistent
obstacles.
Second, market potential can play a significant role in explaining the cross-country
distribution of income in the first period of globalization. The literature has provided very
mixed evidence on whether tariffs and trade openness were important for explaining
growth and income differences in the nineteenth century (as opposed to convergence).
27

Indeed, Clemens and Williamson (2004) argue that GDP growth of a country’s main trade
partner was not a significant determinant of domestic growth. However, the market access
literature gives at least two reasons why this might be a mis-leading experiment and other
forces might influence this finding. If trade costs rose as nations grew richer over time,
this could easily offset the gains from foreign growth. Moreover, the higher the elasticity
of substitution the smaller the rises in trade costs would have to be to offset such growth.
Indeed, the time trend in tariffs which is positive (see Figure 1 in Clemens and
Williamson) would support the view that market potential was not increasing uniformly
over time. Alternatively, if price indexes were falling (i.e., markets became more
competitive) as trading partners grew, then exports to foreign countries and hence
domestic incomes might not rise due to expanded foreign market access. The CES demand
system highlights these pro-competitive effects. We propose a theoretically sound measure
of market exposure and find it to be strongly positively correlated with income per capita
both in the cross-section and in a panel data model.
Third, we provide an assessment of the cost of “small” markets. By eliminating the
iceberg trade costs, which represent pure deadweight loss due to the shipping of goods
across space, nations could have gained significantly. In Europe, our simulated model
suggests that the largest nations would have seen welfare gains of about 8 percent with
the removal of their “troublesome” borders. On the other hand, smaller nations could
have significantly closed their income gaps against the US had they been lucky enough to
become part of larger “free-trade” federations like the US or even a European Union.
Openness matters, but the impact depends strongly on the country in question.
Finally, we conclude by considering a reality check. We have proposed a general
equilibrium model and estimated one equilibrium structural relationship that this model
provides. While scale economies are not necessary for our conclusions complete
specialization is. Other trade models could justify our findings. Admittedly, and closely
related to this point, we have not tested against an alternative model.
Implicitly, our research assumes the production process was somewhat close to the
abstractions of modern theories. Still, new economic geography, canonical Hecksher-OhlinVanek models based on factor-endowment-driven trade, and Ricardian models of
comparative advantage all predict welfare gains due to rising terms of trade which is

28

where our evidence lies (Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodriguez-Clare, 2012). To sort out the
underlying driving forces for our results, one would need to look at the dynamics of
location of economic activity and relative factor prices which we ignore at this stage. Still,
the answer to these questions will provide new empirical evidence which dials into the still
smoldering controversy on trade, tariffs, and growth in the 19th century.
One interesting avenue for research would be to consider the extensive margin-or
opening up trade between countries that do not previously trade. In a world with fixed
market entry costs, the welfare gains are different from those in our set-up. Many
countries in our sample, especially the more remote and less developed countries, see
smaller gains in our exercise because the number of trade partners is low and does not
increase.
We also try to deal with institutions and geography, but no interaction between
the two is allowed. Further work on assessing the precise channels by which market
potential affected incentives in industry and how it mattered for consumers in the late
nineteenth century is a remaining challenge. Again, an interesting line that shows access is
the gains available from linking up with new trade partners and in extending the range
and variety of goods. Work by Voth and Leunig (2011) and Hersh and Voth (2010) on
these issues shows this is likely to be important. Furthermore, the gains from trade that
we highlight are entirely static. Investment decisions, research and development, and total
factor productivity growth are almost surely related to market size. More research
certainly remains to be done when considering the interactions between the standard of
living and international integration in the 19th century.

29

References:
Abramovitz, Moses and David, Paul A. 2006. "Convergence and Deferred Catch-up:
Productivity Leadership and the Waning of American Exceptionalism," in Ralph Landau,
Timothy Taylor, and Gavin Wright, eds., The mosaic of economic growth. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press, 1996, pp. 21 -62.
Arkolakis, C., Costinot, A. and Rodriguez-Clare, A. (2012) “New Trade Models Same Old
Gains?” American Economic Review, 102 (1), 94-130.
Annuarie Statistique de la Suisse. 1891, 1900 and 1910.
Annual return of the foreign trade of the Empire of Japan, 1900, 1910. Tokyo
Anuario de la Dirección General de Estadística. Buenos Aires, various years. Dirección
General de Estadística,
Annuario Estatistico do Brasil (various years).
Annuario Estatistico do Portugal. 1900 Lisbon.
Anuario Estatistico de España. (various years). Madrid.
Anuario estadístico de la República Oriental del Uruguay. (various years) Montevideo.
Arkolakis, C., Costinot, A., Rodríguez, Clare, A. 2012. “New Trade Models, Same Old
Gains?” American Economic Review 102 (1) pp. 94-130.
Anderson, J.E., and van Wincoop, E 2003. Gravity with Gravitas: A solution to the
Border Effect. American Economic Review, 93 (1), 70-192.
Anderson, J. E., & van Wincoop, E. 2004. Trade Costs. Journal of Economic Literature,
42, 691-751.
Der Auswärtige Handel Deutschlands. various years.
Barbieri, K. 2005. The Liberal Illusion: Does Trade Promote Peace? Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press. (1996).
30

Bairoch, P. 1972. “Free trade and European economic development in the 19th century.”
European Economic Review, vol. 3, (3), 211-45.
Bértola, Luis, Leonardo Calicchio, María Magdalena Camou, and Laura Rivero. 1998. El
PBI uruguayo 1870-1936 y otras estimaciones. Facultad de Ciencias Sociales, Programa de
Historia Económica y Social.
Bogart, D. 2010. “A Global Perspective on Railway Inefficiency and the Rise of State
Ownership, 1880-1912” Explorations in Economic History 47. 158-178.
Bohlin, Jan 2007. “Structural Change in the Swedish economy in the late nineteenth and
early twentieth century– The role of import substitution and export demand” Goteborg
Working papers in Economic History, no. 8.
Bulletin mensuel de statistique du commerce extérieur. Athens (various years).
Bureau of Railway Statistics. 1911. Comparative railway Statistics of the United States,
The United Kingdom, France and Germany. Bulletin no. 24 Government Printing Office:
Washington DC.
Carnegie, Andrew. 1902. A Rectorial Address Delivered to the Students in the University
of St. Andrews Rectorial.
Carreras, A. 1989. Estadísticas Históricas de España Siglos XIX and XX. Fundacion
Banco Exterior, Madrid.
Clemens, Michael A. and Williamson, J.G. 2004. “Wealth Bias in the First Global Capital
Market Boom, 1870-1913,” Economic Journal, 114 (April), 304-337
Clemens, Michael A. and Williamson, J.G. 2004. “Why Did The Tariff-Growth
Correlation Change After 1950?" Journal of Economic Growth, 9 (1), 5-46.
Contador, Claudio and Haddad, C. 1975. "Produto Real, Moeda e Preços: A Experiência
Brasileira no Período 1861-1970." in Revista Brasileira de Estatística 36-143: 407-440.
Crafts, N.F.R. and Klein, Alexander 2011. “Making Sense of the Manufacturing Belt:
Determinants of U.S. Industrial Location, 1880-1920” Journal of Economic Geography. 12
775-807.
Crafts, N. and Mulatu, A. 2006 “How did the location of industry respond to falling
transport costs in Britain before World War I?” Journal of Economic History 66. 575-607.

31

Donaldson, Dave. 2010 “Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation
Infrastructure” NBER working paper 16487.
della Paolera, Taylor, A.M, Bózzoli, C.G. 2003. Historical Statistics in della, Paolera, G.,
Taylor A.M. (2003) editors, A New Economic History of Argentina. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Federico, G. 2004. “The growth of world agricultural production 1800-1938” Research
economic history. 22 pp.125-181
Federico, G.
d’Italia.

2012. “Le statistiche del commercio estero italiano, 1863-1939” Banca

Fenoaltea, S. 2005. The growth of the Italian economy, 1861-1913: Preliminary
second-generation estimates. European Review of Economic History 9, pp. 273-312.
Feenstra, R.C. 2010. Product Variety and the Gains from International Trade. MIT
Press, Cambridge.
Goldsmith, R. 1991. Brasil 1850-1984: Desenvolvimento Financeiro sob um Seculo de
Inacão. Harper and Row, São Paulo.
Greasley, David, and Les Oxley. 2008. “Re-inventing New Zealand: Institutions Output
and Patents 1870-1939.” Mimeo University of Canterbury.
Grytten, O.H. 2004. The gross domestic product for Norway 1830-2003., Chapter 6 in
Eitrheim, Ø., J.T. Klovland and J.F. Qvigstad (eds.),Historical Monetary Statistics for
Norway 1819-2003, Norges Bank Occasional Papers no. 35, 241-288.
Fujita, M., Krugman, P., Venables, A.J., 1999. The Spatial Economy: Cities, Regions,
and International Trade. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Handelsstatistiek Nederlandsch-Indië 1874-1937. 1939. Mededeelingen van het Centraal
Kantoor voor de Statistiek No.161. Batavia: CKS.
Hannah, L. (2008) “Logistics, Market Size and Giant Plants in the Early Twentieth
Century: A Global View” Journal of Economic History. 68 (1), 46-79.
Hanson, G., 2005. Market potential, increasing returns and geographic concentration.
Journal of International Economics 67 (1) pp. 1-24.
32

Head, K. 1994. “Infant Industry Protection in the Steel Rail Industry.” Journal of
International Economics. Vol. 37. 141-165.
Head, K. and Mayer, T. 2004. Market Potential and the Location of Japanese Investment
in the European Union Journal of International Economics. 86 (4), 959-972.
Head, K. and Mayer, T. 2010. “Illusory Border Effects: Distance Mismeasurement Inflates
Estimates of Home Bias in Trade,” in Brakman, Steven and Peter van Bergeijk eds. The
Gravity Model in International Trade: Advances and Applications , Cambridge University
Press, 2010.
Head, K. and Mayer, T. 2011. “Gravity, market potential and economic development”
Journal of Economic Geography. 11 (2), 281-294.
Helpman, E. 1998. “The Size of Regions.” In D. Pines, E. Sadka, and I. Zilcha, eds.,
Topics in PublicEconomics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 33-54.
Helpman, E. Melitz, M, Rubinstein, Y. 2008. Estimating Trade Flows: Trading Partners
and Trading Volumes. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (2), 441-487.
Horlings, E and Smits, J.P. 1997. A Comparison of the Pattern of Growth and Structural
Change in the Netherlands and Belgium, 1800-1913. Jahrbuch für Wirtschaftsgeschichte 2
89-106.
Irwin. D.A. 2000. “Did Late Nineteenth Century Tariffs Promote Infant Industries?
Evidence from the Tinplate Industry.” Journal of Economic History. 60 (2). 335-360.
Irwin, D. A. 2002. “Interpreting the tariff-growth correlation of the late nineteenth
century.” American Economic Review 92 (2), 165-169.
Irwin, D. A., & Tervio, M. 2002. Does trade raise income?: Evidence from the twentieth
century. Journal of International Economics , 58 (1), 1-18.
Jacks, D. 2006. “New Results on the Tariff-Growth Paradox.” European Review of
Economic History 10(2), 2006: 205-230.
Jacks, D. S., Meissner, C. M., & Novy, D. (2010) “Trade Costs in the First Wave of
Globalization” Explorations in Economic History vol. 47 (2) pp. 127-141.
33

Jacks, D. S., Meissner, C. M., & Novy, D. (2011). “Trade Booms, Trade Busts and Trade
Costs” Journal of International Economics vol. 83 (2), pp. 185-201.
Jacks, D.S. and Pendakur, K. (2010). Global Trade and the Maritime Transport
Revolution. Review of Economics and Statistics 92 (4) 745-755.
Jaarcijfers voor het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden. (various years).
Johnston, L. and Williamson, S.H., “What Was the U.S. GDP Then?” Measuring Worth,
2011. http://www.measuringworth.org/usgdp/.
Jones, M.T. Obstfeld, M. 2001. Saving, Investment, and Gold: A Reassessment of
Historical Current Account Data. from Money, Capital Mobility, and Trade: Essays in
Honor of Robert Mundell, edited by Guillermo A. Calvo, Rudi Dornbusch, and Maurice
Obstfeld. Pp. 303- 363. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kim, S. 2005. “Expansion of Markets and the Geographic Distribution of Economic
Activities:The Trends in U.S. Regional Manufacturing Structure, 1860-1987.” 110 (4)
Quarterly Journal of Economics. 881-908.
Kostelenos, G. C. 1995. Money and Output in Modern Greece: 1858-1938. Center of
Planning and Economic Research, Athens.
Krugman, Paul (1980) “Scale Economics, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of
Trade” American Economic Review, 70, 950-959.
Komlos, J. 1987. Financial Innovation and the Demand for Money in Austria-Hungary,
1867-1913. Journal of European Economic History, 16(3), 587605.
Kostelenos, G. C. (1995): Money and Output in Modern Greece: 1858-1938. Center of
Planning and Economic Research, Athens.
Lains, P. 2007. “Growth in a Protected Environment: Portugal, 1850-1950” research in
Economic History, vol. 24, pp. 121-163.
Lehmann, S. and O’Rourke, K.H. forthcoming. “The Structure of Protection and Growth
in the Late Nineteenth Century” Review of Economics and Statistics.
Maddison, A. 1991. Dynamic Forces in Capitalist Development: A Long-Run Comparative
View. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

34

Maddison, Angus. 2003. The World Economy: Historical Statistics. Paris: Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development.
Malanima, P. 2002. L’economia italiana delle crescita medievale alla crescita
Contemporanea. Mulino: Bologna.
Marshall, Alfred 1920. Industry and Trade. Macmillan and co.: London.
Meissner, C.M and López-Córdova, J.E. 2003. “Exchange Rate Regimes and International
Trade: Evidence from the Classical Gold Standard Era, 1870-1913” American Economic
Review vol. 93 (1) March, 344-353.
Mitchell, B.R. (2007a) International Historical Statistics, volume 1: Africa, Asia and
Oceania 1750-2005, 5th ed. Palgrave Macmillan, London.
Mitchell, B.R. (2007b) International Historical Statistics, volume 2: Europe 1750-2005, 6th
ed. Palgrave Macmillan, London.
Mitchell, B.R. (2007c) International Historical Statistics, volume 3: The Americas 17502005, 6th ed. Palgrave Macmillan, London.
Mitchener, K. J., McLean, I. W. 2003. “The productivity of US states since 1880” Journal
of Economic Growth, 8 (1), 73-114.
Morrisson, C. and Murtin, F. 2009. “The Century of Education” Journal of Human
Capital, 3(1) 1-42.
New Zealand Official Yearbook 1913. Wellington.
Ohkawa, K., Takamatsu, N., and Yamamoto, Y. 1974. National Income Vol. 1 in (eds).
Ohkawa, K., Shinohara, M., and Umemura, M. Estimates of Long-Term Economic
Statistics of Japan Since 1868. Tokyo: Toyo Keizai Shinposha.
O’Rourke, Kevin H., Alan M. Taylor, and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 1996. “Factor Price
Convergence in the Late Nineteenth Century.” International Economic Review 37 499530.
O’Rourke, K.H. and Williamson, J.G. 1994. “Late Nineteenth-Century Anglo-American
Factor-Price Convergence: Were Heckscher and Ohlin Right?”. Journal of Economic
History. 54 (4), 892-916.

35

O’Rourke, K. H. 2000. Tariffs and Growth in the Late 19th Century. Economic Journal,
110, 456-483.
Österreichisches statistisches Handbuch für die im Reichsrathe vertretenen Königreiche
und Länder. Various years
Platt, DCM 1971. “Problems in the Interpretation of Foreign Trade Statistics before
1914” Journal of Latin American Statistics 3 (2), 119-130.
Bureau of Insular Affairs, War Department. 1911. Quarterly Summary of Commerce of
the Philippine Islands. Government Printing Office, Washington.
Rankin, K. 1992. New Zealand’s Gross National Product, 1859-1939. Review of Income
and Wealth vol. 1 series 38 pp. 49-69.
Romer, Paul 1996. “Why, Indeed, in America? Theory, History, and the Origins of
Modern Economic Growth”American Economic Review, 86 (2) pp. 202-206
Rose, A. and van Wincoop, E 2001. National Money as a Barrier to International Trade:
The Real Case for Currency Union. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings
91 (2), 386-390.
Redding, S. and Venables, A. 2004. “Economic Geography and International Inequality”
Journal of International Economics. 62, pp. 53-82.
Ritzmann-Blickenstorfer, H. 1996. Historical Statistics of Switzerland. Chronos Verlag:
Zürich.
Rosenberg, Nathan. 1963. “Technological Change in the Machine Tool Industry, 18401910.” Journal of Economic History, December 23(4), pp. 414-43; reprinted in
Perspectives on technology. Armonk, NY: Sharpe, 1976, pp. 9-31.
Rosenberg, N. 1981. "Why in America?" in Otto Mayr and Robert C. Post, eds., Yankee
enterprise, the rise of the American system of manufactures. Washington, DC:
Smithsonian Institution Press,
Rosés, Juan. 2003. “Why Isn’t the Whole of Spain Industrialized? New Economic
Geography and Early Industrialization, 1797-1910.” Journal of Economic History. 63 (4)
995-1022.
Sammendrag af statistiske Oplysninger. Copenhagen. (various years).
36

Santos-Silva, JMC and Tenreyro, S. 2006. “The Log of Gravity” Review of Economics
and Statistics 88 (4), 641-658.
Schularick, M. and Solomou, S. 2011. “Trade and Growth: Historical Evidence” Journal of
Economic Growth. 16 (1), 33-70.
Schulze, M. 2000. “Patterns of growth and stagnation in the late nineteenth century
Habsburg economy” European Review of Economic History. 4. 311-340.
Schulze, M 2007. “Regional Income Dispersion and Market Potential in the Late
Nineteenth Century Hapsburg Empire” LSE WP 106/07.
Smits, Jan-Pieter, Horlings, Edwin, and van Zanden, Jan Luiten 2000. “Dutch GNP and
Its Components, 1800-1913” Gronigen growth and Development Center.
Smits, J.P., Woltjer, P.J. and Ma, D. 2009. “A Dataset on Comparative Historical
National Accounts, ca. 1870-1950: A Time-Series Perspective” Groningen Growth and
Development Centre Research Memorandum GD-107, Groningen: University of
Groningen.
Summerhill, W. 1997. “Transport Improvements and Economic Growth in Brazil and
Mexico” in Haber, S. Ed. How Latin American Fell Behind: Essays on the economic
histories of Brazil and Mexico, 1800-1914 pp. 93-117 Palo Alto: Stanford University Press.
Statistical Abstract for the Several British, Colonies, Possessions, and Protectorates
(various years).
Statistical Abstract for the United Kingdom. (various years). London.
Statistisk aarbog for Kongeriket Norge udgivet af det Statistiske centralbureau. (various
years).
Sokoloff, Kenneth L. "Inventive Activity in Early Industrial America: Evidence from
Patent Records." Journal of Economic History December 1988,48(4), pp. 813-50.
Sveriges Statistisk Tidskrift. (Various years) Stockholm.

37

Tableau annuel du commerce avec les pays étrangers. Ministère des Finances. (Bruxelles,
various years).
Tena-Junguito A. 2010. “Bairoch revisited: tariff structure and growth in the late
nineteenth century” European Review of Economic History 14, 111-143.
Thomas, Mark. 1984. “An Input-Output Approach to the British Economy, 1890-1914”,
D. Phil. Thesis, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
Urquhart, M.C. et. al. 1993. Gross National Product, Canada, 1870-1926, the Derivation
of the Estimates. Kingston and Montreal, McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Vamvakidis, A. 2002. How Robust is the Growth-Openness Connection? Historical
Evidence. Journal of Economic Growth , 7, 57-80.
Van der Eng, P. 2010. The Sources of Long-Term Economic Growth in Indonesia, 18802008. Explorations in Economic History. 47. 249-309.
Voth, J., & Hersh, J. 2009. Sweet diversity: colonial goods and the rise of European living
standards after 1492. C.E.P.R. Discussion Paper 7386.
Whitney, W.G., 1968. “The Structure of the American Economy in the Late Nineteenth
Century” PhD Dissertation. Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.

38

Appendix I Welfare Calculation from a Structural Model of International
Trade
Here we describe how we calculate the welfare gains from removing international borders
in Figure 8 and Figure 9. We first run our gravity regression to estimate the trade cost
vector,
tij

1 σ

Next, we solve for the equilibrium prices,
, from the market clearing conditions,
equation(8), in Anderson and van Wincoop(2003):
/

Where is the share of country i income in world (i.e., sample) income. From the
, we have
normalization,

where we plug in the definition

Welfare (Welf) for country i is defined as
/

For our simulation, where borders are removed all over the world, we set
the counterfactual trade cost vector is given by
1

3

4

=0 so that

.

We then solve for the new equilibrium prices. All of our calculations assume an elasticity
of substitution of 7.

39

Appendix II: Data Appendix
Bilateral trade data: Data underlying Jacks Meissner and Novy (2011) were used
initially and sources are reported there and in Jacks, Meissner and Novy (2010). To their
298 observations in 1900 and 1910 we added more than 300 observations in each of those
years from the sources listed below.
We first relied on two data bases on bilateral nineteenth century trade: Barbieri (1996)
and López-Córdova and Meissner (2003).
Further data are from specific country sources as follows:
ARGENTINA
AUSTRIA-HUNGARY
AUSTRALIA
BELGIUM
BRAZIL
CANADA
DENMARK
GERMANY
GREECE
INDIA
INDONESIA

ITALY
JAPAN
NETHERLANDS
NEW ZEALAND
NORWAY

Anuario de la Dirección General de Estadística
Österreichisches statistisches Handbuch für die im Reichsrathe
vertretenen Königreiche und Länder:
Statistical Abstract for the Several British, Colonies, Possessions,
and Protectorates
Ministère des Finances, Tableau annuel du commerce avec les pays
étrangers (Bruxelles, various years).
Annuario Estatistico do Brasil
Statistical Abstract for the Several British, Colonies, Possessions,
and Protectorates; Canada Year Book (various issues)
Sammendrag af statistiske Oplysninger
Der Auswärtige Handel Deutschlands
Mēniaion deltion statistikēs exōterikou emporiou. Bulletin mensuel
de statistique du commerce extérieur.
Statistical Abstract for the Several British, Colonies, Possessions,
and Protectorates
CKS 161 (1939) Handelsstatistiek Nederlandsch-Indië 1874-1937.
Mededeelingen van het Centraal Kantoor voor de Statistiek No.161.
Batavia: CKS.
Federico, Giovanni “Le statistiche del commercio estero italiano,
1863-1939” Banca d’Italia
Annual return of the foreign trade of the Empire of Japan, 1900,
1910
Jaarcijfers voor het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden Annuaire
statistique des Pays-Bas
Statistical Abstract for the Several British, Colonies, Possessions,
and Protectorates
Statistisk aarbog for Kongeriket Norge udgivet af det Statistiske
centralbureau
40

PHILIPPINES

PORTUGAL
SPAIN
SRI LANKA
SWEDEN
SWITZERLAND
UK
URUGUAY

Census of the Philippines 1903. US government printing office.
Washington, DC. and Quarterly Summary of Commerce of the
Philippine Islands 1911.
Annuario Estatistico 1900
Anuario Estatistico
Statistical Abstract for the Several British, Colonies, Possessions,
and Protectorates
Sveriges Statistisk Tidskrift
Annuarie Statistique: 1891 (used for data for 1890), 1900 and 1910
Statistical Abstract for the United Kingdom
Anuario estadístico de la República Oriental del Uruguay

GDP and Population Data: For the figures presenting our welfare calculations we rely
on Maddison (2003). For Austria-Hungary we use GDP and population data for Austria,
Hungary, and Czechoslovakia. Population figures are from Clemens and Williamson
(2004) unless noted below. In our regressions from Tables 2-6 we rely on nominal GDP
per capita converted to US dollars at the annual average exchange rate. Sources for GDP
and population are as follows:
ARGENTINA
AUSTRIA-HUNGARY
AUSTRALIA
BELGIUM
BRAZIL
CANADA
DENMARK
FRANCE
GERMANY
GREECE
INDIA
INDONESIA
ITALY

JAPAN
MEXICO
NETTHERLANDS

GDP: Della Paolera, Taylor, Bózzoli (2003)
GDP: Schulze (2000); price deflator from Maddison (1991)
GDP: Jones and Obstfeld (2001)
GDP: Maddison (1991)
GDP: Contador and Haddad; POP: Contador and Haddad
Data kindly shared by Aldo Musacchio.
GDP & POP: Jones and Obstfeld (2001)
GDP: Obstfeld Jones (2001)
GDP: Smits, Woltjer and Ma (2009);
GDP: Jones and Obstfeld
GDP: Kostelenos (1995)
GDP: Smits, Woltjer, and Ma (2009)
GDP and POP: Data underlying Van der Eng (2010)
GDP: Fenoaltea (2005)
Prices used to deflate are from: Malinima “Prices and Wages in
Italy, 1270-1913
GDP: Ohkawa, Takamatsu, and Yamamoto (1974);
GDP: Summerhill (1997)
GDP: Smits, Woltjer, and Ma (2009); POP: Maddison (2005)
41

NEW ZEALAND
NORWAY
PORTUGAL
SPAIN
SWEDEN
SWITZERLAND
UK
URUGUAY
USA

GDP: Rankin (1992)
GDP & POP: Grytten (2004) Norges Bank: http://www.norgesbank.no/pages/77409/p1_c6_table_5.htm
GDP: Lains (2007)
GDP: Smits, Woltjer, and Ma (2009)
GDP: Smits, Woltjer, and Ma (2009)
GDP: Ritzmann-Blickenstorfer (1996) (Net national product).
GDP: Jones and Obstfeld (2001)
GDP: Maddison (2003) deflated to current USD with US CPI
GDP: Johnston and Williamson (2011)

Gross Production Data:
We have attempted to find the ratio of gross value of production to value added
for 1910 or for years as close as possible to 1910 if data for 1910 were not available. With
this ratio we are able to “re-flate” aggregate GDP figures, a value-added concept, to
obtain the theoretically more appropriate value of total expenditure instead of aggregate
value added expenditure.
Federico (2004) reports gross value to value added (GV/VA) ratios for agriculture.
We used his benchmark figures for 1913 for all years for which we run a gravity model.
We rely on these wherever possible and unless otherwise noted. We then use these figures
with the appropriately re-scaled shares in GDP of agriculture and non-agricultural output
to obtain a weighted average of the ratio of gross output to value added. Shares of
agriculture in GDP are largely from Mitchell (2007a, 2007b, 2007c) unless otherwise noted
below.
The ratio of gross output to value-added in the non-agricultural sector is not
available for all of our countries. However, detailed input-output tables for the US in 1899
(Whitney, 1968), UK in 1907 (Thomas, 1984) and Sweden 1913 (Bohlin, 2007) suggest
that the weighted average ratio of gross output to value added is roughly 2 across all
three countries. The weights correspond to industry weights in gross output. For the US,
the exact value is 2.06; for the UK the value is 2.31, and for Sweden it is 2.08.
Data on industrial output and the value of intermediates is available for New
Zealand from an industrial census in 1911. Schulze (2000) reports value-added ratios for

42

various industries, and we rely on these for Austria taking an un-weighted average of the
reported figures. Canada also has good estimates of gross production due to Urquhart
(1993). When country specialists reported gross/value added ratios, we used these as
detailed below. In the absence of the preceding types of data for industrial and service
output we assumed a ratio of 2.
Sources for output shares, gross production and value added are as follows:
ARGENTINA

AUSTRIAHUNGARY
AUSTRALIA
BELGIUM

BRAZIL
CANADA
DENMARK
FRANCE
GERMANY
GREECE
INDIA
INDONESIA
ITALY

JAPAN
MEXICO

GV/VA 1910 is the weighted average of the ratio in industry and non-industry.
We use a ratio of 2 for industry. The sectoral weights are from Mitchell
(2007c).
Data are from Schulze (2000). We used his value-added ratios for several
sectors (mining, tobacco, iron and steel-smelting, iron and steel-refining,
transport engineering,
GV/VA for agriculture from Federico. Share of agriculture output from
Mitchell (2007a). We use a ratio of 2 for industry.
Gross output to value added in agriculture is from Federico. We use a ratio of
2 for industry. We use a ratio of 1.1 for services. Shares for industry,
agriculture and services are from Horlings and Smits (1997).
Data on GV/VA for agriculture are from Federico for the year 1963. We also
use a share of value added for industry of 49.6% taken from Goldsmith (1991).
All data from Urquhart (1993) who reported gross values of output and
GDP/Value added by industry and sector.
GV/VA from Federico for agriculture. We use a ratio of 2 for industry.
Output shares from Mitchell (2007b).
GV/VA from Federico for agriculture. We use a ratio of 2 for industry.
Output shares from Mitchell (2007b).
GV/VA from Federico. We use a ratio of 2 for industry. Output shares from
Mitchell (2007).
Share of agriculture in GDP as of 1910 is from Kostelenos (1995). We rely on
Federico for the GV/VA ratio.
GV/VA from Federico. Output shares from Mitchell (2007).
GV/VA from Federico. We use a ratio of 2 for industry. Agriculture’s share of
GDP is from Van der Eng (1992).
Federico reports a ratio for agriculture for 1910. We use a ratio of 2 for
industry. The share of industry in value added is 44% in 1910 (Mitchell,
2007b).
Federico reports a ratio for agriculture for 1913. Share of agriculture from
Mitchell (2007b).
No data in Federico. We use a ratio of 1.1 for GV/VA for agriculture. Share of
agriculture from Mitchell (2007). We use a ratio of two for industry.
43

NETHERLANDS
NEW ZEALAND

NORWAY
PORTUGAL
SPAIN
SRI LANKA
SWEDEN
SWITZERLAND
UK
URUGUAY

USA

Ratio of gross value to value added from Federico. Data on share of agriculture
in value added from Smits, Horling, and van Zanden (2000).
Ratio of 1.1 is used for agriculture. A gross output ratio of 6.06 is used for
industry. Data are from the Official Yearbook of New Zealand of 1913 and are
based on a census of manufactures from 1911. The share of agriculture in value
added is given in Greasley and Oxley (2008).
Ratio of 1.1 is used for agriculture. Share of agriculture is from Mitchell
(2007b).
GV/VA in agriculture from Federico. We used a ratio of 2 for industry.
GV/VA from Federico. Agricultural share of GDP from Carreras (1989). We
use a ratio of 2 for the non-agricultural portion of gross production.
No data were available for GV/VA. We use a share of 1.1 as in India. The
share of agriculture in GDP is estimated at 60% as in India.
Data are from Bohlin (2007) who presents an input-output table for 1913.
We use a value of 2 in the absence of detailed reconstructions of national
accounts in secondary sources.
Data are based on an input output table by Thomas (1984) for 1907.
GV/VA from Federico. Share of agriculture in GDP is from Bertola et. al.
(1998).The agricultural sector does not include the pastoral sector which
undertook significant processing.
All figures are based on the input-output table of Whitney (1968).

Intra-national and international distances:
We calculate the population weighted distance between two countries as the weighted
sum of the bilateral distances of the ten most populous cities in each country. Data on
population by city are not available for all years. We used instead data from years that
fell within the two decades 1895-1904 and 1905-1914. If there were multiple observations
on a city within a decade, we averaged these values over the decade. It should be noted
that at times observations from different years are available for cities within a country.
We constructed the maximal amount of city observations possible for each country within
the decade in this case. We then have one observation per city per decade and then one
weighted distance per country pair per decade for domestic distance. For the USA we use
the ten most populous states and the distances between the principal cities of those states.
City populations were taken from the Statesman’s yearbook and the following
comprehensive website: http://www.populstat.info/

44

Great circle distances were calculated with the vincenty utility in Stata as the great circle
distance using latitude and longitude data.
Latitude and Longitude are available from two websites:
http://www.worldatlas.com/aatlas/latitude_and_longitude_finder.htm and
http://www.maxmind.com/app/worldcities

The weights are equal to population shares in the respective country. For each city
internal distance is calculated as 5 kms. As explained in the text. The full data set for city
populations by decade that we used is available upon request.

45

Figure 1 The Tariff Equivalent of International Borders, Distance and not Sharing a
Border.
1

0.9

Tariff Equivalent

0.8

Tariff equivalent
of crossing a border

Tariff equivalent
of distance at 6,500 kms

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

Tariff equivalent of
not sharing a language

0.2

0.1

0

1900

1910

Notes: Bars represent the tariff equivalent of the respective “trade cost” indicated with an elasticity of
substitution between all goods of 7. The tariff equivalent of distance is computed at the average weighted
distance within the sample of 6,500 kms. Coefficients are from the gravity models in Table 1.

46

Figure 2 Total Market Potential, 1900 and 1910 for 27 Countries
160000

140000

Total Market Access,

120000

100000

80000

60000

40000
1900

1910

20000

0

Country

Notes: Total market potential is calculated from the sum of domestic and foreign market potential
as described in the text.

47

Figure 3 Foreign Market Potential, 1900 and 1910 for 27 Countries
35000

Foreign Market Access,

30000

25000

20000

1900
1910

15000

10000

5000

0

Country

Notes: Foreign market potential is calculated as described in the text.

48

49

Country

Notes: Domestic market potential is calculated as described in the text.
Sri Lanka

Greece

Philippines

1900

Uruguay

Argentina

Portugal

Indonesia

New Zealand

Norway

Brazil

Switzerland

Sweden

Canada

Australia

Denmark

Mexico

Netherlands

Spain

Belgium

Japan

Italy

India

Austria

France

Germany

USA

United Kingdom

Domestic Market Access

Figure 4 Domestic Market Potential, 1900 and 1910, 27 Countries
160000

140000

120000

100000

80000

60000

40000

1910

20000

0

Figure 5 Total Market Potential and GDP per Capita in 1900 for 25 Countries

6
USA

NEW AUS

UK
URU

DEN BEL
SWI
NOR
SWENET

ARG

FRA
GER

5

ITA
AUH

SPA

BRA

4

MEX

ln(GDP/Population)

CAN

POR
GRE

JAP
INN

3

IND

9

10
11
ln(lagged total market access)

12

Notes: Figure represents the relationship between the logarithm of nominal GDP per capita in US dollars in
1902 and the logartihm of total market potential in 1900. The regression line is based on a regression of the
logartihm of nominal GDP per capita in 1902 and the logarithm of total market potential in 1900 and a
constant.

50

Figure 6 Foreign Market Potential and GDP per Capita for 25 Countries in 1900

6
NEW AUS

USA

URU

DEN
FRA
GER
ARG

NOR
SWE
ITA
SPA

BEL
SWI5

NET

AUH

4

MEX
BRA

ln(GDP/Population)

UK
CAN

POR
JAP

GRE

INN

3

IND

7

7.5
8
8.5
ln(lagged foreign market access)

9

Notes: Figure represents the relationship between the logarithm of nominal GDP per capita in US dollars in
1902 and the logartihm of foreign market potential in 1900. The regression line is based on a regression of
the logartihm of nominal GDP per capita in 1902 and the logarithm of foreign market potential in 1900 and
a constant.

51

Figure 7 Domestic Market Potential and GDP per Capita for 25 Countries in 1900

6
USA

NEW AUS

UK
URU

DEN BEL
SWI
NOR
NET
SWE

ARG

FRA
GER

5

ITA
AUH

SPA

BRA

4

MEX

ln(GDP/Population)

CAN

POR
GRE

JAP
INN

3

IND

8

9
10
11
ln(lagged domestic market access)

12

Notes: Figure represents the relationship between the logarithm of nominal GDP per capita in US dollars in
1902 and the logartihm of domestic market potential in 1900. The regression line is based on a regression of
the logartihm of nominal GDP per capita in 1902 and the logarithm of domestic market potential in 1900
and a constant.

52

Figure 8 Welfare Changes from a Uniform Removal of All International Borders Compared to Gaps in GDP/Capita, 1900

90

Average Rise in trade in percetage terms

Percentage change in welfare x 100, GDP Gap * 100,

8

Change in Welfare

7

Gap in GDP
Avg. percentage rise in trade
70

6

5

50
4

3

30

2

10
1

-10

0

Country

Notes: This figure compares the difference between Maddison’s real, PPP adjusted GDP/capita for the USA and each country to the
welfare changes from a counterfactual world with “no international borders”. A world with no borders implies that the tariff equivalent
trade cost of an international border is equal to 1. Welfare changes are equivalent to the percentage rise (x 100) in the ratio of nominal
output divided by the rise in the consumer price index. The consumer price index is calculated according the model discussed in the text
and assumes that the elasticity of substitution between all goods—domestic and local--is 7. The average percentage rise in trade is an
un-weighted average across all partners. A value of 1 is a 100 percent rise in trade.

53

Figure 9 Welfare Changes from a Removal of All European Borders Compared to Gaps in GDP/Capita, 1900

EU
UK
SWI
BEL
NET

Country

DEN

Gap in GDP

FRA

Change in Welfare

GER
AUH
GRE
SWE
NOR
ITA
SPA
POR

-10

10

30

50

70

90

Percentage change in welfare x 100, (GDP/cap)USA/(GPD/cap)i

Notes: This figure compares the difference between Maddison’s real, PPP adjusted GDP/capita for the USA and each country to the
welfare changes from a counterfactual world with “no European borders”. A world with no European borders implies that the tariff
equivalent trade cost of an international border is equal to 1 for all intra-European country pairs. Welfare changes are equivalent to the
percentage rise in the ratio of nominal output divided by the rise in the consumer price index. The consumer price index is calculated
according the model discussed in the text and assumes that the elasticity of substitution between all goods—domestic and local--is 7.

54

Table 1 Gravity Models for 1900 and 1910

ln (distij)
No shared language indicator
No Shared Border
International trade indicator “Border effect”

1900

1910

-0.426***

-0.349***

[0.084]

[0.087]

-0.858***

-0.611***

[0.152]

[0.165]

0.102

-0.212

[0.195]

[0.218]

-2.680***

-2.905***

[0.282]

[0.308]

523
523
Number of Observations
Importer and Exporter Fixed Effects
yes
yes
Notes: Dependent variable is the level of bilateral exports in 1990 US dollars. Both models are estimated using
the Poisson PML specification. For domestic pairs, exports equal GDP-Exports. See text for an explanation.
Importer and exporter fixed effects are included in all columns. Robust standard errors clustered on dyads appear
in brackets. *** p-value<0.01, ** p-value < 0.05, * p-value < 0.1

55

Table 2 Alternative Measures of Market Potential and GDP per Capita, OLS for 1900

Exports/GDP (IV)

1
0.018*
[0.010]
---

Harris Market Potential

---

Exports/GDP

2
---

3
---

0.025
[0.026]
---

---

0.289
[0.212]
Number of Observations
25
25
25
R-squared
0.093
0.078
0.087
Notes: Dependent variable is the logarithm of nominal GDP per capita two-years ahead.
Column 2 is an instrumental variables regression using the trade costs vector from
Table 1 as the excluded instrument. See text for an explanation. Robust standard
errors appear in brackets. *** p-value<0.01, ** p-value < 0.05, * p-value < 0.1

56

Table 3 Total Market Potential and GDP per Capita, OLS and Instrumental Variables Results for 1900 and 1910

ln (Total Market Potential)
ln (Labor Force/Land Area)
ln (Years of Schooling)
Tropics
Number of Observations
R-squared
F-test first stage
H0 = Market potential exogenous
p-value
Method of estimation

1900

1900

1910

1910

1900 & 1910

0.376**

0.358**

0.340**

0.317*

0.471**

[0.162]

[0.154]

[0.159]

[0.165]

[0.209]

-0.197**

-0.193***

-0.202***

-0.199***

-0.339

[0.073]

[0.064]

[0.065]

[0.057]

[0.444]

0.387***

0.392***

0.377***

0.382***

0.553

[0.120]

[0.111]

[0.103]

[0.094]

[0.613]

-0.328

-0.319

-0.209

-0.203

---

[0.323]

[0.289]

[0.287]

[0.255]

25

25

25

25

50

0.699

0.698

0.718

0.717

0.919

-----

78.212 ***
0.745

-----

112.169 ***
0.728

---

OLS
Fixed Effects
Notes: Dependent variable is the logarithm of nominal GDP per capita two-years ahead. See text for an
explanation. Robust standard errors appear in brackets. In column 5 country fixed effects are included as is
a year indicator for 1910. Excluded instrument is population-weighted trade-costs as described in the text.
*** p-value<0.01, ** p-value < 0.05, * p-value < 0.1
OLS

2SLS

OLS

57

2SLS

---

Table 4 Foreign Market Potential and GDP per Capita, OLS and Instrumental Variables Results for 1900 and 1910

ln (Foreign Market Potential)
ln (Labor Force/Land Area)
ln (Years of Schooling)
Tropics
Number of Observations
R-squared
F-test first stage
H0 = Market potential exogenous
p-value
Method of estimation

1900

1900

1910

1910

1900 & 1910

0.505

0.828*

0.531

0.606

0.698*

[0.424]

[0.455]

[0.397]

[0.388]

[0.365]

-0.174**

-0.207**

-0.207***

-0.213***

0.293

[0.077]

[0.081]

[0.069]

[0.064]

[0.359]

0.420***

0.369***

0.380***

0.370***

0.585

[0.143]

[0.109]

[0.119]

[0.098]

[0.454]

-0.067

-0.024

-0.039

-0.029

---

[0.352]

[0.331]

[0.329]

[0.305]

25

25

25

25

50

0.651

0.637

0.682

0.681

0.912

---

28.37 ***

---

66.931 ***

---

---

0.228

---

0.688

---

OLS
Fixed Effects
Notes: Dependent variable is the logarithm of nominal GDP per capita two-years ahead. See text for an
explanation. Robust standard errors appear in brackets. A constant is included in each regression but not reported.
In column 5 country fixed effects and a year dummy for 1910 are included. Excluded instrument is population
weighted trade costs as described in the text. *** p-value<0.01, ** p-value < 0.05, * p-value < 0.1
OLS

2SLS

58

OLS

2SLS

Table 5 Domestic Market Potential and GDP per Capita, OLS and Instrumental Variables Results for 1900 and 1910

ln (Domestic Market Potential)
ln (Labor Force/Land Area)
ln (Years of Schooling)
Tropics
Number of Observations
R-squared
F-test first stage
H0 = Market potential
exogenous
p-value
Method of estimation

1900

1900

1910

1910

1900 & 1910

0.328**

0.315**

0.297**

0.281*

0.383**

[0.142]

[0.137]

[0.140]

[0.147]

[0.168]

-0.191**

-0.188***

-0.197***

-0.195***

-0.269

[0.071]

[0.063]

[0.064]

[0.056]

[0.410]

0.393***

0.397***

0.383***

0.387***

0.526

[0.123]

[0.114]

[0.105]

[0.096]

[0.612]

-0.345

-0.337

-0.221

-0.215

---

[0.327]

[0.292]

[0.285]

[0.254]

25

25

25

25

50

0.697

0.698

0.716

0.717

0.917

---

92.415***

---

73.17 ***

---

---

0.837

---

0.83

---

OLS
Fixed Effects
Notes: Dependent variable is the logarithm of nominal GDP per capita two-years ahead. See text for an
explanation. Robust standard errors appear in brackets. A constant is included in each regression but not
reported. In column 5 country fixed effects and a year dummy for 1910 are included. The excluded instrument
is population weighted trade costs as described in the text. *** p-value<0.01, ** p-value < 0.05, * p-value <
0.1
OLS

2SLS

OLS

59

2SLS

Table 6 Total Market potential and GDP per Capita, Panel Models for 1880-1913

ln (Total Market Potential)
ln (Foreign Market Potential)
ln (Domestic Market
Potential)
ln (Years of Schooling)
ln (Labor Force/Land Area)
Number of Observations
Number of countries
R-squared
Kleibergen Paap
F-test first stage
Method of estimation

TMP

TMP

FMP

FMP

DMP

DMP

0.515***

0.258***

---

---

---

---

[0.090]

[0.118]

---

---

0.113*

0.135***

---

---

[0.062]

[0.045]

---

---

0.531***

0.230***

[0.089]

[0.14]

---

---

0.094

unrep.

0.207

unrep.

0.073

unrep.

[0.349]

[0.129]

[0.647]

[0.151]

[0.337]

[0.127]

-0.258

unrep.

0.153

unrep.

-0.324

unrep.

[1.397]

[0.331]

[1.821]

[0.366]

[1.394]

[0.330]

442

442

442

442

442

442

13

13

13

13

13

13

0.767

0.232

0.676

0.04

0.773

0.225

---

24.565

---

28.786

---

22.619

OLS

2SLS

OLS

2SLS

OLS

2SLS

Notes: Dependent variable is the logarithm of nominal GDP per capita. See text for an explanation. Robust standard
errors appear in brackets. Country fixed effects and country-specific time-trends are included in all regressions.
Excluded instrument is population weighted trade costs. See text for an explanation. For 2SLS results, preliminary
regressions of the dependent variable, market potential, and the excluded instrument on the included exogenous
variables are run. This allows calculation of robust standard errors clustered at the country level. R-squared’s in
column 2, 4, and 6 refer to the final “univariate” 2SLS regression. *** p-value<0.01, ** p-value < 0.05, * p-value <
0.1

60

