NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAPITAL FLOWS, CREDIT BOOMS, AND FINANCIAL CRISES IN THE CLASSICAL
GOLD STANDARD ERA
Christopher M. Meissner
Working Paper 18814
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18814

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013

This paper is forthcoming in a special issue on the “History of Financial Crises” in the Revista de Historia
de la Economía y de la Empresa being published and supported by the Archivo Histórico-BBVA (Banco
Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria)-Spain. Comments from the editor, two referees, Michael Bordo, Charlie
Calomiris, and Alan M. Taylor were very helpful. The author remains responsible for all errors and
omissions herein. An honorarium of less than $5,000 was paid to the author for this research by the
Archivo Histórico-BBVA. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Christopher M. Meissner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Capital Flows, Credit Booms, and Financial Crises in the Classical Gold Standard Era
Christopher M. Meissner
NBER Working Paper No. 18814
February 2013
JEL No. E5,E65,G01,N10,N20
ABSTRACT
The classical gold standard period, 1880-1913, witnessed deep economic integration. High capital
imports were related to better growth performance but may also have created greater volatility via
financial crises. I first document the substantial output losses from various types of crises. I then explore
the relationship between crises and two forces highlighted in the recent literature on financial crises:
international capital movements and credit growth. Neither factor is sufficient to explain financial
crises in this period. Instead, interactions between the informational environment, the fiscal situation,
the exchange rate regime, and events beyond a nation’s borders all help explain crises. Some examples
are provided.

Christopher M. Meissner
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
cmmeissner@ucdavis.edu

1. Introduction
Financial crises are an enduring phenomenon in the modern economy. It was during the
19 century, and, in particular, in the heyday of the international gold standard (1880-1913) and
globalization that the world witnessed at least two major global financial crises and innumerable
local crises. These crises came in several formats. Banking crises led to losses to creditors and
depositors alike but also had broader negative impacts in the short and long run. Currency
instability gave rise to choppy headwinds for local monetary systems affecting trade and capital
flows. Fiscal debacles ending in debt defaults were not unheard of, and often these were related
to problems with the exchange rate and the financial system. While the institutional setup and the
economic environment are radically different now, observation of the last 30 years’ experience
with capital flows easily provides some striking similarities to historical events.
th

This survey first explores the relationship between capital flows and the growth
experience. I find that the biggest capital importers had higher volatility in their growth rates
than countries with lower capital imports. It is plausible that this volatility was caused by
financial crises. I then ask: what caused these crises? I join into a recent debate about whether
credit booms or capital inflow bonanzas were major determinants of financial crises. So far this
discussion has mainly been focused on crises in recent decades1. In my sample, using one
plausible econometric specification, neither capital inflows nor a proxy for credit growth are
strongly associated with financial crises. Still there is some weak evidence that capital inflows
generated higher volatility and a higher probability of experiencing financial turmoil. One of the
problems in identifying the effects of credit and capital inflows is that in a small open economy
these factors are highly correlated.
If credit and inflows do not go all that far in explaining crises what does? I also
emphasize that in the 19th century numerous other forces often cited in the large literature on
financial crises also mattered. A good framework for understanding these events is the “third
generation” view of financial crises elaborated in the wake of the Asian financial crisis. Without
capital flows and leveraged actors, third generation crises are impossible. An appeal is then made
to the historical record to illustrate how foreign lending interacted with other fundamentals to
generate crises. The paper concludes by asking what we can learn about the past based on the
global crisis of 2007 and what the past might tell us about the present.

2. Contours of the First Wave of Globalization
The period between 1880 and 1913 witnessed a continuation of the process of global
economic integration in international capital and goods markets that was unleashed in the early
19th century2. Capital moved across borders free of government controls in this period propelled
1

Jordà, Schularick and Taylor (2011) (JST) is an important exception. They rely on Schularick and Taylor’s (2012)
path breaking collection of bank loan data for a broad sample of countries. While JST pool data from the last 130
years, I focus only on the period 1880-1913.
2
Bordo (2003) explores the structure of capital markets. Obstfeld and Taylor (2005) is an excellent guide to
international finance since the 19th century. Kindleberger (2005) remains the classic reference on the history of

2

by a financial infrastructure with global connections based in London, Paris and Berlin. As
Europe matured economically, its financial system funnelled savings into foreign government
bond issues, railroad equities and debentures as well as myriad other industries and enterprises.
Cross border market-based financing for projects in both the developed and the lessdeveloped regions played an important role in shaping economic outcomes of the recipient
countries. Foreign capital helped build up the local capital stock and social overhead
infrastructure, funded residential investment, and unleashed the potential of many newly settled
export-based countries. Foreign capital also allowed governments to fill revenue gaps in times of
war and economic turbulence and at times it indulged the extravagance of local governments.
These global flows also affected local policy. Countries increasingly coordinated on the
gold standard to provide an umbrella of stability for capital flows and commodity trade. By
1880, the leading countries of the world had all given up silver or bimetallic systems while by
1900 the leading countries in Latin America and Asia had also joined the bandwagon (Meissner,
2005).
At the core of the global economy was Great Britain with a vast surplus of domestically
produced loanable funds. This funding was channelled through the City of London to borrowers
from all over the world. Gross (and net) inflows were large even by contemporary standards. On
average the current account deficit (relative to GDP) in the principal receiving countries such as
Argentina, Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the US (although in the latter this was mainly
prior to 1860), was on the order of three per cent and much higher in many years. In the so-called
periphery, the levels were somewhat lower in absolute value but still significant in certain years.
Foreign investment often accounted for about 20 per cent of gross investment in the typical
developing country of the time and up to 50 per cent in Argentina, Australia, Brazil, and Canada.
Great Britain exported the majority of capital flows while France, Germany, Belgium,
and Holland provided smaller amounts. In Great Britain the current account surplus never fell
below one per cent of GDP and averaged over four per cent of GDP the entire period. France
was the second largest capital exporter at the time. The volumes exported were about half those
of Britain.
Clemens and Williamson (2004) demonstrate that factor endowments mattered for the
direction of these capital outflows. Australasia, Canada, and other new world regions which
received heavy inflows relative to local GDP were richly endowed in natural resources, high in
human capital, recipients of large in-migration of young men active in the labor force. Investors
expected, and earned, a high rate of return with relatively little risk and large diversification
benefits. According to Goetzmann and Ukhov (2006) British investors in the late 19th century
could have earned 5.21% with a standard deviation of 3.89% on domestic investments. A
diversified portfolio with foreign investments attained a much better return-risk ratio with an
average return of 5.02% and a standard deviation of only 2.4% (i.e., a higher Sharpe ratio). There
is every indication that British investors did in fact take advantage of these opportunities as the
literature on capital movements in the nineteenth century shows.
3. Capital Flows & the Receiving Economies
If European investors benefitted from investment, what was the impact on the receiving
countries? One question is whether capital inflows raised long-run average growth rates as they
financial crises. Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) provide an intriguing new analysis of financial crises over the long run
and provide one comprehensive chronology of these events back to the middle ages.

3

might have if they helped build up the capital/labor ratio. Schularick and Steger (2010) found
that capital inflows raised the rate of economic growth in the late 19th century by raising the rate
of investment. Bordo and Meissner (2011) found evidence that bursts of capital inflows in the
19th century period were associated with higher incomes in the long-run and temporarily higher
growth rates as a neoclassical model would predict. Both of these papers, and a wider qualitative
economic history literature, support the idea that foreign capital mattered for development. This
is quite a contrast with the modern literature that studies the period between 1972 and the present
and which has not isolated any significant positive growth impact of capital inflows.
Figures 1 through 5 present data on growth in output per capita, growth in consumption
per capita (and their standard deviations), and investment rates for the 19th century with a focus
on data from a sample of 10 countries for which more than 29 years (1885-1913) of investment,
consumption and output data are available3. We break the sample into five quintiles based on the
within country average ratio of gross capital inflows to GDP between 1880 and 1913. The
countries in each quintile from highest to lowest capital inflow recipient are: Argentina and
Canada, Norway and the US, Demark and Japan, Italy and Sweden, and France and Germany. I
used the London capital calls data from Stone (1999) to measure capital inflows, and I scaled
these flows by local GDP as in Bordo and Meissner (2011).
Figure 1 shows that the average growth rates do not seem to vary significantly amongst
the lowest four quintiles. However, the highest quintile seems to have enjoyed significantly
higher growth rates of output per capita and consumption per capita (Figure 2). Figure 3 shows
that investment rates were fairly similar between the quintiles suggesting that some capital
inflows were not always used for productive purposes. If anything, investment rates seem
noticeably higher than the average in the lowest quintile-two net surplus countries France and
Germany.
One other feature of the data is clear in Figures 4 and 5: higher growth in output per
capita and consumption per capita for the high capital importers seems to come at the cost of
higher volatility. In the highest quintile (Canada and Argentina), the volatility of growth of both
output per capita and consumption per capita is two to three times higher than in the bottom four
quintiles. The volatility of output growth also seems to be positively associated with the general
level of exposure to capital flows. Such volatility was significantly higher in the third (Denmark
and Japan) and fourth quintiles (Norway and the US) compared to the bottom and second
quintiles. One reason volatility was higher is very likely the fact that capital inflows played a role
in heightening the probability of a crisis as suggested in Bordo and Meissner (2011). Of course
the pattern of specialization – itself an ultimate driver and consequence of financial globalization
may have played a role too. A first cut at this proposition is investigated below. First I turn to an
examination of output losses in the wake of financial crises.

3.1 Output, Consumption and Investment Losses after Crises

3

Data on output and consumption are from Barro and Ursúa (2008). Investment data are those underlying Taylor
(2002).

4

The academic literature on contemporary financial crises largely supports the idea that
financial crises are often accompanied by economic downturns. Many authors cite financial
panics and crises as the cause of economic downturns4. Bordo, Eichengreen Klingebiel, and
Martínez-Peria (2001) looked at the long-run evidence and found that financial crises (banking,
currency and twin crises) were associated with cumulative output losses of 9.8 percent.
Cumulative output losses were measured as the difference between actual and trend growth from
the onset of the crisis to the return of growth to its trend.
No such historical study has been undertaken for debt crises, but the modern literature
also finds defaults are associated with lower growth. Borensztein and Panizza (2008) find that
growth is 1.2 percentage points below average in the aftermath of a default for at least one year.
One has to be cautious about causality here since, as they observe, defaults often come at the tail
end of a recession or recessions cum financial crises.
Figure 6 presents graphic evidence on the output costs of crises between 1880 and 1913.
Data on output are from Barro and Ursúa (2009). I graph the arithmetic average of the log of the
output indexes for the subset of countries that experienced a financial crisis. The sample of crisis
countries varies by type of crisis. The criterion used is that output per capita data be available for
six years before and seven years after a crisis event. A trend line for each kind of crisis is found
by averaging the growth rates over the four years leading up to two years before a crisis (i.e.,
average growth of output for the interval [T-5, T-2] where T is the year of a crisis). Panel A of
Figure 6 suggests that output turns down preceding crisis events, but that crisis years see output
roughly 4 percentage points below their trend levels. Within two years, countries on average
appear to return to trend. The output gap in the year following banking crises (Panel B) appears
to be on average only 1 percentage point while for currency crises (Panel C) the gap is roughly 3
percentage points. Panel D shows a negative trend rate of growth in the run-up to debt crises.
Debt crises appear to be the culmination of an economic downturn, rather than the proximate
cause. One reason for this is that debt crises in our sample follow currency and banking crises
which are themselves associated with below average growth. Following the same methodology
as above, Figure 7 analyses the evolution of consumption before and after the various kinds of
crises. Panel A presents evidence for all crises combined. The contrast between consumption and
output is startling. While Figure 6 showed that output was somewhat lower following a crisis,
consumption does not seem to decrease on average. This is as true for banking crises as it is for
currency crises (Panels B and C). While on average consumption was only slightly lower
following a debt crisis this obscures one outlier. For Argentina, consumption was 17 percent
below trend in 1890 in the run-up to the Baring crisis. Consumption actually begins to decline in
the years before the default events.
Figure 8 illustrates the evolution of the ratio of investment to GDP using the same
methodology except that here the focus is on the average levels of the ratio prior to the crisis
rather than the growth rate. It is evident from Panel B that banking crises have a larger impact on
investment rates than currency crises. This is consistent with the notion that banking crises in the
19th century were associated with a process of financial disintermediation. On the other hand,
currency crises often simply reflected financial market volatility. Many of the “currency crises”
in the data are defensive rises in short-run interest rates to stave off currency speculation.
4

Calomiris and Hubbard (1989) show that falling industrial output preceded banking panics in the US prior to 1913.

5

Currency crises may have been associated with reserve losses which might eventually be
sterilized (at least for the short-run) by an active central bank if necessary. Debt defaults also
seem to be associated with lower investment in the years following such an event.

4. Bonanzas vs. Financial Fiestas
I now turn to a discussion of the links between capital flows, credit, and financial crises.
In fact, there is significant debate in the international finance literature on whether capital
inflows sow the seeds of a financial crisis. Heavy capital inflows expose countries to the
possibility of a “sudden stop” whereupon a rapid improvement in the current account is forced
onto a country via a large compression in expenditure and consumption and a sharp exchange
rate depreciation. Depreciation in turn poses a further challenge to economies that have built up
large liabilities denominated in foreign currency5.
Reinhart and Reinhart (2008) note that capital inflow “bonanzas” (i.e., periods of high
capital inflows) elevated the probability of a banking crisis in a sample of countries between
1960 and 2007. Powell and Tavela (2012) summarize the recent literature and find that portfolio
or banking system capital inflows tend to be associated with a higher probability of a financial
crises.
Taylor (2012) suggests that the impact of capital flows on crises has been generally
overstated. According to Jordà, Schularick and Taylor (2011), over the long run (1880-2010)
abnormally high credit growth (what I refer to above as a financial fiesta) is a better predictor of
banking crises than large rises in current account deficits. Underlying this view are formal tests
comparing the predictive power of growth in the ratio of credit to GDP to changes in the ratio of
the current account to GDP (i.e., net capital inflows relative to GDP) in a sample of 14 countries
between 1870 and 2008. This finding suggests that domestic forces may be a more important
determinant of crises than external factors. The findings from Jordà, Schularick and Taylor (JST)
come from a sample comprising four different time periods with very different institutional bases
for international capital flows including the laissez-faire first period of globalization, the volatile
interwar years, the ultra-stable Bretton Woods period with low capital flows (1945-1971) and the
resurgence of un-governed international capital flows in the modern float. Evidence from Bordo,
Meissner and Stuckler (2010), looking at a larger set of countries, suggests that capital inflows
were a robust determinant of financial crises in a sample confined to the years between 1880 and
1913 and then again in the years between 1972 and 2008. However, they did not test whether
credit booms played a role. Moreover JST use a logit specification allowing for country specific
heterogeneity which BMS did not use.
4.1 Other Causes of Crises

5

Aguiar and Gopinath (2007) study sudden stops in LDCs and argue that changes in trend output can lead to a
sudden stop rather than having sudden stops be the determinants of the business cycle. Bordo, Cavallo, and Meissner
(2010) explore this issue between 1880 and 1913 century finding that sudden stops associated with changes in the
cyclical component of output were often associated with financial crises while episodes with changes in trend output
and sudden stops did not often witness financial crises.

6

The Anglo-American experience of the classical gold standard would suggest (relative)
financial stability, smooth adjustment and so forth. However, Britain boasted an exceptionally
large economy; it was the world’s banker; it was extremely economically advanced and, due to
its financial development, it could credibly commit to maintaining gold convertibility. For Great
Britain, external forces were not necessarily fundamental nor were they particularly nefarious or
challenging (in relative terms) considering these initial conditions. While the gold standard and
international capital markets made for stability in the nation that supported the international gold
standard, most of the rest of the world, especially that part that participated in the globalization
process, was faced with the fact that capital flows were often de-stabilizing. Fiscal policy was
pro-cyclical. Moreover, the gold standard inhibited smooth adjustment and transmitted financial
crises6. Super-imposed on local banking systems that had no recourse to a lender of last-resort,
and which were often intimately connected to the fiscal needs of the unstable local political
incumbents, the 19th century international financial system was a minefield for the small-open
economies of the day.
A fruitful way to understand the instability in the capital importing periphery is to
envision British creditors as depositors who entrusted their savings to a foreign country (i.e. the
bank). Borrowers aimed to distribute capital amongst many potential projects in order to develop
their infrastructure. These projects by and large had low liquidation value in the event that
foreign creditors needed or recalled their money in the ‘short-run’ (i.e, prior to the maturation of
a large infrastructure project) . Hence global capital markets of the time were prone to instability
in the same way that banks are in the abstract world of Diamond and Dybvig (1983). The
Diamond and Dybvig (1983) view of banks holds that the time deposit contract and its maturity
mismatch are inherently prone to bank runs and hence episodes of collapse.
After the Asian financial crisis of 1997, a new perspective on financial crises was offered
(e.g., Krugman, 1999). The third generation view built upon the Diamond and Dybvig model and
applied it to global capital markets to explain why sudden stops, banking crises, currency crises
and debt defaults tended to be associated. Assume open international capital markets, local firms
(financial and non-financial), and sovereigns that leverage themselves via international capital
markets and maturity and currency mismatches whereby liabilities are payable in foreign
currency. These factors generate financial fragility much in the same way that the time deposit
creates the potential for large losses in the Diamond and Dybvig framework.
A crisis occurs when market expectations change. When market actors change their
expectations (for whatever reason) and come to believe that the exchange rate might depreciate,
this expectation can become self-fulfilling. Actors know that a depreciated exchange rate would
lead to solvency problems especially when debt was payable in a foreign currency and exports
could not react quickly enough. One equilibrium in this game is for net capital flows to reverse
or stop altogether creating a “sudden stop” and sharp reversal in the current account from deficit
to surplus. The exchange rate sharply depreciates, and this validates the financial havoc that was
expected (Calvo, Izquierdo, and Mejia, 2004).
Of course, this abstract view of the world neglects many important aspects of reality and
the country experiences of the day. Calomiris and Hubbard (1989) suggest that in nineteenth
century America banking panics and banking failures were preceded by large unexpected
6

See the introduction to the volume by Eichengreen and Flandreau (1997) for a review of the issues.

7

declines in industrial output and falls in equity markets. Davis, Hanes, and Rhode (2009) echo an
earlier literature suggesting that in the 19th century USA, financial dependence in northern and
mid-western states interacted with a high demand for money so that harvest shocks created
monetary stringency and banking panics. A broader literature on monetary history discusses
solutions to this instability including bank branching, tighter regulation, the ability to “suspend
convertibility”, the availability of a lender of last resort and even deposit insurance. Most of
these measures were only partially implemented in the US in the 19th century. On the other hand,
Canada enjoyed relative stability partially due to its national branch system.
The literature on currency crises also has many diverse views. Early work in the vein of
Krugman (1979) and Flood and Garber (1984) suggested that fiscal deficits combined with an
accommodating central bank could break a peg. Second generation models argued that the
political will to defend a peg mattered in a world of open capital markets (Obstfeld, 1986).
Third generation models are encompassing views of domestic financial systems
embedded in an open-economy. It implies that there are interactions between financial flows and
other aspects of the economy. The level of financial fragility, the probability of a crisis, depends
not only on capital flows but on the level of indebtedness, the amount of hard currency debt,
connections to other economies, the elasticity of demand and supply for exports, and the
productivity of the tradeable sectors and so forth. The credit boom hypothesis is not necessarily a
story about an open-economy nor about interactions with these underlying variables. Moreover,
the theory as to why credit booms are likely to lead crises is underdeveloped in relative terms if
not underspecified in absolute terms7. To the extent that for small developing economies
domestic credit is driven by capital inflows however, the credit view might not be inconsistent
with the capital flows view.

4.2 Frequency of Crises
Table 1 presents dates for three types of financial crises: banking, currency and debt.
Dates for banking and currency crises come largely from Bordo, Eichengreen, Klingebiel and
Martínez-Peria (BEKM) (2001) with one exception listed in the notes to Table 1. Debt crisis
dates are from Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano (2003) and Beim and Calomiris (2001) with two
exceptions noted in the notes to Table 1. A banking crisis occurs when there is a systemic event
in the financial sector involving significant losses to the capital of active banks, significant
numbers of bank failures, or widespread bank runs. Currency crises were dated by BEKM using
an exchange market pressure index together with narrative evidence. This allows for sharp
depreciations of the nominal exchange rate, but the methodology can also signal an event when
short-term interest rates rise sharply or reserves fall significantly. Debt crises involve
rescheduling of the central sovereign’s foreign debt obligations, arrears on these liabilities or
outright repudiation on any or all of the debt.

7

Borio and White (2003) develop one narrative, reminiscent of Minsky’s earlier thoughts, of how “imbalances” can
sow the seeds of a crisis. The key idea seems to be that for a given distribution of financial and real shocks the
economy becomes more vulnerable to panic and sharp changes in the level of lending at higher levels of debt.

8

4.3 Dating Credit Booms and Capital Inflow Bonanzas: Development and Instability

To identify credit booms, I created an indicator taking the value of one when there is
significantly fast growth in the real stock of broad money. Specifically, I used the growth rate of
broad money from the BEKM data set and subtracted the rate of inflation to arrive at an
approximation of the growth rate of the real money stock8. Following Reinhart and Reinhart, I
then found the 80th percentile for each country. When the growth rate was at or above this cutoff,
that year’s value was classified as a boom year.
Lacking credit in a larger more representative sample, I turn to the growth of the real
stock of broad money which is available in the BEKM data set for more countries. The growth of
the money stock is used in lieu of the credit stock, but ostensibly this is a reasonable choice.
Schularick and Taylor (2011) provide data for the growth of money and credit for a sample of 14
countries for a total of 428 country years prior to 1914 noting that “money growth and credit
growth were essentially two sides of the same coin”. The growth rate of the real stock of broad
money from the larger BEKM dataset is highly correlated with similar data from Schularick and
Taylor’s data (rho = 0.76, N=416)9.
Table 2 shows money and inflow boom indicators by year or sets of years across
countries. I focus on a sample of 14 countries/colonies for which we have 33 years of capital
inflows (1880-1913) and 33 years of money growth (1881-1913) 10. Figure 9 shows the aggregate
share of the 14 countries that experienced either kind of boom along with the total number of
crises (in these 14 countries) in any given year (banking, currency, twin—banking and currency
together or in consecutive years, and debt crises). Two global booms and crisis periods are
visible in Figure 9. The financial meltdown of the early 1890s followed a peak in global capital
inflows between 1887 and 1889. Argentina, which is not in the data underlying Figure 9, had
both a money and an inflow boom in these years and this country was at the heart of the debacle
that brought the London house of Baring to its knees in 1890-91 and led to a global slowdown in
capital flows. In 1904-1906 there is another surge in the growth rate of real money and credit.
This preceded the global crisis of 1907 that emanated out of the US and affected nearly all major
financial centers and many countries on the periphery too.
While these two well-known episodes of global financial distress illustrate the potential
relationship between inflows, credit and crises, there are many other episodes of boom without
bust and busts without international booms. The early 1880s, the period 1894-1895 and the years
circa 1900 are all periods of high growth in money in many countries but do not post especially
8

Using the growth of nominal money relative to nominal GDP does not alter my conclusions below. Schularick and
Taylor (2012) focus on the growth of real loans whereas Jordà, Schularick and Taylor (2011) focus on the ratio of
loans to GDP.
9
The monetary literature distinguishes between credit and money. In the 19th century, much of the growth of
domestic credit was intermediated within the banking system that funded itself by issuing monetary liabilities-either
notes or deposits. New sources of funding for banks came on line later in the 20th century as Schularick and Taylor
(2012) discuss. In the case of international borrowing, a gold inflow or a rise in domestic deposits could cause a rise
in the money supply.
10
Only 322 observations with both information on capital inflows and credit would be available using Schularick
and Taylor’s data on credit/bank loans. The 14 countries are (the colonies of) Australia, Austria, Brazil, Canada,
France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Spain, Sweden, United States.

9

large numbers of financial crises. There are also many financial crises that are left “unexplained”
since they did not occur during any global lending bonanzas or generalized financial booms as I
have classified them here.
To test whether capital inflow booms were associated with crises in the recent past,
Reinhart and Reinhart (2008) report the conditional probability of having a crisis given that an
inflow bonanza has occurred in the three years preceding or following the current year. I carry
out a similar test for both inflow booms and money booms in Figures 10 through 12. These
figures plot the percentage of country years divided by total sample years in which there is a
banking, currency or any (banking, currency, twin, or debt) type of crisis. Next, as in Reinhart
and Reinhart (2008), I condition the sample probability of a crisis on whether a money boom or a
credit boom occurred in the preceding three years. The number of crisis years is divided by the
total number of boom years to arrive at a conditional probability of a crisis after each kind of
boom. As Reinhart and Reinhart argue, if this ratio is larger than the unconditional ratio, then
there is support for the idea that booms are a determinant of crises.
While Reinhart and Reinhart found evidence that the conditional probabilities were often
significantly higher for all varieties of crises (debt, banking and currency) in their sample, the
evidence is not so clear in the late nineteenth century. Only a slight majority of countries have
larger conditional probabilities for either type of boom and for any type of crisis. For banking
crises (Figure 10), the percentage of countries in the sample having higher probabilities is 57%
(inflow bonanzas) and 61% (money booms). These percentages slide down considerably for
currency crises (Figure 11) going to 43% and 28% respectively. If any type of boom matters for
currency crises in the gold standard period, it is more likely to be an inflow boom rather than a
money boom. Combining all types of crises, Figure 12 again shows that 52% of countries report
a higher ratio after conditioning on capital inflow booms and 52% when controlling for money
booms.
We now look for connections between inflow and credit booms and crises using
multivariate limited dependent variable models for the empirical probability of each type of
crisis. In Table 3 we report the results from three families of logit models. The first family of
regressions models the probability of a banking, currency or any kind of crisis (banking,
currency, twin, or debt) as a function of the money boom and inflow boom indicators11. For these
dummies, three lags of each variable are included. In columns 3-6 of Table 3, other determinants
of financial crises studied in Bordo and Meissner (2011) are included. The first is the ratio of
foreign currency debt to total debt which controls for currency mismatches. The next variable
indicates whether a country is on the gold standard and maintaining a pegged exchange rate
versus the major creditor nations of Europe. The British discount rate is used to control for
conditions in the international capital market. Lagged values of these controls are used
throughout to avoid simultaneity bias. Finally, lagged values of a currency crisis indicator and
banking crisis are included since third generation models of crises link the exchange rate, the
financial sector and the sovereign. In columns 7-9 I replace the boom indicators with the rate of
change of the (real) money stock and the ratio of capital inflows to GDP.

11

The indicator is one if the ratio of capital inflows to GDP or the growth of real money is higher than the within
country 80th percentile in the given year.

10

None of these specifications provide conclusive evidence that money/credit booms
heighten the chances of a financial crisis in this sample12. On the other hand, there is some
limited evidence that capital inflows were associated with a higher probability of a crisis. The
first lagged value of the capital inflows boom indicator, or the level of (lagged) inflows/GDP, is
significant and positive in several of the specifications.
Neither the foreign currency debt variable nor the gold standard variable are significant.
Bordo and Meissner (2007) found that hard currency debt only raised the chances of a financial
crisis when other factors made a country financially fragile. Nations like the USA, Sweden,
Canada and Australia, carried debt payable entirely in terms of fixed amounts of gold but
avoided the kind of third generation meltdowns evident in the southern cone of Latin America
(Argentina, 1890-91; Brazil, 1890-91 and 1897) or in Southern Europe (Italy 1891-93; Portugal
1891; Greece, 1894).
The contemporary literature often argues that fixed exchange rates transmit financial
shocks and so heighten the chances of a crisis. The gold standard does not seem to raise the
probability of a crisis in the 19th century. National experience was too variable for gold standard
adherence to show up directly as a determinant. Some countries managed to hold their pegs even
through serious financial turbulence (e.g., USA, 1890-1893, Australia, 1890, Canada 1890-1893,
France, 1882, Germany 1893 & 1907). By holding their pegs, these nations avoided the financial
meltdown associated with depreciating currencies and higher debt burdens. Their techniques for
maintaining stability varied but often these nations relied upon, playing by the “rules of the
game” and cutting back on credit when gold was scarce, cooperative short-term lending or
stabilizing speculation on capital markets that would bring gold back.
At times large actors even had recourse to international cooperation relying on stop-gap
liquidity support from large financial actors or foreign central banks. The Bank of France and the
Bank of Russia offered support to the Bank of England in the midst of the Baring crisis in 1890.
Once again, in 1907, the Bank of England relied on assistance from the Bank of France and the
Reichsbank13. The US made special arrangements with the Belmont-Morgan syndicate in the
1890s and often relied on temporary suspensions of convertibility to ease liquidity problems. By
contrast, many other nations in the poor periphery hooked up to the gold standard temporarily,
and in times of duress they were incapable of securing assistance from abroad. After crises such
nations aimed to restore convertibility but were unable to return to convertibility after
suspension. In the southern cone of Latin America, the years before the crises of the 1880s and
1890s involved a large monetary expansion and increase in the price level. Return to the precrisis gold parity was often politically challenging leading to further economic uncertainty and a
slow recovery. Monetary expansions in these countries in the late 19th century were often related
to fiscal problems and not only Minskian private sector “exuberance”. Therefore, in a large
12

To deal with the potential correlation between money growth and capital inflows which might obscure the
relationship to crises, capital inflows were omitted. This did not make the coefficient on the money growth variable
become more significant. I also found that the growth of the ratio of broad money to GDP, closer to the ratio of
credit to GDP used by JST, is also not significant. Also, if I use the cumulative change in Schularick and Taylor’s
credit variable, in a much smaller sample, credit is a significant predictor of banking crises in the 1880-1913 period.
According to personal communication with Alan Taylor, credit data for a broader sample than that in Schularick and
Taylor (2012) are currently being collected. These new data will allow researchers to assess whether the credit
hypothesis holds up in a broader sample.
13
Bordo and Schwartz (1999) survey the history of international financial rescues and instances of assistance.

11

number of countries, a fundamental inability to maintain a sound banking system and balanced
fiscal position combined to create the conditions for significant financial instability.
Related to this observation, Table 3 shows that the lagged values of various crises are
significant and positive. Countries already engulfed in financial turmoil in part of one year were
likely to be racked by such perturbations in the following year providing some support for the
third generation view of crises. The discount rate in Britain is also positive and significant such
that higher interest rates, and presumably lower capital inflows, contributed to the probability of
a crisis in smaller nations. This parallels evidence on the influence of the US discount rate in
shaping the onset of the debt crisis of the 1980s and the Asian crisis of 1997.
Given the lack of high levels of statistical significance of most of the explanatory
variables included above, the lesson from the econometric models of Table 3 might be that there
are few systematic determinants of financial instability in this period14. The next section
highlights several other determinants of financial crises that are more difficult to fit into a
regression framework.
5. The Bigger Picture: What Else Explains Crises in the 19th Century?
The preceding section made use of a set of parsimonious models to understand financial
crises in the gold standard period. What other factors explain financial crises in the late 19th
century? What lessons are there to take from three decades of financial instability?
Perhaps the first lesson is one emphasized by Carmen Reinhart and Ken Rogoff. Crises
were an “equal opportunity menace” for countries of all stripes, levels of development and
financial sophistication. At some point between 1880 and 1913, virtually every country was hit
by some form of financial crisis or instability. Financial activity is risky business. The banking
systems of the late 19th century were prone to losses and most of them realized large losses at
some point. The stability of the financial sector in the face of realized losses and the spillovers
into the real economy varied by country however due to a country’s fiscal situation, its
institutional foundations, the informational environment, and exposure to global capital
markets15.
5.1 Fiscal Crises and Financial Crises
In many countries there was a fiscal undercurrent to the banking, currency and debt crises
that unfolded in 19th century. These fiscal issues came in many forms. At times there was an
inability to generate sufficient revenue to cover previous obligations. Argentina, Brazil, Egypt,
Portugal, and Turkey all fell victim to such problems at some point between 1880 and 1913. This
begs the question of who committed to such obligations and why they did so if they were able to
foresee financial catastrophe looming?

14

One might look at goodness of fit measures as in Jordà, Schularick and Taylor (2011) but since most determinants
in my models are not statistically significant individually, it is unlikely that these metrics would be very insightful.
15
Bordo, Redish and Rockoff (2011) discuss the history of Canada’s banking sector where systemic crises have
been much rarer than in the US. In the 19th century, losses of deposits in both banking systems were similar and yet
the US was much more frequently engulfed in systemic financial crises that had an impact on the real economy than
Canada was.

12

As is often the case, political forces may have played a role in exposing countries to
financial crises. In the case of Argentina in 1890, political pressures to develop the hinterland,
raise land prices and to sustain an unsustainable deficit led to a fiscal debacle (Della Paolera,
1994). Following a recovery from monetary instability in 1885, Argentina, under Roca and then
Juárez Celman, embarked upon an ambitious attempt to further consolidate political control at
the federal level. In exchange, the provinces gained many concessions including an uptick in
education spending (Elis, 2011), loan guarantees to construct railroads ensuring that local
producers could more easily access international markets, and a new banking law that allowed
for significant monetary expansion that would grease the wheels of aggregate activity. The
National Banking of Argentina system rolled out in 1888. This new system allowed 16 new
banks to be established on condition that their bank notes be backed by national government debt
which itself was supposed to be payable in gold. While this law was supposed to be modeled on
the US National Banking system, it in fact differed substantially by design. The most important
difference was the fact that bonds backing the note issues of the banks were specially issued
rather than being purchased on secondary markets as in the US. In effect, the debt was fully
monetized. A “fiesta financiera” ensued coinciding with massive capital inflows from Britain.
The government posted large deficits throughout the period and by 1890 it was unable to
honor its commitments to pay off its debts. The government also became incapable of stabilizing
the peso as locals rushed to convert paper obligations of the banks into gold. International
markets sold Argentinean bonds in a panic. The result was a sudden stop in capital inflows, a
currency crisis of epic proportions and a debt default. Baring Brothers London was heavily
exposed to Argentina and had to eventually be rescued with a lifeboat operation organized by
London banks which was guaranteed by the Bank of England
Events in Brazil in the 1890s followed a remarkably similar trajectory. They also
illustrate how deep fiscal and political problems can create massive financial meltdown. The
revolution of 1889 de-throned the Emperor creating a republic. Thereupon currency
convertibility was abandoned in 1890 and a period of monetary exuberance followed. Banking
regulations in the new republic were liberalized allowing for a number of local banks to be
established with the nominal money supply rising four-fold between 1889 and 1891. A set of
erratic and inconsistent policies was then instituted. Although gold convertibility of the currency
had been abandoned, the authorities tried to halt monetary expansion by consolidating the note
issue at the Bank of the Republic. Soon after, an outright civil war led to an increase in the
funding needs of the government and a consequent a rise in the national debt. In 1892 the Bank
of the United States of Brazil was re-chartered leading to further outbreaks of rapid monetary
expansion. As the milreis depreciated further, the burden of the foreign debt which was payable
in gold increased. By 1898 Brazil was forced into a moratorium on its debt with a radical plan to
re-vamp public finances sponsored by the Rothschilds.
Both of these examples from South America demonstrate how a weak fiscal position and
governments desperate to shore up support can tempt governments into dabbling with the
banking system. The outcome in both of these situations was what we would now call a credit
boom. These periods of exuberance (and deficits) were often accompanied by strong capital
inflows. Temporarily, their currencies held strong and asset prices remained high. Microeconomic forces sustained the booms as financial firms competed for a slice of the abnormal
returns (Flores Zendejas, 2010). Eventually expectations changed, a shock in foreign markets
13

occurred, or a real shock at home extinguished the flames of hope. Sudden stops of capital
inflows occurred in both cases and the currencies depreciated. Banks that relied on funding from
abroad became insolvent. Nations in such dire straits often chose to default on foreign currency
debt rather than smother their economies in a difficult re-adjustment via massive expenditure
reductions.
5.2 Information asymmetries
No discussion of financial markets is complete without reference to the role of
asymmetric and incomplete information. Both of these have been cited as reasons why
economies are financially fragile. Informational issues undoubtedly contributed to financial
instability in the nineteenth century in ways that are difficult to capture in an econometric
framework.
Moral hazard and adverse selection were two significant problems prior to 1913.
Investors in London, France, and Germany frequently over-estimated the ability and willingness
of sovereign and private borrowers to repay. In Australia in the late 1880s and early 1890s,
British savers appear to have been duped into thinking that their deposits in the British branches
of Australian colonial banks were as safe as they might be in banks operating primarily in the
British system. As capital poured into Australia, the seeds of a massive banking crisis were
sown. Competition in the Australian banking system between traditional trading banks and land
banks generated a massive lending spree. Building societies, mortgage banks and land
investment companies sprang up quickly propelling a full-scale property and land boom. Some
of the trading banks in Australia connected themselves to the land banks during this period.
When the financial frenzy ended, these banks were found to be insolvent.
Although the land boom had ended by 1890, and many smaller mortgage companies had
failed, the crisis had yet to run its course. Indeed British deposits in the Australian banking
system were increasing as late as 1892. In late 1892 and early 1893, the crisis found its way into
the traditional banking sector when the Federal Bank of Australia was liquidated after it
suspended payment of specie. The Commercial Bank of Australia had also invested heavily in
the land sector. When it suspended payment on its deposits in 1893, over 40 percent of its
deposits reportedly belonged to British nationals. The Australian crisis culminated with large
losses in the banking sector and a re-capitalization of the remnants of the banking system at the
behest of regulators. Some depositors also accepted a conversion of their savings into interestbearing transferable deposits which helped ease the liquidity crunch in the banking sector.
Another colorful example of informational problems is evident in the Comptoir
d’Escompte crisis of 1889 in France. Several years earlier, a group of leading French financiers
and other financial institutions including the Comptoir d’Escompte, Paribas and the Rothschilds
formed a syndicate with the intention of cornering the global market in copper. As copper prices
rose, the inevitable temptation to cheat on production targets (i.e., moral hazard) played itself out
and new sources of supply came online. The copper price crashed in early 1889. In March 1889
the president of the Comptoir d’Escompte, Denfert-Rochereau committed suicide sparking a run
on his bank. The Bank of France was asked to respond with an enormous loan to keep the bank
afloat16. A contentious debate within the general council of the Bank of France preceded this
16

What follows was greatly informed by Hautcoeur, Riva, and White (2012).

14

bailout. Opponents suspected conflicts of interest amongst voting members on the Bank of
France governing council who also had participated in the copper corner. Eventually however,
the loan was approved, and although tough conditionality was meant to be imposed, political
battles prevented this conditionality. In the end, of a number of the leading financiers in the
copper syndicate faced criminal and financial penalties, while directors of the institutions
involved and a board member of the Bank of France were forced to resign (Hautcoeur, Riva,
White, 2012). The lack of either government or market-based discipline in the run-up to the
crisis suggests that informational problems were rife even in the largest financial centers.
A succession of 19th century crises also reveals the potential for moral hazard. In Italy
and in the 1890s a land boom combined with implicit government guarantees which eventually
generated large financial losses. The Baring Crisis itself was underpinned by government
guarantees of interest on railway bonds and assumption of currency risk by the government.
While deposit insurance and other implicit government or international guarantees had yet to be
developed in the early 19th century, moral hazard was certainly already a factor.

5.3 Contagion
Since the resurgence of international capital flows in the 1970s, the world has suffered at
least three international crises: the Latin American debt meltdown, the Asian financial crisis, and
the sub-prime crisis. It has been argued that greater financial integration could make financial
turbulence spillover directly into other markets that were otherwise not posed for a crisis. A
handful of economic history papers have looked for a similar dynamic in the classical gold
standard era. Neal and Weidenmier (2003) and Bordo and Murshid (2001) investigated increased
co-movement in 19th century financial markets around the time of financial crises. Statistical
tests along the lines of Forbes and Rigobon (2002) found that it was difficult to reject the
hypothesis of no increase in financial markets co-movement after accounting for the higher
volatility of crisis periods. In other words contagion, and even increased co-movement, may have
been a statistical mirage.
Still, anecdotal evidence in Neal and Weidenmeir (2003) and Odell and Weidenmier
(2004) is suggestive that the global crisis of 1907 was transmitted to third countries via
international money markets. Specifically, insurance claims associated with the San Francisco
earthquake of 1906 sparked intense demand for gold in London. The Bank of England was then
forced to raise its discount rate to avoid gold outflows. Later in 1907, a banking panic erupted in
New York in connection with the Trust companies of New York17. Before the crisis abated,
financial tremors had been felt throughout the world’s financial markets from Denmark and
France all the way to Egypt and Chile. Kris Mitchener and Marc Weidenmier (2008) also found
evidence of contagion in sovereign bond markets. They studied a sample of Latin American
bond yields and found a sell-off of Latin American assets following the outbreak in Argentina of
the 1890 Baring crisis as if global capital markets shunned geographically proximate emerging
markets.

17

The Trust companies, most notably the Knickerbocker in New York City, were identified with a mis-guided
attempt to corner shares in the United Copper Company.

15

As this brief survey highlights, the causes of financial crises were varied and interacted
with other shocks to the global economy and to local economies. While some leading
determinants can be highlighted, there was a large idiosyncratic component to the financial
debacles of the nineteenth century.

6. Conclusions
What conclusions can be drawn from this brief survey of financial crises during the
classical gold standard period? First, crises were ubiquitous events in the period of globalization
that preceded World War I. Could it be that globalization was a primary cause of these crises?
Indeed there seems to be some evidence that capital inflows sowed the seeds of banking,
currency and debt crises. These inflows then interacted with other weaknesses creating financial
fragility or a heightened potential for a crisis. An alternative possibility is that high levels of
credit growth fueled unsustainable asset booms raising the potential for crises. There seems to be
very little strong evidence that between 1880 and 1913 credit or money growth was a good
predictor of financial turmoil across countries in my sample.
Beyond credit and capital inflows, many crises had their origins in local deficiencies.
Real and financial shocks mattered too and international events played a large role. Whatever
their root causes, there is substantial evidence that a “third generation” view of how crises unfold
can help inform our understanding of crises in the 19th century. Expectations, capital market
frictions and capital flows combine to create the possibility for the trio of problems
encompassing bank failures, currency depreciation and debt defaults. Argentina and Brazil fell
victim to this kind of problem in the 19th century but so did Portugal, Greece, and Italy. Others
might have fallen victim to these crises but were able to short-circuit total meltdown through
effective policy responses.
Should we view the past differently in light of the Subprime crisis that broke out in 2007
and 2008? As various observers have pointed out, one of the key drivers of the crisis and panic
on Wall Street was severe informational problems. However, the shadow banking system
appears to have been rendered financially fragile due to major regulatory failures that allowed
risks to be hidden off balance sheet and for unregulated insurance companies like AIG to buildup mammoth positions in derivatives markets. All of this suggests that it is very useful to
understand the micro-structure of financial markets and the role of intermediaries in order to
make sense of a financial crisis (Adrian and Shin, 2008). This lesson holds for the 19th century.
Other commentators have also emphasized the role of moral hazard in the recent crisis.
This review suggests that guarantees and implicit commitments to bailouts have long existed. An
important avenue of research is better understanding the political determinants of moral hazard
in the financial sector.
At the macro level, excessive credit growth and capital inflows or imbalances were
implicated in the recent crisis. In fact, the relationship between capital inflows to the US,
coincident global imbalances, and the recent crisis is rather circumstantial. Some have claimed
that capital inflows and ultra-low global interest rates led New York banks to reach for yield
16

through sub-prime mortgages. However, central bank policy and regulatory failure undoubtedly
played key supporting roles.
A final thought concerns the persistence of crises. We have seen that crises were an
important phenomenon throughout the classical gold standard period and few countries were
spared. Many countries had multiple events within the 34 year period studied. The question then
is why do not countries learn to avoid crises? As a matter of fact, these observations obscure
significant differences between countries. Some nations had repeated episodes of crises with
similar causes and effects. The US had a series of banking crises throughout this period due to its
peculiar banking system. The 1880s and 1890s were very unstable for many Latin American
countries. Others had multiple crises but with very different causes. Future research should aim
to show whether and why some countries “learn” from financial crises and whether such learning
is permanent. The aim here will be to understand what the determinants of learning are so that
crises that raise economic volatility and bring welfare losses might not have to endlessly repeat
themselves especially in emerging economies where development prospects are often so fragile.

References:
ADRIAN, Tobias and SHIN, Hyung Song (2008): “Financial Intermediaries, Financial Stability and
Monetary Policy” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 2008 Jackson Hole Economic Symposium
Proceedings.
AGUIAR, Mark and GOPINATH, Gita (2007): “Emerging Market Business Cycles: The Cycle is the
Trend”, Journal of Political Economy, 115, nº1, pp. 69-102.
BARRO, Robert J. and URSÚA, José F. (2008): “Macroeconomic Crises since 1870”, Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity, spring, pp. 255-335.
BEIM, David O. and CALOMIRIS, C.W. (2001): “Emerging Financial Markets”, MacGraw-Hill, New
York.

BORDO, Michael D. (2003): “The Globalization of International Financial Markets: What Can
History Teach Us?”, in AUERENHEIMER, Leonardo (ed.): International Financial Markets:
The Challenge of Globalization, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 29-78.
BORDO, Michael D., CAVALLO, Alberto, and MEISSNER, Christopher M. (2010): “Sudden
Stops: Determinants and Output Effects in the First Era of Globalization, 1880-1913”, Journal of
Development Economics, 91, nº2, pp. 227-241.
BORDO, Michael D., EICHENGREEN, Barry, KLINGEBIEL, Daniela and MARTINEZ-PERIA, Maria
Soledad (2001): “Is the Crisis Problem Growing More Severe?”, Economic Policy, 16 nº 32, pp. 53-82.
BORDO, Michael D., MEISSNER, Christopher M. (2007): “Financial Crises, 1880-1913: The Role of
Foreign Currency Debt” in EDWARDS, Sebastian, ESQUIVEL, Gerardo y MARQUEZ, Graciela (eds.):
17

The Decline of Latin American Economies: Growth, Institutions, and Crises, University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, pp. 139-194.
BORDO, Michael D. and MEISSNER.Christopher. M. (2011): “Foreign Capital, Financial Crises and
Incomes in the First Era of Globalization”, European Review of Economic History, 15, nº1, pp. 61-91.
BORDO, Michael D., MEISSNER, Christopher M., and STUCKLER, David (2010): “Foreign Capital
and Economic Growth: A Long-Run Comparative Perspective”, Journal of International Money and
Finance, 29, nº 4, pp. 642-665.
BORDO, Michael D. and MURSHID, Antu (2001): “Are Financial Crises Becoming More Contagious?
What is the Historical Evidence on Contagion?” in Claessens, Stijn and Forbes, Kirsten (eds.):
International Financial Contagion, Kluwer, Norwell, Mass., pp. 367-406.
BORDO, Michael D., REDISH, Angela, and ROCKOFF, Hugh (2011): “Why didn't Canada have a
banking crisis in 2008 (or in 1930, or 1907, or ...)?”, NBER working paper nº 17312.
BORDO, Michael D. and SCHWARTZ, Anna J. (1999): “Under what circumstances, past and present,
have international rescues of countries in financial distress been successful?”, Journal of International
Money and Finance, 18, pp. 683-708.
BORENSZTEIN, Eduardo and PANIZZA, Ugo (2008): “The Costs of Sovereign Default” IMF working
paper WP/08/238.
BORIO, Claudio and WHITE, William W. (2003): “Whither monetary and financial stability? The
implications of evolving policy regimes”, in: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City: Monetary Policy and
Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy: A Symposium. Kansas City, MO pp. 131-211.
BUYST, Erik, MAES, Ivo (2007): “Central Banking in 19th century Belgium: Was the NBB a Lender of
Last Resort?”, in Oesterreichische Nationalbank Proceedings of the Second Conference of the SouthEastern European Monetary History Network.
CALOMIRIS, Charles W. and HUBBARD, R. Glen (1989): “Price Flexibility, Credit availability and
Economic Fluctuations: Evidence from the United States, 1894-1909”, The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 104, nº3, pp. 429-452.
CALVO, Guillermo., IZQUIERDO, Alejandro, and MEJÍA, L. (2004): “On the Empirics of Sudden
Stops: The Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
Series No. 10520.
COMIN, Franciso (2012): “Default, rescheduling and inflation. Debt crisis in Spain during the 19th and
20th centuries” Working paper 12-06 Departamento de Historia Económica e Instituciones ,Universidad
Carlos III de Madrid.
DAVIS, Joseph H., HANES, Christopher, and RHODE, Paul W. (2009): “Harvests and Business Cycles
in Nineteenth-Century America,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, nº4, pp. 1675-1727.

18

DIAMOND, Douglas and DYBVIG, Philip (1983): “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity”,
Journal of Political Economy, 91, nº 3, pp. 401-419.
DELLA PAOLERA, Gerardo (1994): “Experimentos monetarios y bancarios en Argentina: 1861–1930”,
Revista de Historia Económica, 12, nº 3, pp. 539- 590.
EICHENGREEN, Barry. and FLANDREAU, Marc (1997): “Editor’s Introduction” in EICHENGREEN,
Barry. and FLANDREAU, Marc. (eds.): The Gold Standard in Theory and History, Routledge: London,
pp. 1-30.
ELIS, Roy (2011): “Redistribution under Oligarchy: Trade, Regional Inequality, and the Origins of Public
Schooling in Argentina, 1862-1912”, mimeo Stanford University Political Science Dept.
FORBES, Kristin and RIGOBON, Roberto (2002): “No Contagion, Only Interdependence: Measuring
Stock Market Comovements”, The Journal of Finance, 57, nº5 pp. 2223-2261.
FLOOD, Robert P. and GARBER, Peter (1984): “Collapsing exchange-rate regimes: Some linear
examples”, Journal of International Economics, 17, nº 1-2, pp. 1-13.
FLORES ZENDEJAS, Juan H. (2010): “Competition in the Underwriting Markets of Sovereign Debt:
The Baring Crisis revisited”, Law and Contemporary Problems, 73, nº 4, pp. 129-150.
GOETZMANN, William N. and UKHOV, Andrey D. (2006): “British Investment Overseas 1870-1913:
A Modern Portfolio Theory Approach”, Review of Finance, 2006, 10, nº 2, pp. 261-300.
HAUTCOEUR, Pierre-Cyrille, RIVA, Angelo and WHITE, Eugene (2011): “Bagehot on the Continent?
How the Banque de France Managed the Crisis of 1889”, mimeo Paris School of Economics.
JORDA, Oscar, SCHULARICK, Moritz, and TAYLOR, Alan M. (2011): “Financial Crises, Credit
Booms and External Imbalances: 140 Years of Lessons”, IMF Economic Review, 59, nº 2, pp. 340-378.
KINDLEBERGER, Charles P. (2005): Manias, Panics and Crashes: A history of Financial Crises. 5th
Edition. Wiley, New York.
KRUGMAN, Paul (1979): “A Model of Balance of Payments Crises”, Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking, 11, nº3, pp. 311-325.
KRUGMAN, Paul (1999): “Balance Sheets, the Transfer Problem, and Financial Crises”, International
Tax and Public Finance, 6, nº3, pp. 459-472.

MEISSNER, Christopher M. (2005): “New World Order: Explaining the International Diffusion
of the Gold Standard, 1870-1913”, Journal of International Economics, 66, pp. 385-406.
MITCHENER, Kris James, and WEIDENMIER, Marc D. (2008): “The Baring Crisis and the Great Latin
American Meltdown of the 1890s”, The Journal of Economic History, 68, 02, pp. 462-500.
NEAL, Larry and WEIDENMIER, Marc (2003): “Crises in the Global Economy from Tulips to Today”
in Bordo, Michael D., Taylor, Alan. M. and Williamson, Jeffrey G. (eds): Globalization in Historical
Perspective. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 473-514.
19

OBSTFELD, Maurice (1986): “Rational and Self-Fulfilling Balance of Payments Crises”, American
Economic Review, 76, nº1, pp. 72-81.

OBSTFELD, Maurice and TAYLOR, Alan M. (2005): Globalization and Capital Markets:
Integration, Crisis, and Growth. Cambridge University Press, New York.
ODELL, Kerry and WEIDENMIER, Marc (2004): “Real Shock, Monetary Aftershock: The 1906 San
Francisco Earthquake and the Panic of 1907”, Journal of Economic History, 64, nº pp. 1002-1027.

POWELL, Andrew, TAVELLA, Pilar (2012): “Capital Inflow Surges in Emerging Economies:
How Worried Should LAC Be?”, IDB working paper 326, Washington, D.C.
REINHART, Carmen and REINHART, Vincent (2008): “Capital Flow Bonanzas: An
Encompassing View of the Past and Present,” in FRANKEL, Jeffrey and PISSARIDES,
Christopher. (eds.): NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2008, University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 9-62.
REINHART, Carmen and ROGOFF, Kenneth (2009): This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of
Financial Folly. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
REINHART, Carmen, ROGOFF, Kenneth, and SAVASTANO, Miguel (2003): “Debt
Intolerance”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity ,1, pp. 1-74.
SCHULARICK, Moritz. and STEGER, Thomas. M. (2010): “Financial Integration, Investment, and
Economic Growth: Evidence from Two Eras of Financial Globalization”, Review of Economics and
Statistics, 92, nº 4, pp. 756-768.

SCHULARICK, Moritz, TAYLOR Alan M. (2012): “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary
Policy, Leverage Cycles and Financial Crises, 1870–2008”, American Economic Review, 102, nº
2, pp. 1029-1061.
STONE, Irving (1999): The Global Export of Capital from Great Britain, 1865-1914. StMartin’s Press, New York.
TATTARA, Giuseppe (2003): “Paper Money but a Gold Debt: Italy on the gold Standard”,
Explorations in Economic History, 40, nº 2, pp. 122-142.
TAYLOR, Alan M. (2012): “The Great Leveraging”, NBER working paper 18290.
TAYLOR, Alan. M. (2002): “A Century of Current Account Dynamics”, Journal of International Money
and Finance, 21, pp. 725–48.

20

Figure 1 Growth Rate of Output Per Capita by Quintile

Growth Rate of GDP per capita

2.4
2.2
2

Sample average = 1.7%

1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
1st quintile

2nd quintile

3rd quintile

4th quintile

5th quntile

Notes: Quintiles are defined for a sample of 10 countries and are based on the ranking in the average ratio of capital
calls on London (see text) relative to local GDP. The within country average is taken over the period 1880-1913.
GDP per capita data are from Barro and Ursúa (2009).

Figure 2 Growth Rate of Consumption per Capita by Quintile
2

Grwoth Rate of cConsumption per capita

1.8
1.6

Sample average = 1.3%

1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1st quintile

2nd quintile

3rd quintile

Notes: See notes for Figure 1.

21

4th quintile

5th quntile

Figure 3 Investment/GDP by Quintile
18

Investment/GDP

17

Sample average = 15.3%
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
1st quintile

2nd quintile

3rd quintile

4th quintile

5th quntile

Notes: See notes to Figure 1 and text.

Figure 4 Standard Deviation of the Growth Rate of Output per capita by Quintile

Std. Deviation of Growth Rate of GDP/capita

8

7

6

5

4

3

2
1st quintile

2nd quintile

3rd quintile

Notes: See notes to Figures 1 and 2.

22

4th quintile

5th quntile

Figure 5 Standard Deviation of the Growth Rate of Consumption per capita by Quintile

Std. Deviation of Growth
Rate of Consumption/capita

9.5

8.5

7.5

6.5

5.5

4.5

3.5

2.5
1st quintile

2nd quintile

3rd quintile

Notes: See notes to Figures 1 and 2.

23

4th quintile

5th quntile

Figure 6 Average Output per Capita Before and after Crisis Events
Panel B

105

Panel A

104
103

102

101

Actual Output

99

Pre-crisis trend

Actual Output
Pre-crisis trend

100

97

98

95

96

93

94
91

92
89

90

87

88

85
-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

Years before/after crisis

Years before/after crisis

Panel C

Panel D

110
108

Actual Output
104

Actual Output

106

Pre-crisis trend

Pre-crisis trend

102

104
102

100

100
98

98
96

96

94
94

92
92
-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

90
-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

Years before/after crisis

Years before/after crisis

Notes: Panels are A) All crises, B) Banking crises, C) Currency Crises, D) Debt crises. Actual output is an average of the Barro-Ursúa per capita
output index for all countries that had a crisis of the specified variety. The trends are calculated as the average growth rate of these same countries
from the fifth year before the crisis until the second year before the crisis.

24

Figure 7 Average Consumption per capita before and after crises
Actual Output

Actual Output

Pre-crisis trend

Pre-crisis trend

105

Panel A

Panel B

103

104

101

102

99

100

97

98

95

96

93

94
91

92

89

90

87
85
-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

88
-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

0

1

2

3

4

5

Years before/after crisis

Years before/after crisis

Actual Output

-1

Pre-crisis trend

Actual Output

Pre-crisis trend

105

Panel C

Panel D

104

100

102
100

95

98
96

90

94
85

92
90

80
-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

Years before/after crisis

Years before/after crisis

Notes: Panels are for A) All crises, B) Banking crises, C) Currency Crises, D) Debt crises. Actual output is an average of the Barro-Ursúa per capita
output index for all countries that had a crisis of the specified variety. The trends are calculated as the average growth rate of these same countries
from the fifth year before the crisis until the second year before the crisis.

25

Figure 8 Average Ratio of Investment to GDP before and after crises
Panel B

Panel A

Actual Output

Actual Output

Pre-crisis average

Pre-crisis average

0.18

0.2

0.175
0.19
0.17
0.18
0.165
0.16

0.17

0.155
0.16
0.15
0.15
0.145
0.14

0.14
-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

Actual Output

0

1

2

3

4

5

Years before/after crisis

Years before/after crisis

Panel C

-1

Panel D

Pre-crisis average

Average Investment/GDP

Pre-crisis average

0.22

0.15
0.14

0.21

0.13
0.2

0.12
0.11

0.19

0.1
0.18

0.09
0.08

0.17

0.07
0.16

0.06
0.15
-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

0.05
-6

Years before/after crisis

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

Years before/after crisis

Notes: Panels A) All crises, B) Banking crises, C) Currency Crises, D) Debt crises. The averages are calculated as the average investment rate
for these same countries from the fifth year before the crisis until the second year before the crisis.

26

Figure 9 Crises and Booms for 14 Countries, 1880-1913
9

80

8

70

7
60
6

5
40
4
30
3
20
2
10

1

0

0
1880

1882

1884

1886

1888

1890

1892

1894

1896 1898
Year

Debt Crisis-Number of Countries
Currency Crisis-Number of Countries
Share of Countries in Capital Inflow Boom

1900

1902

1904

1906

1908

1910

Twin Crisis-Number of Countries
Banking Crisis-Number of Countries
Share of countries in a Monetary Boom

Notes: Data are for 14 countries with complete time series for money growth and capital inflows.

27

1912

Share

Number

50

Figure 10 Frequency of Banking Crises Conditional on an Inflow and Money Boom

Notes: See the text for definition of a money or inflow boom. Conditional frequencies are given by the number of
years in which a crisis occurs given there has been an inflow or money boom in the preceding or following three
years divided by the number of years in which there has been a boom in the preceding or following three years. No
bar indicates no crises.

28

Figure 11 Frequency of Currency Crises Conditional on an Inflow or Money Boom

Notes: See notes to Figure 10.

29

Figure 12 Frequency of Any Kind of Crisis Conditional on an Inflow or Money Boom

Notes: Any crisis is defined as a banking crisis, currency crisis, twin crisis (both banking and currency) or a debt
crisis. See also notes to Figure 10.

30

Table 1 Dates of Financial Crises, 1880-1913
Country
Argentina
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Austria
Austria
Belgium
Brazil
Brazil
Brazil
Brazil
Brazil
Chile
Chile
Chile
Denmark
Denmark
Egypt
Finland
France
France
France
Germany

Banking Crisis
1890
1891
1893
1882
1883
1884
1885
1890
1891
1897
1900
1901
1889
1898
1907
1885
1907
1907
1900
1882
1889
1907
1901

Country
Italy
Italy
Italy
Japan
Japan
Mexico
Mexico
Mexico
Mexico
Netherlands
New Zealand
New Zealand
New Zealand
Portugal
Sweden
Sweden
Turkey
UK
USA
USA
USA
Uruguay

Banking Crisis
1891
1893
1907
1901
1907
1884
1885
1907
1908
1897
1893
1894
1895
1891
1897
1907
1895
1890
1884
1893
1907
1913

Country
Argentina
Argentina
Argentina
Brazil
Brazil
Canada
Canada
Canada
Chile
Chile
Chile
Egypt
France
Germany
Country
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Greece
Italy
Mexico
Portugal

Currency Crisis
1885
1890
1908
1889
1898
1891
1893
1908
1887
1889
1898
1900
1888
1893
Sovereign Debt
Crisis
1890
1898
1880
1894
1894
1880
1892

Country
Germany
Greece
India
Italy
Italy
Japan
Japan
Japan
New Zealand
Portugal
Russia
Turkey
Turkey
USA
Country
Russia
Spain
Spain
Turkey
Uruguay

Currency Crisis
1907
1885
1891
1894
1908
1900
1904
1908
1903
1891
1891
1886
1903
1891
Sovereign Debt
Crisis
1885
1882
1900
1880
1891

Notes: Sources for these dates are data Underlying Bordo, Eichengreen, Klingebiel, and Martínez-Peria (2001), Beim and Calomiris (2001) and Reinhart, Rogoff
and Savastano (2003). The crisis in Belgium was not dated by BEKM but was highlighted by Buyst and Maes (2007). The debt default in Italy (1894) was
discussed in Tattara (2003) and Spain (1900) in Comín (2012).

31

Table 2 Dates of Capital Inflow Booms and Money Booms 1880-1913
Country
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Brazil
Canada
Chile
Denmark
Egypt
France
Germany
Greece
India
Italy
Japan
Mexico
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Russia
Spain
Sweden
Turkey
USA
Uruguay

Capital Inflow Booms
1883-84, 1886-90
1880, 1883-87, 1895
1881, 1890, 1895-96, 1910-11, 1913
1883, 1886, 1888, 1910-13
1885, 1888, 1908-10, 1912, 1913
1888-89, 1895-96, 1907, 1911-1912
1881, 1883, 1899, 1901, 1908, 1910, 1912
1881, 1885, 1899, 1904, 1905-07
1881-82, 1887, 1891-92, 1896-97
1881-83, 1888, 1891, 1897, 1901
1881, 1885, 1887, 1889-90 1898, 1910
1881-82, 1887, 1897-98, 1900, 1908
1881-82, 1885, 1887-89, 1891
1897, 1899, 1903-06, 1909
1882, 1888-89, 1894, 1909-10, 1913
1880, 1883-86, 1888, 1895
1880, 1886-87, 1900, 1909, 1911, 1913
1880-81, 1884-85, 1889, 1890, 1894
1890, 1906, 1909-13
1880, 1883-84, 1888-89, 1890, 1897
1881, 1886, 1888, 18889, 1900, 1908-09
1888-89, 1891, 1894-95, 1909-10
1880-82, 1887, 1889, 1890, 1913
1883, 1887-91, 1896

Country
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Brazil
Canada
Denmark
Egypt
Finland
France
Germany
India
Italy
Japan
Mexico
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
UK
USA
Uruguay

Money Booms
1886, 1888, 1899, 1903-04, 1908
1881, 1887, 1894-95, 1909-10, 1913
1881, 1887, 1892, 1895, 1900, 1906, 1910
1894 ,1896-97, 1904-05, 1908, 1913
1884, 1887, 1890, 1901, 1905, 1909-10
1888, 1894, 1897, 1899, 1905-06, 1909
1886-87, 1893-94, 1895, 1901
1904-06
1882, 1886, 1888, 1893-96
1887-88, 1892-93, 1903-04, 1907
1884, 1886, 1894-95, 1902, 1904, 1908
1885, 1887, 1890, 1894, 1898, 1905, 1909
1881, 1884, 1886, 1899, 1905, 1908-09
1890, 1893, 1895, 1899, 1902, 1904-05
1902, 1906
1886, 1892, 1894-95, 1897, 1905, 1908
1881-82, 1895, 1905-07, 1910
1884-85, 1890, 1901-02, 1907, 1909
1883, 1886-89, 1895, 1910
1883-1885, 1891, 1896, 1898, 1909
1883-85, 1893, 1899, 1900-01
1884-85, 1896, 1902, 1905, 1906, 1909
1881, 1884-85, 1894-96, 1899
1881, 1883, 1898, 1899, 1901, 1905, 1909
1902, 1908, 1911

Notes: Capital inflow booms are defined as ratios of capital calls on London to GDP above the within country 80th percentile between 1880-1913. Money booms
are defined as growth in the real money supply above the 80th percentile within a country between 1880 and 1913.

32

Table 3 Capital Inflow Booms and Money Booms as Determinants of Banking, Currency and “All” types of Financial Crises
Currency
Crisis
0.75
[0.534]
0.24
[0.638]
0.22
[0.495]
-0.84
[0.816]
0.25
[0.385]
0.36
[0.504]
0.75
[0.534]
---

Banking
Crisis
-0.53
[0.527]
1.07***
[0.404]
0.35
[0.444]
-0.36
[0.435]
0.63
[0.433]
0.12
[0.351]
-0.53
[0.527]
---

-0.23
[0.317]
0.70*
[0.404]
0.32
[0.381]
-0.67
[0.419]
0.35
[0.273]
0.27
[0.290]
-0.23
[0.317]
---

Currency
Crisis
0.96
[0.651]
0.24
[0.750]
-0.1
[0.545]
-0.68
[0.780]
0.23
[0.430]
0.09
[0.591]
0.96
[0.651]
---

Banking
Crisis
-0.51
[0.573]
1.09***
[0.386]
0.07
[0.538]
-0.14
[0.447]
0.72*
[0.398]
-0.23
[0.368]
-0.51
[0.573]
---

Growth (M/P) t-1

---

---

---

---

---

---

Foreign Currency Debt/Total Debt

---

---

---

Gold Standard dummy

---

---

---

GB discount rate

---

---

---

Banking Crisis t-1

---

---

---

-0.3
[0.720]
-0.16
[0.596]
0.87**
[0.347]
1.23
[0.832]

Currency Crisis t-1

---

---

---

0.77
0.77
486

0.27
0.63
486

0.22
0.92
486

0.41
[0.483]
-0.09
[0.664]
0.67*
[0.403]
1.62*
[0.893]
1.36**
[0.556]
0.32
0.65
486

0.43
[0.437]
-0.55
[0.549]
0.39
[0.360]
1.82***
[0.566]
1.67***
[0.480]
0.28
0.93
486

Inflow Boom t-1
Inflow Boom t-2
Inflow Boom t-3
Money/Credit Boom t
Money/Credit Boom t-1
Money/Credit Boom t-2
Money/Credit Boom t-3
Capital Inflows/GDP t-1

p-value test sum of Inflow Boom = 0
p-value test sum of Money Boom = 0
Observations

All Crises

0.10
0.69
486

All Crises
-0.09
[0.395]
0.69
[0.424]
0.04
[0.422]
-0.55
[0.399]
0.47*
[0.276]
0.13
[0.333]
-0.09
[0.395]
---

Currency
Crisis
---

Banking
Crisis
---

All
Crises
---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

0.11***
[0.025]
-0.89
[1.972]
-0.83
[0.737]
0.12
[0.644]
0.87***
[0.334]
1.21
[0.860]

0.08**
[0.034]
0.5
[0.862]
0.03
[0.575]
0.04
[0.667]
0.70**
[0.349]
1.61**
[0.752]
1.53**
[0.618]
----486

0.05
[0.033]
-0.59
[1.089]
0.24
[0.506]
-0.48
[0.544]
0.43
[0.347]
1.78***
[0.494]
1.71***
[0.513]
----486

----486

Notes: Coefficients are estimated by maximum likelihood in a series of logit models. Robust standard errors are in brackets.

33

