NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TARGETING RULES FOR MONETARY POLICY

Joshua Aizenman

Jacob A. Frenkel

Working Paper No. 1881

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1986

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1881
April 1986

Targeting Rules for Monetary Policy

ABSTRACT

This paper develops an analytical framework for the analysis of

targeting rules for monetary policy. We derive the optimal money supply rule
and analyze the implications of other monetary rules including rules that
target nominal GNP, the price level, the monetary growth rate and the interest

rate. An explicit welfare criterion is used in order to rank the alternative
rules. In the model monetary policy is needed because labor market contracts
set nominal wages in advance of the realization of the stochastic shocks. The
principal result is that the welfare ranking of alternative targeting rules
depends on whether the elasticity of labor demand exceeds or falls short of

the elasticity of labor supply. Specifically, it is shown that if the demand
for labor is more elastic than the supply, then targeting nominal GNP produces
a smaller welfare loss than targeting the CPI which in turn produces a smaller
welfare loss than interest-rate targeting.

Joshua Aizenman
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 E. 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
(312)962—7260

Jacob A. Frenkel
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street

Chicago, IL 60637
(312)962—8253

This paper develops an analytical framework for the analysis of targeting rules

for monetary policy. We derive the optimal money—supply rule and analyze the implications of other rules governing the money supply process including the rules that
target nominal GNP, the price level, the monetary growth rate and the interest rate.
We use an explicit welfare criterion which permits ranking of the alternative rules.
In our model, as in Fischer (1977), the need for monetary policy arises from the
existence of labor market contracts which set nominal wages in advance of the reali—

zation of the stochastic shocks. We show that if the demand for labor is more elastic than the supply, then targeting nominal GNP produces a smaller welfare loss than
targeting the CPI which in turn produces a smaller welfare loss than interest—rate

targeting. We also explore the conditions under which a constant money—growth rule
produces larger or smaller welfare losses than the nominal GNP targeting rule.

I. The Model
Output is assumed to be produced by a Cobb—Douglas production function using

labor as the variable input. Hence, for period t,

(1)

log

where

=

log

B +

log Lt +

,

0 <

< 1,

denotes output, Lt denotes labor input, B denotes a fixed parameter and

denotes a stochastic i.i.d. productivity shock assumed to be distributed normally

with a fixed known variance a2. In the subsequent analysis we suppress the time
subscript and use lower—case letters to denote percentage discrepancies of a variable
from the value obtained in the absence of shocks.. Accordingly, equation (1) can be
rewritten as

(1')

y =

+

2

where y and Z denote the percentage deviations of output and employment from their
corresponding non-stochastic levels. It is assumed that due to cost of negotiations
nominal wages are set in advance at their expected market clearing level, and employ—
inent is determined by the demand for labor. Profit maximization along with the
assumption that producers satisfy their demand for labor yields

y =

(2)

where

[(p—w)

1/(1—)

r =

+

is the elasticity of labor demand (defined to be positive) and

where p and w denote, respectively, the product price and the nominal wage rate
(all measured as a percentage deviations from their non—stochastic levels).
This specification reflects the assumption that

9..

and thereby y are

determined exclusively by the demand for labor rather than by the interaction between

the demand and the supply. As a result actual employment and output may not be
optimal. We evaluate the various rules for monetary policies in terms of their
impact on the expected welfare loss arising from sub-optimal output. As a benchmark
we first determine the undistorted equilibrium.
Let the supply of labor (measured in percentage deviations) be

(3)

9.5 =

c(w—p)

where c denotes the elasticity of labor supply. Substituting (3) for 9.. in (1')
yields the value of y consistent with the supply of labor; equating it with the value
of y that is consistent with the demand for labor (eq. 2) yields the equilibrium
level of output, y (measured in terms of deviations):

—

()

(1+c)ri

11.

3

Equilibrium

output, y, may not coincide with realized output, y. The latter is de-

termined by the contractual nominal wage and by the realized price. The difference
between the two inflicts welfare loss which is proportional to the squared discre-

pancy [see Aizenman and Frenkel (1985)J. Thus, the expected welfare loss, H, is

H

(5)

cE[yyJ2

where c is a positive proportionality factor.

Money—market equilibrium requires that the supply of money, m, equals the
demand:

(6)

m

k + p +

y—

ia).

In equation (6), 1 denotes the nominal rate of interest, 10 denotes the nominal

interest rate in the absence of shocks, k denotes a stochastic com—ponent of money
demand which is distributed normally and independently with zero mean and a fixed

known variance a, denotes the income elasticity of the demand for money and cz
denotes the interest rate semi—elasticity of money demand. The real rate of interest
also contains a stochastic component, p, which is distributed normally and independ-

ently with zero mean and a fixed known variance a2. It can be shown1 that the specification of the stochastic shocks Imply that i—i0 =

p—p

and, therefore, equation

(6) can be written as:

(6')

II.

m =

k + (1+a)p

+

y—

Active Money-Supply Rules

In this section we analyze the welfare implications of alternative active
money—supply rules starting with a determination of the optimal rule.

'4

11.1 The Optimal Money—Supply Rule
The optimal money—supply rule aims at eliminating the welfare loss. As seen
from equation (5), the welfare loss is eliminated only if y =

y.

Since nominal wages

are assumed given by wage contracts, the equilibrium price p must generate an
output level, y, equal to the optimal output, y. Equating y (from equation (2)) to y
(from equation ('4) yields

(7)

p=—----ii

Using equations (14) and (7') in (6') yields n as the optimal money—supply rule

in =

(8)

k

—

+

[(1c)

—

(1+CL)]fl

C+ fl

Equation (8) also shows that the optimal monetary rule requires a complete accommoda-

tion to money—demand shocks. As is evident in the special case for which

and

=

= c = 0

1, monetary policy should not respond to real shocks. This case corresponds

to the one examined by Fischer (1985).

The optimal monetary rule can also be expressed in terms of the observable

variables p and y. Since at the optimum in — k

=

(1+ct) p + y—ap, it can be shown2

from (7), (8) and (6') that

(9)

cp+ (p+y) =0.

Thus, a monetary rule that targets the sum of (p+y) +

p

to zero, eliminates the

welfare loss. Equation (9) also reveals that in the special case for which c=O, a
nominal GNP targeting rule is optimal; likewise, in the special case for which y = 0
(.i.e., in the absence of real shocks), a price level targeting rule is also optimal.

5

11.2 Nominal GNP Targeting
The preceding discussion specified the optimal money—supply rule. Suppose
alternatively that the monetary authority targets nominal GNP.3 With this rule
p÷y=O. Using equation (2) and recalling that w=O, the realized price is —.i and,

p. Using the loss function (5) and the expression for y from

correspondingly, y

(14), the welfare loss associated with this targeting rule is

_rE

2

H

(ivi

p+y=O

2

a

p

c+ii

where the notation indicates that this loss results from the stabilization of nominal
income and where a =

11.3 CPI Targeting
With CPI targeting p=O. In that case the value of the loss function (5)
becomes

2
(11)

H

=

p=Q

a(—--)
cn

a2
p

11.14 Interest—Rate Targeting

With interest—rate targeting monetary policy assures that 1=10. Equivalently,
since i—i0

p—p,, this targeting rule sets p=p. In this case y = n(Bp+p) and the

loss function (5) becomes

(12)

= a a2 +

HI0

6

III. Ranking the Targeting Rules
A comparison of (11) and (12) shows that price targeting produces a smaller
welfare loss than interest-rate targeting (they are equivalent only in the case in

which there are no interest—rate shocks). A comparison between the welfare cost
associated with these rules and the cost Induced by nominal GNP targeting (equation

(10)) shows that the ranking depends on whether n exceeds or falls short of
If il>c

then

m =

(13)

rn p +

y =

Op

=

Oi

10

where the symbol x. z indicates that x produces a smaller welfare loss than or is
equivalent to z. On the other hand if

ri <

then price targeting produces a

smaller welfare loss than both nominal GNP and interest-rate targeting. Nominal GNP
targeting in turn produces a smaller welfare loss than interest—rate targeting if
p

IV.

> (e'-Tl)/(c+fl) and vice versa.
i.i

A Constant Money—Growth Rule
In sections II and III we analyzed the implications of alternative targeting

rules requiring active policy actions. In this section we analyze a targeting rule
which does not allow for a policy response to the stochastic shocks.

Specifically,

we consider a constant money—growth rule by which in=O. Using equations (2) and (6')
and recalling that rn=w=0, yields the value of p which, together with equation (2)

implies that the value of y associated with the constant money—growth rule is
r [8(ap—k) +

(1+a)p]/(1+c

+

Fi). Using

equation (5), the welfare loss associated

with the constant money-growth rule is

(1)

a

dlm=O =

2 k
(1+a+)

+

a2)

+

([(1)(1+C)]fl)

2

7

As is evident from equation (114) one of the components of the welfare loss arises

from shocks to the demand for money. This may be contrasted with the welfare cost of
the CPI and the nominal GNP targeting rules in which money demand shocks did not play

a role. This assymetry stems from the fact that these targeting rules respond In one
way or another to the realized price and, thereby, neutralize the welfare effects of
the monetary shocks.

Using equation (11) we can also write equation (114) as

(114')

H

1

m

2 {a(a +
(1+cx+n8)

+ [(1+ct)
2)
p

(1+c)]2 H

p

In general, the relation between this welfare cost and the cost associated with the
other targeting rules depends on the value of the parameters and on the variance of

the shocks. It may be seen, however, that for a relatively high value of

the

constant money—growth rule produces a larger welfare loss than the other targeting

rules. Similarly, for a relatively high value of

the constant money-growth rule

produces a smaller welfare loss than the interest-rate targeting rule. In these two
cases both rules produces a larger welfare loss than the CR1 and to the nominal—GNP
targeting rules.

8

Footnotes

1The equilibrium nominal rate of interest i satisfies the Fisher relation
—

i0

+

Pt

+

E[log

P —

log

where the last term on the right hand side

denotes expected inflation. The absence of trends and the zero—mean i.i.d. shocks

imply that the expected price level Elog —

equals the non—stochastic stationary

level log P0. Hence, expected inflation is

In

the presence of trends our

formulation applies to the transitory deviations from the trend.
2Substituting (7) for
the resulting expression for
rn—k —

(l+a)p

+

into (8) yields in

into equation (6')

as a function of p. Substituting

(evaluated

at the optimum, i.e.,

— ap) yields equation (9).

3For recent discussions of this targeting rule, see Bean (1983), Hall (1983),
McCallum (19814) and Aizenman and

Frenkel

(1986).

9

RE F ERENCES

Aizenxnan, Joshua and Frenkel, Jacob A., 1985, Optimal wage indexation, foreign
exchange intervention and monetary policy, American Economic Review 75,
No. 3,

1102—23.

__________

1986,

Supply shocks, wage indexatiori and monetary accommodation, Journal

of Money Credit and Banking XVIII, No. 3, forthcoming.

Bean, Charles R., 1983, Targeting nominal income: an appraisal, Economic Journal
93, No. 14,

806—19.

Fischer, Stanley, 1977, Long term contracts, rational expectations and the optimal

money supply rule, Journal of Political Economy 85, No. 1, 191—205.
Hall, Robert E., 1983, Macroeconomic policy under structural change, in Industrial

Change and Public Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 85—111.
McCallum, Bennett T., 19814, Monetarist rules in the light of recent experiences,
American Economic Review 714, No. 2, 388—91.

Taylor, John B., 1985, What would nominal GNP targeting do to the business cycle? in:
Karl Bruriner and Allan H. Meltzer, eds., Understanding Monetary Regimes,

Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 22, North—Holland,
Amsterdam 61—814.

