                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               AGGREGATE DEMAND, IDLE TIME, AND UNEMPLOYMENT

                                         Pascal Michaillat
                                         Emmanuel Saez

                                       Working Paper 18826
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18826


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2013




This paper was previously circulated under the titles “A Theory of Aggregate Supply and Aggregate
Demand as Functions of Market Tightness with Prices as Parameters” and “A Model of Aggregate
Demand and Unemployment”. We thank George Akerlof, Andrew Atkeson, Paul Beaudry, Francesco
Caselli, Varanya Chaubey, James Costain, Wouter den Haan, Peter Diamond, Emmanuel Farhi, Roger
Farmer, John Fernald, Xavier Gabaix, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Philipp Kircher,
David Lagakos, Etienne Lehmann, Alan Manning, Emi Nakamura, Maurice Obstfeld, Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau,
Franck Portier, Valerie Ramey, Pontus Rendhal, Kevin Sheedy, Robert Shimer, Stefanie Stantcheva,
Jón Steinsson, Silvana Tenreyro, Carl Walsh, Johannes Wieland, Danny Yagan, four referees, the
Editor Robert Barro, and numerous seminar and conference participants for helpful discussions and
comments. This work was supported by the Center for Equitable Growth at the University of California
Berkeley, the British Academy, the Economic and Social Research Council [grant number ES/K008641/1],
the Banque de France foundation, the Institute for New Economic Thinking, and the W.E. Upjohn
Institute for Employment Research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Pascal Michaillat and Emmanuel Saez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Aggregate Demand, Idle Time, and Unemployment
Pascal Michaillat and Emmanuel Saez
NBER Working Paper No. 18826
February 2013, Revised January 2015
JEL No. E12,E24,E32,E63

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper develops a model of unemployment fluctuations. The model keeps the architecture of the
general-disequilibrium model of Barro and Grossman (1971) but takes a matching approach to the
labor and product markets instead of a disequilibrium approach. On the product and labor markets,
both price and tightness adjust to equalize supply and demand. Since there are two equilibrium variables
but only one equilibrium condition on each market, a price mechanism is needed to select an equilibrium.
We focus on two polar mechanisms: fixed prices and competitive prices. When prices are fixed, aggregate
demand affects unemployment: with a higher aggregate demand, firms find more customers; this reduces
the idle time of their employees and thus increases their labor demand; and this reduces unemployment.
We combine the predictions of the model and empirical measures of product market tightness, labor
market tightness, output, and employment to assess the sources of labor market fluctuations in the
US. First, we find that the product market and labor market tightnesses fluctuate a lot, which implies
that the fixed-price equilibrium describes the data better than the competitive-price equilibrium. Next,
we find that labor market tightness and employment are positively correlated, which suggests that
labor market fluctuations are mostly due to labor demand shocks and not to labor supply or mismatch
shocks. Last, we find that product market tightness and output are positively correlated, which suggests
that the labor demand shocks mostly reflect aggregate demand shocks and not technology shocks.


Pascal Michaillat
Department of Economics
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London, WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
pascal.michaillat@gmail.com

Emmanuel Saez
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
saez@econ.berkeley.edu
                                           I.    I NTRODUCTION

Numerous hypotheses have been formulated and empirically tested to explain the extent and per-
sistence of unemployment in the US between December 2008 and November 2013. Over that
five-year period, the unemployment rate remained above 7%, peaking at 10% in October 2009.
These hypotheses include high labor market mismatch, caused by major shocks to the financial
and housing sectors; low search effort from unemployed workers, triggered by the long extension
of unemployment insurance benefits; and low aggregate demand, caused by a sudden need to repay
debts or by pessimism.1 Low technology is another natural hypothesis since technology shocks are
the main source of fluctuations in the textbook model of unemployment.2
    We have learned a lot from this work. Yet, our understanding of this period of high unemploy-
ment, and of the cyclical fluctuations of the labor market in general, remains incomplete. There is
a view that to make progress, we need a macroeconomic model that describes the many sources of
labor market fluctuations, including aggregate demand, while permitting comparative-statics anal-
ysis. The aim of this paper is to develop such a model and use it to assess the sources of labor
market fluctuations in the US.
    Our starting point is the general-disequilibrium model of Barro and Grossman (1971). The
Barro-Grossman model was the first microfounded representation of the macroeconomic theory
of Keynes (1936). The model elegantly captures the link between aggregate demand and unem-
ployment, so it is a promising starting point.3 However, it suffers from some limitations because it
relies on disequilibrium, whereby the price is fixed and demand and supply may not be equal. First,
disequilibrium raises difficult theoretical questions, for instance, how to ration those who cannot
buy or sell what they would like at the prevailing price. Second, disequilibrium limits tractability,
because the economy can be in four different regimes, each described by a different system of
equations, depending on which sides of the product and labor markets are rationed.
    We keep the architecture of the Barro-Grossman model: our model is static; it has a produced
   1 On mismatch, see Sahin et al. (2014), Lazear and Spletzer (2012), and Diamond (2013). On job-search effort, see
Elsby, Hobijn and Sahin (2010), Rothstein (2011), and Farber and Valletta (2013). On aggregate demand, see Farmer
(2012) and Mian and Sufi (2014).
   2 See for instance Pissarides (2000) and Shimer (2005).
   3 General-disequilibrium theory generated a vast amount of research. For reviews of this literature, see Grandmont

(1977), Drazen (1980), and Bénassy (1993). The macroeconomic implications of the theory are discussed in Barro
and Grossman (1976) and Malinvaud (1977). For recent applications of the theory, see Mankiw and Weinzierl (2011),
Caballero and Farhi (2014), and Korinek and Simsek (2014).



                                                         2
good, labor, and money; the product and labor markets are formally symmetric. But to address the
limitations of the Barro-Grossman model, we take a matching approach to the product and labor
markets instead of a disequilibrium approach: on each market, a matching function governs the
number of trades and buyers incur a matching cost.
   The matching approach allows us to move into general-equilibrium theory. A matching market
is analogous to a Walrasian market in which a seller takes as given not only the price but also the
probability to sell, and a buyer takes as given not only the price but also a price wedge reflecting the
cost of matching. The selling probability and price wedge are determined by the market tightness.
Hence, the matching equilibrium is analogous to a Walrasian equilibrium in which not only prices
but also tightnesses equalize supply and demand on all markets.
   Although grounded in equilibrium theory, the matching approach allows us to introduce the
price and real-wage rigidities required for aggregate demand to influence unemployment. Indeed,
on each matching market, both price and tightness adjust to equalize supply and demand. Since
there are two equilibrium variables (price and tightness) but only one equilibrium condition (sup-
ply equals demand) on each matching market, many combinations of prices and tightnesses satisfy
all the equilibrium conditions. This means that many price mechanisms are consistent with equi-
librium; of course, once a price mechanism is specified, the equilibrium is unique. To understand
the effects of aggregate demand shocks, we study an equilibrium in which the price and real wage
are fixed and the product market and labor market tightnesses equalize supply and demand on all
markets. In addition, we contrast the properties of this fixprice equilibrium with those of an equi-
librium in which the price and real wage are competitive—they ensure that the tightnesses always
maximize consumption, in the spirit of Moen (1997). We also show that the results for fixed prices
hold under partially rigid prices, and the results for competitive prices hold under Nash bargained
prices.
   The matching approach also allows us to describe the general equilibrium of the model with
one system of well-behaved equations while preserving the property of the disequilibrium ap-
proach that market conditions are favorable sometimes to buyers and sometimes to sellers. This
property is essential for the propagation of aggregate demand shocks to unemployment. In the
Barro-Grossman model, sellers and buyers are in a binary situation on each market—rationed or
not rationed. In our model, the conditions on each matching market are captured by a tightness: a
high tightness is favorable to sellers and a low tightness is favorable to buyers. Because the tight-


                                                   3
nesses are continuous and not binary variables, the equilibrium equations are well behaved and the
model tractable.
    Our model generates predictions concerning the comparative static effects of aggregate demand
shocks on unemployment and other variables. Despite the different formalism, our model retains
the intuition of the Barro-Grossman model that negative aggregate demand shocks propagate to
the labor market by making it more difficult for firms to sell goods or services. With fixed prices, a
decrease in aggregate demand lowers product market tightness, which reduces sales made by firms
and increases the idle time of employed workers. Since employees are idle a larger fraction of the
time, they are less profitable to firms, and the labor demand falls. Finally, the decrease in labor
demand reduces the labor market tightness and raises unemployment. With competitive prices, a
decrease in aggregate demand is absorbed by lower prices, so it has no effect on product market
tightness and unemployment.
    Besides aggregate demand shocks, our model generates predictions concerning the compara-
tive static effects of technology, mismatch, and labor supply shocks, thus capturing many of the
shocks cited in the context of the depressed labor market of 2008–2013. Two principles emerge
from the analysis. First, tightnesses respond to shocks when prices are fixed but not when prices
are competitive. Second, when prices are fixed, a demand shock on a market generates a positive
correlation between tightness and quantity, whereas a supply shock generates a negative correla-
tion.
    By combining the predictions of the model with empirical evidence, we assess the sources of
labor market fluctuations in the US. Time series are available for employment, output, and labor
market tightness, but not for product market tightness, so we construct a time series proxying
for product market tightness. The proxy is based on the capacity utilization rate measured in the
Survey of Plant Capacity (SPC) of the Census Bureau.
    Our first finding is that a fixprice equilibrium describes the data better than a competitive equi-
librium. This finding is based on the observation that the product market and labor market tight-
nesses fluctuate a lot. We therefore use the comparative statics from the fixprice equilibrium to
identify the sources of labor market fluctuations. Our second finding is that labor market fluctua-
tions are mostly due to labor demand shocks—aggregate demand or technology shocks—and not
to labor supply or mismatch shocks. This finding is based on the observation that labor market
tightness and employment are positively correlated. Our third finding is that labor demand shocks


                                                  4
mostly reflect aggregate demand shocks and not technology shocks. This finding is based on the
observation that product market tightness and output are positively correlated.
    Our findings are consonant with those obtained by other researchers. Our first finding agrees
with the result from Shimer (2005) and Hall (2005) that real-wage rigidity is important to explain
unemployment fluctuations over the business cycle. Our second finding is similar to the finding
of Blanchard and Diamond (1989b) that labor market fluctuations are mostly due to aggregate
activity shocks and not to reallocation or labor force participation shocks. Our third result echoes
the finding of Galı́ (1999) and Basu, Fernald and Kimball (2006) that technology shocks do not
explain most business-cycle fluctuations.


Literature Review. To explore the sources of labor market fluctuations, many models are avail-
able. We review them here. The textbook model of unemployment is the matching model of the
labor market.4 The matching model accurately represents the mechanics of the labor market, and
it can be used to analyze many labor market shocks. But it ignores aggregate demand, thus leaving
out a potentially important source of labor market fluctuations.
    To introduce aggregate demand, the matching model can be augmented with a product market
combining monopolistic competition and price rigidity.5 If prices are fixed, the model is tractable.
But because employment is solely determined by aggregate demand and technology, shocks to mis-
match, job-search effort, and labor force participation have no effect on employment, so potentially
important sources of employment fluctuations are ignored. If prices sluggishly adjust to shocks, for
instance with Calvo (1983) pricing, the model can account for numerous sources of employment
fluctuations.6 But this type of model is complex because it is inherently dynamic and relies on
the Phillips curve, the Euler equation, and a monetary policy rule to describe aggregate demand.
Its level of complexity goes far beyond that of a static model of the sort developed by Barro and
Grossman (1971) or Blanchard and Kiyotaki (1987), making it difficult to characterize analytically
the effects of shocks and thus to inspect the mechanisms behind labor market fluctuations.
    To introduce aggregate demand into the matching model of the labor market, we combine it
with a matching model of the product market. The literature applying the matching approach to
   4 See Pissarides (2000) for an exhaustive treatment.
   5 See Blanchard and Kiyotaki (1987) for the classical model of the product market with monopolistic competition.
   6 For New Keynesian model with matching frictions on the labor market and Calvo pricing, see for instance Walsh

(2003), Gertler, Sala and Trigari (2008), and Blanchard and Galı́ (2010). See Galı́ (2010) for a survey of this literature.
See Rendahl (2012) for an alternative model built around the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates.


                                                            5
the product market is small and scattered, so we develop a new matching model of the product
market.7 Our model of the product market is formally symmetric to our model of the labor market.
Lehmann and Van der Linden (2010) and Huo and Rı́os-Rull (2013) also propose models in which
aggregate demand influences unemployment through a product market with matching frictions.
These models are quite different from ours, especially because they focus on economies with
flexible prices in which dynamics play a key role.8


           II.   A BASIC M ODEL OF AGGREGATE D EMAND AND I DLE T IME

This section presents a simplified version of the complete model, which is only introduced in Sec-
tion III. In this basic model we abstract from the labor market and assume that all production
directly takes place within households and not within firms. This is done to simplify the presen-
tation of the equilibrium concept and the matching frictions on the product market, which are the
two most important new elements of the complete model. This section also provides empirical
evidence in support of matching frictions on the product market.


II.A.      Assumptions
The model is static. The assumption that the model is static will be relaxed in Section IV. The
economy is composed of a measure 1 of identical households. Households produce goods or
services. For concreteness, we assume that households produce services. They sell their services
on a product market with matching frictions. Households also consume services, but they cannot
consume their own services, so they buy services from other households on the product market.
Each household also holds some money. Money is the numeraire.


The Product Market. The productive capacity of each household is k; that is, a household is
able to produce k services. Each household visits v other households to purchase their services.
The number of trades y on the product market is given by a matching function with constant returns
   7 The seminal contribution to this literature is Diamond (1982a), and recent models include Arseneau and Chugh
(2007), Mathä and Pierrard (2011), Gourio and Rudanko (2014), and Bai, Rios-Rull and Storesletten (2012).
   8 Hall (2008), den Haan (2013), and Petrosky-Nadeau and Wasmer (2011) also take a matching approach to the

product and labor markets, but they do not explicitly represent and study aggregate demand.




                                                       6
to scale. For concreteness, we assume that the matching function takes the form

                                                                  − 1
                                               y = k−γ + v−γ         γ
                                                                         ,


where k is the aggregate productive capacity, v is the aggregate number of visits, and the parameter
γ governs the elasticity of substitution of inputs in matching. We impose γ > 0 to guarantee that y
is less than k and v.9 In each trade, one service is sold at price p > 0.
    We define the product market tightness as the ratio of aggregate number of visits to aggregate
productive capacity: x = v/k. The product market tightness is an aggregate variable taken as given
by households. With constant returns to scale in matching, the tightness determines the probabili-
ties that services are sold and that visits yield a purchase: one service is sold with probability

                                                      y          − 1
                                            f (x) =     = 1 + x−γ γ ,
                                                      k

and one visit yields a purchase with probability

                                                      y              1
                                             q(x) =     = (1 + xγ )− γ .
                                                      v

A useful property is that q(x) = f (x)/x. The function f is smooth and strictly increasing on
[0, +∞), with f (0) = 0 and limx→+∞ f (x) = 1. The function q is smooth and strictly decreasing
on [0, +∞), with q(0) = 1 and limx→+∞ q(x) = 0. The properties of the derivative f 0 will be useful
later: f 0 (x) = q(x)1+γ so f 0 is strictly decreasing on [0, +∞) with f 0 (0) = 1 and limx→+∞ f 0 (x) = 0.
An implication is that f is strictly concave on [0, +∞). The properties of f and q imply that when
the product market tightness is higher, it is easier to sell services but harder to buy them.
    We abstract from randomness at the household level: a household sells f (x) · k services and
purchases q(x) · v services with certainty. Since a household does not sell its entire productive
capacity, household members are idle part of the time. In fact, since a household only sells a
fraction f (x) of its productive capacity, household members are busy a share f (x) of the time and
idle a share 1 − f (x) of the time. Thus, the rate of idleness in the economy is 1 − f (x).
   9 The matching function is borrowed from den Haan, Ramey and Watson (2000). It always satisfies y ≤ min {k, v},
which is a required property for a matching function. We use this function instead of the standard Cobb-Douglas
matching function, y = kγ · v1−γ , because the latter must be truncated to ensure that y ≤ min {k, v}, which complicates
the analysis.



                                                           7
                                              xm                           Output          Productive capacity k
                                                                          y = f (x)k




                           Product market tightness x
                                                                Consumption  Matching cost Idle capacity
                                                            c = (f (x)    ⇢x)k   ⇢xk      (1 f (x))k




                                                        0
                                                            0                        Quantity

                     Figure I: The Matching Frictions on the Product Market


    We model the matching cost as follows. Each visit requires to purchase ρ ∈ (0, 1) services.
These services for matching do not contribute to the buyer’s consumption, but they are purchased
like the services for consumption. A buyer doing v visits and consuming c services therefore
purchases a total of c + ρ · v services. Since the matching process limits the purchases of a buyer
doing v visits to q(x) · v services, the number v of visits needed to consume c services satisfies
q(x) · v = c + ρ · v or, equivalently, v = c/ (q(x) − ρ). This means that consuming one service
requires to do 1/ (q(x) − ρ) visits and thus to buy a total of 1 + τ(x) services, where

                                                                                       ρ
                                                                         τ(x) ≡              .
                                                                                    q(x) − ρ

The function τ is positive and strictly increasing for all x ∈ [0, xm ), where xm > 0 is defined by
q(xm ) = ρ. We also have τ(0) = ρ/(1 − ρ) and limx→xm τ(x) = +∞. Note that any equilibrium
satisfies x ∈ [0, xm ). Because of the matching cost, consumption is necessarily lower than output.
    We define the aggregate supply as the amount of consumption traded at a given tightness:

D EFINITION 1. The aggregate supply is a function of product market tightness defined for all
x ∈ [0, xm ) by

                                                                                     f (x) · k
                                                                         cs (x) =              .
                                                                                    1 + τ(x)




                                                                                    8
P ROPOSITION 1. The aggregate supply satisfies


                                        cs (x) = ( f (x) − ρ · x) · k                                   (1)


for all x ∈ [0, xm ). We define the tightness x∗ ∈ (0, xm ) by f 0 (x∗ ) = ρ. The aggregate supply is
strictly increasing on [0, x∗ ] and strictly decreasing on [x∗ , xm ]. Hence, x∗ maximizes the aggregate
supply. Furthermore, cs (0) = 0 and cs (xm ) = 0.

Proof. We have cs (x) = f (x) · k/(1 + τ(x)). Using the definition of τ and f (x)/q(x) = x, we
have f (x)/(1 + τ(x)) = f (x) · (1 − ρ/q(x)) = f (x) − ρ · x. Hence, cs (x) = ( f (x) − ρ · x) · k. As
showed above, f 0 is strictly decreasing on [0, +∞) with f 0 (0) = 1 and limx→+∞ f 0 (x) = 0. Since
dcs /dx = ( f 0 (x) − ρ) · k with ρ ∈ (0, 1), we infer that dcs /dx > 0 on [0, x∗ ), dcs /dx = 0 at x = x∗ ,
and dcs /dx < 0 on (x∗ , +∞). Thus, cs is strictly increasing on [0, x∗ ] and strictly decreasing on
[x∗ , xm ]. Since f (0) = 0 and f (xm )/xm = q(xm ) = ρ, we have cs (0) = 0 and cs (xm ) = 0.

    The property that the aggregate supply is first increasing then decreasing with x is unusual, but it
naturally arises from the properties of the matching function. When x is low, the matching process
is congested by the available productive capacity increasing x—that is, increasing the number of
visits relative to available productive capacity—leads to a large increase in the probability to sell,
f (x), but a small increase in the price wedge faced by buyers, τ(x). Since the aggregate supply is
proportional to f (x)/(1 + τ(x)), it increases. Conversely when x is high, the matching process is
congested by the number of visits, and increasing x leads to a small increase in f (x) but a large
increase in τ(x) so an overall decrease in aggregate supply.
    The aggregate supply curve is depicted in Figure I; it gives the amount of consumption for
each level of tightness. Figure I also illustrates the relationship between consumption, output,
and productive capacity imposed by matching frictions. Output is y = f (x) · k, an increasing and
concave function of tightness. Consumption is c = ( f (x) − ρ · x) · k so it is always below output.
The number of services used for matching is ρ · v = ρ · x · k, an increasing function of tightness; the
gap between consumption and output represents this matching cost. The number of services that
could be produced if workers were not idle is k − f (x) · k = (1 − f (x)) · k, a decreasing function of
tightness; the gap between output and productive capacity represents this idle capacity.




                                                     9
Households. The representative household derives utility from consuming services and holding
real money balances. The household’s utility is given by

                                                            ε−1
                                     m      χ    ε−1   1     m ε
                                u c,     =     ·c ε +     ·         ,
                                     p     1+χ        1+χ    p

where c is consumption of services, m are nominal money balances, m/p are real money bal-
ances, the parameter χ > 0 measures the taste for consumption relative to holding money, and the
parameter ε > 1 is the elasticity of substitution between consumption and real money balances.
    The desired level of consumption determines the number of visits that the household makes.
Consuming c services requires to purchase (1 + τ(x)) · c services in the course of (1 + τ(x)) · c/q(x)
visits. For simplicity, we relegate the visits to the background and focus on consumption.10 We
summarize the cost incurred by the household for the visits with a price wedge. Consuming one
service requires to purchase one service for consumption plus τ(x) services to cover the cost of the
visits. The total cost of consuming c therefore is p · c + p · τ(x) · c = p · (1 + τ(x)) · c. From the
household’s perspective, it is as if it purchased c services at a unit price p · (1 + τ(x)). Effectively
the matching frictions impose a wedge τ(x) on the price of services.
    Taking as given the product market tightness and the price, the representative household chooses
consumption and nominal money balances to maximize utility subject to a budget constraint. The
household receives an endowment µ > 0 of nominal money and income from the sale of f (x) · k
services at price p. With these, the household purchases c services at price (1 + τ(x)) · p and holds
m units of nominal money balances. Hence, the household’s budget constraint is


                                     m + (1 + τ(x)) · p · c = µ + p · f (x) · k.


Solving the utility-maximization problem gives

                                          − 1
                                    1     m   ε      1       χ        1
                                       ·        =         ·      · c− ε .                                            (2)
                                   1+χ    p       1 + τ(x) 1 + χ

This equation implies that at the margin, the household is indifferent between consumption and
holding money.
  10 This representation is slightly unconventional. The matching literature usually emphasizes the role of visits or, on
the labor market, of vacancies.



                                                          10
   We define the aggregate demand as the utility-maximizing level of consumption at a given
product market tightness and price, accounting for the fact that the money market clears:

D EFINITION 2. The aggregate demand is a function of product market tightness and price
                                                                 ε
                                       d                  χ                µ
                                      c (x, p) =                       ·                          (3)
                                                       1 + τ(x)            p

for all (x, p) ∈ [0, xm ] × (0, +∞), where xm > 0 satisfies ρ = q(xm ).

P ROPOSITION 2. The aggregate demand is strictly decreasing in x and p. Furthermore, cd (0, p) =
χ ε · (1 − ρ)ε · µ/p and cd (xm , p) = 0.

Proof. Obvious from (3), since τ is strictly increasing in x.

   The aggregate demand is the level of consumption that satisfies (2) when m = µ. The properties
of the aggregate demand reflect the household’s indifference between consumption and holding
µ/p real money balances. First, a higher p leads to lower real money balances. Households’
indifference between consumption and holding money implies that they desire lower consumption
when p is higher. Hence the aggregate demand decreases with p. Second, 1 + τ(x) is the effective
price of consumption relative to real money balances. A higher x leads to a higher relative price that
reduces the attractiveness of consumption relative to that of holding real money balances, whose
quantity is fixed at µ/p. Hence the aggregate demand decreases with x. The aggregate demand is
plotted in Figure III; it slopes downward in the (c, x) and (c, p) planes.


II.B.    Discussion of the Assumptions
We discuss two critical assumptions of the model: matching frictions on the product market, and
money in the utility function. To represent the matching frictions, we assume that the number
of trades is governed by a matching function and that buyers face a matching cost; we discuss
matching function and matching cost in turn.


The Matching Function. Much in the same way that the production function summarizes how
inputs are transformed into output through the production process, the matching function summa-
rizes how productive capacity and visits are transformed into trades through the matching process.
The matching function provides a tractable representation of a very complex process. Its main

                                                       11
                                                                                                                                       100%
             Idleness, non-manufacturing                             750
    30%




                                                  Thousands of workers




                                                                                                                  Share of relationships
             Idleness, manufacturing
             Unemployment                                                                                                                  75%

    20%                                                              500
                                                                                                                                           50%

    10%                                                              250
                                                                                                                                           25%
                                                                                                   Purchasing                                            Long-term customers
                                                                                                   Recruiting                                            Long-term employees
     0%                                                                  0                                                                 0%
      1990             2000                2010                          1997       2002        2007       2012                              AT BE DE ES FR IT LU PT SE UKUS

          A. Selling difficulties                                               B. Purchasing costs                                        C. Long-term relationships

              Figure II: Evidence of Matching Frictions on the Product and Labor Markets
Panel A: The time period is 1989:Q4–2013:Q2. The rate of idleness is one minus the operating rate measured by the
ISM. For non-manufacturing sectors, the operating rate is only available after 1999:Q4. The rate of unemployment is
constructed by the BLS from the CPS. Panel B: The time period is 1997–2012. The number of workers in recruiting
and purchasing occupations is from the OES database constructed by the BLS. Recruiting occupations include human
resource managers, specialists, and assistants. Purchasing occupations include purchasing managers, buyers and pur-
chasing agents, and procurement clerks. Panel C: The share of sales to long-term customers is from the following firm
surveys: Kwapil, Baumgartner and Scharler (2005) for Austria (AT); Aucremanne and Druant (2005) for Belgium
(BE); Stahl (2005) for Germany (DE); Alvarez and Hernando (2005) for Spain (ES); Loupias and Ricart (2004) for
France (FR); Fabiani, Gattulli and Sabbatini (2004) for Italy (IT); Lunnemann and Matha (2006) for Luxembourg
(LU); Martins (2005) for Portugal (PT); Apel, Friberg and Hallsten (2005) for Sweden (SE); Hall, Walsh and Yates
(2000) for the UK; and Blinder et al. (1998) for the US. All the surveys were conducted between 2000 and 2004,
except in the UK and the US where they were conducted in 1995 and 1990–1992. The share of workers in long-term
employment is from the OECD dataset on the incidence of permanent employment for 2005.


implication is that not all productive capacity is sold and not all visits are successful. Formally,
households only sell a fraction f (x) < 1 of their productive capacity and the visits of buyers to
sellers are only successful with probability q(x) < 1. The matching function is a useful modeling
tool only if we find convincing evidence that at all times, some employed workers are idle and
some visits are unsuccessful.11
    The prediction that not all productive capacity is sold can be examined empirically. In US data,
we find that some productive capacity is idle at all time. Panel A of Figure II displays the rates
of idleness in non-manufacturing sectors and in the manufacturing sector. These rates indicate
the share of time when employed workers are idle due to a lack of activity. These rates are con-
structed as one minus the operating rates measured by the Institute for Supply Management (ISM)
for non-manufacturing sectors and for the manufacturing sector. The operating rate indicates the
actual production level of firms as a share of their maximum production level given current cap-
ital and labor. On average the rate of idleness is 14.8% in non-manufacturing sectors and 17.3%
  11 Pissarides
              (1985) pioneered the concept of the matching function on the labor market. Pissarides (1986) and
Blanchard and Diamond (1989a) first explored the empirical properties of the matching function on the labor market.
See Petrongolo and Pissarides (2001) for a survey of this literature.


                                                                                           12
in the manufacturing sector. The rate of idleness is the product-market equivalent of the rate of
unemployment; for comparison, the panel also displays the rate of unemployment constructed by
the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) from the Current Population Survey (CPS). Perhaps surpris-
ingly, the rates of idleness prevailing in the manufacturing and non-manufacturing sectors are much
higher than the rate of unemployment.
   In addition, evidence suggests that firms in the US face difficulties in selling their output. Using
output and price microdata from the Census of Manufacturers, Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson
(2012) find that, despite similar or lower prices, new plants grow more slowly than similar plants
with an established customer base because it is difficult for new plants to attract customers.
   Visits are the product-market equivalent of vacancies. A visit represents the process that a
buyer must follow to buy an item. These visits can take different forms, depending on the buyer.
For an individual consumer, a visit may be an actual visit to a restaurant, to a hair salon, to a
bakery, or to a car dealer. A visit could also be an inquiry to an intermediary, such as a travel
agent, a real estate agent, or a stockbroker. For a firm, a visit could be an actual visit to a potential
supplier. A visit could also be the preparation and processing of a request for proposal or request
for tender or any other sourcing process. Unlike for vacancies, however, visits are not recorded in
any dataset. It is therefore difficult to provide quantitative evidence on the share of visits that are
unsuccessful. The only quantitative evidence that we found is the average stockout rate provided
by Bils (2004). Using the monthly microdata underlying the Consumer Price Index, Bils finds that
temporary stockouts are quite common: the average stockout rate for consumer durables over the
1988–2004 period is 9%. A stockout is an item not available for sale, continuing to be carried by
the outlet, and not seasonally unavailable; hence, a stockout indicates that a buyer’s visit to a store
would not result in a purchase because the desired product would be unavailable.
   Casual observation also suggests that many visits do not generate a trade. At a restaurant, a
consumer sometimes need to walk away because no tables are available or the queue is too long.
The same may happen at a hair salon if no slots are available or if the salon is not open for business.
At a bakery, the type of bread or cake desired by a consumer may not be available at the time of
the visit, either because it was not prepared on the day or because the bakery has run out of it. At a
car dealer, the specific car desired by the consumer may not be in inventory and may therefore not
be available before a long time. Buyers employed by firms travel the world to visit the production
facilities of potential suppliers and assess their quality, and many of these visits do not lead to a


                                                   13
contract. Finally, when a firm issues a request for proposal or a request for tender, it considers the
applications of many potential suppliers, but only one supplier is eventually selected.


The Matching Cost. Empirical evidence indicates that buyers incur a broad range of matching
costs on the product market. In this paper we make the assumption that the matching cost is in-
curred in services. This representation of the matching cost is crude but convenient: it is tractable
because the cost appears as a price wedge for buyers; it is portable because we could similarly rep-
resent the matching cost incurred by a firm or a government (other representations of the matching
cost, such as a utility cost, would not offer this portability); and it is isomorphic to the representa-
tion of the matching cost on the labor market in Section III. It is also conventional in the matching
literature to measure matching costs in terms of output and to define consumption as output net of
matching costs, as we do here (for example, Gertler and Trigari, 2009).
   Of all the matching costs incurred by buyers on the product market, some are indeed service
costs: for a consumer using a travel agency to book a vacation, the matching cost of purchasing
hospitality services is the travel agent’s fee; for a consumer who goes to a hair salon in a taxicab,
the matching cost of purchasing hairdressing services is the taxicab fare; and for a firm recruiting
a manager with an executive search agency, the cost of purchasing labor services is the agency’s
fee. Travel agent’s fee, taxicab fare, and executive search agency’s fee are service costs.
   Besides service costs, buyers incur other types of matching costs on the product market. For
consumers, the cost of a visit to a seller could be a traveling time or the time spent in a queue at a
restaurant or hair salon. These time costs are not negligible: on average between 2003 and 2011 in
the American Time Use Survey conducted by the BLS, people spend 47 minutes a day shopping
for goods and services. For firms, a large share of the cost of sourcing goods and services is a
labor cost. To quantify this cost, we use data from the Occupational Employment Survey (OES)
database constructed by the BLS. We measure the number of workers whose occupation is buying,
purchasing, and procurement.12 Panel B of Figure II displays the results; on average between 1997
and 2012, 560,600 workers were employed in such occupations. For comparison, we use the same
methodology to evaluate the matching cost incurred by firms on the labor market. We measure the
number of workers devoted to recruiting in the OES database; on average between 1997 and 2012,
543,200 workers were employed in an occupation involving recruitment, placement, screening,
  12 Note   that the classification of occupations evolves over time so comparisons across years are not meaningful.



                                                           14
and interviewing. Hence, the numbers of buyers and recruiters have the same magnitude.
   Since matching costs take various forms, we could model the matching cost differently. For
example, in Online Appendix E we study an alternative model in which the matching cost is a
time cost instead of a service cost. In that model, households share their time between supply-
ing services and matching with other households who sell services. We find that this alternative
representation of the matching cost does not modify the properties of the model.
   Finally, sellers could also incur a matching cost. Indeed, firms spend substantial resources on
sales and marketing. These resources are used by firms to increase their sales for a given productive
capacity. In Online Appendix F we extend our model to include an endogenous marketing effort
for sellers. We model the marketing effort as a continuous variable that increases sellers’ selling
probability at a cost. This extension does not alter the structure of the model or its properties.


Money in the Utility Function. The assumption that households derive utility from holding real
money balances is borrowed from Barro and Grossman (1971). This assumption was also used
by Blanchard and Kiyotaki (1987), among many others. Introducing money in the utility function
crudely but conveniently captures the fact that money provides transaction services to households.
The presence of money in the utility function is necessary to obtain an interesting concept of
aggregate demand in a static environment because without money, consumers would mechanically
spend all their income on the produced good (Say’s law). Here households choose between buying
consumption and holding money, and the aggregate demand is the desired level of consumption.


II.C.   Definition of the Equilibrium
D EFINITION 3. An equilibrium consists of a product market tightness and a price (x, p) such that
aggregate supply is equal to aggregate demand:


                                          cs (x) = cd (x, p).


   Since the equilibrium has two variables but only one condition, infinitely many combinations
of price and tightness satisfy the equilibrium condition. To select an equilibrium, we specify a price
mechanism. In Sections II.E–II.G, we will study the equilibria selected by different mechanisms.
   Figure III represents aggregate demand and supply, and the equilibrium. The equilibrium tight-


                                                  15
      x                                                                    cd(x,p)   cs(x)     y             k
                                            y      k                   p
      xm
                          cs(x)




          x


                                                                       p
                                        cd(x,p)
          0                c        y                   c, y, k        0                       y             k       c, y, k
              0                                    k                       0           c
                  A. Representation in a (c, x) plane                          B. Representation in a (c, p) plane

Figure III: Aggregate Demand, Aggregate Supply, and Equilibrium in the Basic Model of Section II


ness is at the intersection of aggregate demand and supply in the (c, x) plane.13 The equilibrium
price is at the intersection of aggregate supply and demand in the (c, p) plane.
    Since many equilibrium prices are possible, we categorize equilibria into the following regimes:

D EFINITION 4. An equilibrium is efficient if it maximizes consumption. An inefficient equilibrium
can be either slack, if an increase in tightness at the equilibrium point raises consumption, or
tight, if an increase in tightness at the equilibrium point lowers consumption. Equivalently, an
equilibrium is efficient if x = x∗ , slack if x < x∗ , and tight if x > x∗ .

    Figure IV illustrates the three regimes in which equilibria may fall. In the efficient equilibrium,
consumption is maximized. An efficient equilibrium also maximizes welfare taking real money
balances as given. In a slack equilibrium, aggregate demand is too low and tightness is below
its efficient level. In a tight equilibrium, aggregate demand is too high and tightness is above its
efficient level. The slack and tight equilibria are inefficient because their consumption levels are
below the efficient consumption level. As illustrated in Figure I, higher output is not equivalent to
higher consumption. Compared to the efficient equilibrium, a slack equilibrium has lower output
and a tight equilibrium has higher output, but both have lower consumption. Given that the aggre-
gate demand is decreasing in price, the price is too high when the equilibrium is slack and too low
when the equilibrium is tight. The property that an equilibrium can be efficient, slack, or tight is
  13 In the equilibrium that we consider, tightness is given by the intersection with positive consumption. There is
another equilibrium at the intersection with zero consumption. In that equilibrium, the tightness is xm . We do not
study that equilibrium because it has zero consumption.

                                                                  16
                                      x
                                                 cs(x)
                                                                         Tight equilibrium



                                                                            cd(x, p < p*)
                                     x*
                                                                         Efficient equilibrium
                                                                         cd(x, p = p*)

                                                                          Slack equilibrium
                                                              cd(x,   p > p*)
                                                         c*                              c

                      Figure IV: The Three Regimes in the Basic Model of Section II
The figure compares the equilibria obtained for different equilibrium prices. The price p∗ is given by (5).


true in any matching model (Pissarides, 2000, Chapter 8).


II.D.       Discussion of the Equilibrium Concept
This section proposes a more detailed definition of the equilibrium concept. To make the definition
more transparent, we generalize our model slightly and consider a measure 1 of households indexed
by i ∈ [0, 1]. Household i has productive capacity k(i) and an endowment of money µ(i). We define
the equilibrium by analogy to a Walrasian equilibrium:14

D EFINITION 5. An equilibrium is a price p, a tightness x, visits {v(i), i ∈ [0, 1]}, and nominal
money balances {m(i), i ∈ [0, 1]} such that the following conditions are satisfied:

(1) Taking x and p as given, household i ∈ [0, 1] chooses v(i) and m(i) to maximize its utility
     function subject to a budget constraint and the constraints imposed by matching frictions.
     The matching frictions impose that the output bought by household i is yb (i) = v(i) · q(x),
     the output sold by household i is ys (i) = k(i) · f (x), and the consumption of household i is
     c(i) = yb (i)/(1 + τ(x)). The budget constraint is m(i) + p · yb (i) = µ(i) + p · ys (i).
                                                                   R1             R1
(2) Quoted tightness equals actual tightness: x =                  0    v(i)di/   0    k(i)di

    As in Walrasian theory we make the institutional assumption that a price and a tightness are
quoted on the product market, and we make the behavioral assumption that households take the
  14 For   a standard definition of a Walrasian equilibrium, see Mas-Colell, Whinston and Green (1995).

                                                              17
quoted price and tightness as given. It is natural for households to take tightness as given because
the tightness is the ratio of aggregate number of visits to aggregate productive capacity, and each
household is small relative to the size of the market. The issue is more complicated for the price
since a buyer and a seller could bargain the transaction price once they have matched. However,
the actual transaction price has no influence on households’ decisions because the decisions are
made before the match is realized; what matters is the price at which households expect to trade.
Hence, we assume that households take the expected transaction price as given, and to ensure the
consistency of the equilibrium, we require that actual and expected transaction prices are the same.
    As in a Walrasian equilibrium, Condition (1) imposes that households behave optimally given
the quoted price and tightness. The difference with Walrasian theory is that households cannot
choose the quantities that they trade. These quantities are constrained by matching frictions: as
buyers, households only choose how many sellers to visit, knowing that the purchasing probability
is q(x) and that the purchase of one unit of output yields 1/(1 + τ(x)) unit of consumption; and
as sellers, households only choose how much productive capacity to bring to the market, knowing
that the selling probability is f (x).15
    Condition (2) is the equivalent of the market-clearing condition of the Walrasian equilibrium.
The Walrasian market-clearing condition imposes that at the quoted price, the quantity that buyers
desire to buy equals the quantity that sellers desire to sell. This condition is required to ensure the
consistency of the Walrasian equilibrium because sellers and buyers make their decisions expecting
to be able buy and sell any quantity at the quoted price. Similarly, Condition (3) is required to
ensure the consistency of our equilibrium. Given {v(i), i ∈ [0, 1]} and {k(i), i ∈ [0, 1]}, the number
of trades is
    "Z           −γ Z       −γ #− 1γ Z          R         Z          R        
                                                       v(i)di                 v(i)di
            v(i)di   +   k(i)di         = k(i)di · f R         = v(i)di · q R          .
                                                       k(i)di                 k(i)di

                                                                                                R          R
These equations imply that the actual selling probability faced by households is f ( v(i)di/ k(i)di)
                                                                             R          R
and the actual purchasing probability faced by households is q ( v(i)di/ k(i)di). To ensure the
consistency of the equilibrium, these probabilities must match the probabilities f (x) and q(x) on
which households base their calculations; equivalently, the quoted tightness, x, must be equal to
  15 Herethe productive capacity of household i is fixed to k(i), but the model could be extended to have household i
choose k(i).



                                                         18
                       R          R
the actual tightness, v(i)di/ k(i)di.
    Our equilibrium has one more variable than the Walrasian equilibrium—the tightness. But the
equilibrium does not have one more equation, which explains why many price-tightness pairs are
consistent with the equilibrium and why a price mechanism is needed to select an equilibrium.
At a microeconomic level, it is impossible to add an equilibrium condition to determine a price
because each seller-buyer pair decides the price in a situation of bilateral monopoly. This situation
arises because the pairing of a buyer and a seller generates a positive surplus. Since the solution
to the bilateral monopoly problem is indeterminate, it cannot be used to impose a condition on
the price.16 What this means is that there is no obvious economic criterion that can determine the
price. For instance, when a buyer and a seller meet, there is no deviation from the quoted price that
generates a Pareto improvement. Of course, a seller would be better-off with a higher price, but a
buyer would be worse-off with a higher price.
    In a symmetric equilibrium, Definition 5 implies that cs (x) = cd (x, p). The budget constraints
of all households are satisfied, and sales equal purchases through the matching process, so Walras’
law implies that the money market clears: m = µ. Given the definition of the aggregate demand and
the fact that m = µ, Condition (1) imposes that v(x, p) = (1 + τ(x)) · cd (x, p)/q(x). Condition (2)
imposes that x = v(x, p)/k = (1 + τ(x)) · cd (x, p)/ (k · q(x)). Since f (x) = q(x) · x, this equation
implies that

                                             x · q(x)        f (x)
                              cd (x, p) =             ·k =          · k = cs (x).
                                            1 + τ(x)       1 + τ(x)


II.E.      Fixprice Equilibrium
We first study a simple equilibrium in which the price is a parameter.17 In this equilibrium, only
the product market tightness equilibrates the market.

D EFINITION 6. A fixprice equilibrium parameterized by p0 > 0 consists of a product market
tightness and a price (x, p) such that aggregate supply equals aggregate demand and the price is
given by the parameter p0 : cs (x) = cd (x, p) and p = p0 .

  16 The indeterminacy of the solution to the bilateral monopoly problem has been known since Edgeworth (1881).
The indeterminacy is discussed by Howitt and McAfee (1987) and Hall (2005) in the context of matching models.
  17 In matching models of the labor market, several researchers have assumed that the wage is a parameter or a

function of the parameters. See for instance Hall (2005), Blanchard and Galı́ (2010), and Michaillat (2012, 2014).


                                                       19
        x                                     y      k              x                                     y   k
                  cs(x)                                                       cs(x)



                                                                    xa
       xb                                                           xb

       xa
                                          cd(x,p0)                                                 cd(x,p0)


                          ca cb ya   yb              k   c, y, k               ca     cb ya   yb     ka       kb c, y, k
             A. Increase in aggregate demand                             B. Increase in aggregate supply

                     Figure V: Shocks in the Fixprice Equilibrium of Section II


P ROPOSITION 3. For any p0 > 0, there exits a unique fixprice equilibrium parameterized by p0
with positive consumption.

Proof. In equilibrium, x satisfies cs (x) = cd (x, p0 ). We look for an equilibrium with positive con-
sumption, so we restrict the search to x ∈ (0, xm ). The equilibrium condition is equivalent to
(1 + τ(x))ε · cs (x) − cd (x, p0 ) = 0 because x ∈ (0, xm ) so (1 + τ(x))ε ∈ (0, +∞). This equation is
                                  

equivalent to

                                                         ε−1             χε µ
                                          (1 + τ(x))           · f (x) =   · .                                             (4)
                                                                         k p0

Since ε > 1, the function x 7→ (1 + τ(x))ε−1 · f (x) is strictly increasing from 0 to +∞ on [0, xm ).
Thus, there is a unique x ∈ (0, xm ) that solves (4).

   We study the comparative static effects of aggregate demand and supply shocks in the fixprice
equilibrium. We parameterize an increase in aggregate demand by an increase in money supply, µ,
or in the taste for consumption, χ. We parameterize an increase in aggregate supply by an increase
in productive capacity, k. The following proposition summarizes the comparative statics:

P ROPOSITION 4. Consider a fixprice equilibrium with positive consumption.

    • An increase in aggregate demand has the following effects: output and product market tight-
      ness increase; the rate of idleness decreases; consumption increases in a slack equilibrium,
      decreases in a tight equilibrium, and does not change in the efficient equilibrium.

                                                               20
    • An increase in aggregate supply has the following effects: output increases but product
      market tightness decreases; the rate of idleness increases; consumption increases.

Proof. In a fixprice equilibrium, x is the unique solution to (4). Since τ and f are strictly increasing
functions of x and ε > 1, equation (4) implies that dx/dµ > 0, dx/dχ > 0, but dx/dk < 0. The
rate of idleness is 1 − f (x) so its comparative statics follow from those of x. Since y = f (x) · k,
dy/dµ > 0 and dy/dχ > 0. We also have y = (1 + τ(x)) · cs (x) so in equilibrium, y = (1 + τ(x)) ·
cd (x, p) = (1 + τ(x))1−ε · χ ε · µ/p. As 1 − ε < 0, we infer that dy/dk > 0. Given that c = cs (x) and
the properties of cs , we infer that dc/dµ > 0 if x < x∗ , dc/dµ = 0 if x = x∗ , dc/dµ < 0 if x > x∗ .
The same is true for dc/dχ. As c = cd (x, p) and cd decreases with x, we have dc/dk > 0.

   The comparative statics are summarized in Panel A of Table I and illustrated in Figure V.
   Panel A in Figure V depicts an increase in aggregate demand. The aggregate demand curve
rotates outward. Indeed, households want to consume more for a given price and tightness, either
because they hold more money or because they value consumption more. Since the price is fixed,
they want to consume more for a given tightness, explaining the rotation of the curve. To reach
a new equilibrium, the product market tightness necessarily increases. Since tightness increases,
workers sell a larger fraction of their productive capacity, which is fixed, so output increases and
the rate of idleness decreases. The equilibrium point moves upward along the aggregate supply
curve, so the response of consumption depends on the regime: in the slack regime consumption
increases; but in the tight regime consumption decreases, because the increase in tightness raises
the amount of output dissipated in matching more than it raises total output.
   Panel B in Figure V depicts an increase in aggregate supply. The aggregate supply curve
expands outward because households’ productive capacity increases. To reach a new equilibrium,
the product market tightness necessarily decreases. Consumption increases as the equilibrium
point moves downward along the aggregate demand curve. The effect on output is not obvious on
the graph: productive capacity increases but tightness falls, so households sell a smaller fraction
of a larger capacity. However, the proposition establishes that output increases. Since tightness
decreases, the rate of idleness increases.
   The proposition implies that aggregate demand matters when the price is fixed. This result
echoes the findings of a vast body of work in macroeconomics, including the contributions of
Barro and Grossman (1971) and Blanchard and Kiyotaki (1987), that aggregate demand matters in


                                                  21
                      Table I: Comparative Statics in the Basic Model of Section II

                                                                                     Effect on:

                                   Output        Product market tightness              Idleness        Consumption
 Increase in:                          y                        x                     1 − f (x)                c

                    A. Fixprice equilibrium and equilibrium with partially rigid price
 Aggregate demand                     +                         +                          −              + (slack)
                                                                                                        0 (efficient)
                                                                                                          − (tight)
 Aggregate supply                     +                         −                          +                  +
                   B. Competitive equilibrium and equilibrium with Nash bargaining
 Aggregate demand                      0                        0                          0                   0
 Aggregate supply                     +                         0                          0                  +
Notes. An increase in aggregate demand is an increase in money supply, µ, or in the taste for consumption, χ. An
increase in aggregate supply is an increase in productive capacity, k. This table summarizes the results of Propositions 4
and 6 and the results discussed in Section II.G.


the presence of price rigidity. The proposition also implies that aggregate demand shocks and ag-
gregate supply shocks have different macroeconomic effects: product market tightness and output
are positively correlated under aggregate demand shocks but negatively correlated under aggre-
gate supply shocks. In Section V, we will exploit this property to identify aggregate demand and
aggregate supply shocks in the data.


II.F.    Competitive Equilibrium
We study an equilibrium in which the price mechanism is the polar opposite of the fixed price.
In a fixprice equilibrium, the price is fixed and tightness alone equilibrates the market. In the
equilibrium that we study now, the price is flexible enough to maintain the market in an efficient
situation. The efficient tightness is invariant to the shocks considered, so in practice the tightness
is fixed at its efficient level and the price alone equilibrates the market.

D EFINITION 7. A competitive equilibrium consists of a product market tightness and a price (x, p)
such that aggregate supply equals aggregate demand and the product market tightness is efficient:

                                                           22
cs (x) = cd (x, p) and x = x∗ .

P ROPOSITION 5. There exits a unique competitive equilibrium. The competitive price is

                                           (1 + τ(x∗ ))1−ε χ ε
                                    p∗ =                  ·    · µ.                                  (5)
                                                f (x∗ )     k

Proof. Obvious using equation (4).

    In Definition 7 we simply assume that the price adjusts to maintain the product market tightness
at its efficient level, but market forces could achieve this through the competitive search mechanism
of Moen (1997). (We label the equilibrium as competitive in reference to the competitive search
mechanism.) The mechanism lies beyond the scope of the model because it relies on directed
search, whereby buyers search for the submarket offering the best price-tightness compromise,
whereas our model assumes random search. Nevertheless, the mechanism is simple to understand.
Starting from an equilibrium (pa , xa ), a subset of sellers can deviate and offer a different price,
pb . Buyers will flee or flock to the new submarket until they are indifferent between the old and
new submarkets. Indifference happens when pb · (1 + τ(xb )) = pa · (1 + τ(xa )). By deviating,
sellers obtain a revenue pb · f (xb ); thus, sellers’ optimal choice is to select pb to maximize pb ·
f (xb ) subject to pb · (1 + τ(xb )) = pa · (1 + τ(xa )). This is equivalent to selecting xb to maximize
f (xb )/(1+τ(xb )) = f (xb )−ρ ·xb , that is, to selecting the efficient tightness. Under the competitive
search mechanism, tightness is always efficient in equilibrium, and prices cannot be rigid because
market forces provide an incentive for sellers to adjust their price if tightness changes.
    The competitive price ensures that the aggregate demand curve is always in the position de-
picted in Figure IV, where the aggregate demand curve intersects the aggregate supply curve at
its maximum. This price necessarily exists because by increasing the price from 0 to +∞, the
aggregate demand curve rotates around the point (0, xm ) from a horizontal to a vertical position.
    The following proposition summarizes the comparative statics in the competitive equilibrium:

P ROPOSITION 6. Consider a competitive equilibrium.

    • An increase in aggregate demand has the following effects: output, product market tightness,
      the rate of idleness, and consumption remain the same; the price increases.

    • An increase in aggregate supply has the following effects: output and consumption increase;
      product market tightness and the rate of idleness remain the same; the price decreases.

                                                  23
Proof. The efficient tightness, x∗ , satisfies f 0 (x∗ ) = ρ so x∗ is solely determined by f and ρ and is
independent of χ, µ, and k. The comparative statics for the competitive equilibrium are therefore
obvious, using x = x∗ , y = f (x∗ ) · k, and c = ( f (x∗ ) − ρ · x∗ ) · k, and the expression (5) for p.

    The comparative statics are summarized in Panel B of Table I. The comparative statics follow
from the properties that the tightness is efficient in a competitive equilibrium and that the efficient
tightness responds neither to aggregate demand shocks nor to aggregate supply shocks.
    The proposition implies that aggregate demand shocks have no effect on real outcomes in a
competitive equilibrium. This result is reminiscent of those obtained by Blanchard and Galı́ (2010)
and Shimer (2010, Chapter 2) in the context of matching models of the labor market. They find
that labor demand shocks in the form of technology shocks have no effect on the efficient labor
market tightness and unemployment rate.


II.G.       Other Equilibria
We have considered a fixed price and a competitive price, but many other price mechanisms are
possible. We study two of them here: a partially rigid price and Nash bargaining. The partially
rigid price is a generalization of the fixed price that partially responds to shocks. Nash bargaining
is the typical price mechanism in the matching literature.18 We show that the comparative statics
with a partially rigid price are the same as those with a fixed price, and the comparative statics with
a Nash bargained price are the same as those with a competitive price.


Equilibrium with Partially Rigid Price. We consider the following partially rigid price:

                                                                      ξ
                                                           χε
                                                  p = p0 ·    ·µ            ,                                   (6)
                                                           k

where the parameter p0 > 0 governs the price level and the parameter ξ ∈ [0, 1) governs the rigidity
of the price. If ξ = 0, the price is fixed. If ξ = 1, the price is proportional to and therefore as flexible
as the competitive price, given by (5).19 In the general case with 0 < ξ < 1, the price is more rigid
than the competitive price but less rigid than the fixed price.
  18 Nash bargaining was first used in the seminal work of Diamond (1982b), Mortensen (1982), and Pissarides (1985).
  19 The   competitive price is obtained by setting ξ = 1 and p0 = (1 + τ(x∗ ))1−ε / f (x∗ ) in (6).




                                                             24
    In equilibrium, tightness equalizes aggregate demand and supply with the price given by (6).
As in the fixprice case, there exists a unique equilibrium with positive consumption. Combining
cs (x) = cd (x, p) with (6) implies that in equilibrium the product market tightness satisfies

                                                                     1−ξ
                                        ε−1                   χε                 1
                              (1 + τ(x))      · f (x) =          ·µ          ·      .
                                                              k                  p0

Since ξ < 1 the comparative statics for the product market tightness are the same here and in the
fixprice equilibrium, where tightness satisfies (4). Hence, all the comparative statics of the fixprice
equilibrium remain valid in this equilibrium even though the price is not fixed but partially rigid.
    The comparative statics of the fixprice equilibrium are therefore robust: they hold whenever the
price responds less than proportionally to χ ε · µ/k, and they only break down in the knife-edge case
in which the price is proportional to χ ε · µ/k. This finding echoes results obtained by Blanchard
and Galı́ (2010) and Michaillat (2012): they show in matching models of the labor market that the
comparative static effects of technology are the same when the real wage is fixed and when the real
wage responds less than proportionally to technology.


Equilibrium with Nash Bargaining. In an equilibrium with Nash bargaining, the price is the
generalized Nash solution to the bargaining problem between a buyer and a seller with bargaining
power β ∈ (0, 1). After a match is made, the marginal surplus to the household of buying one
service at price p̃ is
                                                   "              − 1 #
                          ∂ u p̃ ∂ u    ε     1            1  p̃  m   ε
                 B( p̃) =    − ·     =     ·      · χ · c− ε − ·
                          ∂ c p ∂ m/p ε − 1 1 + χ             p   p

and the marginal surplus to the household of selling one service at price p̃ is

                                                           1
                                  p̃ ∂ u    ε     1   p̃ m − ε
                         S ( p̃) = ·     =     ·     · ·       ,
                                  p ∂ m/p ε − 1 1 + χ p   p

where p is the price level on the product market. The Nash solution maximizes B( p̃)1−β · S ( p̃)β ,
so S ( p̃) = β · [S ( p̃) + B( p̃)] = β · [ε/(ε − 1)] · [χ/(1 + χ)] · c−1/ε , and the bargained price is
p̃ = p · β · χ · c−1/ε /(m/p)−1/ε . In equilibrium p̃ = p, so combining the condition on the bargained




                                                    25
price with the aggregate demand condition, given by (2), yields


                                            β · (1 + τ(x)) = 1.                                        (7)


This equation determines the product market tightness in an equilibrium with Nash bargaining.
    Equation (7) implies that the product market tightness responds neither to aggregate demand
shocks nor to aggregate supply shocks, exactly as in the competitive equilibrium. Since the com-
parative statics for the product market tightness are the same in the equilibrium with Nash bargain-
ing and in the competitive equilibrium, all the comparative statics are in fact the same.
    The comparative statics are the same in the competitive equilibrium and in the equilibrium with
Nash bargaining despite the fact that the former is always efficient whereas the latter is generally
inefficient. Indeed, the efficient tightness satisfies f 0 (x∗ ) = ρ; using f (x)/x = q(x), we rewrite this
condition as x∗ · f 0 (x∗ )/ f (x∗ ) = ρ/q(x∗ ) and then as

                                                           1
                                            η(x∗ ) =              ,
                                                       1 + τ(x∗ )

where 1 − η(x) is the elasticity of f (x). Comparing this equation with (7) indicates that the equi-
librium with Nash bargaining is only efficient if β = η(x)—this is the Hosios (1990) condition for
efficiency. Hence, the equilibrium with Nash bargaining is efficient only for a specific value of the
bargaining power, not in general.
    The result that aggregate demand shocks have no effect on tightness, output, and consumption
in the equilibrium with Nash bargaining is reminiscent of a result obtained by Blanchard and Galı́
(2010), Shimer (2010, Chapter 2), and Michaillat (2012): they show in different matching models
of the labor market that labor demand shocks in the form of technology shocks have no effect on
labor market tightness and unemployment when real wages are determined by Nash bargaining.
    The result of Blanchard and Galı́, Shimer, and Michaillat does not hold in any matching model
of the labor market, however. If the value of unemployment (unemployment benefits plus the
value from leisure) is positive and fixed (independent of technology), then labor market tightness
and unemployment respond to technology shocks under Nash bargaining. Indeed, in that case, the
bargained wage increases less than proportionally with technology, so the labor demand increases
with technology. Yet, if the fixed value of unemployment is calibrated to the generosity of the
unemployment insurance system in the US, the responses of labor market tightness and unemploy-

                                                       26
ment are negligible, much smaller than in the data (Shimer, 2005). It is only if the fixed value of
unemployment is very close to the value of employment—that is, if the higher value from leisure
obtained by unemployed workers almost offsets their lower income—that the responses of labor
market tightness and unemployment can be large (Hagedorn and Manovskii, 2008).
   To generate realistic labor market fluctuations, Hagedorn and Manovskii rely on two strong
assumptions: individuals are almost indifferent between working and being unemployed, and the
value of unemployment is fixed. As will become apparent in Section III when we introduce our
complete model, an advantage of our approach is that an equilibrium with fixed or partially rigid
prices can generate large responses of labor market tightness and unemployment to shocks without
any of these two assumptions.


II.H.    The Case with No Matching Cost
We describe the case with no matching cost (ρ = 0). This case is useful to clarify the relations
between a matching model and Walrasian and disequilibrium models. Without matching cost, there
is no price wedge so the aggregate demand is independent of tightness. Furthermore, no output
is dissipated in matching so consumption equals output and the aggregate supply increases with
tightness everywhere; the efficient tightness, which maximizes the aggregate supply, is infinite.
Formally, τ(x) = 0 so the aggregate demand and supply are given by cd (p) = χ ε · µ/p and cs (x) =
f (x) · k. In Panel A of Figure III, the aggregate supply curve would take the shape of the output
curve, and the aggregate demand curve would become vertical at c = χ ε · µ/p.
   A first result is that the competitive equilibrium of the model with no matching cost achieves
the price and consumption of a Walrasian equilibrium. In the competitive equilibrium of the model
with no matching cost, the tightness is efficient so x = x∗ = +∞ and c = limx→+∞ cs (x) = k as
limx→+∞ f (x) = 1; furthermore, since cd (p) = c = k, the price satisfies p = χ ε · µ/k. In a Walrasian
equilibrium, households are indifferent between consumption and money and the money market
clears, so c = χ ε · µ/p; furthermore, the product market clears, so c = k and p = χ ε · µ/k. Hence,
c and p are the same in the two equilibria.
   Consider a price p0 > χ ε · µ/k. A second result is that the fixprice equilibrium at p0 in the
model with no matching cost yields the same consumption as the excess-supply situation at p0 in
the disequilibrium model. In the fixprice equilibrium of the model with no matching cost, con-
sumption is given by cd (p0 ) = χ ε · µ/p0 < k. In the excess-supply situation of the disequilibrium

                                                  27
model, the price is too high for the market to clear, so consumption is determined by the level of
demand at p0 : c = χ ε · µ/p0 < k. Hence, c is the same in the two cases (by assumption, p = p0 is
also the same). Michaillat (2012) obtains a similar result in a matching model of the labor market.
   The models with matching cost (ρ > 0) and without matching cost (ρ = 0) share many proper-
ties. In fact, the properties of all the observable variables (price, output, tightness) are the same in
the two models. However, imposing ρ = 0 has several disadvantages. It is unrealistic because em-
pirical evidence suggests that buyers face matching costs. It impoverishes the model by eliminating
the tight regime and thus the model’s ability to describe an economy that “overheats”. Finally, it
makes the model less tractable by imposing a constraint on the equilibrium price (the equilibrium
only exists if p ≥ χ ε · µ/k) and by making the efficient tightness infinite.


           III.    A M ODEL OF AGGREGATE D EMAND , I DLE T IME , AND
                                            U NEMPLOYMENT

This section develops the main model of the paper. The model keeps the architecture of the Barro
and Grossman (1971) model but takes a matching approach to the labor and product markets in-
stead of a disequilibrium approach.


III.A.   Assumptions
The economy has a measure 1 of identical households and a measure 1 of identical firms, owned by
the households. The product and labor markets are matching markets that are formally symmetric.
Product market and households are the same as in Section II. Labor market and firms are described
below.


The Labor Market. In each household, h ∈ (0, 1) members are in the labor force and 1 − h
members are out of the labor force. All the workers in the labor force are initially unemployed and
search for a job. Each firm posts v̂ vacancies to hire workers. The number l of workers who find
                                                                    −1/γ̂
a job is given by the following matching function: l = h−γ̂ + v̂−γ̂        , where h is the aggregate
number of workers who are initially unemployed, v̂ is the aggregate number of vacancies, and the
parameter γ̂ > 0 governs the elasticity of substitution of inputs in matching.




                                                  28
    We define the labor market tightness as the ratio of aggregate number of vacancies to ag-
gregate number of workers who are initially unemployed: θ = v̂/h. The labor market tightness
is an aggregate variable taken as given by the firms and households. The labor market tight-
ness determines the probabilities that a worker finds a job and that a vacancy is filled: a worker
                                                       −1/γ̂
finds a job with probability fˆ(θ ) = l/h = 1 + θ −γ̂         , and a vacancy is filled with probability
                          −1/γ̂
                                . The properties of the functions fˆ and q̂ imply that when the labor
                         
q̂(θ ) = l/v̂ = 1 + θ γ̂
market tightness is higher, it is easier to find a job but harder to fill a vacancy. We abstract from
randomness at the firm and household levels: a firm hires exactly v̂ · q̂(θ ) workers, and exactly
fˆ(θ ) · h household members find a job.
    Each firm has two types of employees: n producers and l − n recruiters. The job of recruiters
is to post vacancies.20 Posting a vacancy requires ρ̂ ∈ (0, 1) recruiter, so the number of recruiters
required to post v̂ vacancies is l − n = ρ̂ · v̂. Since hiring l employees requires posting l/q̂(θ )
vacancies, the number n of producers in a firm with l employees is limited to n = l − ρ̂ · l/q̂(θ ).
This relationship can be written as l = (1 + τ̂(θ )) · n, where τ̂(θ ) ≡ ρ̂/ (q̂(θ ) − ρ̂) is the number
of recruiters per producer.
    We define the labor supply as the number of producers employed at a given labor market
tightness:

D EFINITION 8. The labor supply is a function of labor market tightness defined by ns (θ ) = fˆ(θ ) ·
h/ (1 + τ̂(θ )) for all θ ∈ [0, θ m ), where θ m > 0 satisfies ρ̂ = q̂(θ m ).

P ROPOSITION 7. The labor supply satisfies


                                           ns (θ ) = fˆ(θ ) − ρ̂ · θ · h
                                                                    


for all θ ∈ [0, θ m ). We define the tightness θ ∗ ∈ (0, θ m ) by fˆ0 (θ ∗ ) = ρ̂. The labor supply is strictly
increasing on [0, θ ∗ ] and strictly decreasing on [θ ∗ , θ m ]. Hence, the tightness θ ∗ maximizes the
labor supply. Furthermore, ns (0) = 0, and ns (θ m ) = 0.

Proof. Similar to the proof of Proposition 1.
  20 In the literature, firms usually pay the cost of posting vacancies in output. Here, firms pay the cost of posting
vacancies in labor as they need to employ recruiters to fill vacancies. We make this assumption because it greatly
simplifies the analysis and seems more realistic. Farmer (2008) and Shimer (2010) make the same assumption.




                                                         29
                                                                                   θ                                 l   h
                                            Employment           Labor force h              ns(θ)
                              θm                                                   θm
                                             l = fˆ(✓)h
   Labor market tightness θ



                                      Producers    Recruiters Unemployment
                                   n = (fˆ(✓) ⇢ˆ✓)h ⇢ˆ✓h       (1 fˆ(✓))h


                                                                                   θ


                                                                                                                nd(θ,x,w)
                              0                                                    0
                                  0             Number of workers                      0            n       l            h   n, l, h
                              A. The matching frictions on the labor market        B. Labor demand and supply in a (n, θ ) plane

                                               Figure VI: The Labor Market in the Model of Section III


   The labor supply is depicted in Figure VI. In Panel A, the labor supply curve gives the number
of producers. The panel also displays the numbers of recruiters and unemployed workers as a
function of labor market tightness. Employment is l = fˆ(θ ) · h, an increasing and concave function
of tightness. The number of producers is n = fˆ(θ ) − ρ̂ · θ · h so it is always below the number
                                                              

of employed workers. The number of recruiters is l − n = ρ̂ · v̂ = ρ̂ · θ · h, an increasing function
of tightness; this number is represented by the gap between the labor supply and employment
curves. The number of unemployed workers is h − l = (1 − fˆ(θ )) · h, a decreasing function of
tightness; this number is represented by the gap between the employment and labor force curves.
The unemployment rate is 1 − l/h = 1 − fˆ(θ ). Comparing this panel with Figure I shows that the
matching frictions on the product and labor markets are isomorphic.


Firms. The representative firm hires l workers. Some of the workers are engaged in produc-
tion while others are engaged in recruiting. More precisely, n < l producers generate a productive
capacity k according to the production function k = a · nα . The parameter a > 0 measures the
technology of the firm and the parameter α ∈ (0, 1) captures decreasing marginal returns to la-
bor. Because of the product market frictions, the firm only sells a fraction f (x) of its productive
capacity.
   The firm pays its l workers a real wage w; the nominal wage is p · w. The real wage bill of
the firm is w · l = (1 + τ̂(θ )) · w · n. From this perspective, matching frictions in the labor market
impose a wedge τ̂(θ ) on the wage of producers.


                                                                              30
    Taking as given the labor market tightness, product market tightness, price, and real wage, the
representative firm chooses employment to maximize its profits


                                  p · f (x) · a · nα − (1 + τ̂(θ )) · p · w · n.


The profit-maximizing number of producers satisfies


                                   f (x) · α · a · nα−1 = (1 + τ̂(θ )) · w.                        (8)


This equation implies that the real marginal revenue of one producer equals its real marginal cost.
The real marginal revenue is the marginal product of labor, α ·a·nα−1 , times the selling probability,
f (x). The real marginal cost is the real wage, w, plus the recruiting cost, τ̂(θ ) · w.
    We define the labor demand as the profit-maximizing number of producers at a given product
market tightness, labor market tightness, and real wage:

D EFINITION 9. The labor demand is a function of labor market tightness, product market tight-
ness, and real wage defined by

                                                                             1
                                                    f (x) · α · a
                                                                       
                                                                            1−α
                                    d
                                   n (θ , x, w) =                                                  (9)
                                                  (1 + τ̂(θ )) · w

for all (θ , x, w) ∈ [0, θ m ] × (0, +∞) × (0, +∞), where θ m > 0 satisfies ρ̂ = q̂(θ m ).

P ROPOSITION 8. The labor demand is strictly increasing in x and strictly decreasing in θ and w.
Furthermore, nd (0, x, w) = [ f (x) · α · a · (1 − ρ̂)/w]1/(1−α) and nd (θ m , x, w) = 0.

Proof. Obvious from (9).

    The labor demand is the number of producers that satisfies (8). The labor demand is strictly in-
creasing in x because when x increases, the probability 1 − f (x) that a producer is idle decreases, so
producers become more profitable to firms. It is strictly decreasing in w because when w increases,
the wage of producers increases, so producers become less profitable to firms. It is strictly decreas-
ing in θ because when θ increases, the number τ̂(θ ) of recruiters that firms must hire for each
producer increases, so producers become less profitable to firms. The labor demand is depicted in
Panel B of Figure VI. The labor demand curve slopes downward in the (n, θ ) plane.


                                                        31
   Unemployment is traditionally decomposed into three components: a Keynesian component
caused by deficient aggregate demand, a classical component caused by excessively high real
wages, and a frictional component caused by recruiting costs. In our model this decomposition
is not meaningful because equilibrium unemployment is simultaneously determined by aggregate
demand, real wage, and recruiting cost. Yet, our model of the labor demand incorporates Keyne-
sian, classical, and frictional factors. The Keynesian factor operates through f (x) in (9), because
f (x) describes how easy or difficult it is for firms to find customers. The classical factor operates
through w in (9). The frictional factor operates through τ̂(θ ) in (9), because τ̂(θ ) describes how
costly it is for firms to recruit workers. The cost of recruiting workers can be high either because
the cost of posting a vacancy is high or because vacancies are filled with low probability—this
happens when the labor market tightness is high.


III.B.   Definition of the Equilibrium
Employed and unemployed household members pool their income before jointly deciding con-
sumption; therefore, despite the unemployment risk, the aggregate demand is still given by (3).
Firms’ productive capacity is not exogenous but is endogenously determined by firms’ employ-
ment level; the aggregate supply is given by

                                                                             α
                        cs (x, θ ) = ( f (x) − ρ · x) · a · fˆ(θ ) − ρ̂ · θ ) · hα .


This expression is obtained from (1) by setting the productive capacity to a · nα and expressing n
as a function of θ using the labor supply. The equilibrium is defined as follows:

D EFINITION 10. An equilibrium consists of a product market tightness, a price, a labor market
tightness, and a real wage (x, p, θ , w) such that aggregate supply is equal to aggregate demand
and labor supply is equal to labor demand:
                                    
                                    
                                     cs (x, θ ) =        cd (x, p)
                                    
                                    

                                    
                                     ns (θ )      = nd (θ , x, w).
                                    
                                    


   Since the equilibrium is composed of four variables that satisfy two conditions, infinitely many


                                                    32
combinations of (x, p, θ , w) are consistent with the equilibrium conditions. To select an equi-
librium, we specify a price and a wage mechanism. In Sections III.C–III.E, we will study the
equilibria selected by different mechanisms.
    Many equilibrium prices and wages are possible, so the equilibrium may be in different regimes:

D EFINITION 11. The equilibrium is efficient if θ = θ ∗ and x = x∗ , labor-slack and product-slack if
θ < θ ∗ and x < x∗ , labor-slack and product-tight if θ < θ ∗ and x > x∗ , labor-tight and product-slack
if θ > θ ∗ and x < x∗ , labor-tight and product-tight if θ > θ ∗ and x > x∗ .

    These four inefficient regimes are reminiscent of the four regimes in the Barro-Grossman
model. In both models, whether the price and the real wage are inefficiently high or low deter-
mines which regime prevails. In Online Appendix B we characterize the four regions of a (w, p)
plane that correspond to the four inefficient regimes. These regions are depicted in Figure VII.
The region of the labor-slack and product-slack equilibria has high prices and high real wages, the
region of labor-tight and product-tight equilibria has low prices and low real wages, and so on. The
efficient equilibrium is at the intersection of the two curves delimiting the inefficient regimes.
    Despite the similarities between our model and the Barro-Grossman model, our model is more
tractable because it describes the economy in the four regimes more compactly. In our model the
equilibrium is described by the same system of smooth equations in all the regimes. In contrast, in
the Barro-Grossman model the disequilibrium is described by four different systems of equations,
one for each regime. These four systems are required to describe all the possible disequilibrium
situations as either supply or demand can be rationed in each market. Studying the model is
therefore difficult because each regime requires a different analysis.


III.C.    Fixprice Equilibrium
D EFINITION 12. A fixprice equilibrium parameterized by p0 > 0 and w0 > 0 consists of a product
market tightness, a price, a labor market tightness, and a real wage (x, p, θ , w) such that supply
equals demand on the product and labor markets and price and real wage are given by the param-
eter p0 and w0 : cs (x, θ ) = cd (x, p), ns (θ ) = nd (θ , x, w), p = p0 , and w = w0 .

P ROPOSITION 9. For any p0 > 0 and w0 > 0, there exists a unique fixprice equilibrium parame-
terized by p0 and w0 with positive consumption.


                                                     33
                                 p
                                          Labor-tight               Labor-slack
                                          Product-slack             Product-slack




                                                                         Labor-slack
                                 p*
                                                                         Product-tight
                                          Labor-tight
                                          Product-tight
                                  0
                                      0                   w*                             w


                  Figure VII: The Four Inefficient Regimes in the Model of Section III


Proof. See Online Appendix A.

    We use comparative statics to describe the response of the fixprice equilibrium to aggregate
demand, technology, labor supply, and mismatch shocks. We parameterize an increase in aggregate
demand by an increase in money supply, µ, or in the taste for consumption, χ. We parameterize an
increase in technology by an increase in the production-function parameter, a. We parameterize an
increase in labor supply by an increase in the size of the labor force, h. An increase in h captures
increases in labor force participation caused by demographic factors, changes to the taste for leisure
and work, or changes to policies such as disability insurance. An increase in h also captures
increases in job-search effort caused by changes to policies such as unemployment insurance.21
We parameterize an increase in mismatch by a decrease of the matching efficacy on the labor
market along with a corresponding decrease in recruiting cost: fˆ(θ ), q̂(θ ), and ρ become λ ·
fˆ(θ ), λ · q̂(θ ), and λ · ρ̂ with λ < 1.22 Note that the function τ̂ and tightness θ ∗ remain the
same after a mismatch shock. The interpretation of an increase in mismatch is that a fraction
of potential workers are not suitable to employers, which reduces matching efficacy, and these
unsuitable workers can be spotted at no cost, which reduces the cost of managing a vacancy.23 The
  21 Assume    that workers receiving unemployment insurance search for a job with effort 0 or 1. A change to the
generosity of unemployment insurance affects the share of workers searching with effort 1. But only workers searching
with effort 1 are part of h because only these workers contribute to the matching process. Hence, changing the
generosity of unemployment insurance affects h. Note that our classification of the workers receiving unemployment
insurance is consistent with the definitions used in official statistics. In the statistics constructed by the BLS from the
CPS, jobseekers are counted as unemployed if they search with effort 1 and as out of the labor force if they search
with effort 0, irrespective of their receipt of unemployment insurance.
   22 See Shimer (2007) and Sahin et al. (2014) for microfounded models of labor market mismatch.
   23 Another possible parameterization of mismatch shocks is a decrease in matching efficacy with no change in



                                                               34
following proposition summarizes the comparative statics:24

P ROPOSITION 10. Consider a fixprice equilibrium with positive consumption.

    • An increase in aggregate demand has the following effects: output, product market tight-
       ness, employment, and labor market tightness increase; the rate of idleness and the rate of
       unemployment decrease.

    • An increase in technology has the following effects: output increases but product market
       tightness decreases; employment and labor market tightness increase; the rate of idleness
       increases but the rate of unemployment decreases.

    • An increase in labor supply has the following effects: output and employment increase, but
       product market tightness and labor market tightness decrease; the rate of idleness and the
       rate of unemployment increase.

    • A decrease in mismatch has the following effects: output and employment increase, but
       product market tightness and labor market tightness decrease; the rate of idleness increases
       but the rate of unemployment decreases.

Proof. See Online Appendix A.

    The comparative statics are summarized in Panel A of Table II. Here we explain these compar-
ative statics with the help of the equilibrium diagrams in Figures III and VI. We concentrate on the
effects of shocks on tightnesses; the effects of shocks on quantities follow.
    First, consider an increase in aggregate demand. As explained in Section II.E, the aggregate
demand curve rotates upward in Panel A of Figure III, and the product market tightness rises.
Therefore, the rate of idleness among the producers employed by firms falls, and hiring a producer
becomes more profitable. Consequently, the labor demand curve rotates outward in Panel B of
Figure VI, which raises the labor market tightness. As a result, the number of producers change,
which shifts the aggregate supply curve in Panel A of Figure III. Hence, the initial increase in prod-
uct market tightness may be dampened (if the labor market is slack and the number of producers
increases) or accentuated (if the labor market is tight and the number of producers decreases).
recruiting cost. Such a parameterization leads to less clearcut results because the mismatch shock affects both labor
demand and labor supply.
   24 With a linear production function (α = 1), all the comparative statics would remain the same.



                                                         35
    Second, consider an increase in technology. Firms’ productive capacity rises, so, as explained
in Section II.E, the aggregate supply curve shifts outward in Panel A of Figure III, and the product
market tightness falls. At the same time, producers’ productivity increases while their real wage
remains fixed; hence hiring a producer becomes more profitable. Consequently, the labor demand
curve rotates outward in Panel B of Figure VI, which raises the labor market tightness. The initial
responses of the tightnesses spill over across markets. Firstly, the decrease in product market
tightness increases the rate of idleness among firms’ producers, which pushes the labor demand
curve back inward and attenuates the initial increase in labor market tightness. Secondly, the
increase in labor market tightness changes the number of producers, which shifts the aggregate
supply curve in Panel A of Figure III. Thus, the initial decrease in product market tightness may
be dampened (if the labor market is tight) or accentuated (if the labor market is slack).
    Our model retains the intuition of the Barro-Grossman model that negative aggregate demand
shocks propagate to the labor market by making it more difficult for firms to sell services. But
the mechanism of propagation from the product market to the labor market is quite different in
the two models; the response of employment to an increase in technology make this difference
visible. In our model, a positive technology shock always increases employment. In contrast, in
the Keynesian unemployment regime of the Barro-Grossman model, a positive technology shock
decreases employment (Bénassy, 1993). In that regime, firms are demand constrained: fixed price
and aggregate demand determine the output y that firms can sell. As firms have a production
function y = a · l α , employment is determined by the demand constraint: l = (y/a)1/α . An increase
in technology a therefore reduces employment. The same property is true in some New Keynesian
models (Galı́, 1999).25 Technology shocks have opposite effects on employment in the Barro-
Grossman model and our model because aggregate demand constrains firms differently in the two
models: in the Barro-Grossman model, firms take as given the number of services that they can
sell; in our model, firms take as given the probability to sell a service offered for sale.
    Third, consider an increase in labor supply. The labor force and labor supply curves shift
outward in Panel B of Figure VI. Thus, the labor market tightness falls but the number of producers
increases. With more producers, firms’ productive capacity increases; therefore, the aggregate
  25 New Keynesian models feature monopolistic firms that can only change their prices at intermittent intervals.
                                                                                                              When
its price is fixed, a firm faces a demand constraint as the firms in the Keynesian unemployment regime of the Barro-
Grossman model. This explains why some New Keynesian models have inherited the property of the Barro-Grossman
model.



                                                          36
supply curve shifts outward in Panel A of Figure III, which reduces the product market tightness.
Since the product market tightness falls, the labor demand curve rotates inward in Panel B of
Figure VI, which further reduces the labor market tightness and attenuates the initial increase in
the number of producers.
    Finally, consider a decrease in mismatch. In Panel B of Figure VI, the labor supply curve
shifts outward but the labor demand curve remains the same. As after an increase in labor supply,
the labor market and product market tightnesses decrease. But unlike after an increase in labor
supply, the unemployment rate decreases. This is because the reduction in mismatch increases
employment without affecting the size of the labor force; an increase in labor supply also increases
employment, but not as much as the underlying increase in the size of the labor force. In fact, the
mismatch shock is the only shock generating a positive correlation between labor market tightness
and unemployment rate.


III.D.     Competitive Equilibrium
D EFINITION 13. A competitive equilibrium consists of a product market tightness, a price, a
labor market tightness, and a real wage (x, p, θ , w) such that supply equals demand on the product
and labor markets and the labor and product market tightnesses are efficient: cs (x, θ ) = cd (x, p),
ns (θ ) = nd (θ , x, w), x = x∗ , and θ = θ ∗ .

P ROPOSITION 11. There exits a unique competitive equilibrium. The competitive price and real
wage are given by

                                 (1 + τ(x∗ ))1−ε          1 + τ̂(θ ∗ ) α χ ε
                                                                      
                              ∗
                            p =                       ·                   ·         ·µ
                                        f (x∗ )             fˆ(θ ∗ )         a · hα
                                             fˆ(θ ∗ )α−1
                            w∗ = f (x∗ ) ·                  · α · a · hα−1 .
                                           (1 + τ̂(θ ∗ ))α

Proof. See Online Appendix A.

P ROPOSITION 12. Consider a competitive equilibrium.

    • An increase in aggregate demand has no effect on output, product market tightness, the rate
       of idleness, employment, labor market tightness, and the rate of unemployment.



                                                       37
                         Table II: Comparative Statics in the Model of Section III

                                                                      Effect on:

                             Output       Product market tightness         Employment          Labor market tightness
 Increase in:                   y                      x                           l                       θ

                A. Fixprice equilibrium and equilibrium with partially rigid price and real wage
 Aggregate demand               +                      +                         +                         +
 Technology                     +                      −                         +                         +
 Labor supply                   +                      −                         +                         −
 Mismatch                       −                      +                         −                         +
                       B. Competitive equilibrium and equilibrium with Nash bargaining
 Aggregate demand               0                      0                           0                       0
 Technology                     +                      0                           0                       0
 Labor supply                   +                      0                         +                         0
 Mismatch                       −                      0                         −                         0

Notes. An increase in aggregate demand is an increase in money supply, µ, or in the taste for consumption, χ. An
increase in technology is an increase in the production-function parameter, a. An increase in labor supply is an increase
in the size of the labor force, h. An increase in mismatch is a decrease of the matching efficacy on the labor market
along with a corresponding decrease in recruiting cost. After an increase in mismatch, fˆ(θ ), q̂(θ ), and ρ̂ become
λ · fˆ(θ ), λ · q̂(θ ), and λ · ρ̂, with λ < 1. This table summarizes the results of Propositions 10 and 12 and the results
discussed in Section III.E.


     • An increase in technology has the following effects: output increases; product market tight-
       ness, the rate of idleness, employment, labor market tightness, and the rate of unemployment
       remain the same.

     • An increase in labor supply has the following effects: output and employment increase;
       product market tightness, the rate of idleness, labor market tightness, and the rate of unem-
       ployment remain the same.

     • A decrease in mismatch has the following effects: output and employment increase; product
       market tightness, the rate of idleness, and labor market tightness remain the same; the rate
       of unemployment decreases.

Proof. Similar to the proof of Proposition 6.


                                                           38
    The comparative statics are summarized in Panel B of Table II. The competitive equilibrium
has three notable properties. First, aggregate demand shocks have no real effects. Second, the
product market and labor market tightnesses do not respond to any of the shocks considered, not
even mismatch shocks. Third, employment only responds to labor supply and mismatch shocks,
and the unemployment rate only responds to mismatch shocks.


III.E.     Other Equilibria
Equilibrium with Partially Rigid Price and Real Wage. We consider the following partially
rigid price and real wage:

                                                                    ξ
                                                        χε
                                              p = p0 ·        ·µ
                                                       a · hα
                                                                       ξ
                                             w = w0 · α · a · hα−1          .


The parameter ξ ∈ [0, 1) governs the rigidity of the price and the rigidity of the real wage.26 We
show in Online Appendix A that, even though price and real wage are only partially rigid, the
equilibrium conditions have the same properties as when price and real wage are fixed. Hence, the
comparative statics of the fixprice equilibrium remain valid in this equilibrium with partial rigidity.


Equilibrium with Nash Bargaining. The real wage is the generalized Nash solution of the bar-
gaining problem between a firm and a marginal worker with bargaining power β̂ ∈ (0, 1).27 After
a match is made, the surplus to the firm of employing a marginal worker is F (w) = f (x) · a · α ·
nα−1 − w, and the surplus to the worker of being employed is W (w) = w. The Nash solution
maximizes F (w)1−β̂ · W (w)β̂ , so W (w) = β̂ · [W (w) + F (w)] = β̂ · f (x) · a · α · nα−1 and the real
wage satisfies w = β̂ · f (x) · a · α · nα−1 . With this wage the labor demand condition, given by (8),
becomes


                                                β̂ · (1 + τ̂(θ )) = 1.
  26 We   confine our analysis to the case in which price and real wage have the same rigidity. This case shows that the
comparative statics of the fixprice equilibrium may also be valid when price and real wage are only partially rigid.
   27 Although a firm and its workers are engaged in multilateral intrafirm bargaining, we abstract from possible strate-

gic behavior. Such behavior is analyzed in Stole and Zwiebel (1996). Instead, we assume that a firm bargains with
each of its workers individually, taking each worker as marginal.



                                                            39
This equation determines the labor market tightness. Equation (7) determines the product market
tightness. In equilibrium the tightnesses are solely determined by the functions τ and τ̂; therefore,
they do not respond to aggregate demand, technology, labor supply, or mismatch shocks. We
conclude that all the comparative statics are the same as in the competitive equilibrium.


         IV.     A DYNAMIC M ODEL WITH L ONG -T ERM R ELATIONSHIPS

In this section we embed the static model of Section III into a dynamic environment to represent
long-term customer and employment relationships. Such relationships are prevalent, as showed
in Panel C of Figure II. The panel displays the fraction of sales going to long-term customers in
eleven countries, including the US; on average, 77% of sales go to long-term customers. The panel
also displays the share of workers engaged in long-term employment relationships in the same
eleven countries; on average, 87% of workers have long-term employment contracts.
   We will use the dynamic model in the empirical analysis of Section V because, compared to
the static model, the dynamic model offers a better mapping between theoretical and empirical
variables. The mapping is better because the matching process in the dynamic model features
long-term relationships and thus corresponds more closely to what we see in real world. Although
the dynamic model is more complex, its comparative statics at the limit without time discounting
are the same as those of the static model.


Matching Process on the Product and Labor Markets. We work in continuous time. Firms
engage in long-term relationships with customers on the product market, and they engage in long-
term relationships with employees on the labor market.
   At time t, there are h workers in the labor force, l(t) employed workers, and h − l(t) unem-
ployed workers. Firms post v̂(t) vacancies. New employment relationships are formed at a rate
                          −1/γ̂
 (h − l(t))−γ̂ + v̂(t)−γ̂

                                 . We define the labor market tightness as θ (t) = v̂(t)/(h − l(t)). Un-
employed workers find a job at rate fˆ(θ (t)) and vacancies are filled at rate q̂(θ (t)). Employment
relationships are destroyed at rate ŝ > 0. The law of motion of employment is therefore given by

                                 ˙ = fˆ(θ (t)) · (h − l(t)) − ŝ · l(t).
                                 l(t)                                                              (10)


In this law of motion, fˆ(θ (t)) · (h − l(t)) is the number of employment relationships created at t


                                                   40
and ŝ · l(t) is the number of employment relationships destroyed at t.
   The product market operates exactly like the labor market. All purchases take place through
long-term customer relationships. At time t, firms have a productive capacity k(t) = a · n(t)α and
sell output y(t) < k(t). Idle capacity is k(t) − y(t). Households create new customer relationships
by visiting v(t) firms that have k(t) − y(t) productive capacity available. New customer relation-
                                                          −1/γ
ships are formed at a rate [(k(t) − y(t))−γ + v(t)−γ ]           . We define the product market tightness as
x(t) = v(t)/(k(t) − y(t)). The k(t) − y(t) units of available productive capacity yield new customer
relationships at rate f (x(t)) and the v(t) visits are successful at rate q(x(t)). Customer relationships
are destroyed at rate s. The law of motion of output is therefore given by


                                ẏ(t) = f (x(t)) · (k(t) − y(t)) − s · y(t).                               (11)


In this law of motion, f (x(t)) · (k(t) − y(t)) is the number of customer relationships created at t
and s · y(t) is the number of customer relationships destroyed at t.

                                                                                 R +∞ −δ ·t
Households. The utility of the representative household is given by               t=0 e     ·u(c(t), m(t)/p(t))dt,
where δ > 0 is the time discount factor, c(t) is consumption at time t, and m(t)/p(t) are real
money balances at time t. To consume c(t), the household must make y(t) ≥ c(t) purchases. The
y(t) purchases are used for consumption, c(t), and to cover the matching costs. At time t, the
household adjusts its number of customer relationships by ẏ(t), and it also replaces the s · y(t) re-
lationships that have just been destroyed. Making these ẏ(t) + s · y(t) new relationships requires
(ẏ(t) + s · y(t)) /q(x(t)) visits, each costing ρ purchases. Hence, purchases and consumption are
related by

                                                  ρ
                                y(t) = c(t) +           · (ẏ(t) + s · y(t)) .                             (12)
                                                q(x(t))

Nominal money balances are an asset with law of motion


                             ṁ(t) = p(t) · w(t) · l(t) − p(t) · y(t) + T (t),                             (13)


where T (t) includes firms’ nominal profits, which are rebated to the household, and transfers from
                                                     +∞                                          +∞
the government. Given [p(t), w(t), x(t), l(t), T (t)]t=0 the household chooses [y(t), c(t), m(t)]t=0 to


                                                     41
maximize utility subject to (12) and (13).


Firms. The representative firm employs n(t) producers and l(t) − n(t) recruiters. At time t, the
                                            ˙
firm adjusts its number of employees by l(t),    and it also replaces the ŝ · l(t) employees that have
                                 ˙ + ŝ · l(t) new workers requires to post l(t)  ˙ + ŝ · l(t) /q̂(θ (t))
                                                                                               
just left the firm. Hiring these l(t)
vacancies. Each vacancy takes the time of ρ̂ recruiters. Hence, the firm needs the following number
of recruiters:

                                                          ρ̂      ˙ + ŝ · l(t) .
                                                                               
                                     l(t) − n(t) =              · l(t)                                               (14)
                                                      q̂(θ (t))

The firm sells output y(t) to customers. The amount of sales depend on the product market tightness
and the productive capacity of the firm:


                                   ẏ(t) = f (x(t)) · (a · n(t)α − y(t)) − s · y(t).                                 (15)

                         +∞                                     +∞
Given [w(t), x(t), θ (t)]t=0 the firm chooses [l(t), n(t), y(t)]t=0 to maximize the discounted stream
                   R +∞ −δ ·t
of real profits,    t=0 e     · (y(t) − w(t) · l(t)) dt, subject to (14) and (15).


Discussion of the Assumptions. We assume that in a long-term relationship, the buyer does not
incur the matching cost and the seller sells one unit of good (labor or output) per unit time with
certainty. These assumptions are standard in dynamic matching models of the labor market. They
describe well long-term employment relationships given the nature of labor contracts.
    We also think that the assumptions describe long-term customer relationships well. First, a
sizable share of transactions on the product market are conducted under contract, and our assump-
tions describe well the terms of an explicit contract.28 Second, observations from a survey of
bakers that we conducted in France in the summer of 2007 suggest that even when no explicit con-
tract is signed, long-term customer relationships are governed by implicit contracts that alleviate
matching frictions in line with our assumptions.29 A first observation is that customer relationships
alleviate the uncertainty associated with random demand. A baker told us that demand is difficult
to predict and that having a large clientele of loyal customers who make it a habit to purchase bread
  28 Using BLS data on contractual arrangements between firms trading intermediate goods, Goldberg and Hellerstein
(2011) find that one-third of all transactions are conducted under contract across industries, for both goods and services.
  29 This survey is described in Eyster, Madarasz and Michaillat (2014).




                                                           42
in the shop was therefore important. In fact, “good” customers are expected to come everyday to
the bakery. A second observation is that customer relationships alleviate the uncertainty associated
with random supply. Being a customer means having the assurance that your usual bread will be
available, even on days when supply runs low. Of course, this is possible because bakers know
exactly what customers order every day through their long association. In fact, one baker said that
it would be “unacceptable” to run out of bread for a customer, and that customers would probably
“leave the bakery” if that happened.


Steady-state Equilibrium. We focus on a steady-state equilibrium with no time discounting
and a money supply growing at a constant rate µ̇(t)/µ(t) = π > 0.30 To maintain real money
balances constant, the rate of price inflation must be ṗ(t)/p(t) = π; hence, the price level sat-
isfies the differential equation ṗ(t) = π · p(t), where π > 0 is growth rate of the money supply
and p(0) is determined by the price mechanism. The real wage is constant: w(t) = w, where
w is determined by the price mechanism. Given a price mechanism, the variables {l, n, y, c, θ , x}
satisfy y = [ f (x)/ (s + f (x))] · a · nα , l = fˆ(θ )/ ŝ + fˆ(θ ) · h, y = (1 + τ(x)) · c where τ(x) ≡
                                                                   

s · ρ/ (q(x) − s · ρ), l = (1 + τ̂(θ )) · n where τ̂(θ ) ≡ ŝ · ρ̂/ (q̂(θ ) − ŝ · ρ̂),
                                                          ε
                                                 χ ·π
                                           
                                                                   µ(0)
                                      c=                       ·
                                               1 + τ(x)            p(0)
                                                                               1
                                                       α ·a
                                                                         
                                           f (x)                              1−α
                                      n=          ·                                 .
                                         s + f (x) (1 + τ̂(θ )) · w

                                                ˙ = 0 and ẏ(t) = 0 in (10) and (11). The next
The first two equations are obtained by setting l(t)
                                          ˙ = 0 in (12) and (14). The last two describe the house-
two are obtained by setting ẏ(t) = 0 and l(t)
hold’s optimal consumption choice combined with the market-clearing condition for money, and
the firm’s optimal employment choice. These last two equations are derived in Online Appendix C.
    These equations describe the output, employment, aggregate supply, labor supply, aggregate
demand, and labor demand curves. These curves correspond exactly to the curves of the static
model of Section III once χ, f (x), and fˆ(θ ) are replaced by χ · π, f (x)/(s + f (x)), and fˆ(θ )/(ŝ +
fˆ(θ )), and once the parameters ρ and ρ̂ are replaced by the parameters s · ρ and ŝ · ρ̂ in τ and τ̂. All
the relevant properties of the functions f and fˆ are preserved by the transformation to f /(s + f )
  30 Introducing   positive inflation ensures that households consume some produced good even when they become
infinitely patient at the limit without time discounting. Without inflation, infinitely patient households would use all
their income to increase their money balances, and aggregate demand would be zero.

                                                           43
and fˆ/(ŝ + fˆ). Hence, the comparative statics of the dynamic model are the same as those of the
static model of Section III. This is true both in a fixprice equilibrium, in which p(0) and w are fixed,
and in a competitive equilibrium, in which p(0) and w ensure that the tightnesses are efficient.


  V.     E XPLORATION OF THE S OURCES OF L ABOR M ARKET F LUCTUATIONS

In this section we combine the comparative-statics predictions of the dynamic model of Section IV
with empirical evidence to assess the sources of the labor market fluctuations observed in the US.31
We find that aggregate demand shocks are the main source of these fluctuations.


V.A.     A Proxy for Product Market Tightness
The empirical analysis relies on the cyclical behavior of the product market tightness, xt . We are
not aware of any measure of product market tightness, so we construct a proxy for the cyclical
component of the product market tightness in the US.32 Our proxy is the cyclical component of the
labor utilization rate, f (xt )/(s + f (xt )). The labor utilization rate is one minus the rate of idleness
of employed workers.
    We construct our proxy from the capacity utilization rate cut measured by the Census Bureau
in the SPC from 1973:Q4 to 2013:Q2. We choose the measure of capacity utilization from the SPC
because, compared to other measures of utilization, it is available for the longest period and uses
the broadest sample of firms. The measure applies to the manufacturing sector. The SPC measures
fourth-quarter capacity utilization rates until 2007 and quarterly capacity utilization rates after
that. To obtain a quarterly series for the entire period, we use a linear interpolation of the annual
series into a quarterly series for 1973:Q4–2007:Q4 and combine it with the quarterly series for
2008:Q1–2013:Q2.
    We need to correct cut to obtain f (xt )/(s + f (xt )) because f (xt )/(s + f (xt )) is the share of
the productive capacity at current employment that is actually sold, whereas cut is the share of
the productive capacity at full employment that is actually sold (Morin and Stevens, 2004). Let
   31 The assumption underlying our analysis is that the comparative statics provide a good approximation to the actual

dynamic effects of shocks. This assumption is justified if the labor and product markets quickly reach their steady
states. Shimer (2005) and Pissarides (2009) argue that this assumption is justified for the labor market because the
rates of inflow to and outflow from unemployment are large. Online Appendix A5 in Michaillat (2012) uses numerical
simulations to validate this assumption for the labor market. There is little evidence on the size of customer flows on
the product market, making it difficult to validate the assumption for the product market.
   32 For a measure of the tightness on the capital market, see Ottonello (2014).



                                                         44
g(a, n, k) = a · nα · k1−α be a firm’s productive capacity with technology a, employment n, and
capital k. Let K be the current stock of capital, which is also the stock of capital that respondents
take into account when they report cu. Let N be the full-employment level that respondents take
into account when they report cu. Let n be the current level of employment. We assume that
N and K move slowly over time so that their cyclical components are zero. The firm’s capacity
is g(a, n, K) under current employment and g(a, N, K) under full employment. We can write the
firm’s output in two different ways:

                                                           f (xt )
                           yt = cut · g(at , N, K) =                 · g(at , nt , K).
                                                         s + f (xt )

Taking log and recombining, we find that
                                         
                              f (xt )
                         ln                   = ln(cut ) − α · ln(nt ) + α · ln(N).             (16)
                            s + f (xt )

   We use (16) to construct the cyclical component of f (xt )/(s + f (xt )), which is our proxy for
the cyclical component of the product market tightness. We denote this proxy by xtc . First, we
measure nt as the quarterly average of the seasonally adjusted monthly employment level in the
manufacturing sector constructed by the BLS Current Employment Statistics program. Then, we
remove from ln(cut ) and ln(nt ) the low-frequency trends produced by a Hodrick-Prescott (HP)
filter with smoothing parameter 1600; this procedure yields the cyclical components of cut and nt ,
which we denote by cutc and ntc . Following conventions, we set α = 2/3. Last, using (16), we
construct our proxy as


                                              xtc = cutc − α · ntc .


Panel A of Figure VIII plots the proxy for 1973:Q4–2013:Q2.
   Our proxy for the product market tightness is not ideal. First, it is constructed from a mea-
sure of capacity utilization instead of a direct measure of labor utilization. Second, the measure
of capacity utilization applies to the manufacturing sector, and it may therefore be influenced by
some logistical issues such as peak load and inventory management. We address these problems in
Online Appendix D. In that appendix we show that all our empirical results are robust to using an
alternative proxy for product market tightness. This alternative proxy is constructed from the op-


                                                       45
erating rate in non-manufacturing sectors measured by the ISM and published in their Semiannual
Reports. The operating rate is the actual production level of firms as a share of their maximum
production level given current capital and labor, so it exactly corresponds to our concept of labor
utilization. Unfortunately, the time series for the operating rate only starts in 1999:Q4, so it is too
brief to permit a thorough empirical analysis.
   The empirical analysis also requires measures of output, employment, and labor market tight-
ness for the US from 1973:Q4 to 2013:Q2. We measure output and employment using seasonally
adjusted quarterly indices for real output and employment for the nonfarm business sector con-
structed by the MSPC program of the BLS. We construct the labor market tightness as the ratio
of vacancy to unemployment. We measure vacancy with the quarterly average of the monthly
vacancy index constructed by Barnichon (2010). This index combines the online and print help-
wanted indices of the Conference Board. We measure unemployment with the quarterly average
of the seasonally adjusted monthly unemployment level constructed by the BLS from the CPS.
We construct the cyclical components of these series by taking their log and removing the low-
frequency trend produced by a HP filter with smoothing parameter 1600.


V.B.    Evidence of Price and Real-Wage Rigidity
The equilibria that we have studied can be sorted in two groups, based on their comparative statics.
The first group includes the fixprice equilibrium and the equilibrium with partially rigid price and
real wage. Their comparative statics are reported in Panel A of Table II. Since shocks are not
entirely absorbed by price and real wage, and transmit to tightnesses, we say that these equilibria
exhibit price and real-wage rigidity. The second group includes the competitive equilibrium and
the equilibrium with Nash bargaining. Their comparative statics are reported in Panel B of Table II.
Since shocks are entirely absorbed by price and real wage, and do not transmit to tightnesses, we
say that these equilibria exhibit price and real-wage flexibility.
   The two groups of equilibria have starkly different comparative statics, so the first step of the
empirical analysis is to determine which group describes the data better. To do so, we observe the
cyclical behavior of the product market and labor market tightnesses, and we exploit the property
that the tightnesses respond to shocks only in equilibria with price and real-wage rigidity.
   Figure VIII displays the cyclical components of the product market and labor market tight-
nesses. Panel A shows that the cyclical component of the product market tightness is subject to

                                                  46
           0.08                                                    0.5

           0.04                                                   0.25
             0
                                                                    0
       −0.04
                                                              −0.25
       −0.08

       −0.12                                                      −0.5

       −0.16                                                  −0.75
                  1980        1990        2000        2010               1980       1990        2000        2010
                   A. Product market tightness                            B. Labor market tightness

Figure VIII: The Cyclical Components of Product Market Tightness and Labor Market Tightness
The time period is 1973:Q4–2013:Q2. Panel A displays the proxy for the cyclical component of the product market
tightness, xtc . The construction of xtc is explained in the text. Panel B displays the cyclical component of the labor
market tightness, θtc . The labor market tightness is constructed as θt = vt /ut , where vt is the quarterly average of the
monthly vacancy index constructed by Barnichon (2010), and ut is the quarterly average of the seasonally adjusted
monthly unemployment level constructed by the BLS from the CPS. We construct θtc by removing from ln(θt ) the
trend produced by a HP filter with smoothing parameter 1600.


fluctuations.33 Panel B confirms the well-known fact that the labor market tightness is subject
to large fluctuations over the business cycle.34 For instance, the cyclical component of the labor
market tightness fell to −0.5 in 2009, which indicates that the labor market tightness was broadly
50% below trend in 2009. While the drop in labor market tightness in 2008–2009 was commen-
surate to the drops in previous recessions, the drop in product market tightness in 2008–2009 was
unprecedented—it was three times as large as the drops in 1981–1982 and 2001.
    The cyclical fluctuations of the product market and labor market tightnesses suggest that the
equilibria with price and real-wage rigidity are more appropriate to describe business cycles than
the equilibria with price and real-wage flexibility. Relatedly, Shimer (2005) and Hall (2005) ob-
serve that the labor market tightness is subject to large fluctuations in the US, and they conclude
that real wages must be somewhat rigid. In the rest of the analysis, we therefore use the predictions
of the equilibria with price and real-wage rigidity. These predictions are reported in Panel A of
Table II.
  33 The  cyclical fluctuations of the product market tightness have never been analyzed before. Yet, the observation
that the product market tightness fluctuates a lot is not very surprising: everybody knows that queues at restaurants
systematically vary depending on the time of the day or the day of the week, which indicates that prices do not adjust
sufficiently to absorb variations in demand.
   34 See for instance the empirical work of Blanchard and Diamond (1989b) and Shimer (2005).




                                                             47
                                                                   1
       0.8                                              0.04
                 Labor market tightness (left scale)
                                                                  0.8
       0.4                                              0.02
                                                                  0.6

                                                                  0.4
        0                                               0
                                                                  0.2
     −0.4                                               −0.02      0

                      Employment (right scale)                   −0.2
     −0.8                                               −0.04      −4     −3   −2    −1     0    1     2    3    4
              1980        1990       2000        2010                                Lags (quarters)
                     A. Cyclical components                             B. Cross-correlogram (tightness leads)

              Figure IX: Correlation Between Labor Market Tightness and Employment
The time period is 1973:Q4–2013:Q2. Panel A displays the cyclical component of the labor market tightness, θtc , and
the cyclical component of employment, ltc . The labor market tightness is constructed as θt = vt /ut , where vt is the
quarterly average of the monthly vacancy index constructed by Barnichon (2010), and ut is the quarterly average of the
seasonally adjusted monthly unemployment level constructed by the BLS from the CPS. Employment is the seasonally
adjusted quarterly index for employment in the nonfarm business sector constructed by the BLS MSPC program. We
construct θtc and ltc by removing from ln(θt ) and ln(lt ) the trends produced by a HP filter with smoothing parameter
1600. Panel B displays the cross-correlogram between θtc and ltc . The cross-correlation at lag i is the correlation
           c and l c . The horizontal dashed lines are the two-standard-deviation confidence bounds.
between θt−i        t




V.C.     Evidence of Labor Demand Shocks
We evaluate whether labor market fluctuations are caused by labor demand, labor supply, or mis-
match shocks. Labor demand shocks encompass aggregate demand and technology shocks.
    Our model with price and real-wage rigidity predicts that the effects of labor demand shocks
are different from those of labor supply and mismatch shocks. Labor demand shocks produce a
positive correlation between labor market tightness and employment. In contrast, labor supply and
mismatch shocks produce a negative correlation between labor market tightness and employment.
    To assess the prevalence of labor demand, labor supply, and mismatch shocks, we therefore
measure the correlation between the cyclical components of labor market tightness and employ-
ment. This correlation is displayed in Figure IX. In Panel A the cyclical components of labor
market tightness and employment appear strongly positively correlated. Panel B formalizes this
observation by reporting the cross-correlogram of labor market tightness and employment: labor
market tightness leads employment by one lag; at one lag, the correlation is large, 0.95; the contem-
poraneous correlation is broadly the same, 0.93; and all the correlations are statistically different


                                                            48
                                                                        1
       0.08                                                  0.05
                          Output (right scale)
                                                                       0.8

                                                                       0.6
          0                                                  0
                                                                       0.4

                                                                       0.2
      −0.08                                                  −0.05
                                                                        0
              Product market tightness (left scale)
                                                                      −0.2
      −0.16                                                  −0.1       −4     −3   −2    −1     0    1     2    3    4
                 1980        1990        2000         2010                                Lags (quarters)
                        A. Cyclical components                               B. Cross-correlogram (tightness leads)

                   Figure X: Correlation Between Product Market Tightness and Output
The time period is 1973:Q4–2013:Q2. Panel A displays the proxy for the cyclical component of the product market
tightness, xtc , and the cyclical component of output, ytc . The construction of xtc is explained in the text. Output, yt , is
the seasonally adjusted quarterly index for real output in the nonfarm business sector constructed by the BLS MSPC
program. We construct ytc by removing from ln(yt ) the trend produced by a HP filter with smoothing parameter 1600.
Panel B displays the cross-correlogram between xtc and ytc . The cross-correlation at lag i is the correlation between xt−ic
      c
and yt . The horizontal dashed lines are the two-standard-deviation confidence bounds.


from 0.
    In the context of our model, these positive correlations imply that it is labor demand shocks
and not labor supply shocks or mismatch shocks that generate labor market fluctuations. Relatedly,
Blanchard and Diamond (1989b) observe that the vacancy and unemployment rates are negatively
correlated in US data, and they conclude that labor market fluctuations must be caused by aggregate
activity shocks and not by labor force participation shocks or reallocation shocks.


V.D.      Evidence of Aggregate Demand Shocks
Having found that labor demand shocks are the prevalent source of labor market fluctuations, we
determine whether these labor demand shocks are aggregate demand shocks or technology shocks.
    Our model with price and real-wage rigidity predicts that the effects of aggregate demand
shocks are different from those of technology shocks. Aggregate demand shocks produce a positive
correlation between product market tightness and output. In contrast, technology shocks produce
a negative correlation between product market tightness and output.
    To determine the nature of labor demand shocks, we therefore measure the correlation between
the cyclical components of product market tightness and output. This correlation is displayed

                                                                 49
in Figure X. In Panel A the cyclical components of product market tightness and output appear
positively correlated. Particularly, large drops in product market tightness followed the output
drops of 1981–1982, 2001, and 2008–2009, suggesting that these recessions were caused by a
negative aggregate demand shock. There are some exceptions, however. From 2004 to 2006,
output was increasing while product market tightness was falling. This observation suggests a
positive technology shock in the 2004–2006 period. Panel B reports the cross-correlogram of
product market tightness and output: product market tightness leads output by one lag; at one lag,
the correlation is quite large, 0.59; the contemporaneous correlation is 0.49; and all the correlations
are statistically different from 0.
   In the context of our model, these positive correlations imply that it is aggregate demand shocks
and not technology shocks that are the main source of labor market fluctuations. Our conclusion
coincides with the conclusions of Galı́ (1999) and Basu, Fernald and Kimball (2006) that technol-
ogy shocks are not the main source of business-cycle fluctuations, despite the fact that the three
analyses follow different approaches based on entirely different models.


                                      VI.     C ONCLUSION

We use a simple model and direct empirical evidence to explore the sources of the unemployment
fluctuations observed in the US. The model makes predictions about the comovements of product
market tightness, labor market tightness, output, and employment for a broad set of shocks that
could potentially explain the fluctuations. We compare these predictions with the comovements
observed in US data. The comparison suggests that aggregate demand shocks are the main source
of unemployment fluctuations while technology, labor supply, and mismatch shocks are not an
important source of fluctuations. Our analysis also confirms the prevalence of price and real-wage
rigidities in the data; the rigidities allow aggregate demand shocks to propagate to the labor market.
   In our model, aggregate demand arises from a choice between consumption and holding money.
Usually, we think that aggregate demand arises from a choice between consumption, holding
money, and saving with interest-bearing assets. In Michaillat and Saez (2014), we extend the
model in that direction and show that the properties of the aggregate demand and equilibrium are
robust. We also use the extended model to study the roles and limitations of conventional and
unconventional fiscal and monetary policies in stabilizing unemployment fluctuations.



                                                  50
                                      R EFERENCES
Alvarez, Luis J., and Ignacio Hernando. 2005. “Price Setting Behaviour of Spanish Firms: Evi-
  dence from Survey Data.” European Central Bank Working Paper 538.
Apel, Mikael, Richard Friberg, and Kerstin Hallsten. 2005. “Microfoundations of Macroeco-
  nomic Price Adjustment: Survey Evidence from Swedish Firms.” Journal of Money, Credit and
  Banking, 37(2): 313–338.
Arseneau, David M., and Sanjay K. Chugh. 2007. “Bargaining, Fairness, and Price Rigidity in
  a DSGE Environment.” Federal Reserve Board International Finance Discussion Paper 900.
Aucremanne, Luc, and Martine Druant. 2005. “Price-Setting Behaviour in Belgium: What Can
  Be Learned from an Ad Hoc Survey?” European Central Bank Working Paper 448.
Bai, Yan, Jose-Victor Rios-Rull, and Kjetil Storesletten. 2012. “Demand Shocks as Productivity
  Shocks.” http://www.econ.umn.edu/∼vr0j/papers/brs Sept 27 2012.pdf.
Barnichon, Regis. 2010. “Building a composite Help-Wanted Index.” Economics Letters,
  109(3): 175–178.
Barro, Robert J., and Herschel I. Grossman. 1971. “A General Disequilibrium Model of Income
  and Employment.” American Economic Review, 61(1): 82–93.
Barro, Robert J., and Herschel I. Grossman. 1976. Money, Employment and Inflation. Cam-
  bridge:Cambridge University Press.
Basu, Susanto, John G. Fernald, and Miles S. Kimball. 2006. “Are Technology Improvements
  Contractionary?” American Economic Review, 96(5): 1418–1448.
Bénassy, Jean-Pascal. 1993. “Nonclearing Markets: Microeconomic Concepts and Macroeco-
  nomic Applications.” Journal of Economic Literature, 31(2): 732–761.
Bils, Mark. 2004. “Studying Price Markups from Stockout Behavior.” http://www.econ.rochester.
  edu/people/BilsPapers/st1.pdf.
Blanchard, Olivier J., and Jordi Galı́. 2010. “Labor Markets and Monetary Policy: A
  New-Keynesian Model with Unemployment.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
  2(2): 1–30.
Blanchard, Olivier J., and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. 1987. “Monopolistic Competition and the Effects
  of Aggregate Demand.” American Economic Review, 77(4): 647–666.
Blanchard, Olivier J., and Peter A. Diamond. 1989a. “The Aggregate Matching Function.”
  In Growth, Productivity and Unemployment. , ed. Peter A. Diamond, 159–206. Cambridge,
  MA:MIT Press.
Blanchard, Olivier J., and Peter Diamond. 1989b. “The Beveridge Curve.” Brookings Papers on
  Economic Activity, 20(1): 1–76.
Blinder, Alan S., Elie R. D. Canetti, David E. Lebow, and Jeremy B. Rudd. 1998. Asking about
  Prices. New York, NY:Russell Sage Foundation.
Caballero, Ricardo, and Emmanuel Farhi. 2014. “The Safety Trap.” National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research (NBER) Working Paper 19927.
Calvo, Guillermo A. 1983. “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework.” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 12(3): 383–398.


                                             51
den Haan, Wouter J. 2013. “Inventories and the Role of Goods-Market Frictions for Business
  Cycles.” http://www.wouterdenhaan.com/papers/inventories.pdf.
den Haan, Wouter J., Garey Ramey, and Joel Watson. 2000. “Job Destruction and Propagation
  of Shocks.” American Economic Review, 90(3): 482–498.
Diamond, Peter A. 1982a. “Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium.” Journal of
  Political Economy, 90(5): 881–894.
Diamond, Peter A. 1982b. “Wage Determination and Efficiency in Search Equilibrium.” Review
  of Economic Studies, 49(2): 217–227.
Diamond, Peter A. 2013. “Cyclical Unemployment, Structural Unemployment.” IMF Economic
  Review, 61: 410–455.
Drazen, Allan. 1980. “Recent Developments in Macroeconomic Disequilibrium Theory.” Econo-
  metrica, 48(2): 283–306.
Edgeworth, Francis Y. 1881. Mathematical Psychics: An Essay on the Application of Mathemat-
  ics to the Moral Sciences. London:Kegan Paul.
Elsby, Michael W.L., Bart Hobijn, and Aysegul Sahin. 2010. “The Labor Market in the Great
  Recession.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 41(1): 1–69.
Eyster, Erik, Kristof Madarasz, and Pascal Michaillat. 2014. “The Curse of Inflation.” Centre
  for Economic Policy Research (CEPR) Discussion Paper 10286.
Fabiani, Silvia, Angela Gattulli, and Roberto Sabbatini. 2004. “The Pricing Behavior of Italian
  Firms: New Survey Evidence on Price Stickiness.” European Central Bank Working Paper 333.
Farber, Henry S., and Robert Valletta. 2013. “Do Extended Unemployment Benefits Lengthen
  Unemployment Spells? Evidence from Recent Cycles in the U.S. Labor Market.” National Bu-
  reau of Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper 19048.
Farmer, Roger E.A. 2008. “Aggregate Demand and Supply.” International Journal of Economic
  Theory, 4(1): 77–93.
Farmer, Roger E.A. 2012. “The Stock Market Crash of 2008 Caused the Great Recession: Theory
  and Evidence.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 36(5): 693–707.
Foster, Lucia, John C. Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. 2012. “The Slow Growth of New
  Plants: Learning about Demand?” National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Working
  Paper 17853.
Galı́, Jordi. 1999. “Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle: Do Technology Shocks
  Explain Aggregate Fluctuations?” American Economic Review, 89(1): 249–271.
Galı́, Jordi. 2010. “Monetary Policy and Unemployment.” In Handbook of Monetary Economics.
  Vol. 3A, , ed. Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, 487–546. Amsterdam:Elsevier.
Gertler, Mark, and Antonella Trigari. 2009. “Unemployment Fluctuations with Staggered Nash
  Wage Bargaining.” Journal of Political Economy, 117(1): 38–86.
Gertler, Mark, Luca Sala, and Antonella Trigari. 2008. “An Estimated Monetary DSGE Model
  with Unemployment and Staggered Nominal Wage Bargaining.” Journal of Money, Credit and
  Banking, 40(8): 1713–1764.
Goldberg, Pinelopi K., and Rebecca Hellerstein. 2011. “How Rigid Are Producer Prices?” http:
  //www.econ.yale.edu/∼pg87/ProducerPrices.pdf.

                                              52
Gourio, Francois, and Leena Rudanko. 2014. “Customer Capital.” Review of Economic Studies,
  81(3).
Grandmont, Jean-Michel. 1977. “The Logic of the Fix-Price Method.” The Scandinavian Journal
  of Economics, 79(2): 169–186.
Hagedorn, Marcus, and Iourii Manovskii. 2008. “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unem-
  ployment and Vacancies Revisited.” American Economic Review, 98(4): 1692–1706.
Hall, Robert E. 2005. “ Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness.” American
  Economic Review, 95(1): 50–65.
Hall, Robert E. 2008. “General Equilibrium with Customer Relationships: A Dynamic Analysis
  of Rent-Seeking.” http://www.stanford.edu/∼rehall/GECR no derivs.pdf.
Hall, Simon, Mark Walsh, and Anthony Yates. 2000. “Are UK Companies’ Prices Sticky?”
  Oxford Economic Papers, 52(3): 425–446.
Hosios, Arthur J. 1990. “On the Efficiency of Matching and Related Models of Search and Un-
  employment.” Review of Economic Studies, 57(2): 279–298.
Howitt, Peter, and R. Preston McAfee. 1987. “Costly Search and Recruiting.” International Eco-
  nomic Review, 28(1): 89–107.
Huo, Zhen, and José-Vı́ctor Rı́os-Rull. 2013. “Paradox of Thrift Recessions.” National Bureau
  of Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper 19443.
Keynes, John Maynard. 1936. The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. New
  York, NY:Macmillan.
Korinek, Anton, and Alp Simsek. 2014. “Liquidity Trap and Excessive Leverage.” National Bu-
  reau of Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper 19970.
Kwapil, Claudia, Joseph Baumgartner, and Johann Scharler. 2005. “The price-setting be-
  haviour of Austrian firms: Some survey evidence.” European Central Bank Working Paper 464.
Lazear, Edward P., and James R. Spletzer. 2012. “The United States Labor Market: Status Quo
  or A New Normal?” In Proceedings of the Economic Policy Symposium of Jackson Hole. 405–
  451. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
Lehmann, Etienne, and Bruno Van der Linden. 2010. “Search Frictions on Product and Labor
  Markets: Money in the Matching Function.” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 14(01): 56–92.
Loupias, Claire, and Roland Ricart. 2004. “Price Setting in France: New Evidence from Survey
  Data.” European Central Bank Working Paper 448.
Lunnemann, Patrick, and Thomas Y. Matha. 2006. “New Survey Evidence on the Pricing Be-
  havior of Luxembourg Firms.” European Central Bank Working Paper 617.
Malinvaud, Edmond. 1977. The Theory of Unemployment Reconsidered. Oxford:Basil Blackwell.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Matthew Weinzierl. 2011. “An Exploration of Optimal Stabilization
  Policy.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 42(1): 209–272.
Martins, Fernando. 2005. “The Price Setting Behaviour of Portuguese Firms: Evidence From
  Survey Data.” European Central Bank Working Paper 562.
Mas-Colell, Andreu, Michael D. Whinston, and Jerry R. Green. 1995. Microeconomic Theory.
  Oxford:Oxford University Press.


                                             53
Mathä, Thomas Y., and Olivier Pierrard. 2011. “Search in the Product Market and the Real
  Business Cycle.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 35(8): 1172–1191.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2014. “What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment?” Econo-
  metrica, 82(6): 2197–2223.
Michaillat, Pascal. 2012. “Do Matching Frictions Explain Unemployment? Not in Bad Times.”
  American Economic Review, 102(4): 1721–1750.
Michaillat, Pascal. 2014. “A Theory of Countercyclical Government Multiplier.” American Eco-
  nomic Journal: Macroeconomics, 6(1): 190–217.
Michaillat, Pascal, and Emmanuel Saez. 2014. “An Economical Business-Cycle Model.” Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper 19777.
Moen, Espen R. 1997. “Competitive Search Equilibrium.” Journal of Political Economy,
  105(2): 385–411.
Morin, Norman, and John Stevens. 2004. “Estimating Capacity Utilization from Survey Data.”
  Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion Paper 2004-49.
Mortensen, Dale T. 1982. “Property Rights and Efficiency in Mating, Racing, and Related
  Games.” American Economic Review, 72(5): 968–979.
Ottonello, Pablo. 2014. “Capital Unemployment, Financial Shocks, and Investment Slumps.” http:
  //www.columbia.edu/∼po2171/Ottonello JMP 13Oct2014.pdf.
Petrongolo, Barbara, and Christopher A. Pissarides. 2001. “Looking into the Black Box: A
  Survey of the Matching Function.” Journal of Economic Literature, 39(2): 390–431.
Petrosky-Nadeau, Nicolas, and Etienne Wasmer. 2011. “Macroeconomic Dynamics in a Model
  of Goods, Labor and Credit Market Frictions.” Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) Discussion
  Paper 5763.
Pissarides, Christopher. 1986. “Unemployment and Vacancies in Britain.” Economic Policy,
  1(3): 500–559.
Pissarides, Christopher A. 1985. “Short-Run Equilibrium Dynamics of Unemployment, Vacan-
  cies, and Real Wages.” American Economic Review, 75(4): 676–690.
Pissarides, Christopher A. 2000. Equilibrium Unemployment Theory. . 2nd ed., Cambridge,
  MA:MIT Press.
Pissarides, Christopher A. 2009. “The Unemployment Volatility Puzzle: Is Wage Stickiness the
  Answer?” Econometrica, 77(5): 1339–1369.
Rendahl, Pontus. 2012. “Fiscal Policy in an Unemployment Crisis.” http://sites.google.com/site/
  pontusrendahl/stimulus.pdf.
Rothstein, Jesse. 2011. “Unemployment Insurance and Job Search in the Great Recession.” Brook-
  ings Papers on Economic Activity, 43(2): 143–213.
Sahin, Aysegul, Joseph Song, Giorgio Topa, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2014. “Mismatch Un-
  employment.” American Economic Review, 104(11): 3529–3564.
Shimer, Robert. 2005. “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies.”
  American Economic Review, 95(1): 25–49.
Shimer, Robert. 2007. “Mismatch.” American Economic Review, 97(4): 1074–1101.


                                               54
Shimer, Robert. 2010. Labor Markets and Business Cycles. Princeton, NJ:Princeton University
  Press.
Stahl, Harald. 2005. “Price Setting in German Manufacturing: New Evidence from New Survey
  Data.” European Central Bank Working Paper 561.
Stole, Lars A., and Jeffrey Zwiebel. 1996. “Intra-Firm Bargaining under Non-Binding Con-
  tracts.” Review of Economic Studies, 63(3): 375–410.
Walsh, Carl E. 2003. “Labor Market Search and Monetary Shocks.” In Elements of Dynamic
  Macroeconomic Analysis. , ed. Sumru Altug, Jagjit S. Chadha and Charles Nolan, 451–487.
  Cambridge:Cambridge University Press.




                                            55
                AGGREGATE DEMAND, IDLE TIME, AND
                UNEMPLOYMENT: ONLINE APPENDICES

                            Pascal Michaillat and Emmanuel Saez

                                             January 2015



                           O NLINE A PPENDIX A: L ONG P ROOFS
Proof of Proposition 9. In a fixprice equilibrium parameterized by p0 > 0 and w0 > 0, (x, θ )
satisfies ns (θ ) = nd (θ , x, w0 ) and cs (x, θ ) = cd (x, p0 ). We look for equilibria with positive con-
sumption. These equilibria necessarily have θ ∈ (0, θ m ) and x ∈ (0, xm ).
                                                                        1−α
    Equation nd (θ , x, w0 ) = ns (θ ) is equivalent to nd (θ , x, w0 )       = [ns (θ )]1−α . Following the
                                                            

logic of the proof of Proposition 3, we can show that the latter equation is equivalent to
                                                                                  w
                  F(θ , x, a, h, w) ≡ f (x) − fˆ(θ )1−α · (1 + τ̂(θ ))α · h1−α ·      = 0.            (A1)
                                                                                 α ·a
Since α < 1, the function θ 7→ fˆ(θ )1−α ·(1 + τ̂(θ ))α is strictly increasing from 0 to +∞ on [0, θ m ).
Hence, (A1) implicitly defines θ as a function ΘF of x ∈ [0, +∞). Since f is strictly increasing
from 0 to 1 on [0, +∞), ΘF is strictly increasing on [0, +∞),      F (0) = 0, and lim
                                                             α Θ1−α
                                                                                            F
                                                                                     x→+∞ Θ (x) = θ
                                                                                                       F

where θ ∈ (0, θ ) is defined by fˆ(θ )
          F        m                    F 1−α            F
                                              · 1 + τ̂(θ ) · h         · w/(α · a) = 1.
     The proof of Proposition 3 shows that the equation cs (x, θ ) = cd (x, p0 ), combined with k =
a · nα is equivalent to
                                                    α
                                        fˆ(θ )
                                   
                                                                            µ
                          f (x) · a ·            · h · (1 + τ(x))ε−1 = χ ε · .
                                      1 + τ̂(θ )                            p

Using (A1), we transform this equation to
                                                                       α         µ
                   G(θ , x, h, χ, µ, w, p) ≡ fˆ(θ ) · (1 + τ(x))ε−1 −     · χ ε · = 0.                (A2)
                                                                      w·h        p
                                                                    ε−1
If α · χ ε · (µ/p)/(w · h) ≥ 1, we define xG (p, w) by 1 + τ(xG )        = α · χ ε · (µ/p)/(w · h). If
α · χ ε · (µ/p)/(w · h) < 1, we set xG (p, w) = 0. Since ε > 1, the function x 7→ (1 + τ(x))ε−1 is
strictly increasing from 1 to +∞ on [0, xm ); therefore, xG is well defined and xG (p, w) ∈ (0, xm ).
Since fˆ is strictly increasing from 0 to 1 on (0, +∞), (A2) implicitly defines θ as a function ΘG
of x ∈ (xG (p, w), xm ). Moreover, ΘG is strictly decreasing on (xG (p, w), xm ), limx→xG (p,w) ΘG (x) =
+∞, and limx→xm ΘG (x) = 0.
    The system of (A1) and (A2) is equivalent to the system of ΘF (x) = ΘG (x) and θ = ΘF (x).
The properties of ΘF and ΘG imply that this system admits a unique solution (x, θ ) with x ∈
(xG (p, w), xm ) and θ ∈ (0, θ F ).

                                                    56
Proof of Proposition 10.

Aggregate Demand Shocks. We parameterize an increase in aggregate demand by an increase
in χ or µ. The function F in (A1) satisfies ∂ F/∂ θ < 0, ∂ F/∂ x > 0, ∂ F/∂ a > 0, and ∂ F/∂ h < 0.
Using the implicit function theorem, we write the solution θ to F(θ , x, a, h, w) = 0 as a function
ΘF (x, a, h) with ∂ ΘF /∂ x > 0, ∂ ΘF /∂ a > 0, and ∂ ΘF /∂ h < 0.
    The function G in (A2) satisfies ∂ G/∂ θ > 0, ∂ G/∂ x > 0, ∂ G/∂ h > 0, ∂ G/∂ χ < 0, and
∂ G/∂ µ < 0. Using the implicit function theorem, we write the solution θ to G(θ , x, h, χ, µ, w, p) =
0 as a function ΘG (x, h, χ, µ) with ∂ ΘG /∂ x < 0, ∂ ΘG /∂ h < 0, ∂ ΘG /∂ χ > 0, and ∂ ΘG /∂ µ > 0.
    In equilibrium, x satisfies G(ΘF (x, a, h), x, h, χ, µ) = 0. Given that ∂ ΘF /∂ x > 0, ∂ G/∂ θ > 0,
∂ G/∂ x > 0, and ∂ G/∂ χ < 0, the implicit function theorem implies that ∂ x/∂ χ > 0. We can show
similarly that ∂ x/∂ µ > 0. Since θ = ΘF (x, a, h) with ∂ ΘF /∂ x > 0, we also have ∂ θ /∂ χ > 0 and
∂ θ /∂ µ > 0. Equation (8) yields y = fˆ(θ ) · h · w/α; therefore, the comparative statics for θ imply
that ∂ y/∂ χ > 0 and ∂ y/∂ µ > 0. Since l = fˆ(θ ) · h, the comparative statics for θ also imply that
∂ l/∂ χ > 0 and ∂ l/∂ µ > 0.

Technology Shocks. We parameterize an increase in technology by an increase in a. In equilib-
rium, x satisfies F(ΘG (x, h, χ, µ), x, a, h) = 0. Given that ∂ ΘG /∂ x < 0, ∂ F/∂ θ < 0, ∂ F/∂ x > 0,
and ∂ F/∂ a > 0, the implicit function theorem implies that ∂ x/∂ a < 0. Since θ = ΘG (x, h, χ, µ)
with ∂ ΘG /∂ x < 0, we obtain ∂ θ /∂ a > 0. The logic presented for aggregate demand shocks im-
plies that since ∂ θ /∂ a > 0, then ∂ y/∂ a > 0 and ∂ l/∂ a > 0.

Labor Supply Shocks. We parameterize an increase in labor supply by an increase in h. The
functions F and G both depend on h, so it is impossible to obtain comparative statics for x and θ
from them. To obtain the comparative statics, we manipulate and combine (A1) and (A2), and we
obtain
                                                                  α α       α−1
                            α                    (1−α)·(ε−1)              ε µ
     H(θ , x) ≡ (1 + τ̂(θ )) − f (x) · (1 + τ(x))            ·a·       · χ ·        = 0.     (A3)
                                                                   w         p

The function H satisfies ∂ H/∂ θ > 0 and ∂ H/∂ x < 0. The function H does not depend on h,
which resolves the earlier problem. Using the implicit function theorem, we write the solution θ
to H(θ , x) = 0 as a function ΘH (x) with ∂ ΘH /∂ x > 0.
    In equilibrium, x satisfies G(ΘH (x), x, h) = 0. Given that ∂ ΘH /∂ x > 0, ∂ G/∂ θ > 0, ∂ G/∂ x >
0, and ∂ G/∂ h > 0, the implicit function theorem implies that ∂ x/∂ h < 0. Since θ = ΘH (x) with
∂ ΘH /∂ x > 0, we obtain ∂ θ /∂ h < 0. We find that ∂ y/∂ h > 0 because y = (1 + τ(x)) · cd (x, p) =
(1 + τ(x))1−ε · χ ε · µ/p and 1 − ε < 0 and ∂ x/∂ h < 0. We also find that ∂ l/∂ h > 0 because
l = α · y/w (from equation (8)) and ∂ y/∂ h > 0.

Mismatch Shocks. We parameterize an increase in mismatch by a decrease in matching efficacy
on the labor market along with a corresponding decrease in recruiting cost: fˆ(θ ), q̂(θ ), and ρ be-
come λ · fˆ(θ ), λ · q̂(θ ), and λ · ρ̂ with λ < 1. Consequently, the function τ̂ remains the same. With
the parameter λ for mismatch, the functions H and ΘH are the same, but the function G depends
on λ with ∂ G/∂ λ > 0. In equilibrium, x satisfies G(ΘH (x), x, λ ) = 0. Given that ∂ ΘH /∂ x > 0,


                                                  57
∂ G/∂ θ > 0, ∂ G/∂ x > 0, and ∂ G/∂ λ > 0, the implicit function theorem implies that ∂ x/∂ λ < 0.
Since θ = ΘH (x) with ∂ ΘH /∂ x > 0, we have ∂ θ /∂ λ < 0. The logic presented for labor supply
shocks implies that since ∂ x/∂ λ < 0, then ∂ y/∂ λ > 0 and ∂ l/∂ λ > 0.

Comparative Statics with Partially Rigid Price and Real Wage. Using the expressions of the
partially rigid price and real wage, we rewrite (A1), (A2), and (A3) as

                                                                               w0 · h(1−α)·(1−ξ )
                                           f (x) − fˆ(θ )1−α · (1 + τ̂(θ ))α ·                      =0
                                                                                  (α · a)1−ξ
                                                                       α 1−ξ        (χ ε · µ)1−ξ
                                            fˆ(θ ) · (1 + τ(x))ε−1 −              ·              =0
                                                                      w0 · h1−ξ           p0
                                                                           "                #α−1
                                                               α α(1−ξ )     (χ ε · µ)1−ξ
        (1 + τ̂(θ ))α − f (x) · (1 + τ(x))(1−α)·(ε−1) · a1−ξ ·           ·                       = 0.
                                                                  wα0              p0

The implicit functions defined by these equations have exactly the same properties as the functions
F, G, and H. Hence, the comparative statics for x and θ are the same in the fixprice equilibrium
and in the equilibrium with partially rigid prices. Finally, the arguments used above for the fixprice
equilibrium imply that the comparative statics for y and l are the same in the fixprice equilibrium
and in the equilibrium with partially rigid prices.

Proof of Proposition 11. In a competitive equilibrium, the pair (p∗ , w∗ ) satisfies ns (θ ∗ ) = nd (θ ∗ , x∗ , w∗ )
and cs (x∗ , θ ∗ ) = cd (x∗ , p∗ ). Following the steps of the proof of Proposition 9, we show that (p∗ , w∗ )
satisfies

                          w∗ = f (x∗ ) · fˆ(θ ∗ )α−1 · (1 + τ̂(θ ∗ ))−α · hα−1 · α · a
                           ∗  (1 + τ(x∗ ))1−ε   α
                          p =                 · ∗ · χ ε · µ.
                                   ˆf (θ ∗ )   w ·h

This system admits a unique solution. Thus, there exists a unique competitive equilibrium. Clearly,
the wage w∗ satisfies the expression in the proposition. Combining these two equations, we find
that the price p∗ also satisfies the expression in the proposition.


              O NLINE A PPENDIX B: T HE F OUR I NEFFICIENT R EGIMES
This appendix establishes the boundaries in a (w, p) plane of the four inefficient regimes of the
model of Section III. These boundaries are depicted in Figure VII.

P ROPOSITION A1. There exists a function w 7→ px (w) such that for any w > 0, the product market
is slack if p > px (w) and tight if p < px (w). There exists a function w 7→ pθ (w) such that for
any w > 0, the labor market is slack if p > pθ (w) and tight if p < pθ (w). The function px is
strictly decreasing for w ∈ (0, w∗ ], strictly increasing for w ∈ [w∗ , +∞), limw→0 px (w) = +∞, and
limw→+∞ px (w) = +∞. The function pθ is strictly decreasing for w ∈ (0, wF ], limw→0 pθ (w) = +∞,
and pθ (w) = 0 for w ∈ [wF , +∞), where wF ∈ (w∗ , +∞). Furthermore, px (w∗ ) = pθ (w∗ ) = p∗ .


                                                      58
    θ                                                    θ
              ⇥G (x, p✓ (w), w)                                                 ⇥G (x, px (w), w)
    θm                                                   θm

                                  ⇥F (x, w < wF )                                      ⇥F (x, w < w⇤ )

    θ*                                                   θ*                                   ⇥F (x, w⇤ )
                                      ⇥F (x, wF )        θe
     θe




     0           ⇥G (x, p > p✓ (w), w)                                ⇥G (x, p > px (w), w)
                                                         0
         0   xe XF(w)                           xm   x       0   xe             x*                      xm   x
              A. Condition such that θ   < θ∗                     B. Condition such that x     < x∗

                        Figure A1: Illustration of the Proof of Proposition A1


Proof. We build on the proof of Proposition 9. We define the function ΘF : [0, +∞) × (0, +∞) →
(0, θ m ) such that F(ΘF (x, w), x, a, h, w) = 0. The function ΘF is strictly increasing in x and strictly
decreasing in w. We define the function ΘG : (x, w, p)|p > 0, w > 0, xG (p, w) < x < xm →
                                                       

(0, +∞) such that G(ΘG (x, w, p), x, h, χ, µ, w, p) = 0. The function ΘG is strictly decreasing in
x, p, and w. The proof is illustrated in Figure A1.

First Part: Condition such that θ < θ ∗ . Let wF be defined by ΘF (xm , wF ) = θ ∗ . For all w > wF
and for all x ∈ [0, xm ], ΘF (x, w) < θ ∗ . For all w ≤ wF , there exists a unique x ∈ [0, xm ] such that
ΘF (x, w) = θ ∗ . We define the function X F : (0, wF ] → [0, xm ] by ΘF (X F (w), w) = θ ∗ . The function
X F is strictly increasing, limw→0 X F (w) = 0, X F (w∗ ) = x∗ , and X F (wF ) = xm .
    Next, for all w ≤ wF , there exists a unique p ∈ (0, +∞) such that ΘG (X F (w), p, w) = θ ∗ . We
define the function pθ : (0, wF ] → (0, +∞) by ΘG (X F (w), pθ (w), w) = θ ∗ . The function pθ is
strictly decreasing, limw→0 pθ (w) = +∞, pθ (w∗ ) = p∗ , and pθ (wF ) = 0. We extend the definition
of pθ by setting pθ (w) = 0 for all w ∈ (wF , +∞).
    Last, we denote equilibrium labor market tightness by θ e and equilibrium product market tight-
ness by xe . For any w > wF , θ e = ΘF (x, w) < θ ∗ by definition of wF . Consider w ≤ wF and
p > pθ (w). Then ΘG (X F (w), p, w) < ΘG (X F (w), pθ (w), w) = θ ∗ = ΘF (X F (w), w) because ΘG
is strictly decreasing in p. Given that ΘF is strictly increasing in x and ΘG is strictly decreas-
ing in x and ΘG (xe , p, w) = ΘF (xe , w), we conclude that xe < X F (w). Thus, θ e = ΘF (xe , w) <
ΘF (X F (w), w) = θ ∗ because ΘF is strictly increasing in x. In sum, for any w > 0 and p > pθ (w),
we have θ e < θ ∗ . Following the same logic, we find that for any w > 0 and p < pθ (w), we have
θ e > θ ∗.

Second Part: Condition such that x < x∗ . We define the function px : (0, +∞) → (0, +∞) by

                                     x      (1 + τ(x∗ ))1−ε         α
                                   p (w) =                   · χ ε · · µ.
                                               ˆ   F  ∗
                                           h · f (Θ (x , w))        w



                                                     59
The function px has the property that ΘG (x∗ , px (w), w) = ΘF (x∗ , w). Hence, px (w∗ ) = p∗ .
   Next, we define the auxiliary function Z : (0, +∞) → (0, +∞) by

                                  Z(w) = f (x∗ ) · a · α · ns (ΘF (x∗ , w)).

Given that ΘF (x∗ , w∗ ) = θ ∗ and ΘF is strictly decreasing in w, ΘF (x∗ , w) ∈ [θ ∗ , θ m ) if w ∈ (0, w∗ ]
and ΘF (x∗ , w) ∈ (0, θ ∗ ] if w ∈ [w∗ , +∞). Since ns is strictly increasing on [0, θ ∗ ] and strictly de-
creasing on [θ ∗ , θ m ] and ΘF is strictly decreasing in w, we infer that Z is strictly increasing for w ∈
(0, w∗ ] and strictly decreasing for w ∈ [w∗ , +∞). Since ns (0) = ns (θ m ) = 0, limw→0 ΘF (x∗ , w) =
θ m , and limw→+∞ ΘF (x∗ , w) = 0, we infer that limw→0 Z(w) = 0 and limw→+∞ Z(w) = 0.
     The definition of ΘF implies that Z(w) = h · w · fˆ(ΘF (x∗ , w)). Thus,

                                    x      (1 + τ(x∗ ))1−ε ε
                                   p (w) =                · χ · α · µ.
                                                Z(w)

The properties of Z imply that the function px is strictly decreasing for w ∈ (0, w∗ ] and strictly
increasing for w ∈ [w∗ , +∞), limw→0 px (w) = +∞, and limw→+∞ px (w) = +∞.
    Last, we denote equilibrium labor market tightness by θ e and equilibrium product market
tightness by xe . Consider w ∈ (0, +∞) and p > px (w). Then ΘG (x∗ , p, w) < ΘG (x∗ , px (w), w) =
ΘF (x∗ , w) because ΘG is strictly decreasing in p. Given that ΘF is strictly increasing in x and ΘG
is strictly decreasing in x and ΘG (xe , p, w) = ΘF (xe , w), we conclude that xe < x∗ . In sum, for
any w > 0 and p > px (w), we have xe < x∗ . Similarly, for any w > 0 and p < px (w), we have
xe > x∗ .
    In Figure VII, the function pθ is represented by the downward-sloping line and the function px
is represented by the u-shaped line. The two curves intersect at (w∗ , p∗ ).


               O NLINE A PPENDIX C: O PTIMAL C ONTROL P ROBLEMS
This appendix solves the optimal control problems of the household and firm in the dynamic model
of Section IV.

The Optimal Control Problem of the Household. Let b(t) ≡ m(t)/p(t) denote real money
balances. The law of motion of b(t) is obtained from (13):

                                                                          T (t)
                                ḃ(t) = w(t) · l(t) − y(t) − π · b(t) +
                                                                          p(t)

To solve the problem, we set up the current-value Hamiltonian
                                                                                                          
                            χ         ε−1       1         ε−1            q(x(t))
 H (t, c(t), y(t), b(t)) =      · c(t) ε +          · b(t) ε +Y (t) ·            · (y(t) − c(t)) − s · y(t)
                           1+χ               1+χ                            ρ
                                                                         
                                                                    T (t)
                           + B(t) · w(t) · l(t) − y(t) − π · b(t) +
                                                                    p(t)

with control variable c(t), state variables y(t) and b(t), and costate variables Y (t) and B(t).

                                                     60
    The necessary conditions for an interior solution to this maximization problem are ∂ H /∂ c(t) =
0, ∂ H /∂ y(t) = δ · Y (t) − ẏ(t), and ∂ H /∂ b(t) = δ · B(t) − ḃ(t), together with the transversality
conditions limt→+∞ e−δ ·t ·Y (t) · y(t) = 0 and limt→+∞ e−δ ·t · B(t) · b(t) = 0. Given that H is con-
cave in (c, y, b), these conditions are also sufficient.
    These three conditions can be rewritten as
                                         χ      ε −1       −1           q(x(t))
                                              ·      · c(t) ε = Y (t) ·
                                       1+χ        ε                       ρ
                                                   
                                        q(x(t))
                              Y (t) ·            − s − B(t) = δ ·Y (t) − ẏ(t)
                                           ρ
                             1      ε −1         −1
                                  ·       · b(t) ε − B(t) · π = δ · B(t) − ḃ(t)
                            1+χ       ε

    In steady state, ẏ(t) = ḃ(t) = 0. Hence, after eliminating the costate variables B and Y , we find
that the optimal consumption decision of the household is

                                                                  ρ ε
                                                                    
                                     ε         ε
                               c = χ · (δ + π) · 1 − (δ + s) ·          · b.
                                                                q(x)

We obtain the equation in the text by setting δ = 0 and b = µ(0)/p(0) in the above equation.

The Optimal Control Problem of the Firm. To solve this problem, we set up the current-value
Hamiltonian

        H (t, n(t), y(t), l(t)) =y(t) − w(t) · l(t) +Y (t) · [ f (x(t)) · (a · n(t)α − y(t)) − s · y(t)]
                                                                                
                                            q̂(θ (t))
                                 + L(t) ·             · (l(t) − n(t)) − ŝ · l(t)
                                                ρ̂

with control variable n(t), state variables y(t) and l(t), and current-value costate variables Y (t)
and L(t). The necessary conditions for an interior solution to this maximization problem are
∂ H /∂ n(t) = 0, ∂ H /∂ y(t) = δ · Y (t) − ẏ(t), and ∂ H /∂ l(t) = δ · L(t) − l(t),˙    together with the
transversality conditions limt→+∞ e   −δ ·t · Y (t) · y(t) = 0 and limt→+∞ e−δ ·t · L(t) · l(t) = 0. Given
that H is concave in (n, y, l), these conditions are also sufficient.
    These three conditions can be rewritten as
                                                            q̂(θ (t))
                 Y (t) · f (x(t)) · α · a · n(t)α−1 = L(t) ·
                                                                 ρ̂
                                                1 = Y (t) · ( f (x(t)) + s) + δ ·Y (t) − ẏ(t)
                                               
                                  q̂(θ (t))                              ˙
                         L(t) ·             − ŝ = w(t) + δ · L(t) − l(t)
                                      ρ̂
                    ˙ = ẏ(t) = 0. Hence, after eliminating the costate variables L and Y , we find
   In steady state, l(t)




                                                      61
                               0.04                                            0.08
                                       ISM (left scale)



                                   0                                           0



                              −0.04                                            −0.08
                                        SPC (right scale)


                              −0.08                                            −0.16
                                  2000            2004           2008   2012

      Figure A2: The Two Proxies for the Cyclical Component of Product Market Tightness
The time period is 1999:Q4–2013:Q2. The ISM proxy is constructed in Online Appendix D from the operating rate
in non-manufacturing sectors constructed by the ISM. The SPC proxy is constructed in Section V from the capacity
utilization rate in the manufacturing sector measured by the Census Bureau from the SPC.


that the optimal employment decision of the firm satisfies
                                                                            1
                                  α ·a
                                                   
                                         f (x)                        ρ̂     1−α
                         n=            ·           · 1 − (δ + ŝ) ·              .
                                   w δ + s + f (x)                  q̂(θ )

We obtain equation in the text by setting δ = 0 in the above equation.


        O NLINE A PPENDIX D: A NOTHER P ROXY FOR P RODUCT M ARKET
                                T IGHTNESS
This appendix proposes another proxy for the cyclical component of the product market tightness,
and it shows that all the empirical results are robust to using this alternative proxy. The proxy
is constructed from the operating rate in non-manufacturing sectors measured by the Institute for
Supply Management (ISM) and published in their Semiannual Reports. This operating rate is
available for the 1999:Q4–2013:Q2 period. In the text, the proxy is constructed from the capacity
utilization rate in the manufacturing sector measured by the Census Bureau from the Survey of
Plant Capacity (SPC).
     Using the operating rate from the ISM is conceptually better than using the capacity utilization
rate from the SPC for two reasons. First, the operating rate is a direct measure of labor utilization;
therefore, it is directly linked to product market tightness. Second, the operating rate applies to
non-manufacturing sectors, where logistical issues such as peak load and inventory management
do not influence labor utilization. We do not use this alternative proxy in the text, however, because
it is only available for a brief period (1999:Q4–2013:Q2) that does not cover sufficiently many
business cycles to permit a thorough empirical analysis.
     We construct our alternative proxy for the cyclical component of the product market tightness
as follows. The operating rate ort measured by the ISM is the actual production level of firms as a
share of their maximum production level given their current capital stock and workforce. Since the

                                                            62
operating rate takes labor as a fixed factor, it exactly corresponds to our concept of labor utilization:
ort = f (xt )/(s+ f (x(t))).35 The ISM measures ort in the second and fourth quarter; we use a linear
interpolation of the biannual series to transform it into a quarterly series for the 1999:Q4–2013:Q2
period. Then, we remove from ln(ort ) the trend produced by a HP filter with smoothing parameter
1600. The resulting detrended series is our proxy for the cyclical component of the product market
tightness. This proxy is plotted in Figure A2, together with the proxy used in the text. We refer to
the proxy in the text as the SPC proxy and to this alternative proxy as the ISM proxy.
    Over the 1999:Q4–2013:Q2 period, the correlation between the two proxies is 0.67. As showed
in Figure A2, the two proxies behaved similarly over the period: both fell after 2001, picked up in
the 2004–2008 period, and collapsed in 2009, before recovering. The main difference is that the
SPC proxy is subject to larger fluctuations than the ISM proxy.
    In the text, we use the SPC proxy to identify aggregate demand and technology shocks. The
finding reported in Figure X is that the SPC proxy and output are positively correlated, which
implies that aggregate demand shocks are the main source of labor market fluctuations. Panels A
and B of Figure A3 confirm that this result remains valid if we focus on the correlation between
SPC proxy and output over the subperiod 1999:Q4–2013:Q2. The correlations between SPC proxy
and output are slightly higher: at one lag, the correlation is 0.68; the contemporaneous correlation
is 0.60. These correlations are statistically significant.
    Panels C and D of Figure A3 show that we obtain the same result if we use the ISM proxy
instead of the SPC proxy. The correlations of ISM proxy and output are even slightly higher than
those of SPC proxy and output: the contemporaneous correlation is 0.82; at one lag, the correlation
is 0.77. These correlations are statistically significant.


             O NLINE A PPENDIX E: A NOTHER T YPE OF M ATCHING C OST
This appendix proposes an alternative to the basic model of Section II in which the cost of matching
is a time cost instead of an output cost. In this alternative model, households share their time
between supplying services and matching with other households who sell services. In the original
model, households spend all their time supplying services and they purchase services to match
with other households. Yet, all the results of Section II remain valid in this alternative model.
    Households employ their time to purchase services: the more time they spend on purchasing
services, the less time they have to supply services. A visit takes away an amount ρ > 0 of the
household’s productive capacity; therefore, the actual productive capacity of a household making
v visits is k − ρ · v. The number of matches on the product market is
                                                                  − 1
                                           y = (k − ρ · v)−γ + v−γ γ ,
                                              


and the product market tightness is defined by
                                                            v
                                                    x=           .
                                                          k−ρ ·v
  35 This is a major difference with the capacity utilization rate from the SPC, which takes labor as a variable factor and

thus requires a correction to be converted into a labor utilization rate. Morin and Stevens (2005) discuss the difference
between the capacity utilization rate collected in the SPC and the operating rate collected in the ISM survey.



                                                           63
                                                                   1
       0.08                                             0.04
              Output (right scale)
                                                                  0.8
                                                        0.02
                                                                  0.6
          0                                             0
                                                                  0.4
                                                        −0.02 0.2

     −0.08                                              −0.04      0

              SPC product market                        −0.06 −0.2
              tightness (left scale)
                                                                 −0.4
     −0.16                                              −0.08      −4   −3   −2    −1     0    1     2     3     4
         2000            2004          2008      2012                              Lags (quarters)
                       A. Cyclical components                       B. Cross-correlogram (SPC tightness leads)

                                                                   1
       0.04                                             0.04
              Output (right scale)
                                                                  0.8
       0.02                                             0.02
                                                                  0.6

          0                                             0         0.4

                                                                  0.2
     −0.02                                              −0.02
                                                                   0

     −0.04                                              −0.04 −0.2
            ISM product market tightness (left scale)      −0.4
     −0.06                                            −0.06 −4          −3   −2    −1     0    1     2     3     4
         2000       2004          2008          2012                               Lags (quarters)
                       C. Cyclical components                       D. Cross-correlogram (ISM tightness leads)

                  Figure A3: Correlation Between Product Market Tightness and Output
The time period is 1999:Q4–2013:Q2. Panel A displays the SPC proxy for the cyclical component of the product
market tightness, xtc (SPC), and the cyclical component of output, ytc . The construction of xtc (SPC) is explained in
Section V. Output, yt , is the seasonally adjusted quarterly index for real output in the nonfarm business sector con-
structed by the BLS MSPC program. We construct ytc by removing from ln(yt ) the trend produced by a HP filter with
smoothing parameter 1600. Panel B displays the cross-correlogram between xtc (SPC) and ytc . The cross-correlation at
                                  c (SPC) and yc . Panel C displays the ISM proxy for the cyclical component of the
lag i is the correlation between xt−i              t
product market tightness, xt (ISM), and ytc . The ISM proxy is constructed in Online Appendix D. Panel D displays the
                             c

cross-correlogram between xtc (ISM) and ytc . The cross-correlation at lag i is the correlation between xt−i
                                                                                                         c (ISM) and yc .
                                                                                                                      t
The horizontal dashed lines are the two-standard-deviation confidence bounds.




                                                            64
The probability to sell one of the k − ρ · v services for sale is f (x). The probability that a visit is
successful is q(x).
    To purchase c services, household need to make c/q(x) visits that take away an amount ρ ·
c/q(x) of their productive capacity. Households are left with a capacity k − ρ · c/q(x), and they sell
a fraction f (x) of it. Furthermore, output is equal to consumption—and welfare—because no part
of output is used for matching. Therefore, c = y = f (x) · (k − ρ · c/q(x)). The aggregate supply is
the amount of consumption that solves this equation. Since f (x)/q(x) = x, the aggregate supply
admits the following expression:

                                                      f (x)
                                          cs (x) =          · k.
                                                     1+ρ ·x

The aggregate supply is strictly increasing for x ∈ [0, x∗ ] and strictly decreasing for x ∈ [x∗ , +∞)
where x∗ is the unique solution to
                                                       ρ ·x
                                           q(x)γ =           .
                                                      1+ρ ·x

This equation is obtained by rearranging dcs /dx = 0 and using the fact that f 0 (x) = q(x)1+γ . It
admits a unique solution because q is strictly decreasing from 1 to 0 on [0, +∞) while x 7→ (ρ ·
x)/(1 + ρ · x) is strictly increasing on 0 to 1 on [0, +∞). The tightness x∗ is the efficient tightness:
it maximizes welfare for a given level of real money balances. As in the original model, x∗ depends
only on the matching function and on the matching cost.
    Since all output is used for consumption, there is no price wedge due to matching, and the
price of consumption is p. However, the selling capacity of the household, and thus its income,
is reduced because of the time spent buying consumption. The household’s budget constraint is
therefore modified to
                                                                        
                                                                     c
                                m + p · c = µ + p · f (x) · k − ρ ·        .
                                                                    q(x)

To see the parallel between this budget constraint and the budget constraint in Section II, it is
convenient to rewrite this constraint as

                                m + p · (1 + ρ · x) · c = µ + p · f (x) · k.

From the household’s perspective, the time required to buy consumption imposes a wedge ρ · x on
the price of consumption. Accordingly, the household’s optimal level of consumption is the same
as in the model of Section II after replacing the old price wedge, τ(x), by the new price wedge,
ρ · x. The aggregate demand therefore is
                                                        ε
                                     d             χ         µ
                                   c (x, p) =               · .
                                                1+ρ ·x       p

The aggregate demand is strictly decreasing in x and p for all x > 0 and p > 0.
   Given that the aggregate supply and demand are isomorphic to those in the original model once
τ(x) is replaced by ρ · x, we can analyze this alternative model by following the same steps. We


                                                     65
can show that all the properties of the original model carry over, with one exception. In a fixprice
equilibrium, the comparative statics for output and consumption are the same, and they are the
same as the comparative statics for consumption in the original model. But they are different from
the comparative statics for output in the original model. In the slack regime this difference is mute
because consumption and output move together in the original model. But in the tight regime this
difference is visible: after an increase in aggregate demand, output increases in the original model
but decreases in the alternative model.
    We think that the original model of Section II is more realistic than this alternative model
because the result that output is higher when the economy becomes tighter seems more realistic, at
least for Western economies. The main difference between the original and the alternative model is
that the resources devoted to matching are marketed in the original model but not in the alternative
model. The alternative model perhaps describes better the centralized economies of the Soviet
Union where fewer services were marketed. It is possible that in those economies, people spent
so much time queuing to buy goods and services that they had to reduce their supply of labor, and
output was lower than if aggregate demand had been lower.


            O NLINE A PPENDIX F: E NDOGENOUS M ARKETING E FFORT
This appendix proposes an extension of the basic model of Section II in which households devote
marketing effort to increase their sales. In this alternative model, households share their productive
capacity between supplying services and marketing these services. In the original model, house-
holds spend all their productive capacity on supplying services. All the results of Section II remain
valid in this extension.
    Households spend an amount a ≤ k of their productive capacity on marketing. The amount
of productive capacity left for supplying services is k − a. Marketing increases the visibility of
services for sale and thus their probability of being sold. The function e : [0, k] → [0, 1] describes
the effectiveness of marketing. We assume that e is strictly increasing and concave. To ensure
an interior solution with positive marketing effort, we assume e(0) = 0. To simplify, we assume
that the function e has a constant elasticity ε. As in Pissarides (2000, Chapter 5), the number of
matches on the product market is given by
                                                                 − 1γ
                                 y = [e(a) · (k − a)]−γ + v−γ
                                    
                                                                        ,

and the product market tightness is defined by
                                                     v
                                         x=                  .
                                              e(a) · (k − a)

The probability to sell one service is e(a) · f (x). Hence, a higher amount of marketing generates
more sales. The probability that a visit is successful is q(x).
   Households choose their marketing effort to maximize their income. Given x, they choose a to
maximize e(a) · f (x) · (k − a). The optimal a satisfies ε = a/(k − a), which can be rewritten as
                                                  ε
                                            a=       · k.
                                                 1+ε


                                                 66
It is optimal for households to devote a fraction ε/(1+ε) of their productive capacity to marketing.
     The aggregate supply describes the amount of consumption sold given the matching process
and the optimal marketing decision of households. The aggregate supply admits the following
expression:
                                                               
                            s                              ε        1
                           c (x) = ( f (x) − ρ · x) · e       ·k ·     · k.
                                                          1+ε      1+ε

Although it admits a different expression, the aggregate supply has the same properties as in the
model without marketing. Furthermore, the aggregate demand remains the same because the trade-
off between consumption and holding money is not affected by the marketing effort.
    We can analyze this extension with endogenous marketing effort as we analyzed the original
model. Since aggregate demand and supply retain the properties of the original model, we can
show that in fact all the properties of the original model carry over.


                                         R EFERENCES
Morin, Norman, and John J. Stevens. 2005. “Diverging Measures of Capacity Utilization: An
Explanation”. Business Economics, 46–54.
Pissarides, Christopher A. 2000. Equilibrium Unemployment Theory. 2nd ed., Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.




                                                67
