NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A NATION OF GAMBLERS:
REAL ESTATE SPECULATION AND AMERICAN HISTORY
Edward L. Glaeser
Working Paper 18825
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18825

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013

This is the text of the 2013 Ely Lecture presented at the American Economics Association convention
in San Diego. I am grateful to Yueran Ma, Charles Nathanson and especially Kristina Tobio for extraordinary
research assistance. Joseph Gyourko and Jose Scheinkman provided helpful comments. The Taubman
Center for State and Local Government provided helpful financial support. The Taubman Center for
State and Local Government provided helpful financial support. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Edward L. Glaeser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

A Nation Of Gamblers: Real Estate Speculation And American History
Edward L. Glaeser
NBER Working Paper No. 18825
February 2013
JEL No. D0,N0,R0
ABSTRACT
The great housing convulsion that buffeted America between 2000 and 2010 has historical precedents,
from the frontier land boom of the 1790s to the skyscraper craze of the 1920s. But this time was different.
There was far less real uncertainty about fundamental economic and geographic trends, making the
convulsion even more puzzling. During historic and recent booms, sensible models could justify high
prices on the basis of seemingly reasonable projections about stable or growing prices. The recurring
error appears to be a failure to anticipate the impact that elastic supply will eventually have on prices,
whether for cotton in Alabama in 1820 or land in Las Vegas in 2006. Buyers don’t appear to be irrational
but rather cognitively limited investors who work with simple heuristic models, instead of a comprehensive
general equilibrium framework. Low interest rates rarely seem to drive price growth; under-priced
default options are a more common contributor to high prices. The primary cost of booms has not
typically been overbuilding, but rather the financial chaos that accompanies housing downturns.

Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

―Generally speaking, the prudent purchase of land is a better investment for the ordinary man
than stocks and bonds, because in the former case he does not pit his judgment against the
machinations of a board.‖
Richard T. Ely, Land Speculation, 1920
I.

Introduction

Between January 2000 and March 2006, the Case-Shiller 20 city real estate price index rose by
76 percent in real terms, and then declined by 36 percent between March 2006 and May 2009,
leaving real prices today only 7 percent higher than they were at the turn of the millennium.
Figure 1 shows the time series of price for 281 metropolitan areas based on the Federal Housing
Finance Agency’s (FHFA) repeat sales price index. The figure displays different paths for the
warmest fourth of metropolitan areas and the rest.2 Figure 2 shows the relationship between the
change in the logarithm of FHFA prices between 2000 and 2006, and the change in the logarithm
of FHFA prices between 2006 and 2012. The figure illustrates both the remarkable amount of
mean reversion (the regression coefficient is -.85) across areas and the tremendous heterogeneity
across the United States.
Economists have now studied this Great Housing Convulsion extensively (e.g. Mian and Sufi,
2009, papers in Glaeser and Sinai, forthcoming), but many questions remain unresolved. Why
did spectacular booms and busts occur when and where they did? Were buyers largely rational,
or were their beliefs inconsistent with any sensible model of housing prices? What role did credit
markets play in fueling the boom or causing the bust? What are the policy implications of the
Great Convulsion?
In the spirit of Nicholas and Scherbina (2011), Goetzmann and Newman (2010) and Shiller
(2008), this lecture attempts to use America’s long history of real estate speculation to shed light
on recent events. I briefly study nine episodes, from the frontier lands of the 1790s to today, and
draw six key lessons from the past.
The first and most obvious lesson of this history is that America has always been a nation of real
estate speculators. Price and construction convulsions have been common in both rural and urban
areas. Real estate is a particularly democratic asset that attracts the mighty, like George
Washington and Benjamin Franklin, and the modest, like the small farmers in Kent, Connecticut,
who were buying and selling land parcels rapidly in 1755 (Grant, 1955). Real estate speculation
was an integral part of the ―winning of the west,‖ the construction of our cities, and the
transformation of American home life, from tenements to mini-mansions.
The second lesson is that these boom-bust cycles can generate significant social costs, primarily
through ensuing financial chaos. This fact implies some urgency to rethinking the national and
local policies that impact housing markets. If buyers are particularly prone to engage in wishful
thinking about future price appreciation, then policies that encourage homeowner borrowing,
such as providing under-priced default options, can create larger social losses.
2

The warmest fourth is defined based on January temperatures. I correct the price index for inflation, scaled it to
have a value of one in 2000 and then multiplied by the Census 2000 self-reported housing value in 2012 dollars.

2

The third lesson is that the high prices paid during the boom and the low prices paid during the
bust are typically compatible with reasonable models of housing valuation and defensible beliefs
about future price growth. The farmers in Iowa in 1910 had experienced 15 years of rising real
wheat prices and 40 years of rising wheat yields. High land prices were understandable.
Manhattan’s builders in 1929 could justify their land purchases based on current office rents and
reasonable capitalization rates (Clark and Kingston, 1930). Distinguished real estate economists
(Himmelberg, Mayer and Sinai, 2005) examined price-to-rent ratios in 2004 and argued that they
seemed reasonable given plausible expectations about future price growth and current capital
costs.
The fourth major lesson is that while low interest rates have been less important in generating
price booms, under-priced default options can often help explain high prices. The great Chicago
land boom of 1836-37 was coincident with the chartering of two new state-supported Illinois
banks. Securitization of mortgages for builders in the 1920s appears to have decreased the
downsides of development (Goetzmann and Newman, 2010). Increased credit availability also
boosted prices during the recent boom (Mian and Sufi, 2009).
The fifth lesson is that the dominant mistake that investors make is to underestimate the impact
that elastic long-run supply of land, structures and crops will have on future land values. Land
buyers during Alabama’s 1819 land boom look sensible given then-current cotton prices and
trends. Land values depreciated as cotton prices fell with increased U.S. and worldwide supply.
Similarly the skyscraper builders of the 1920s seem to have underestimated the impact that vast
increases in office and apartment space would have on long term rents. Home buyers in Las
Vegas and Phoenix in 2005 seem to have misunderstood the almost perfectly elastic supply of
homes in America’s deserts.
The sixth lesson is that the Great Convulsion of the past 12 years is unlike previous booms in at
least one major way. In every previous episode there was significant uncertainty about major
economic trends that would impact land values and housing prices. In the late 18th century, it was
unclear how quickly transportation costs could fall and how fast Americans would move west.
Those trends were still unclear in 1887 in California. The future appeal of dense downtowns, like
Chicago and New York, was unsure in 1835 and still unsure a century later. There is no obvious
equivalent source of uncertainty during the post-2001 period.
While the conventional economic approach to housing has been to eschew non-rational or nonBayesian expectations, there is a strong counter-current in real estate economics, where scholars
like Kindleberger (1978) and Shiller (2008) almost discard rationality altogether. As of 2013,
Shiller seems far wiser than the hyper-rationalists, but real-estate economists lack a clear
theoretical alternative to the assumption that buyers are rational and face no cognitive limits.
In Section II of this paper, I discuss four different conceptions of market malfunction—
arbitragibility, irrationality, limited cognition, and ordinary error-- and apply these conceptions to
real estate markets. A market can be arbitraged if any reasonable, well-informed person can
make large profits risklessly, but few, if any, of our past land booms were that easy to game,
partially because of short-selling constraints and high risk levels. A market is irrational if no
coherent model of real estate values can justify existing prices. A market displays limited
cognition if prices are not compatible with a well formulated general equilibrium model that
incorporates all available information. A market displays ordinary error if an extraordinary
3

forecaster would have bought, even though unpredictable subsequent events caused prices to
drop significantly.
Most real estate markets, during extreme booms and busts, lie somewhere between limited
cognition and ordinary error. Reasonable models, such as the finance-based net present value
Gordon growth formula or the geography-based Rosen-Roback model, can typically justify
prices during booms and busts. Buyers’ primary error appears to be a failure to internalize
Marshall’s (1890) dictum that ―the value of a thing tends in the long run to correspond to its cost
of production.‖ But that error is better seen as limited cognition— failing to use a sophisticated
model of global supply and demand – than as ―lacking usual or normal mental clarity or
coherence,‖ one of Merriam-Webster’s definition of irrationality.
After discussing irrationality and housing markets in Section II, I turn to the history of real estate
convulsions in the United States. In Section III, I follow Ely and Wehrwein (1940) and focus on
rural land value episodes. I discuss Robert Morris’ investments in western land that ended in his
1798 bankruptcy and may have helped cause the financial crisis of 1797. I then turn to 1818,
where property values rose dramatically, especially in Huntsville, Alabama, and then collapsed
in the Crisis of 1819. Finally, I examine the period from 1900-1930 where rural land, particularly
in Iowa, prices first rose dramatically, reaching historic heights in the early teens, before
dropping during the 1920s, almost ten years before the Great Depression.
In Section IV, I turn to urban real estate. Luckily, Hoyt (1933) has provided us with 100 years of
land values in Chicago, and I focus first on that city and its 1830s boom. I then turn to Los
Angeles in the 1880s and finish with New York during the 1910-1940 period, relying on the
evidence provided by Nicholas and Scherbina (2011).
Section V turns to metropolitan booms that spread far from the urban core. I briefly discuss the
boom that didn’t happen between 1945 and 1960, when credit conditions changed drastically, but
prices stayed relatively flat due to elastic supply (Fetter, 2010). I then turn to the mini-boom of
the 1970s and 1980s, especially in California. I end with the boom of the recent decade, which
had a particularly propensity to push prices up in the Sunbelt, as Figure 1 illustrates.
Section VI summarizes and concludes. There is no obvious common source of buyer overoptimism during booms, and simple models, such as extrapolating future growth rates, are
usually too weak to definitively warn against over-paying. There is however a common mistake:
ignoring the impact that added supply will have on long-term price. This ordinary,
understandable error can increase the volatility of housing prices and raise the costs of policies
that artificially induce leveraged speculation on real estate.

II.

Limited Rationality and Housing Markets

Over the past 20 years, spurred on by experimental evidence and events like the Internet equity
boom and bust, economics has increased embraced ―behavioral‖ models that assume either
limited cognition or downright irrationality (e.g. Kahneman, 2003). One challenge facing
behavioralists is the lack of a single compelling model of human error. This difficulty is a
corollary to Tolstoy’s line that ―Happy families are all alike; every unhappy family is unhappy in
4

its own way.‖ There is only one way to do Bayesian forecasting correctly, but there are an
uncountable number of ways to screw up.
Case, Shiller, and Thompson (2012) surveys of home buyers during booms suggest that they
hold a dizzying array of apparently inconsistent beliefs about future prices. Buyers in Boston in
2004, for example, on average report that they believe that housing prices will increase by 10.6
percent in each of the next ten years, but only by 7.6 percent in the next year. These beliefs have
many plausible sources. Some buyers may be extrapolating from recent trends; others may be
engaged in wishful thinking about the value of their largest asset. Glaeser (2006) emphasizes the
role of entrepreneurs of error, who persuade buyers that home prices will experience dazzling
future growth. The history of real estate bubbles is replete with examples of interested parties
hyping local land values.
But economic models will lose all discipline if they treat investors as blank slates that irrationally
absorb any foolish notion that they hear. An alternative approach is to assume that such beliefs
are limited by sensible models of asset valuation. In this discussion, I borrow an idea from
Hansen, Heaton and Jaganathan 1992) and ask what range of prices is compatible with different,
reasonable assumptions about human decision-making and markets. Buyers observe sellers’
asking prices, receive myriad suggestions about home values, and then determine whether these
suggestions are reasonable and whether it is worth buying at current prices. The range of
plausible expectations creates a range of possible equilibrium prices, at least to the outside
observer who is not privy to the murky workings of buyers’ mental processes.
To illustrate this approach, I will outline a hierarchy of assumptions, each of which imposes
more stringent predictions about the prices that can appear in a housing or land market. The least
stringent assumption is the absence of arbitrage. This assumption implies only that reasonable
people can’t earn outsized risk-adjusted profits by following any obvious investment strategy. In
the case of pricing derivative securities, this assumption yields tight predictions (e.g. Black and
Scholes, 1973), but even this assumption yields far weaker predictions for underlying values of
assets like equities. Classical models predict that stock prices should follow a random walk
(Samuelson, 1965), but it is hard to assess whether values at a point in time are too low or high,
and it is difficult to arbitrage over long time periods (Barberis and Shleifer, 2003).
Similar difficulties limit arbitrage in housing and land markets. Lewis (2010) describes the
highly profitable undertakings of some visionary investors who thought that mortgage-backed
securities were overvalued during the recent boom. However, their profits required substantial
insight and good luck. If the boom had lasted a few years longer, surely a possibility, they would
have faced significant financing difficulties. Moreover, financial innovations gave them the
ability to essentially short-sell property-related securities, which has traditionally been difficult,
especially with real property itself.3 Even if an investor is quite certain that prices will decline,
there was no obvious way to short-sell property or land, either in Chicago in 1836 or Las Vegas
in 2005.4 The absence of arbitrage is also compatible with a wide range of housing prices,
3

It is unclear how easy it would have been to short sell mortgage-backed securities in the 1920s (Goetzmann and
Newman, 2009).
4
In the later period, it would have been possible to short sell the stocks of developers who had purchased land in the
Las Vegas region, but that would have meant taking on many other risks (such as the general management of the
company) as well as the normal difficulties in selling stocks short (Shleifer and Summers, 1990).

5

because arbitrage through purchase-timing is costly due to the risks inherent in future price
fluctuations (Glaeser and Gyourko, 2009).
The next level of market efficiency is rationality, which I take to mean that buyers’ beliefs are
compatible with some sensible model of real estate values. This allows the possibility of errors
due to faulty inference and the more egregious mistakes that can result when the model used to
forecast the future is badly miss-specified (Hansen, 2007). For example, incorrectly assuming
that prices follow a geometric Brownian motion with drift implies extremely different price
levels in different markets, based on past price patterns, even if true fundamentals are the same.5
A market only violates rationality if the prices for land and housing are incompatible with any
internally consistent theory that matches data readily available to market participants.
Real estate speculation, always and everywhere, reflects the conjunction of geographic
fundamental, that determine the value-in-use of land, and financial variables, that help translate a
future flow of explicit or implicit rents into a current price. Two models dominate the academic
discussion of real estate, and variants of them are also used by market participants. Urban and
land economists, such as Ely himself, typically focus on the value-in-use of real estate, which
reflects different geographic advantages. Financial economists have often been more interested
in financial variables, such as interest rates, down-payment requirements, and mortgage approval
rates, which determine the value of a flow of future implicit rents (Poterba, 1984, Himmelberg,
Mayer and Sinai, 2005).
The first model follows the work on land rents of Ricardo (1822) and von Thunen (1826). I will
refer to its adherents as Thunenites. This model focuses on spatial arbitrage, comparing real
estate prices with prices elsewhere within the region or nation. A place should only have higher
rents, and presumably higher housing and land values as well, if it offers higher wages or other
amenities (Rosen, 1979, Roback, 1982). Within cities, the spatial arbitrage model was applied by
Alonso (1964), Muth (1964) and Mills (1967) to predict that housing costs and density levels
should be higher where commuting costs are lower.
The spatial arbitrage model’s empirical successes have typically involved rents or land values at
a point in time (e.g. Black, 1999), or very long-run multi-decade changes.6 At higher frequencies,
it is hard to justify the overall level of volatility or the patterns of housing price changes (strong
positive serial correlation at annual frequencies, strong mean reversion at five year frequencies),
with changing fundamentals at the metropolitan area level (Glaeser, et. al. 2011). Yet that fact
does not mean that buyers are not justifying prices by comparing them with other areas. The
pattern of progression of the recent boom, where price growth gradually spread from the costs to
nearby areas (Ferreira and Gyourko, 2011) suggests that people may have been benchmarking
prices off of geographically proximate locales.
The primary alternative model is the net present value formula offered by real estate economists
with a more financial orientation. Poterba (1984) offers a classic treatment, and in these models
prices equal either the net present value of future rents or the net flow of utility from living in a
particular house. Since that net flow may reflect the different in utility between the location and
5

Assume that in reality there is no drift, and that one place has just received a recent positive shock making it
identical with the second place. The first place will be thought to have a trend, while the other will not.
6
For example, twenty year changes in income correlate strongly with twenty year changes in housing values across
metropolitan areas.

6

some reservation locale, this approach can be seen as transforming Thunenite predictions about
land rents into an asset price. Typically the formula predicts a capitalization rate where
, where reflects the current state of demand (the ―rent‖), is the discount rate,
reflects maintenance costs (assumed to be a fixed share of housing prices), represents the
property tax rate and represents the growth rate of x.7 This is the real estate version of the
standard Gordon (1959) growth formula, and I will refer to its adherents as Gordonians.
Gordonians are often particularly interested in financing arrangements, and the model can easily
be extended to allow for mortgage payments that differ from private discount factors and for
endogenous defaults. If individuals pay a mortgage rate of r over an infinite horizon, and pay a
down-payment equal to d times the price, and if follows a geometric Brownian motion with
drift and variance , and borrowers can default at will, then the pricing formula becomes:
(1)
where
.8 The derivation of this formula follows Krainer, LeRoy and O
(2009). To incorporate uncertainty about default, it is possible to assume that individuals can
only default with probability , and then the first term (which reflects the value of the default
option) is just multiplied by .
If there is no uncertainty, then

. The impact of market interest rates on

prices will be less than in the classic Gordon formula, as long as market rates and private
discount rates aren’t equal, which seems likely given credit-constrained borrowers. Glaeser,
Gottlieb and Gyourko (2012) present simulations that demonstrate that the predicted impact of
interest rates on housing prices are significantly reduced when interest-rates are decoupled from
private discount factors. Interest rates will also have a lower impact on prices than the classic
formula suggests because of elastic housing supply, and mean reversion of interest rates, which
implies that buyers who face low rates when they purchase should expect to sell when rates are
higher and that buyers who borrow at high rates should expect to refinance at lower rates. The
empirical relationship between log prices and real interest rates is approximately -7 ( one
percentage point drop in real rates implies .07 log points higher housing prices), which is in line
with the predictions from extended Gordon models, if not with the model simply applied.
If the default option is priced into the interest rate, and if borrowers and lenders have the same
discount rate and are both risk neutral, then it has no impact on price. If the default option is not
priced into interest rates, perhaps because of government subsidy, then this will increase the
willingness-to-pay for the home. I will use this formula to evaluate the impact that a free put
option has on prices in the historical examples.
The impact of financial variables differs with the degree of optimism or over-optimism, which
can be seen as an inappropriately high assessment of . Interest rates become more powerful
when expected growth rates are high (Himmelberg, Mayer and Sinai, 2005). The default option
7

I am ignoring more complex issues surrounding mortgage deductibility and inflation (Poterba, 2004).
In this formula, I have assumed that mortgage, maintenance and tax costs are a function of the initial price of the
property not of its later selling price.
8

7

becomes significantly less valuable if buyers expect prices to perpetually increase. If buyers
think that high growth is accompanied by high uncertainty, then a free default option moves
prices more. If marginal buyers are wildly optimistic about future growth rates, then higher
approval rates could more significantly impact price, which is one interpretation of Mian and
Sufi’s (2009) findings on the connection between subprime mortgages and recent price growth.
The next step towards market efficiency occurs when participants are not only rational, but have
essentially unlimited cognitive powers and correctly model the long run determinants of market
supply and demand. This assumption enables them to move from crude capitalization rates or
spatial equilibrium models to sophisticated general equilibrium estimation that takes into account
the global supply of land, and demand for other commodities. Market participants with unlimited
cognition would correctly foresee that worldwide cotton prices in 1819 would not stay high,
because of the ability to grow cotton in lower cost locations throughout the planet. This
assumption puts tighter bounds on beliefs, but even here false signals may cause errors.
To look at the differences in prices between cognitively limited and unlimited buyers, I assume
that there is a stock of housing denoted , which also equals the number of households in the
community, and this depreciates so that the change in
, where refers to new
construction. The cost of construction is
, which creates some congestion in the
construction sector. The expected value of a building equals
where
represents the rents in each period. I now introduce a downward sloping demand curve so the
rent equals
, where grows continuously at a rate .
In a cognitively unlimited world,

, so that construction

costs equal the expected value of future rents. Given an initial stock of capital,
of prices satisfy:

, the time path

(2)
where

denotes

long run capitalization rate is

. Prices converge to
. If there is no growth and

, and the
is sufficiently small, then price

should essentially converge to the construction costs.
If home buyers or developers who rented units were naïve Gordonians, who assumed that rents
would continue to grow perpetually at a rate g (they do not attempt to forecast changes in
supply), then the price will equal
(the current rent) divided by
. Builders will
respond to that price so
, as long as these beliefs hold. Substituting in for the
implied capital stock means that prices will equal:
(3)

8

If
, then the long run prices and capital stock will be the same in the two cases, which
is not surprising since the Gordonians eventually get things right. If
, then Gordonians
will typically pay higher prices in the long run, because the actual growth rate in price is lower
than they anticipate, but the Gordonian model surely makes more sense in the short-run, before
reality has a chance to disabuse buyers of their errors.
In Figure 3, I illustrate price dynamics given a naïve Gordonian and hyper-rational world,
assuming that
,
,
,
,
,
,
and g=.005.9
Both
and
are denominated in thousands of dollars. This city begins with less capital than it
will have in the long run, and the gap between Gordonian and correct beliefs ultimately stems
from that fact. The Gordonian takes current prices and capitalizes them, expecting a growth rate
that is actually lower than the long run growth in demand, without recognizing that new supply
will dramatically lower rents.
High Gordonian prices then motivate an excess of supply in the short run that further depresses
prices in the long run. This creates a huge boom-bust cycle in housing prices and construction.
The perfect cognition case, conversely, displays far more moderation, since the impact of extra
supply is correctly anticipated. Overshooting can easily occur even if Gordonians don’t expect
high growth rates. A failure to foresee price declines caused by increased supply is enough to
generate overbuilding and radical price swings.
The final level in the hierarchy of market perfection is that all future shocks are foreseen. In that
model, we wouldn’t expect to see any of the massive fluctuations that we see in housing and land
values, since prices will perfectly anticipate future events.
I now turn to the historical examples, where I will attempt to connect events with the models just
discussed and the hierarchy of errors. The approach of examining particular episodes has
problems. These episodes are not representative of housing or land price fluctuations over all of
American history. They are chosen because they are extreme, so the estimates of mean reversion,
for example, during these periods do not indicate anything about housing markets over any
broader time period. Additionally, early episodes are usually studied in places that became
successful ex post, like Chicago in the 1830s, and this will mean that the boom prices may
appear more reasonable with the benefit of hindsight than they actually were given the
information available at the time.

III.

Rural Land Speculation

In this section, I examine three episodes of rural land speculation in U.S. history: the 18th century
boom and bust of Robert Morris, the land boom of 1818 that preceded the panic of 1819, and the
great wave of land price increases and declines between 1890 and 1933. Table 1 provides the
most significant facts about these booms.
9

the parameter

is based on estimates from Glaeser et al. (2011), which finds estimates of

ranging from 1 to 10

dollars depending on the region of the country, but with the bulk of the estimates towards the lower part of that
range. The value of .01 for v means that every extra 10,000 homes reduces the value of living in the area by 100
dollars.

9

18th Century Land Speculation
In 1798, America’s most famous financier, Robert Morris, was imprisoned for indebtedness. His
once vast fortune had been wagered on stunningly large land holdings and he was now unable to
pay his creditors. His failure would be one of the landmark events of the financial crisis of 1797.
Before Morris’ bankruptcy, he occupied a storied, somewhat unique place in American history,
as a merchant, financier of the revolution, signer of the Declaration of Independence, and
national ―Superintendent of Finance‖ from 1781 to 1784, when he may have been the wealthiest
man in America. Morris gambled in real estate throughout his career, but his truly immense real
estate speculations began in 1790, when he spent about $175,000 ($4.4 million in 2012 dollars)
to buy about 1.3 million acres of New York State land, from Nathaniel Phelps, Oliver Gorham
and other Massachusetts investors.
Phelps, Gorham and Morris were engaged in the great 18th century business of large scale land
speculation on the American frontier, a practice of the Ohio Company, the Vandalia Company
(Benjamin Franklin was an investor), the Loyal Land Company, William Penn, Lord Calvert, the
Lords Proprietor of Carolina and arguably the Virginia and Plymouth Companies themselves.
Their basic business model was to acquire land from a public entity (initially the crown) at low
cost and gradually sell the land to smaller investors. As the King, and later state governments,
were not always the toughest bargainers -- Penn received 45,000 square miles in exchange for
16,000 pounds— returns could be immense. Two major risks faced these grand speculators:
governments or Native Americans might not co-operate, and the demand for frontier land might
grow too slowly to cover the costs of long-term borrowing.
After the revolution, New York and Massachusetts had competing claims to western New York
State, which were settled by the 1786 Treaty of Hartford, where they agreed that New York had
legal jurisdiction over the territory, but Massachusetts could claim ownership of the soil as long
as it could buy the territory from the Native Americans (Grubb, 2009). Massachusetts sold its
right to buy 6.75 million acres to Gorham and Phelps for three annual payments totaling 300,000
pounds payable in Massachusetts securities, which were trading at one-fifth their par value
(Chernow, 1977).10 Phelps then secured 2.6 million of those acres—land between Lake Seneca
and the Genesee River—with a payment of 2,100 pounds to the Native Americans and a promise
to pay an additional 500 pounds per year.11
The Federal assumption of Massachusetts debt in 1790 increased the market price of
Massachusetts securities, and hence also increased the costs of the remaining payments owed by
Gorham and Phelps. They returned the right to buy four million or so acres to Massachusetts, in
exchange for being forgiven the 200,000 pounds that they still owed. All told they had acquired
2.6 million acres, for less than 125,000 dollars or under five cents an acre, not counting
surveying and other costs. Gorham and Phelps then sold Morris over one million acres out of 2.6
million for four payments totaling 30,000 pounds plus interest, or about 13.5 cents per acre
(~$3.30 per acre in 2012 dollars, or $4.4 million total in 2012 dollars).

10

The standard exchange rate is approximately 4.5 dollars to the pound (Officer, 1983), making this approximately
1.35 million dollars in nominal values, or one-fifth that amount in hard currency.
11
That promise seems not to have been reliably kept. (http://www.rochester.lib.ny.us/~rochhist/v1_1939/v1i1.pdf)

10

Morris resold the land in 1791 to the English Pulteney Associates for 75,000 pounds, or
$343,800 (about $8.4 million in 2012 dollars, or $6.40 an acre in 2012 dollars), making a
substantial profit. He plowed his earnings, and additional loans from the Pulteney Associates
back into New York land, spending another 100,000 pounds to purchase the remaining four
million acres of the original Phelps-Gorham land (Wilkinson, 1953). At the Treaty of Big Tree,
Morris paid another $100,000 to actually buy the land from its Native American inhabitants.
The total purchase price of 4 million acres was well below 15 cents an acre (~$3.70 in 2012
dollars), and Morris was again able to resell his land profitably to the Dutch Holland Land
Company. In four separate transactions, he sold 3.25 million acres for close to one million
dollars, suggesting that land prices had risen to about 30 cents (~$5.22 in 2012 dollars). The
Dutch investors did buy and hold and were less successful, but a recent investigation of the
Holland Land Company’s finances finds that they too earned reasonable returns over the long
term (Frehen, Rouwenhorst and Goetzmann, 2012).
Morris continued his massive land purchases in other states, but faced increasing difficult credit
conditions. The yield on British consols, a classic measure of the long run interest rate, rose from
3.3 percent in 1793 to 5.9 percent in 1797 (Silberling, 1919).12 The period of credit tightening
culminated in the Bank of England’s suspension of specie payment in February 1797. As
borrowing became more difficult, Morris formed the North American Land Company, in 1795
with James Greenleaf and John Nicholson, evidently in the unrealized hope of finding equity
financing..
Morris’ ability to meet his debts deteriorated, and he increasingly mortgaged his property.
Amidst the confusion of his financial affairs, it is hard to determine what an actual market price
of land would have been in 1797, but the number of buyers were limited in that chaotic year.
Eventually, he was unable to meet his obligations and become bankrupt. Still, Morris and his
partners would surely have prospered if not for ―their failure to raise sufficient capital to allow
them to be patient investors ―(Frehen, Rouwenhorst and Goetzmann, 2012).
Morris’ land purchases were not at absurd ―bubble‖ level prices, but rather at prices that were
quite low both relative to future prices and relative to prices elsewhere in the U.S. In the early
1790s, Alexander Hamilton thought that 30 cents per acre (~$7.50 in 2012 dollars) was a fair
price for government frontier land, and by 1796, congress considered a two dollar (~$35 in 2012
dollars) minimum sale price to be reasonable (Treat, 1910). The Blodget (1806) estimate of the
value of unimproved land in 1804 is $2.20 per acre, or 43 dollars per acre in modern currency.
By 1850, New York State land was valued at 29 dollars per acre ($854 in 2012 dollars), implying
that the 60 year nominal return for Morris would have been nine percent per year (Lindert,
1988), well above the normal six percent maximum mortgage lending rate (Homer and Sylla,
1991).
There is also a Thunenite justification for Morris’ purchases because frontier land prices were
quite low relative to land elsewhere in the U.S. Ellis (1946) reports that land values in
established regions typically ranged from 14 to 18 dollars per acre (3 to 4 pounds, or $293-$397
12

Assuredly, these rate increases indicated some premium for large scale political risk as a result of the Napoleonic
conflict, but they still indicate an increasingly difficult borrowing environment for Morris and his partners, who
would certainly have also fared poorly in the case of a political catastrophe impacting England.

11

in 2012 dollars), and prices could rise as high as $125 dollars ($2,600 in 2012 dollars) per acre
for the best wheat-bearing soil. The difficulties of moving goods over land made frontier land
less valuable, but it was surely not unreasonable to believe ongoing transportation improvements
would cause western New York properties to eventually be almost as valuable as land in the
East.
While boom prices were compatible with reasonable real estate models, so were the prices
during the bust. Grubb’s (2009) price series suggest a decline of approximately 20 percent in
value after 1797, which is readily reconcilable with a two percentage point increase in long-run
expected returns from 8 percent to 10 percent.13
Credit market tightening helps explain Morris’ decline, but increases in easy credit do not seem
to have fueled his earlier buying. Morris found much of his financing abroad, and rates were
rising in England over this period.14 Financial innovation in the Netherlands did play a role in the
land sales of the 1790s, but Morris began his purchases before he could have known about these
new financial structures. It seems more likely that Morris believed that he would sell his later
purchases, like his earlier ones, to more standard groups of non-American investors.
Yet as Frehen, Rouwenhorst and Goetzmann (2012) note, there is a credit puzzle hidden in the
Morris story. The people who invested in Morris, and in the Holland Land Company, did not
have the same upside potential that the equity owners did. Yet they lent money at relatively
standard interest rates, suggesting that like recent purchasers of mortgage-backed securities, they
may have underestimated the risks inherent in real estate speculation.
The 1815-1819 Convulsion
During the boom before the Panic of 1819, Rothbard (2007) writes that ―speculation in urban and
rural lands and real estate, using bank credit, was a common phenomenon which sharply raised
property values.‖ As Treat (1910) notes ―It was in Alabama, of course, that the land speculation,
under the credit system, reached its height.‖ The epicenter of the boom, Huntsville, combined
excellent cotton-growing soil with access to the Tennessee River, which brings access to the
Ohio river, the Mississippi river and ultimately, the Gulf of Mexico. Transportation was the key
to making frontier land valuable, and water was the key to transportation.
Rohrbough (1968) reports that 5,610 acres of public land in Madison County, Alabama (which
contains Huntsville) were sold in 1817 for $11,220 ($194,000 in 2012 dollars, or about $35 an
acre), and 973,000 acres were sold in 1818 for $7.2 million ($130 million in 2012 dollars, or
about $134 per acre). A 270 percent increase in price during a single year is impressive. Chappell
(1949) notes that ―at the first sales at Huntsville, Alabama Territory, in February, 1818, the lands
in the first four ranges sold at prices ranging from $20 to $78 per acre,‖ which seems
extraordinary given that land prices elsewhere on the American frontier were closer to one dollar
per acre. The initial seller of land was the Federal government, which ―facilitated large-scale
speculation in public lands by opening up for sale large tracts in the Southwest and Northwest,
and granting liberal credit terms to purchasers‖ (Rothbard, 2007). Greer (1948) writes that
13

That increase is in line with the previously discussed increase in British consol rates.
Curott and Watts (2011) note that realized real rates declined in 1795 because of a spike in nominal wholesale
prices. I remain convinced that the nominal series is somewhat more reasonable to use, because of the unexpected
nature of these prices changes, and the specie-backed nature of currency in that decade.
14

12

―[p]ublic lands were sold by the federal government on an installment payment basis, and
speculators mingled with homesteaders in the rush to buy.‖15
In 1819, the boom busted, the country went into recession and Alabama land values plummeted.
Treat (1910) reports that land buyers owed $21 million to the Federal government in 1820, and
$12 million of that amount was due from Alabama itself. The government responded to these
debts with various relief measures and it reduced the credit available for buying public land
(Rothbard, 2007).
These boom prices were not as unreasonable as they might first appear. Howe (2007) writes that
―while backcountry South Carolina yielded 300 pounds of cotton per acre, the Alabama blackbelt
could yield 800 or even a thousand pounds per acre.‖ In 1817 and 1818, cotton prices were over
30 cents ($5 in 2012 dollars) per pound in many markets (Cole data) 16 Moreover, English cotton
imports had increased by 78 percent from 1815 to 1818, despite high prices, suggesting that
industrialization was creating an enormous boost in cotton demand (Mitchell, 1988).
According to Watkins (1908) one-twelfth of the cotton was the standard price for ginning.
Conrad and Meyer (1958) estimate the annual cost of slave labor at 20 dollars per year after
1840, which given a productivity level of 1000 pounds per slave, suggests a cost of two cents per
pound. Abernethy (1922) gives a similar cost for slaves the 1820s in Alabama, although his cost
appears to be less inclusive, so I will double that value and use instead four cents per pound. He
also gives 10 cents a pound as the minimum price for profitability during this time period.
Conrad and Meyer suggest that transportation and marketing costs were about .7 cents per
pound, again for a later period. Given the deflation between 1820 and 1850, this would be about
1.2 cents per pound in 1820. If that cost figure was quadrupled to account for higher transport
prices, then total costs would be 15 cents per pound. This figure is also supported by the fact that
Alabama was still producing cotton in the mid-1820s when prices had fallen to less than 15 cents
per pounds, where they would stay until the Civil War.
If cotton sells for 30 cents per pound and costs 15 cents per pound to produce, then this would
imply annual profits of 120 dollars per acre, which could readily support a 75 dollar per acre
price, or possibly even a 750 dollar per acre price. Even with reasonable expectations about
interest rates, mean reversion and depreciation of the land, 75 dollars per acre seems like a good
deal in 1818.
From 1815 to 1818, demand growth outstripped the growth in supply, but after that year supply
triumphed, cotton prices fell and land prices followed. Cole reports that first quality cotton went
for 32 cents a pound in January 1818, 25 cents a pound in January 1819, and 16 cents per pound
in January 1820. If production costs were 15 cents per pound, the profit associated with an acre
of land had dropped by over 90 percent. The prices appeared to have been pushed down by
increases in supply from the U.S. and elsewhere. Between 1818 and 1819, U.S. exports to the
United Kingdom increased by 50 percent (Mitchell, 1988).
15

Bidding on public land seems to have involved a fair amount of collusion, both among groups of bidders and with
public officials (Chappell, 1949). Rohrbough (1968) describes how ―interested individuals organized into joint stock
companies or partnerships,‖ and then ―land was purchased for the company at the minimum price; and the tracts thus
acquired were immediately resold at auction.‖
16
http://www.vanderbilt.edu/econ/cipr/cole-historical-data.html

13

The Alabama boom and bust illustrates a phenomenon that will reappear throughout these real
estate episodes: an under-appreciation of the long-run power of elastic supply to push prices
downward. At current cotton prices, land prices in 1818 Alabama were justifiable. But since land
was so freely available, in the U.S. and elsewhere, a smart investor might have reasoned that
prices would eventually fall so that land prices in Alabama would resemble land prices of
similarly productive places throughout the world. That logic would have made the land buyer of
1818 far warier about paying so much for even prime Alabama land.
To gauge reasonable beliefs about prices as of 1819, I have run simple time series regressions on
cotton prices over the 1801-1840 period. I have used average prices from Cole for January in
four key markets: Charleston, New Orleans, New York, and Philadelphia.17 A land speculator
with access to this data, as of 1819, who based long term prices on the average past price, would
have estimated an average cotton price of 22 cents per pound in 1820. This price was below the
32 cents high, but still high relative to the prices that actually materialized. At seven cents per
pound profit, yields of 800 pounds per acre could still justify the prices being paid at the peak. A
more sophisticated buyer, estimating a regression with a time trend, would have found a
statistically significant upward trend of .6 cents per year, which if extrapolated would make the
1818 prices look cheap indeed.18 Buyers would need to have a much better model than just
forecasting cotton prices with past time series to anticipate the drop in prices.
The boom doesn’t appear to be related to lower interest rates. Homer and Sylla (1991) show that
New England municipal bond yields were flat. While Federal yields decline by two percentage
points between 1815 and 1817, they are then flat during the rest of the boom. The availability of
private credit assuredly declined substantially after the 1819 Panic, but for most land buyers the
elimination of public credit in 1820 was the more important issue, and that followed the bust.
The most important credit policy during the boom was the 1800 Land Act, which enabled
purchasers of public land to put up one-twentieth of the price immediately, and then bring the
payment up to one-fourth within forty days. The remainder was to be paid in annual installments,
beginning two years after the purchase date. The nominal interest rate was six percent, but there
were added discounts for early payment, so the effective discount rate was higher.19 The policy
had been essentially constant since 1800 (Grubb, 2009), but the existence of these policies may
still have helped prices rise.
In this instance, there are two ways in which credit policies may have increased housing prices:
bridging the gap between private discount rates and market rates and granting an under-priced
default option. Both may have been significant in this case, but since mortgage durations were so
short, the first effect is likely to be modest if private discount factors were less than 15 percent.
At that discount rate, the value of being able to delay payments for four years would cause the
17

In 1802, I utilize the February rather than the January price for Charleston, because the January price is given in
Shillings and at standard exchange rates this differs sufficiently much from the prices that prevail for the next six
months that it seemed safer to use the slightly later price. In 1801, I inflate the 1802 price for Charleston by
difference in shilling prices listed in Cole. We are missing 1814 and 1815 prices for New Orleans, and have
averaged over the three remaining markets.
18
An even more sophisticated buyer, who estimated a time series regression with mean reversion and a growth rate,
would also have expected high returns from prime cotton land bought at 75 dollars per acre.
19
Since the government tended to forgive its debtors, this lowered the effective rate.

14

effective price of the property to drop by 16.25 percent, meaning that prices should be only 19
percent higher than they would be with full credit.
An under-priced default option may have done more to boost prices. For illustrative purposes,
assume that the buyers thought that the long run uncertainty about cotton conditions was going to
be resolved before 1821, when the first payment was due, and that land would be worth either 50
dollars per acre or 2 dollars per acre, each with equal probably. A risk neutral buyer with a six
percent interest rate would then have been willing to pay 21 dollars for the land if he had to put
everything down up front (if he wasn’t planning on planting anything for the first two years) and
82 dollars (or 20.5 dollars up front), if he was just putting 25 percent down. This is an extreme
example, but the default option could easily have increased values substantially. The dramatic
uncertainty about Alabama’s future would have made any free put option offered by the
government far more valuable.
The boom was not initiated by any change in credit policies for public land, but instead fueled by
optimism about uncertain economic fundamentals, such as declining transport costs and English
demand for American cotton. Alabama’s land prices were not obviously rational in 1818, but
they weren’t obviously irrational either. The seven dollar average price, which would have been
4.60 dollars in 1860, also looks reasonable relative to the 9 dollar per acre prices that were
prevalent in that later year (Lindert, 1988). Buyers at higher prices lost money, but they wouldn’t
have if cotton prices had stayed high. The world was changing rapidly and industrial producers
needed raw cotton. The buyers just don’t seem to anticipate that supply would eventually outstrip
demand. Ex post, the Alabama speculators look foolish, but ex ante, there was enough
uncertainty to justify the buying; prices would have been reasonable as long as cotton prices
stayed high, and that was hardly such a crazy thought.
The 1900-1940 Land Cycle
We now turn to a more modern period, during which there exists widespread data on agricultural
land values. Figure 4 illustrates, in 2012 dollars, the basic pattern of real values, where I have
included four different series. The first two series begin in 1850, and reflect the value per acre
for both buildings and land. The second two series begin in 1910, when building valuations
become available that enable us to look at pure land value (even after 1910, the building series
requires inter-censal interpolation).20 The figure shows time patterns both for the entire United
States and for the 35 states for which there is data in 1850, which may somewhat diminish the
tendency of the changing composition of acreage to shift land values (Lindert, 1988).21
From 1850 through 1900, land values are slowly rising. From 1900 to 1935, prices soar and then
decline, hitting bottom in the 1930s. After 1945, prices again rise steadily. I focus on the great
price undulation between 1900 and 1940. The nature of the convulsion is illustrated in Figure 5,
which shows the relationship between the growth in the logarithm of the real value of farm land
per acre between 1890 and 1910 and the decline in the logarithm of farm land value per acre
20

Building values are only available for years in which there is an agricultural census. For the years between
Censuses, I have assumed that building prices move with a linear time trend.
21
I am of course not eliminating changing land composition entirely, because there is a substantial shift in the
location of agriculture within those 35 states.

15

between 1920 and 1933.22 The figure follows a remarkably straight line (slope of -.95), with only
four visible outliers: Massachusetts, Connecticut, New Jersey and Florida.23 For every dollar
increase between 1890 and 1910, prices dropped by 96 cents between 1920 and 1933. The rsquared of the underlying regression is .7, meaning that the relationship is even tighter than the
mean reversion seen during the great convulsion of the past decade.
Looking at this regression alone, this looks like a great land bubble that peaked in the early teens
and then gradually disappeared: a farm property phenomenon, almost as spectacular as the
housing boom that we have just experienced. Across the U.S. as a whole, farm debt per acre
increased five-fold between 1910 and 1920, and as in the post-2007 period, the price collapse led
to financial failures. Alston, Grove and Wheelock (1994) discuss the wave of bank failures that
went through rural America after 1920; those failures occurred disproportionately in states that
experienced greater increases in land values between 1912 and 1920.
Yet just like the buyers in Alabama in 1818, the buyers of 1915 don’t look irrational given the
potential profits from their farms. Just as in earlier Alabama, major technological changes (and
changes in rail regulation) were altering the geography of agricultural productivity across the
United States. As the figure shows that the biggest gains and losses were in Iowa, I will focus my
analysis on farm profitability in that state and focus especially on wheat-growing. One doesn’t
necessarily think of the sturdy farmers of Iowa as being high-flying speculators, but these
agrarians were at the center of the land boom of 1910.
Iowa wheat yields averaged 18 bushels per acre between 1905 and 1915, and a bushel of wheat
was priced at about one dollar ($24 in 2012 dollars) on the Chicago exchange. 24 Over the same
1895 to 1910 period, wheat yields had been rising in the state by 1.4 percent per year. The
growth in wheat yields did not occur nationwide, but was particularly present in the Middle
West, where new wheat varieties were boosting wheat productivity (Olmstead and Rhode, 2002).
Over the longer period since 1868 when data becomes available, yields in Iowa rose by more
than one percent per year.
Chicago wheat prices had been rising for 16 years. Figure 6 shows the great undulation in wheat
prices during the late 19th century. From 1876 to 1894, prices steadily declined, as increases in
supply outstripped demand. Then the trend reversed itself and prices would continue to rise until
1917. During this period domestic demand, and increasingly accessible international markets,
rose even more steadily than supply. Real Chicago wheat prices had increased by 3.3 percent per
year annually since 1895.25
Harley (1978) discusses an average Iowa price of wheat of 76 cents ($18 in 2012 dollars) in
1910 during the same time period, which suggests that transport costs ran at 24 cents ($5.80 in
2012 dollars) per bushel, but transportation costs were declining significantly (Schmitz, 2003).
The ability of railroads to price discriminate against Midwestern farmers had diminished due to
22

A similar but somewhat weaker pattern appears if I regress 1910-1933 changes on 1890-1910 changes.
In the three northeastern states, farms were close to metropolitan areas and this presumably kept prices up. Florida
peaked later than other states, because of its mid-1920s land boom. Moreover, it continued to decline steadily
throughout the 1930s, while other states began to recover. By 1940, it no longer seemed unusual.
24
Data from the NBER historical price series data.
25
Across states, there is a.44 correlation between growth in prices and growth in wheat yields between the ten year
average around 1890 and the ten year average around 1910.
23

16

regulatory changes and transportation technology was also improving. Real revenue per ton mile
across all U.S. railroads had declined by 20 percent since 1895, making for an annual rate of
decline of 1.5 percent.26 The decline in transport costs helps explain the pattern of the boom.
Figure 7 shows the -.55 correlation coefficient between longitude and price growth among states
east of -99 degrees longitude.27
Over the 1910-1920 period, U.S. Department of Agriculture Data shows that the ratio of net
income to total revenues on farms ranged from .56 in 1913 to .66 in 1917, with a mean of .6
(costs include property taxes).28 If 18 bushels of wheat are sold at 76 cents ($18 in 2012 dollars)
a bushel, and 40 percent of that amount is subtracted for costs, then the total return on an acre of
wheat land would be $8.20 ($199 in 2012 dollars). Iowa’s land price of 96 dollars ($2,330 in
2012 dollars) per acre (for buildings and land) in 1910 implies a discount factor of 8.5 percent
which seems quite reasonable, given standard mortgage rates of six percent (Homer and Sylla,
1991). If the owner’s value of time, and any other costs, caused the net return to drop by 20
percent, then the implied discount factor is 6.8 percent, which seems somewhat low, at least for
farmers that expected the world to continue without change.
Yet the world of 1910 was anything but static, and the trends make that 96 dollar price seem
even better. To appraise the impact that expected growth might have on the value of land, I
assume that land yields
, where is price,
is production costs, is yield
and represents transport costs. If prices are growing at a continuous rate , yields are
growing at a continuous rate , transport costs are declining at a continuous rate , and if the
individual discounts future revenues at a rate of , then the net present value of the land is
.29 Taking wheat yields to be 18,
to be .6, to be one
dollar, to be twenty five cents, and to be .10, and, if the growth rate in prices and yields are
assumed to be 1 percent, and the rate of decline in transport costs is also assumed to be 1 percent,
then the value of the land equals 108 dollars, slightly above prices in 1910 and 1911. These
growth rates were not unreasonable in 1910—they were below recent trends-- and a 10 percent
discount rate also seems high, although it is meant to partially compensate for not fully counting
the cost of the owner’s time in managing the farm.
In the short run, those projections didn’t look bad. Transport costs continue to fall, declining
about four percent per year in real terms between 1910 and 1920. Prices continued to grow
substantially until 1917, at an annual rate of over 10 percent. Only wheat yields sagged, falling
by two percent per year over the teens, but that partially reflects the increasing number of
marginal acres harvested over the decade.
Iowa land prices continued to rise in real terms until 1916, when they hit 138 dollars per acre
(again for buildings and land) which is equivalent to 120 dollars in 1910 ($2,900 in 2012). But
given that national wheat prices had increased by 34 percent in real terms since 1910, this price
growth is understandable. Figure 6 shows that wheat prices switched from growth to decline in

26

http://www.nber.org/databases/macrohistory/rectdata/03/a03003b.dat
The figure excludes Texas, New Mexico, California and Oregon from our sample through that restriction.
28
I include revenues to non-resident owners and interest on real property as income.
29
This formula excludes property taxes and maintenance, because those costs are built into farm operating costs.
27

17

1917, when they hit their 20th century peak.30 International supply recovered after the war and
American production stayed high. Over the 1920s, the growth in world wheat production
appeared to be seriously outpacing the growth in world wheat demand (Malenbaum, 1953).
Again, buyers seem not to have anticipated the impact that elastic supply would have on price.
The positive trend in wheat yields stalled until World War II. While farmers in 1910 could
reasonably believe that technology would continue perpetually increasing the productivity of
their farms, the farmers of 1933 could also reasonably believe that the age of productivity
advances were over. To assess prices in 1933, I use the same formula as before, assuming the
same discount factor, parameters for yield, and costs. In 1932, rail revenues per ton mile were the
same in real terms as 1910, but I will assume transport costs to have fallen to 18 cents.31 I will
also assume that buyers now believe that there is no prospective growth in yields, prices or
transport costs. At the wheat price of 38 cents per bushel, the formula predicts a price of 22
dollars per acre, which is actually far less than the nominal price of 89 dollars ($1,500 in 2012
dollars) in 1932 or even 68 dollars ($1,200) per acre (the lowest value) in 1933. If the long run
price was thought to be closer to 80 cents per bushel, which would be the norm later in the
decade, the implied price is 67 dollars.
While debt levels increased over the teens, credit markets appear to have played only a modest
role in the price increase and decrease. Nominal bond yields were rising over the period (Homer
and Sylla, 1991) although expected real bond yields may have fallen somewhat because of
changing inflationary expectations. Loans were limited to 50 percent of property values and
interest rates averaged five percent (Preston, 1922). The 50 percent down-payment requirement,
which was required by state law, also limited the potential value of any non-priced default
option. Given the historical standard deviation of log price changes of .18, interest rates of 5
percent, a down payment of 50 percent, and expected price growth of .015 log points annually
(one-half the actual rate from 1880-1910), depreciation and tax rates of one percent, the value of
a free default option only increases the value of the land by 6 percent, which is shown in Table 2.
A free default option would increase land values by only 8.9 percent if expected land price
growth dropped to zero. Easy credit seems to have little role in the land boom of the teens.
The farm convulsion between 1880 and 1933 was an extreme event, but wheat price changes
were also dramatic. Reasonable projections of increases in wheat prices, yields and lower
transportation costs could readily justify the high land values seen during the boom years. Those
projections were wrong, and one can argue that farmers should have anticipated the fall in prices
that would eventually result from abundant supply. Still, it would be a far-sighted farmer indeed
who wouldn’t have been optimistic given over a decade’s worth of positive price movements.

IV.

The Urban Price Waves

In 1899, Adna Weber began his majesterial study of cities with the words ―the most remarkable
social phenomenon of the present century is the concentration of population in cities.‖ Cities
30

We have used the USDA average wheat price average 1908, and the Chicago price before then. To make them
compatible, we regressed USDA average wheat prices on Chicago prices after 1908 and used the regression to
adjust the Chicago prices during the earlier period.
31
This would reflect 23 years of 1.5 percent price declines. Higher costs make prices lower.

18

grew because they were productive, and the cities that grew were nodes on a great transportation
network that spread across American during the nineteenth century (Bleakley and Lin, 2012).
Every one of the twenty largest cities in the U.S. in 1900 was on a major waterway, from the
oldest, typically where a river hits the ocean, to the newest, Minneapolis, on the northernmost
navigable point on the Mississippi River, reflecting the enormous cosst advantages of water
borne trasnport during the early 19th century In 1816, it cost as much to ship goods 30 miles over
land as it did to ship them across the Atlantic Ocean (Taylor, 1951).
Today, we routinely see high prices paid for urban residential real estate, but residential land was
fairly abundant in all 18th century American cities and most early 19th century cities as well. The
1722 Bonner map of Boston shows plenty of open space within 1.5 miles of the Long Wharf.
Blodget (1806) reports that in 1785, the price of improved land near the centers of either New
York or Philadelphia was $50 per acre (over $1,000 dollars today). By contrast, moving
hogsheads was significantly harder work, which made it natural to put commercial operations
along King Street near the wharf. The high cost of moving goods meant that areas close to
waterways were particularly valuable as commercial space, which is the backdrop for the great
Chicago land convulsion of the 1830s. The most salient facts about these urban price waves are
given in Table 3.
The Chicago Boom:1830-1841
The great Chicago boom and bust of the 1830s has been seen as the epitome of a classic real
estate bubble (Shiller, 2008). Prices for land on the edge of America rose from essentially
nothing to New York levels in six years. Hoyt (1933) remains the indispensible resource for 19th
century Chicago real estate. While much of his early data is interpolated, there is no obviously
better source for land values during the city’s formative perirod. I will focus on his data on land
values in the Chicago loop, where according to Hoyt’s estimates, prices per acre in 2012 dollars
were about $800 dollars in 1830, $327,00 per acre in 1836 and $38,000 per acre in 1841. In the
aftermath of the bust, the Bank of Illinois first foreclosed on sizable real estate holdings and then
declared bankruptcy in 1842.
Figure 8 illlustartes the mean reversion of prices across city blocks in Chicago over this time
period. The figure shows the relationship between land value increases, in 2012 dollars, between
1830 and 1836 and land value decreases between 1836 and 1841. The slope is almost exactly
negative one, which is not surprising since prices are essentially zero in both 1830 and 1841.
Since many of Hoyt’s figures are interpolations, the figure should be taken more as an sketch of
the event than as a precise description.
The Chicago real estate convulsion was not some isolated asset market event, reflecting a
temporary mania for rare flora or exotic securities. The Chicago boom was vitally connected
with the deep currents of America’s economic development. The Erie Canal, which had opened
in 1825 gave Chicago access to the East Coast, meaning that ―even by 1831 it was found that
goods could be brought from New York to St. Louis by way of Chicago one-third cheaper than
by New Orleans‖ (Hoyt, 1933). In 1835, the State of Illinois had committed itself to digging the
Illinois and Michigan Canal which promised to eventually (it would take until 1848) give
Chicago access to the Mississippi River System. With these two canals, Chicago would sit at the
epicenter of America’s transportation network.

19

The twenty years before 1830 had seen an explosive period of population growth for other cities
occupying critical spots on America’s waterways. Most spectacularly of all, Cincinnati, on the
banks of the Ohio river, had grown from 2,540 people in 1810 to almost 25,000 people twenty
years later. Rochester and Buffalo had each more than tripled in size during the 1820s, thanks
largely to the promise of the Erie Canal.
The importance of access to water is illustrated by the pattern of the boom. Figure 9 shows the
relationship between price growth between 1830 and 1836 and proximity to the Chicago river. I
estimate that the distance gradient from the river in 1836 in Chicago is about three times steeper
than the price gradients for distance from City Hall estimated by Atack and Margo (1998) for
New York.32
Were the 1836 prices in line with sensible expectations? A Gordonian would compare Chicago
prices with the expected vlaue of future rent flows for commercial enterprises in the area.
Andreas (1884) quotes the July 9, Chicago American: ―a store on Lake Street, that sold for
$8,000, rents for $1,000.‖ Hoyt (1933) finds this capitalization rate low, given risk and the
possibility that interest rates may have been over 10 percent, but given reasonable growth
expectations, it looks like a good return to me. While this solitary data point makes buying look
sensible, most land buyers were purchasing properties with no initial income whatsoever.
For areas with no current cash flow, the Thunenite approach, which focuses on comparisons with
other cities, seems more sensible. This approach asks whether prices seem reasonable by looking
at current prices in successful cities and assigning a probability that the city willl also succeed.
Atack and Margo (1998) provide land prices for New York City in 1835, and the average price
per square foot in their sample is 76 cents ($20 in 2012 dollars). In the highest price areas, land
appears to sell for $2.50 a square foot ($65 in 2012 dollars).
I have also assembled my own data on property sales from New York City during the 1830s,
from the sales announcements in the Spectator. The median price for unimproved land per square
foot between 1832 and 1836 is 64 cents (~$17 in 2012 dollars), which is slightly less than the
Atack and Margo figure. This price rises to $1.10 (~$27 dollars) per square foot in 1836 and
1837. Four out of 122 sales, in 1836 and 1837, of undeveloped land parcels between 2000 and
10000 square feet, are over five dollars ($122 in 2012 dollars) per square foot, and only one-sixth
of such sales are over $2.50 ($61 in 2012 dollars) per square foot. These data corroborate Atack
and Margo and suggest that $2.50 per square foot represents a reasonable upper limit on land
values, but it remains possible that a few particularly well placed parcels could be more valuable.
Cincinnati, the‖Queen of the West‖,might have been a more feasible comparison for Chicago
than New York. Greve (1904) is the best source I have on Cincinnati land values during the
period. He lists a number of land sales at different years, and gives the impression that these are
somewhat representative of desirable commercial land in the in city center. He discusses prices
between 120 and 300 dollars per front foot (one to two dollars per square foot, or $26 to $51 in
2012 dollars) in downtown Cincinnati in the 1830s and provides land rents that seem to justify
those prices. It surprised me that Cincinnati land values were so close to prime New York values,

32

They also report stronger distance gradients in Chicago than in New York.

20

and leads me to wonder whether Greve may have reported properties at the very high top of the
land value distribution.
The Hoyt data, in dollars per front foot (typical depths are 160 feet), indicate that Dearborn
Avenue and the River hit 267 dollars per front foot ($6,597 in 2012 dollars), or $1.66 per square
foot ($41 in 2012 dollars). The other river front blocks are typically 160 dollars per front foot
($3,953 in 2012 dollats) or $1 ($25) per square foot. The average across the entire loop sample is
19 dollars ($469) per front foot. That average price is less than one-sixth of the land values listed
in New York City or in Cincinnati, but the peak prices in Chicago on Dearborn are only slightly
less than the New York or Cincinnati peaks.
I assume that the buyers of 1835 believe that with probability , Chicago will resemble
Cincinnati or a mini-New York in 15 years, and with probability
the land will be
worthless. If we assume that buyers discount the future at a rate and that the value of
Cincinnati or New York style land will grow at a rate, g. then a risk neutral buyer would evaluate
Chicago property, that paid no rents, at a value of
. Using 10 percent as a discount
factor and assuming a growth rate of 5 percent (the realized nominal annual growth rate for New
York City between 1835 and 1870 in the Atack and Margo, 2006, data), then the discount factor
is approximately
relative to New York or Cincinnati values. The discount reflects both the
possibility that Chicago will fail and the time delay before success.
Walters (2010) suggests that only one-third of the Illinois towns founded in the 1830s made it to
maturity, although none of those towns, at the time, were thought to have nearly the same
possibilities as Chicago.33 If I assume that
, then if success means hitting 80 cents per
square foot, which seems plausible given New York and Cincinnati values, then the 19 cents per
acre seems reasonable. If land should go for one-fourth New York values, then land values
should not exceed .75 cents. The bulk of riverfront property appears slightly too expensive
relative to that standard, and Dearborn Street property seems much too expensive, but it is surely
a mistake to overweight the importance of a single parcel.34 The trophy property buyers may
have been unreasonably optimistic, but, of course, they did end up being right.
Many authors—Hoyt among them— discuss the role of easy money after 1835. The state
government appears to have intended to boost real estate through aggressive lending practices.
The critical facts are that the State Bank of Illionois was forbidden by statute from lending out
more than one-half of the appraised value for any property or from lending mortgages over five
years (Public and General Status of the State of Illinois, 1839, p. 96).35 The State Bank was the
large local lender, and these terms presumably reflect the terms given by other banks as well.

33

Walters provides an entertaining discourse into land speculation in smaller upstart Illinois towns between 18351837. While town promoters certainly over-hyped their properties, the uncertainty was large enough to justify
significant confusion. The difference in value per acre between frontier agricultural land and the center of an even
modestly successful town could be enormous.
34
Dearborn Street property seems much too expensive, but surely it is inappropriate to put too much weight on a
single transaction.
35
In New York, during the same time period, it was alleged that lenders would grant real estate buyers loans as if
they were business, on commercial credit terms. If this occurred in Chicago, it would mean higher leverage ratios
and shorter debt durations.

21

Since the Bank of Illinois was a creature of state policy, and since the legislature pushed the bank
to support real estate, it is certainly possible that the Bank was not charging appropriate interest
rates given the probability of default. In Table 2, I evaluate the impact that a non-priced default
option would have on willigness-to-pay, assuming that the standard deviation of log prices is 1.2,
the downpayment rate is 50 percent, and the interest rate is 10 percent. I present results both for
the case of no price growth and for the case of 50 percent growth (one half the realized annual
growth rate). In the case of no growth, the default option increases the willingness to pay for land
by 65 percent. In the case of 50 percent growth, the default option increases the willingness to
pay by 41 percent. The premium for intermediate growth rates lies between those two extremes,
suggesting that a free default option could have had significant value, despite the high
downpayment level.36
The optimists were vindicated in the long run. Even the buyers of the most expensive tract in the
loop in 1836, on Dearborn Avenue near the Chicago River, experienced 3.6 percent real property
value appreciation over the next twenty years. But ex post justification is dangerrous. Chicago is
studied precisely because it ended up as a success.
In 1837, there was widespread panic. Temin (1968) blames credit tightening coming from
England. Rousseau (2000) emphasizes governmental inter-bank transfers across. On May 29,
1837, the Illinois banks suspended payments. As the banks careened towards bankruptcy,
Illinois’ internal improvements, like the canals which were supposed to be financed by the banks,
stopped.
Hoyt reports that in 1841 land near the river on Michigan Avenue was down to five dollars a
front foot, or less than 1,500 dollars an acre, less than one-thirtieth of its price 4 years earlier. He
estimates that the prime land on Dearborn was worth less than one-fifth of its 1837 peak. These
prices are so low that they seem like far greater folly than the higher prices paid four years
earlier. Yet if the discount rate had gone up from 10 percent, to 15 or 20 percent, and if the
probability of Chicago becoming a major city had fallen dramatically, then even the bottom
doesn’t look so strange. At a 20 percent interest rate, with no free default option, then land that
will be worth 100,000 dollars in 20 years time but provides no intervening benefits is only worth
2,600 dollars an acre.
Los Angeles in the 1880s
I now turn to Los Angeles in the 1800s, the ―Chicago of the West,‖ which experienced a
substantial run-up in values during the 1880s and a subsequent reversal. To assess the rise, I use
land value data from reported sales in the Los Angeles Times from 1882 to 1889. As Figure 10
shows, the median price per square foot, in 2012 dollars, increases from 1.8 cents in 1882 to 2.8
cents in 1885. In 1886, the real price per square rises to 6.9 cents, and then 9.3 cents in 1887 and
18 cents in 1888, before the price returns to 12 cents in 1889. The 90th percentile price in 1888 is
70 cents per square foot. Figure 10 also shows the time path of annual dummy variables from a
regression of log of real price on log of land area and dummies for the major ranchos in the area;
that line shows log prices increasing by 1.5 between 1885 and 1888.
36

Alternatively, I could use the calculation discussed above, and assume that if Chicago does not succeed, the buyer
will default. In that case, a free default option can increase the willingness to pay as much as 100 percent.

22

These sales represent non-urban land that is relatively far from the urban core, where prices were
much higher. On January 9, 1887, the Los Angeles Times gives the price per front foot of $1333
(~$32,000 in 2012 dollars), and prices would still increase. On May 6, 1888, the Times reported
that the single most valuable piece of property in the city ran for $2,500 (~$61,000 in 2012
dollars) per front foot, but that the largest recorded transaction price was $1700 (~$41,000 in
2012 dollars) per front foot. Somewhat contradictorily, three days earlier the Times had said that
the maximum price paid was $2000 (~$49,000 in 2012 dollars) per front foot.
Perhaps even more impressively, commercial lots far from the urban core could also go for $100
(~$2,400 in 2012 dollars) or more per front foot. After the boom more than 60 percent of these
would-be cities disappeared (Dumke, 1944). Los Angeles buyers who bought during the boom
and held would earn substantial real returns. The buyers in these outlying areas were less
fortunate.
The Los Angeles boom was precipitated by the entry of the Sante Fe railroad into the Los
Angeles market, breaking the monopoly previously held by the Southern Pacific and leading to a
rate war. The price of transport for people and goods dropped dramatically, and the population of
Los Angeles increased from six to fifty thousand between 1885 and 1890. Migrants saw benefits
in the southern California climate, the agricultural value of its land and the economic
opportunity, created partially by real estate speculation.
Within Los Angeles, there was considerable demand for rented residential and commercial space
and there exists some information about rents. The Los Angeles Times in 1887 and 1888
regularly inveighed against the high rents charged by landlords, which appear to have started at
20 dollars per month for a modest bungalow away from the city center and could rise to 30 to40
dollars per month for homes closer to the central city. The Times gives 5 dollars per month per
room as a standard figure.
In 1887, the Times lists the price for a high end sized residential lot of 7500 square feet in Los
Angeles at 2,500 dollars ($61,000 in 2012 dollars). The price of a cheap lot is given at 400-500
dollars ($9,700-12,000 in 2012 dollars).37 Building costs, again according to the Times on
January 1, 1887, ranged from 172-250 dollars per room ($4,200-6,000 in 2012 dollars), so a
seven room house would cost $1750 ($43,000 in 2012 dollars). A Chicago builder in the Times
who noted that Los Angeles construction costs were higher than those in Chicago cites a cost of
$2500 ($61,000 in 2012 dollars). I will use the latter figure and assume that the owner must pay
1.5 percent of the construction costs annually to forestall deprecation.
A seven room house might cost $4000 ($97,000 in 2012 dollars) in land and construction costs,
assuming a $1500 ($36,000) lot price figure, which is triple the cheap lot price of 1887 but less
than the most expensive lots.38 State property taxes were approximately .6 percent in the 1880s
(Ely and Finley, 1888); the City Charter capped city property tax rates at one percent, so I
assume a 1.5 percent total tax rate. I assume a discount rate of 10 percent and a growth rate of
2.5 percent, which is far less than the actual Los Angeles experience. This implies that rents

37

Scholars of the Los Angeles boom (Dumke, 1944) suggest that real estate peaked in that city in the late summer of
1887, although our series suggests that prices continued to rise in 1888.
38
Such lots seem unlikely to be used for lower end rental properties.

23

would have to be $420 ($10,200), which is exactly what the monthly rents of $35 ($850) (seven
rooms at five dollars ($121) per room) would equal.39
On June 11, 1888, the Times went through a similar calculation for an owner who had built a
$15,000 structure, with stores and lodging room, and spent $50 monthly on land rent. Since ―he
will rent it for the first five years at $700 a month— after that without doubt at a higher rate,‖ the
costs are amply returned. At a capitalization rate of 12.5, 50 dollars per month land rent ($600
per year) would justify a $7500 value for the underlying land.40
Los Angeles prices could also be justified using a Thunenite perspective. On January 9, 1887, the
Los Angeles Times ran an article titled ―A Comparison: Real estate prices here and in other
cities.‖ The primary conclusion drawn from the data was that ―these figures should convince
anyone that considering the great natural advantages enjoyed by this city, prices of realty are not
so inflated a condition as is sometimes supposed by the less sanguine among us.‖ This is exactly
the logic suggested by the Rosen-Roback approach to metropolitan area pricing.
They note that while the price for top commercial real estate in Los Angeles is $1,333 per front
foot (~$32,000 in 2012 dollars), the price per front foot is $3,000 (~$73,000) in Cleveland and
$6,000 (~$146,000) in Chicago. Low end business land was similarly cheaper in Los Angeles
than in Cleveland or Chicago. Residential properties in Los Angeles cost 40 percent of prices in
Cleveland or Chicago and were comparable to the other cities in the sample. In other articles the
Times repeatedly compared Los Angeles with San Francisco and pronounced its own city cheap.
Los Angeles hardly possessed the economic dynamism of those Midwestern cities in 1887 and
the comparison does seem optimistic. Nonetheless, the city had grown so rapidly and it did seem
poised to become the region’s major hub. Moreover, as the Times repeatedly noted, Los Angeles
did have a nice climate. Buyers could and did look at prices in other cities and they appear to
have inferred that Los Angeles’ prices were reasonable.
A similar process occurred in the outlying boom towns around Los Angeles. The Gordonian
approach is hard to use for lots in outlying towns, where just as in Chicago in 1836, prices were
really based on hopes of a far flung future. The promoters of those towns instead used a
Thunenite approach, explicitly comparing their prices with those in Los Angeles and suggesting
that the inconvenience of distance was well worth the reduction in price. The problem with that
logic is that Los Angeles did have access to a truly scarce resource: proximity to the two major
rail lines. No other town had any comparable monopoly power. There was abundant land to
house millions within the region, but millions would not materialize for many decades.
Marshallian buyers would have observed the abundance of land and concluded that supply would
eventually push land prices down.

39

Real (2012) dollar numbers may not add up exactly due to rounding.
I am, unfortunately, not in possession of any form of rental data that would enable me to gauge whether the higher
prices paid by businesses were sensible from a Gordonian perspective. Perhaps the only evidence that it did was that
many of the most expensive properties, such as the land that went for 1700 dollars per foot cited by the Los Angeles,
were owned by businesses that used them and would presumably not have acquired them if the associated revenues
did not cover the costs.
40

24

What role did finance play in the boom? Interest rates were typically seven percent and there
seems to be little change in credit conditions during the preceding years. The New York
Commercial Paper rates rose in 1887. Banks were generally conservative, although it appears to
have been possible to provide only a 30 percent down payment. Table 2 evaluates the value of a
free default options given the variation in log prices of our land data over the period assuming a
ten percent interest rate and illustrates that even a free default option should have increased
prices at 10 percent with no growth or 30 percent at higher growth rates. Yet there is little
evidence that banks were giving away such free options.
Sellers themselves often offered financing on liberal terms, and that suggests the listed prices
overstate the true cost of property. Sellers presumably weren’t offering a free default option, but
were instead charging more to reflect the risk. The true price was therefore substantially less than
the listed price because the buyer was also giving the seller the option to default.
Prices declined after 1888, but Southern California continued to grow. Since aggressive
financing was provided by sellers not banks, there was no financial crisis during the bust. Los
Angeles did have a large boom-bust cycle and people who bought during the boom did lose
money. Yet the prices paid seem compatible with both Gordonian and Thunenite assumptions.
They were also quite justified given subsequent events, at least in the city itself. The biggest
losses were sustained by investors in outlying boom-towns, who don’t seem to have focused on
the virtually limitless supply of space in greater Los Angeles, at least relative to the demand
during the 19th century.

Building Up: New York City and Chicago from 1890-1933
In 1885, William LeBaron Jenney built the Home Insurance Building in Chicago, one of the
seminal buildings in the development of the skyscraper: a tall building with a load-bearing steel
or cast-iron skeleton. Skyscraper technology, which made it vastly cheaper to build up,
substituted the elevator for the streetcar as a means of transportation. It also radically increased
the value of urban land, at least temporarily.
Theoretically, skyscrapers can either increase or decrease the value of land. To see this, assume
that demand for office space satisfies
where X is a constant, K reflects
the quantity of space rented and v is a parameter. The world is static and the stock price of
capital will equal
, where is the discount rate.41 The total amount of land in the
area is normalized to one, so K=H, where H denotes the average height in the area. If developers
buy land and then pay for building cost equal to
times land area, where c and are
parameter and

, then the equilibrium price of land is

equals revenues minus construction costs given optimal building,

41

I have adopted a log-linear demand curve to simplify the algebra.

42

Equilibrium height equals

and the price of space equals

25

, which
42

Clark and Kingston (1930) present a comprehensive guide to the costs of skyscraper construction
in 1929. Their typical average cost runs from $9.2 -12.6 dollars ($124-$174 in 2012 dollars) per
square foot for the physical costs of construction. Using their data on the cost-height relationship
suggests that =1.2, for buildings above 8 stories.43 This suggests that the equilibrium price of
space should be less than 15.1 dollars per square foot.44
The impact of improvements in either technology is unclear, because reducing costs will
generate more supply and lower prices. If skyscraper technology represents a reduction in the
parameter , then land values will rise if and only if
. If skyscraper
technology is a reduction in costs ―c‖ then this will increase land values if and only if demand is
inelastic, i.e. 1>v. Even if a reduction in c leads to an increase in land values, a decline in the
technological parameter may not, because that parameter both increases the supply of space
and reduces the gap between marginal cost and average cost, which determines the value of land.
The parameter seems more closely related to skyscraper technology because it directly
determines the extent to which average costs increase with height.
Over the period 1873-1933, both New York and Chicago experienced a radical boom and bust in
land and property values. Figure 11 illustrates these cycles using data from Hoyt (1933) and
Nicholas and Scherbina (2011). Hoyt’s data includes only four years from this period and is
meant to capture land values. Nicholas and Scherbina (2011) have data on the sales of properties
given a particular year. In both cases, I regress the log of price on a vector of characteristics and
year dummies and I plot the year dummies. 45 The year 1894 is normalized to zero, since that is
the earliest year in the Hoyt data.
The 1920s were not some land value bubble without precedent—prices had actually peaked
before World War I. Chicago prices shoot up from 1894 to 1910 and then decline mildly from
1910 to 1928 and radically from 1928 to 1933. Given the New York price series, it seems likely
that Chicago also experienced a drop in values during the teens and a recovery during the 1920s.
Changes in building technology had enabled a vast increase in the supply of office space in core
downturn areas. The amount of cubic space in Chicago’s business district increased from 344
million in 1893 to 581 million in 1923 to 743 million in 1933 (Hoyt, 1933, Table XL). Supply
seems to have reduced prices after 1910. The New York prices are flat until the teens, and then
decline (primarily because of inflation) during the late teens before rising again during the early
1920s and then dropping dramatically after 1929. Wheaton, Baranski, and Templeton (2006)
show that commercial real estate prices in Manhattan declined from 1899 to 1919 and then
returned in 1929 to 1899 levels before crashing again.

43

This estimate comes from regressing that logarithm of building cost per square foot on the logarithm of building
height. Price per square foot actually declines from 8 to 14 stories, but after that the estimated coefficient is .19 and
the standard error is .0.14. There are only seven data points, as they only list costs for eight total heights.
44
It also suggests that the share of land in total cost should not exceed 20 percent, but land shares in 1929 were often
over 50 percent, implying either that the model is wrong, or that land price were due to drop, as they did.
45
In the case of Chicago, the controls include the logarithm of parcel depth and location fixed effects, but these
controls are irrelevant since the sample is completely balanced. In the case of New York, I control for fixed location
dummies, the logarithm of square footage of the property, and building height.

26

Figures 12 and 13 show mean reversion for these two samples. In Figure 12, I show the
relationship between log land value growth in Chicago from 1877 to 1910 and the subsequent
decline. The coefficient is -.25 and the r-squared is .16. Figure 13 shows the growth in log price
residuals for New York using the same regression used in Figure 11 but without year or zip code
dummies, averaged at the zip code level from 1920-1922, 1927-1929 and 1934-1936. Again,
there is substantial mean reversion.
I will focus on the great boom of New York during the 1920s basing my discussion on the data
collected by Nicholas and Scherbina (2011). Their hedonic price index shows a 34 percent
increase in nominal values between 1920 and 1929 and a 56 percent real price increase.46
Inferring actual per square foot prices from their data is somewhat difficult, because while they
have lot dimensions and hieght, those facts don’t translate immediately into usable square
footage, because lots may not may be fully used, and more importantly, there will be
significantly non-renatable space in any tenement or commercial building.
Making no correction for non-used ground space, and simply mutliplying the lot dimensions by
height yields a price series in which the median price per square foot increases from $2.70 per
square foot in 1920 ( $31 in 2012 dollars) to $4 per square foot in 1929, ($54 in 2012 dollars).
Clark and Kingston (1930) provide ratios of rentable space to total possible space, for buildings
of various heights, based on actual building constructions in New York during the late twenties.
Their estimate is that the ratio of net rentable space to stories times ground area ranges from over
.75 (at eight stories) to under 30 percent for taller buildings, reflecting the setback requirements
in the 1916 Zoning Act. The Old Tenement Law of 1879 mandated air shafts and restricted the
coverage of lots to under 65 percent, and even those buildings had to allocated some space for
stairwells.47 I will use the figure of 60 percent of lot size times the number of stories. This figure
is in line with current estimates of the relationship between gross and net square footage,
allowing for some for some unused ground space. With this correction, the square footage prices
in their series should be multiplied by 1.66, yielding a value of $6.60 in 1929.
Even scaled upward, the Nicholas and Scherbina (2011) figures are lower than many of the more
usual figures seen in the 1920s, which reflects the enomrous heterogeneity in housing quality and
location value within New York. If I restrict their sample to buildings labelled dwellings, rather
than tenements, the median price per square foot, where area equals height times lot size times
.6, reaches $12 and the mean is double that amount.48 The 90th percentile of the value per foot
distribution in 1929 for dwellings $24 per square foot.
Can these higher prices be reconciled with rational buyer beliefs? I begin with a tenement
purchaser intending to rent out rooms and then turn to skyscraper builders.
Between 1920 annd 1929, Nicholas and Scherbina report 368 sales of tenements with exactly 5
stories and betweeen 2400 and 2600 square feet of ground space (25 times 100). These represent
the dimensions of a classic dumbell tenement, with fourteen rooms on each floor. The median
46

I have averaged over the four quarters reported in Table A1 of their paper.
The laws concerning new law tenements are somewhat more complicated, but the new law seems to have allowed
roughly the same amount of rentable space (DeForest and Veiller, 1903).
48
Extremely high values per square foot presumably reflects the value placed on the underlying land, which may
have been part of land assembled to create a larger parcel and a considerably taller building.
47

27

nominal price for these structures over the decade as a whole is $27,000 (~$354,000 in 2012
dollars). Between 1926 and 1929, the median price rises to $30,000 (~$393,000 in 2012 dollars).
If buildout uses 60 percent of lot size, this represents a price of $4 per square foot ($52 in 2012
dollars) ,or approximately 428 dollars ($5,600 in 2012 dollars) per room (dumbbell tenements
typically have 14 rooms per floor), where rooms contain slightly less than 110 square feet. The
75 percentile buyer paid 34 percent more than the median during the latter half of the decade.
The Stein Commission extensively studied tenemenet rents during the early part of the 20s and
discusses room rents from 12 to 15 dollars ($155-194 in 2012 dollars) per month, which would
represent at the low end, $1.33 per square foot ($17) per year. Fisher (1951) reports that
operating expenses for office buildings run at 50 percent of revenues. If this ratio held for
tenements as well, then this would imply $ .67 dollars ($8.50) per square foot per year both for
expenses and net income. I will assume that operating expenses are sufficient to forstall
depreciation. I will also assume a 2.4 percent tax rate (Report of the New York State
Commission for the revision of tax laws, 1922).
If the purchase price per foot is $4, then rents of 67 cents would represent an annual return of
14.35%, and if the price is 34 percent more, returns would be 10.1 percent. Even if these
numbers are slightly incorrect, the standard tenement pruchaser of the late 1920s could expect to
receive a relatively good return on investment, assuming that prices didn’t fall dramatically.
The 1920s was a great era of skyscraper building (Barr, 2010), and some of these builders
certainly did poorly after 1929. But would reasonable expectations make their investments
appear sensible. I will assume construction cost of 12 dollars per square foot ($161 in 2012
dollars). Clark and Kingston (1930) describe land prices per square foot of $200 (~$2,700 in
2012 dollars), which is about the price that John J. Rascob paid for the two acres that sit beneath
the Empire State Building, and that once housed the old Waldorf-Astoria. Nicholas and
Scherbina find almost no larger properties (with over 4,000 square feet), with values above $2
million per acre in their sample, but their data contains little of the highest end real estate. The
top price of land by foot frontage in Hoyt’s data for 1928 is $55,000, or $343 dollars (~$4,300 in
2012 dollars) per square foot. Clark and Kingston (1930) calculate the ratio of rentable square
feet to land area is 15 for a 50 story building. If land costs 200 dollar` per square foot, land costs
per square foot of rentable space are 13.3 dollars (~$178 in 2012 dollars).49
Securitization had increased substantially in the 1920s (Goetzmann and Newman, 2010), and as
a result, real estate companies could get financing at six percent. Fisher (1951) gives us data on
income and operating costs for office buildings across 56 cities during the 1920s. His data shows
that costs per rentable square foot average $1.09 ($15 in 2012 dollars) and rents average $2.17
($29 in 2012 dollars). Clark and Kingston’s operating costs are somewhat lower, and they give
revenues of over $3.50 per square feet ($47 in 2012 dollars) for Manhattan skyscrapers, which
would suggest net revenues of $1.75 per square foot ($23 in 2012 dollars) if the ratio of costs to
revenues were close to the national norm.50 Their $3.50 result is supported by a July 14, 1929,
49

The critical factor is that there are only about .3 square feet of rentable space on each floor for each square foot of
land, both because the property doesn’t use the entire lot and because of non-rentable space, like elevators.
50
This relatively high rent also includes the significant rental income from ground floor retail; their pure office rents
top out of $3.34 ($45 in 2012 dollars) on average. They suggest somewhat lower operating costs, including taxes
and depreciation, or about $1.45 ($19 in 2012 dollars) per square foot.

28

New York Times article that surveys rents in Manhattan and suggests a range that begins at
$2.50 in Midtown and $3.50 in Downtown (~$34-47 in 2012 dollars). Top rents appear to have
been as high as $6.50 per square foot, or even eight dollars (~$88-108 in 2012 dollars). The
revenues even at $3.50 per square foot can readily cover physical construction costs.
In a pure Gordonian framework with no growth, net revenues of $1.75, together with an interest
rate of six percent and a tax rate of 2.4 percent, should imply a willingness to pay of $20.83. This
is slightly below total construction and land costs of $25.33. But with a two percent expected
growth rate, the willingness to pay should be over 27 dollars. Annual prices were growing at 4.5
percent during the 1920s, so these beliefs were compatible with recent experience. Given
reasonable assumptions about capitalization rates, building up even with very expensive land
would have seemed reasonable in 1927 and 1928.
What would the Thunenite have to say about prices or rents in New York City in the 1920s? The
cost of living gap between New York City and the nation does not seem to have widened over
the 1920s. The 1930 U.S. Statistical Abstract shows that between 1920 and 1929, the cost of
living declined by 12 percent in New York and 14.5 percent in the country as whole. Average
weekly manufacturing wages in the U.S. as a whole were $24.60 (~$324 in 2012 dollars) in 1925
and $30.70 (~$404 in 2012 dollars) in New York City. Yet despite that gap, rental costs in New
York City in 1923 appear to have averaged $315 (~$4,200) for families earning between $1,500
and $2,000 (~$20,000-27,000) annually (Stein Report), while Historical Statistics gives a higher
value of spending on housing for the U.S. as a whole in 1929 (prices were constant between
those two years). It is impossible to correct properly for quality, so it is quite likely that prices
were higher in New York, but there is no evidence suggesting that people were paying higher
rents that New York’s higher wages would justify.
The 1929 Census of Manufactures suggests that value added averaged $3,600 (~$48,000) per
worker across the U.S. as a whole, and $6,200 (~$83,000) in Manhattan While there are many
problems with just using that gap (differences in capital investment, differences in worker
quality, etc)., it seems reasonable to think that firms renting in the city were also paying rental
costs that were compatible with the enormous productivity of the island. Both the Gordonian and
the Thunenite approaches could justify the prices paid during the 1920s, even if they failed to
predict the subsequent price decline.
The one approach that would have managed to predict the future more accurately is Marshallian.
At 50 stories a building, there was essentially an infinite supply of upward space in New York
and Chicago in the 1920s. The Loop contains 1.58 square miles. If 50 story buildings covered
just ½ of that area, this could supply 65 million square feet of office space, nearly ten times
Chicago’s supply in 1933. The marginal cost of building up is still higher than the average, but
only by a few dollars, and this would mean that in an uncontrolled market, prices per acre would
have to be far below 1928 prices. By 1930, an economic downturn made the over-supply of
space apparent. Far from receiving high rents in perpetuity, many buildings sunk to the very
margins of profitability. Prices, again understandably, plummeted and building ceased.
What impact did easy credit have on the boom? Private borrowers faced mortgage conditions
that remained essentially constant throughout the period. Interest rates stayed around six percent
and down payments were typically 50 percent with banks and 40 percent when borrowing from
savings and loans, which typically charged an extra percentage point in interest (Historical
29

Statistics of the United States, Millennium Edition). The gap in interest rates between banks and
Savings and Loans, which offered lower down-payments and longer duration mortgages,
suggests that lenders were well aware of default risk. Nonetheless, if buyers facing six percent
rates and 50 percent down payments were given a free default option, this would increase the
willingness to pay for the house modestly, assuming a standard deviation of log prices changes
of .14, which represents the real experience of Chicago prices over the 1871-1933 period.
It is more likely that an under-priced default option played more of a role in encouraging the
speculative activities of builders. While some mega-buildings of the 1920s, including the
Chrysler and Empire State Buildings were largely self-financed, Goetzmann and Newman (2010)
detail the impressive increase in the securitization business for property-backed securities. These
securities were bought by ordinary investors, in search of a six percent return, and those
investors may well have under-appreciated the value of the default option that they were giving
the building’s promoters.
I lack hard data on the equity-shares in these investments, which would be the equivalent of the
down payment. As an illustrative calculation, I assume that the equity share was only 10 percent.
In that case, given a standard deviation of .25 and an expected growth rate of zero, the default
option would have added 46 percent to the willingness to pay. If the growth rate was expected to
be 2.25 percent, the extra willingness to pay is 32 percent. While we do not yet have the data that
would enable us to assess the down payment levels, let alone the degree to which default risk
was actually priced into the cost of capital, it seems possible that securitization helped boost
prices paid by developers significantly during the 1920s.
After 1929, prices plummeted during a great global meltdown. Yet even if the Great Depression
had not occurred, it is hard to see how peak 1920s prices would have been sustainable. Before
1961, there were no effective height limits on building up, only setback requirements, and the
amount of space that could have been added is considerable. If Clark and Kingston (1930) are
right, and construction technology has few diseconomies of scale, then prices would have
eventually been squeezed down near construction costs, at least for skyscrapers, which would
ultimately causes the price of land to also fall.

V.

Metropolitan Real Estate Convulsions

Sprawl has occurred whenever transportation innovations have enabled people to travel further at
less cost. In the early 19th century, Manhattan moved uptowns as Abraham Brower’s horsedrawn omnibuses made it possible for people to share the costs of equine power. In the middle
and late parts of the same century, elevated railroads and streetcars enabled still further
decentralization of population into the upper reaches of Manhattan and the streetcar suburbs of
Boston (Warner, 1962). In the 20th century, the automobile generated an enormous
decentralization of people (Baum-Snow, 2007) and employment (Glaeser and Kahn, 2004).
Declining transport costs, also enabled the move to the Sunbelt consumer cities (Glaeser, Kolko

30

and Saiz, 2001) away from older urban centers that had access to inland waterways and the older
rail network.51
The housing convulsions in the late 20th century are metropolitan rather than purely urban. While
the price growth of the last boom was higher in the city centers (Glaeser, Gottlieb and Tobio
2012), the largest building booms were often at the urban edge. In this section, I discuss three
episodes since World War II, all of which spread across the wide territory in enlarged
metropolitan regions. Table 4 summarizes the conditions during these booms, but I begin with a
bubble that didn’t happen.
The Bubble that Didn’t Happen: Housing Prices Immediately After World War II
The period between 1945 and 196 would seem to be an ideal setting for a housing bubble. The
economy was resurgent after World War II and the Great Depression. Household formation
soared during the baby boom. Most strikingly, there was a revolution in mortgage finance,
making it far easier to almost anyone to get a long-term, relatively low rate mortgage.
Before the Great Depression, down-payment requirements averaged 50 percent, sometimes by
law, although Savings and Loans sometimes decreased down-payments to 40 percent. Bank
loans had terms under five years, and even Savings and Loans average only slightly more than a
decade. Interest rates were typically six percent. The Federal Housing Administration was
formed in 1934 to insure mortgages and hopefully increase employment in the construction
sector, insuring mortgages requiring only 20 percent down. By 1939, FHA mortgages reached 18
percent of the mortgage market (Quigley, 2006), yet prices were still far below 1929 levels.
In the 1940s and 1950s, Federal programs, including the FHA, the Veteran’s administration and
the Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae), enabled a massive increase in credit
availability. By 1955, FHA and VA insured mortgages had average maturities over 20 years and
down payment requirements averaged under 20 percent.52
Yet during the entire 1950-1970 prices remained astonishingly flat across America’s
metropolitan areas. Figure 14 shows prices in 1950 and 1970 in 2012 dollars. The bottom line on
the graph is the 45 degree line. Almost everywhere experienced a significant increase in prices.
But those prices were perfectly in line with the general increase in construction costs in America
during that time period.
Glaeser, Gyourko and Saks (2005a) report that the R.S. Means survey of construction costs
showed that the real price per foot of construction increased from $49.70 per square foot in 1950
to $63.60 per square foot in 1970. The second higher line in the figure multiplies that $23.90 cost
per square foot increase times 1500 square feet (a reasonable house size) and adds that amount to
the 1950 price. Almost everywhere, prices in 1970 were below 1950 prices plus this construction
cost related price increase. Even after the most stupendous change in America’s mortgage

51

The move to the Sunbelt was also abetted by improvement in health (Bleakley, 2008) and pro-business policies
(Holmes, 2000).
52
Fetter (2010) looks at the impact of these programs on homeownership and fertility choice by comparing
individuals whose birthdays put them right before or rate after the dates that led to being drafted to fight in the
Korean War. He finds significant effects on both outcomes.

31

history, and a post-war economic boom, housing prices had gone up less than construction costs
would warrant.
The natural explanation for the missing boom in prices after World War II is that there was an
enormous increase in housing supply over the same time period. During the 1950s, America
permitted 11.84 million housing units, which is roughly the same as America permitted during
the twenty-six years from 1920 to 1945. The construction was disproportionately on the urban
fringe (Jackson, 1979) and disproportionately in the Sunbelt.
The post-World War II era demonstrated exactly what textbook economics predicts should
happen when robust demand meets relatively elastic supply. Quantities rose and prices stayed
relatively flat. The relatively elastic supply owed much to the rise of automobile-based living on
the urban fringe, which can be seen as either a shift in housing supply or a change in supply
elasticity. For example, in an open-city formulation of the Alonso-Muth-Mills model, with
supply costs that increase with density, lower transportation costs will increase supply but not
change supply elasticity. Yet it is possible that the automobile made supply more elastic as well.
On the urban fringe, lower cost, low density housing can be built in massive quantities,
essentially using a constant returns-to-scale technology.
Accompanying the shift towards car-based suburbia were technological improvements in
building. One view of Arthur Levitt and his two post-war Levittowns is that he brought Fordist
ideas about mass production to housing and significantly increased efficiency (Gans, 1969). The
fact that real construction costs rose substantially over this period does seem to question this
technological improvement claim, but it is quite possible that the Means data substantially
overstates cost increases because quality of new homes improved. The R.S. Means survey does
claim to hold unit quality constant, but given how radically the quality of the U.S. housing stock
rose after World War II, it seems unlikely that they managed to correct for quality perfectly.53
The missing post-war price boom is not a problem conventional economics, but it does present a
challenge to those who seek to explain bubbles as the outcomes of a stable process where readily
observable exogenous variables translate into the presence of a bubble. The 1950s had easier
credit for homeowners than the 1920s and economic conditions were at least as good. Any model
that suggests that there is a stable relationship between either of those variables and price
bubbles has difficulties with this epoch.
California in the 1970s and 1980s
For the first half of the post-war period, California housing prices didn’t seem all that different
from prices elsewhere in the U.S. Between 1950 and 1970, the logarithm of self-reported
housing values grew only .002 log points faster annually in Californian metropolitan areas than
in other American metropolitan areas. The California effect even becomes negative if you
control for January Temperature, which is positively associated with price growth during this
period (Glaeser and Tobio, 2008).
By contrast, between 1970 and 1990, price growth was .03 log points higher annually in
California than elsewhere, an extremely significant difference, both statistically and
53

If this view is correct, then the rising prices between 1950 and 1970 are explained not by increasing construction
costs but by increasing unit quality.

32

economically. In 1970, self-reported housing values across California’s metropolitan areas were
on average 26 percent higher than self reported housing values elsewhere in the United States.
By 1990, self-reported housing values in California were 140 percent higher than elsewhere in
the U.S.
The shift in California prices certainly doesn’t seem rooted in changes in credit markets: real
mortgage rates were rising over much of this time period, and local economic conditions don’t
seem to have driven the price rise. The average metropolitan area in California saw its incomes
rise by .0022 log points annually faster than metropolitan areas elsewhere in the country. Even if
all of this change was rising productivity, rather than shifting human capital composition, this
should lead to only a .044 log point increase in California prices relative to the rest of the nation
if the income growth represents a permanent level shift in productivity. Even if the growth rate
was expected to continue (it did not), then California’s prices should have risen by an extra 3.5
percent, assuming a real interest rate of four percent, no other price appreciation, a property tax
rate of one percent and depreciation of 1.5 percent.54 Moreover, income in California’s
metropolitan areas was not rising faster than in other warmer places during this time period, and
yet its prices grew far more quickly.
Another explanation for the rising values of California land after 1970 is that as America became
richer, people were willing to pay more for the best climates in the country (Graves, 1980). Yet
California’s climate hadn’t changed, and a secular process of increasing valuation of nicer places
shouldn’t have created such a sizable shift. That slow process should have been anticipated.
California did experience a major reduction in property taxes due to Proposition 13, and Rosen
(1979) finds a significant impact of that change on prices in northern California. The effective
tax rate prior to the reform appears averaged 2.5 percent (Sonstelie, Brunner and Ardon, 2000)
and by 1990, the effective tax rate was .58 percent (Ferreira, 2010). Using the same parameter
values as before, this shift in property taxes should generate a price increase of 23 percent, which
suggests that the effect could have been considerable. Some of this rise should have been offset
by the impact of other tax increases which rose to mitigate the impact of declining property tax
revenue.
There was another major shift in California’s housing markets in the 1970s: new supply fell
significantly. In the 1940s, California’s housing stock grew by 53 percent and the stock grew
again by 52 percent during the 1950s. In the early sixties, California was responsible for over a
fifth of the total number of permits in the United States. But permitting dropped off significantly
after 1965, and the housing stock grew by 32 percent in the 70s and 21 percent in the 1980s.
Growth had particularly dropped in the state’s most economically productive places. Between
1950 and 1970, Los Angeles County added 1.1 million housing units and its housing stock grew
by 76 percent. Between 1970 and 1990, Los Angeles’ housing stock grew by 620,000 housing
units and its housing stock grew by 24 percent. Between 1975, when the FHFA Index coverage
begins and 1989 at the peak of the boom, Los Angeles’s real housing prices rose by 156 percent
or a continuous annual rate of 6.7 percent.

54

The depreciation rate of 1.5 percent reflects a 2.5 percent depreciation rate on the structure (Harding, Rosenthal
and Sirmans, 2007) and the assumption that structure only accounts for sixty percent of value.

33

Albert Saiz’s (2010) work on the determinants of housing supply reminds us that difficult
geography, such as hills and water, limits supply. California’s coastal cities face both forms of
geographic challenge, but there was no change in the geography of California after 1970, and
these future limits to supply should have been anticipated. The regulatory shocks to construction
were far less predictable.
Before the mid-1960s, California looked relatively similar to much of Sunbelt America in its
approach to land use regulation. Growth was typically desired, and the limits to building were
few, as the permits data suggests. Starting in the early 1960s, activists, such as the Save the Bay
movement, used environmental arguments to justify barriers to new building. In the Friends of
Mammoth case, in 1973, the California Supreme Court shifted the rules of development by
requiring all major private developments to go through an environmental impact review process,
which has meant that California’s rules create more impact reviews annually than do the rules of
the Federal government. There were of course myriad local regulations as well, such as 60 acre
minimum lot sizes which exist even in counties close to the heart of the San Francisco
metropolitan area.
Limits on supply would have driven up prices in any case, as would Proposition 13, but buyers
seem to have been particularly optimistic about future price growth. According to Case, Shiller,
and Thompson, (2012) surveys of homebuyers, in 1988, 95 percent of San Francisco buyers in
their sample and 93% of buyers in Orange County agreed with the statement that ―It’s a good
time to buy because prices are likely to increase.‖ On average, respondents in Los Angeles said
that they expected to grow by 14.3 percent in ―each year‖ ―over next ten years‖ (Case, Shiller,
and Thompson, 2012). Moreover, 63.3 percent said that buying a home in Los Angeles involved
little or no risk.
These answers certainly suggest that buyers may have used a naïve Gordonian model, and pricerent ratios in California based on the 1990 Census are compatible with such beliefs.55 Across the
ten most expensive California metropolitan areas in our sample, these price rent ratios range
from 25 (San Diego) to 38 (San Francisco).
Assuming a depreciation rate of 1.15 percent,56 a property tax rate of .58 percent and a real
interest rate of 4 percent yields a predicted price-to-rent ratio of 17.5. If the expected growth rate
is 2.5 percent, the predicted capitalization rate rises to 31. Among those metropolitan areas in the
sample with a price-rent ratio over 25, price growth between 1970 and 1990 averaged .023 log
points more per year than those metropolitan areas with a price rent ratio below 25. The pricerent ratio for the lower group was 18 on average, and hit 29 for the higher group. Facing the
same discount rate, the purchasers in the higher growth area would have to expect 2.5 percent
faster growth per year, which is just about what their recent experience had been.
These prices are compatible with a Thunenite approach as well, for given the idiosyncratic tastes
of Los Angeles buyers, geographic comparisons provide little guidance. Coastal California does
55

There are significant problems with using the ratios of housing values to rents in an area to capture what is meant
by capitalization rates. The housing stock that is rented and owned is different along observable and unobservable
dimensions (Glaeser and Gyourko, 2008). Homeownership involves sweat equity that is not fully priced.
56
I have reduced the depreciation rate to reflect the lower share of structures in total value in 1990 California.
Glaeser, Gyourko and Saks (2006) report that the price to construction cost ratio is 2.17 for the 90th percentile
metropolitan area in the U.S. in 1990, and almost all of California’s major metropolitan areas are above that mark.

34

have relatively unique natural advantages, within the U.S. at least, and a particular culture. It is
no easier to say how much people should value these amenities than to say how much art buyers
should value a Rembrandt. Moreover, since 80 percent of Los Angelenos agreed that ―unless I
buy a home now, I won’t be able to afford one later‖ in the Case-Shiller survey, they really did
seem to want to live in Los Angeles.
The events after 1989 were typical for the ends of booms. Supply had gradually been increasing
in California. From 1985-1989, California averaged 262,000 permits per year, which is 80
percent higher than the average during the early 1980s. By 1990, buyers no longer found scarce
inventory and prices began to fall again. Prices took a long time to reach bottom, but finally in
1996, real prices in Los Angeles hit 62 percent of the peak level. The new prices were also
justifiable in a naïve Gordon model, because if little real growth is expected, these lower prices
seem sensible. The lower prices are also compatible with buyers’ applying a spatial arbitrage
model. Prices elsewhere had fallen, and California had experienced a reasonable tough economic
downturn.
The California boom and bust is the precursor to the great convulsion of the last 10 years. The
earlier event featured real shocks to housing supply and a somewhat limited ability to provide
abundant housing elastically, especially in a short time period. Across metropolitan areas during
this period, there was a tight connection between inelastic housing supply and the extent of price
appreciation. The prices during both the boom and the bust were compatible with reasonable
valuation models. Those models just weren’t right.
The Great Housing Convulsion between 1996 and 2012
The basic contours of the period from 1996 to 2012 are well known. Across the U.S. as a whole,
there was a 53 percent real increase in housing prices between 1996 and 2006, which was
followed by a 28 percent decrease in real values between 2006 and 2011. The boom was not felt
everywhere equally, and as Figure 1 shows, price growth occurred disproportionately in the
warmest quarter of America’s metropolitan areas. Moreover, there was enormous mean reversion
across areas, as shown in Figure 2. If a place experienced 10 percent more price growth between
2001 and 2006, that place on average saw prices drop by nine percent relative to 2001 prices.
Price to rent ratios provide a tool for looking at the event. Using 40th percentile rents for each
metropolitan area, provided by the Department of Housing and Urban Development, and
calculating housing prices by using the base level in the 2000 Census and the FHFA price index,
Figure 16 shows price-rent ratios across the U.S. The middle line shows the median price to rent
ratios. The top line shows the 90th percentile of price to rent ratios and the bottom line shows the
10th percentile of price to rent ratios. The price-rent ratio for the median city increased from 16 in
2001 to 18.6 in 2006; the price-rent ratio for the 90th percentile city increase from 20 in 2000 to
33 in 2006.
While the previous booms were associated with dramatic episodes of economic uncertainty, it is
hard to find any comparable force in the recent boom. The economy was not growing
particularly swiftly, nor was it obvious that there were any tectonic shifts in the geography of
American enterprise. Some denser, older cities like New York and Boston were doing
particularly well, but that can do little to explain the boom in Las Vegas and inland California.
The move to the Sunbelt was continuing during this time period, but much of that appears to
35

have been driven by unrestricted supply of new housing (Glaeser and Tobio, 2008), which
should not have boosted prices. Land buyers may have thought that the supply of new land
surrounding Las Vegas was likely to contract (Nathanson and Zwick, 2012), but reasonable
projections still suggest that there was more than enough desert space for America to build
enormous amounts of housing. The entire country could fit in Texas with more than one acre per
household.
The most common explanation for the boom was that easy credit is the culprit. In previous work
(Glaeser, Gottlieb and Gyourko, 2012), I have argued that credit market conditions cannot
explain the boom if buyers are rational. The changes in interest rates were too small to justify
such price swings, especially given elastic housing supply and rational buyers should expect
interest rates to mean revert following historical norms. Scholars also stress easier approval rates
and lower levels of down payment (Mian and Sufi 2009), but it is hard to assess the magnitude of
these effects since it is impossible to control adequately for the changing characteristics of
mortgage applicants.
While the price boom does not seem to be explained by changing credit conditions, interest rates
were low enough to justify prices given the standard Gordonian model, especially given
reasonable growth rates. Himmelberg, Mayer and Sinai (2005) report a 2.5 percent real interest
rate in 2004, and Glaeser, Gottlieb and Gyourko (2012) similarly find real rates close to two
percent over the time period. If growth rates follow historical norms, incorporating a risk
premium for buyers, property taxes and depreciation still leaves the user cost at under four
percent for many metropolitan areas and under 2.5 percent in some areas in Coastal California
(Himmelberg, Mayer and Sinai, 2005). This calculation suggests that a Gordonian approach
could readily justify price-to-rent ratios of 40 in these areas, which is roughly what occurred
during the boom.
Case, Shiller, and Thompson (2012) report buyer expectations that were far more optimistic than
historic norms would justify. For example, in 2005 the average Orange county buyer said that he
expected 15.2 percent price increases in each of the next ten years. Such beliefs seem utterly
implausible, but even if buyers expect five percent perpetual growth, they would essentially be
willing to pay an almost limitless amount for a new house. Nathanson and Zwick (2011) address
belief heterogeneity, and argue that beliefs for the marginal buyer should determine prices. In
standard housing markets, the marginal buyer may be far less optimistic than the average buyer,
but in markets for land, where large land purchases are prevalent like Las Vegas, a few overlyoptimistic purchasers may end up dominating land sales.
This argument might explain the apparent anomalies of Las Vegas and Phoenix during the boom.
During the 1980s boom, places with elastic housing supply experienced relatively little growth—
the median price growth was five percent in such metropolitan areas (Glaeser, Gyourko and Saiz,
2008). There was still a strong negative connection between elasticity and price growth during
the recent boom, but a number of more elastic metropolitan areas, such as Phoenix, still
experienced fast price growth and reflected skyrocketing land values.
Just as a Gordonian approach could explain the boom, a Thunenite approach can also help
explain the Las Vegas phenomenon. It seems plausible that some Las Vegas buyers in 2003
noted that prices seemed extremely low, relative to California, and reasoned that conditions
weren’t all that different. This reasoning may explain their increased willingness to pay, and the
36

geographic spread of the boom. Ferreiro and Gyourko (2011) find that that the boom spread
spatially, moving from the inelastic areas of the coast to proximate locales inland.
A free, or under-priced, default option might also add considerably to the willingness to pay.
During this period, the mortgage insurance practices of Federally-subsidized mortgage giants
Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae provide the most natural explanation for why borrowers might
have received an underpriced default option. In Table 2, I illustrate the impact of that default
option on willingness-to-pay in an extreme cause. I assume that mortgage, depreciation and
property taxes total five percent, and that the standard deviation of log prices was .066
(following historical norms). If house prices are expected to have no trend, then the default
premium adds 16.9 percent to the price of the housing. If housing prices are expected to rise at
2.25 percent (one-half the national average), then prices should increase by 5.5 percent if
borrowers are given a free default option. The impact of the default option on housing prices will
not be large whenever borrowers are optimistic about future price growth.
There were few obvious changes in economic fundamentals that set off the bust. The economy
continued to grow strongly throughout most of 2007, but the Case-Shiller index reached its peak
in April 2006. Nor is it obvious that credit markets conditions were tightening (Glaeser, Gottlieb
and Gyourko, 2012). Perhaps the most plausible explanation is that slowing price growth led to a
reassessment of future price growth, which is often given as an explanation for the end of a
speculative boom (Kindelberger, 1978).
Calculating Social Costs
One policy question is whether the boom led to substantial social losses from overbuilding. I
now calculate the difference in social welfare after a boom (denoted as time T), comparing an
optimal investment strategy between time zero and time T, with the actual investment strategy
that did occur. I assume a representative agent, with quasi-linear preferences over ―capital‖ and
income. The agent buys the capital from its owners at market price
and also receives profits. I
let
denote the lifetime utility from consuming this capital. Welfare is therefore
. The profits received from the developer equal
, where
denotes the current value of earnings from building
building between time zero and time T,
is the physical cost of the building the structure
and
is the land cost. The agent also receives the earnings from land sales which equal
. I assume that the flow of earnings from t to T equals r times the cost of
construction, so that welfare equals

.

The gap in welfare between this actual building strategy and any alternate is
.
I ignore the social welfare changes associated with interest on the land component of the
construction costs, which should be small if the building episode is short in duration. The
function V(.) is concave, and its derivative equals the price of capital at time T. Using a second
order Taylor series expansion and assuming a demand elasticity for housing of one (see Ellwood
and Polinsky, 1979 or Saiz, 2003), implies that
, can be approximated with
37

, where the adjustment

addresses the concavity of the

welfare function.
If
and
denote the alternative per unit average construction costs, and let
and
denote the total amount of investment under the two scenarios, then the total social welfare
difference is approximately equal to
(5)

.

There are three terms in the expression. The first term reflects the benefits of added capital. The
second term multiplies the change in investment times the realized average cost of production.
The third term is the increase in the average cost of production, created by the boom multiplied
by the old investment level. I will ignore the adjustment

in my calculations.

One of the more troubling aspects of this approximation is that capital is hardly homogenous
within a city, and new capital may be located in areas where prices are far low than area average.
The new units, however, will typically be of higher quality than the existing units which have
depreciated, and that will cause a bias in the other direction.
To implement this scenario across American metropolitan areas during the last boom, we assume
that in the absence of a boom, the investment in each year would have equaled the annual
increase in the housing stock during the 1990s, multiplied by the ratio between national
population growth in the 2000s and divided by population growth in the 1990s times ten. This
formula essentially assumes that the growth in housing would have continued in the same way in
each metropolitan area, except that all metropolitan areas slowed down by the same amount to
reflect the slightly lower national rate of population growth. I use national population growth,
rather than growth in households, to adjust for the fact that household formation is somewhat
more likely to have been impacted by the recession itself.57 To calculate the added capital stock
due to the boom, I add estimated construction between 2004 and 2006 (inclusive) and divide by
three times the predicted annual growth rate.
Annual construction is estimated by taking the number of building permits in the previous year
multiplied by the ratio of national housing completed in that year to national permits in the
previous year. Completed housing is not available at the metropolitan area level, so this
correction is meant to capture the fact that not every unit is completed. This failure to complete
became more severe at the very end of the boom, so it is most relevant for 2006, when the
national completion rate falls to 92 percent.
The calculation of price is not itself completely straightforward, as self-reported Census housing
values in 2010 may seriously overestimate current housing prices in many metropolitan areas.
Overestimation is common in self-reported housing valuations (Goodman and Ittner, 1992), but
it is particularly severe in places that have just experienced a housing bust. To address this issue,
I use an alternative measure of price: the year 2000 self-reported housing value times .94 (to
57

It is of course also true that the population growth has presumably slowed as well because of the recession, but the
impact on population seems to have been less severe.

38

reflect standard over-reporting) times the price appreciation in the metropolitan area implied by
the Federal Housing Finance Agency’s repeat sales index. This measure does miss any upgrading
of quality in the area.
To calculate costs, I use the R.S. Means cost for a luxury 2000 square foot home for each
metropolitan area in each year and the cost for an average 2500 foot home. I also added 25,000
dollars to reflect the cost of added infrastructure including schools, roads, water and sewage
provision, which is based on an estimate for Austin, Texas (Fodor and Associates, 2011) and in
line with an earlier broader estimate based on more locations, once I also include some
adjustment for school costs (Najafi et al., 2007).
The final step is to estimate the difference in cost association with extra development. Glaeser,
Gyourko, Nathanson and Morales (2011) estimate that development costs per unit rise by 74
cents to ten dollars per units. Many of these cost estimates may not be real social costs, but may
reflect instead increases in land prices or permitting difficulties. For this reason, I use a cost
estimate from the bottom of our range of one dollar per unit. However, I multiply this amount by
the ratio of housing units in the area in 2000 to average housing units across our sample. This
division reflects the fact that increasing the number of units by 10,000 in a year will have a much
more modest impact on costs in Atlanta than in Green Bay, Wisconsin. All of these assumptions
are debatable and other researchers may well come disagree about my choice of parameters. My
goal is to provide an illustrative calculation, rather than any sort of definitive figure.
Table 5 shows the results. The top panel shows results given luxury home costs (for a smaller
home); the bottom panel shows results for a larger home. The first column shows the amount of
overbuilding between 2001 and 2006 as a share of the total housing stock in 2010. Bakersfield,
California and Las Vegas, Nevada, are estimated at the upper tail of this over-building, with four
and five percent of their building stock in 2010 respectively reflecting ―over-building‖ during the
boom. This construction is not without value. The next column multiplies the number of extra
homes times 2010 prices and again divides by the total number of houses in 2010. Across all of
Las Vegas, there is estimated to be a $5,424 benefit (per home) from the added building costs.
The third column shows the costs of the extra housing, again on a per unit basis. The costs in Las
Vegas are estimated to be $5,839, only 420 dollars more per unit if I use luxury costs. When I
use average costs, the costs in Las Vegas are actually below current prices. The proximity
between current prices and construction costs (even adding in infrastructure) is the fact that
limits the estimates of social losses from overbuilding.
The fourth column estimates the added construction costs that resulted from congestion in the
building sector. In Las Vegas, this figure is over 500 dollars, which reflects the combination a
high baseline level of housing supply, and a significant increase in construction relative to the
long term trend. In the other metropolitan areas, the estimates are typically much smaller.
The total figures are relatively modest, with largest losses per household under $1,200, assuming
luxury construction costs, and about $1,000 per household assuming average construction

39

costs.58 If taken literally, these results suggest that the over-building during the boom had
relatively modest social costs relatively to the financial distress that occurred during the bust.
One reason why these calculations may understate the true social costs of overbuilding is that
even with the two corrections, I am overestimating the market value of real estate in Las Vegas
as a whole. A second possibility, that seems even more serious, is that I am using a metropolitan
area average price, and much of the new housing has been built in areas with relatively low price
levels. I am far from confident that over-building had such moderate social losses. Further
research, looking below at sub-metropolitan data, is critical. Yet these results do suggest that the
financial downside of the housing bust is still likely to be orders of magnitude more significant
than any real costs of over-building.
Despite Field’s (1992) fine analysis of the recession period, most previous real estate events are
likely to have even smaller real costs from over-building. Even after the California boom of the
1980s, prices remained comfortably above construction costs, so it is unlikely that there were
real losses in that case. The estimates of price decline provided by Nicholas and Scherbina
(2011) suggest even after the bust, prices in Manhattan in 1933 were generally close to or above
the physical cost of construction during the earlier time period. As opposed to Las Vegas in
2004, the land that was built upon was not generally vacant at the time of construction, and the
full opportunity cost must include both the construction costs and the lost value of the destroyed
capital and I have not attempted to evaluate that cost. The booms in early Los Angeles and
Chicago were certainly not associated with over-building. Even if these places ended up being
less successful than they eventually were, more capital was still surely appropriate. Significant
social losses, if they occurred, would have to come from paying too much in construction costs
because of speeding construction too quickly.

VI.

Conclusion

The housing convulsion that occurred between 1996 and 2010 has many precedents in U.S.
history. Americans have been speculating heavily on real estate for centuries, and vast fortunes
have regularly been won and lost. Many things are similar between the most recent boom and
previous events. Rising prices are most strongly associated with optimistic expectations, and
credit market conditions more typically played a supporting role. The optimistic expectations
have been justifiable based on recent experience and a simple capitalization formula (the
Gordonian approach) and by Thunenite comparisons with land prices or rents in other areas.
In the most recent boom, paying high prices required an optimistic assessment of future price
growth. Expecting a better future was also critical to the rural land boom on the New York
frontier in the 1790s, in Iowa in 1910, and in the urban booms of Chicago in the 1830s and Los
Angeles in the 1880s and 1980s. In other cases, such as the Alabama land boom of 1819 and
tenements in New York during the 1920s, prices were reasonable even if rents would stay
constant.

58

The largest social loss given average costs is in Ann Arbor, but the loss there comes from under-building during
the boom relative to historic trends.

40

Booms end when these optimistic projections fail to materialize, at least in the short run, but in
many cases, the shocks seem like they should have been predictable to a forecaster with a
Marshallian appreciation for the power of long-run elastic supply. A sufficiently well-informed
buyer in Alabama in 1819 should have been able to expect that world-wide cotton supply would
push prices down, just like a skyscraper builder in 1920s Manhattan should have been able to
predict that abundant office space should decrease apartment rents dramatically. In the recent
boom, sufficiently well-informed buyers in Las Vegas presumably should have recognized that
America’s incredible abundance of desert space would ultimately limit the long run value of
homes on the urban fringe of that metropolis.
The difficulties in forecasting the impact of supply are both understandable and hard to arbitrage.
They are understandable, because the cognitive requirements needed to forecast the impact of
global supply conditions on local property values are large. To an economist with the benefit of
hindsight, the drop in cotton prices after 1819 may seem highly predictable, but why should that
have been true among cotton farmers on America’s frontier?
The ubiquitous nature of housing convulsions remind us that seemingly safe real estate
investments can leave a gaping hole in bank balance sheets when things go sour. The tendency of
markets to crash teaches that under-priced default options can lead to large social losses,
especially because of financial meltdowns. This fact implies that there may be advantages if
bank regulators recognize the regular tendency of real estate values to mean revert after booms.

41

References
Abernethy, Thomas Perkins. 1922. The formative period in Alabama, 1815-1828. No. 6. The
Brown printing company.
Alonso, W. Location and land use. 1964. Harvard University Press, Massachusetts: Cambridge.
Alston, Lee, Wayne A. Grove, and David Wheelock. 1994. "Why do banks fail? Evidence from
the 1920s." Explorations in Economic History 31, no. 4: 409-431.
Andreas, A. T. 1884. History of Chicago. Illinois: Chicago.
Atack, Jeremy, and Robert A. Margo. 1998. "’Location, location, location!’ The price gradient
for vacant urban land: New York, 1835 to 1900." The Journal of Real Estate Finance and
Economics 16, no. 2: 151-172.
Barberis, Nicholas, and Andrei Shleifer. 2003."Style investing."Journal of Financial Economics
68, no. 2: 161-199.
Barr, Jason. 2010. "Skyscrapers and the Skyline: Manhattan, 1895–2004."Real Estate Economics
38, no. 3: 567-597.
Baum-Snow, Nathaniel. 2007. "Did highways cause suburbanization?."The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 122, no. 2: 775-805.
Black, Fischer, and Myron Scholes. 1973. "The pricing of options and corporate liabilities." The
journal of political economy: 637-654.
Black, S. E. 1999. ―Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary Educations.‖
Quarterly Journal of Economics: 577-600.
Bleakley, Hoyt, and Jeffrey Lin. 2012. "Portage and Path Dependence." The Quarterly Journal
of Economics. Oxford University Press, vol. 127 (2):87-644.
Blodget, Samuel. 1806. Economica: a statistical manual for the United States of America.
Printed for the author.
Case, Karl E., Robert J. Shiller, and Anne Thompson. 2012. ―What Have They Been Thinking?
Home Buyer Behavior in Hot and Cold Markets.‖ No. w18400. National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Chappell, Gordon T. 1949. "Some Patterns of Land Speculation in the Old Southwest." The
Journal of Southern History: 463-477.
Chernow, B. A. 1977. ―Robert Morris: Genese Land Speculator.‖ New York History 58 (2): 195220.
Clark, William Clifford, and John Lyndhurst Kingston. 1930. The skyscraper: a study in the
economic height of modern office buildings. American Institute of Steel Construction, inc.
42

Conrad, Alfred H., and John R. Meyer. 1958. "The economics of slavery in the ante bellum
South." The Journal of Political Economy 66, no. 2: 95-130.
Curott, Nicholas, and Tyler Watts. 2011. "A Monetary Explanation for the Recession of 1797."
Manuscript.
DeForest, Robert Weeks, and Lawrence Veiller, eds. 1903. The tenement house problem:
including the report of the New York state tenement house commission of 1900. New York: The
Macmillan Company.
Dumke, Glenn S. 1944. The boom of the eighties in southern California. Edited by E. Henry. San
Marino, CA: Huntington library.
Ellis, David Maldwyn.1946. Landlords and farmers in the Hudson-Mohawk region, 1790-1850.
Ithaca, N.Y:Cornell University Press.
Ely, Richard Theodore. 1920. "Land Speculation." Journal of Farm Economics 2, no. 3: 121135.
Ely, Richard Theodore, and John Huston Finley. 1888. Taxation in American states and cities.
TY Crowell & co..
Ely, Richard Theodore, and G. S. Wehrwein. 1940. Land Economics. New York: Macmillan.
Ferreira, Fernando. 2010. "You can take it with you: Proposition 13 tax benefits, residential
mobility, and willingness to pay for housing amenities." Journal of Public Economics 94, no. 9:
661-673.
Ferreira, Fernando, and Joseph Gyourko. 2011. ―Anatomy of the beginning of the housing boom:
US neighborhoods and metropolitan areas, 1993-2009.‖ No. w17374. National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Fetter, Daniel K. 2010. "Housing finance and the mid-century transformation in US home
ownership: the VA home loan program." Unpublished manuscript, Harvard University.
Field, Alexander J. 1992. ―Uncontrolled Land Development and the Duration of the
Depression in the United States.‖ Journal of Economic History Vol. 52, No. 4:785-805.
Fisher, Ernest M. 1951. ―Markets for Miscellaneous Types of Land and Improvements.‖ In
Urban Real Estate Markets: Characteristics and Financing, edited by Ernest M. Fisher, 138154. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Fodor & Associates. 2011. Cost of Infrastructure to Serve New Residential Development in Austin, Texas.
Eugene, Oregon.

Frehen, Rik, K. Geert Rouwenhorst, and William N. Goetzmann. 2012. "Dutch Securities for
American Land Speculation in the Late-Eighteenth Century." In Housing and Mortgage Markets
in Historical Perspective. University of Chicago Press.

43

Gans, Herbert J. 1969. "Planning for people, not buildings." Environment and Planning 1, no. 1:
33-46.
Glaeser, Edward L., 2006. Paternalism and psychology. The University of Chicago Law Review
73 (1): 1–21.
.

Glaeser, Edward L., Joshua D. Gottlieb, and Joseph Gyourko. 2012. "Can cheap credit explain
the housing boom?" In Housing and the Financial Crisis. University of Chicago Press.
Glaeser, Edward L., Joshua D. Gottlieb, and Kristina Tobio. 2012. Housing Booms and City
Centers. No. w17914. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Joseph Gyourko. 2009. ―Arbitrage in Housing Markets.‖ In Housing
Markets and the Economy: Risk, Regulation, and Policy, edited by Edward L. Glaeser and John
M. Quigley, 113-146. Cambridge: Lincoln Institute of Land Policy.
Glaeser, Edward, Joseph Gyourko, Eduardo Morales and Charles Nathanson. 2011. "Housing
Dynamics," 2011 Meeting Papers 307, Society for Economic Dynamics.
Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko and Albert Saiz. 2008. "Housing supply and housing
bubbles," Journal of Urban Economics, Elsevier, vol. 64 (2):98-217.
Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko and Raven E. Saks. 2005a. ―Why have Housing Prices
Gone Up?‖ The American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings of the One Hundred
Seventeenth Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, Philadelphia, PA, January
7-9, 2005. Vol. 95, No. 2: 329-333.
Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko, and Raven Saks. 2005b. "Why Is Manhattan So
Expensive? Regulation and the Rise in Housing Prices." Journal of Law and Economics 48, no.
2: 331-369.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Matthew Kahn. 2004. ―Sprawl and Urban Growth.‖ Handbook of
regional and urban economics, Volume 4. Cities and geography: 2481-2527.
Glaeser, Edward L., Jed Kolko, and Albert Saiz. 2001. "Consumer city." Journal of Economic
Geography, Oxford University Press, vol. 1 (1): 27-50.
Glaeser, Edward L. and David C. Mare. 2001. "Cities and Skills." Journal of Labor Economics
19 (2): 316-342.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Todd Sinai. Forthcoming. Housing and the Financial Crisis. National
Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Kristina Tobio. 2008. "The Rise of the Sunbelt." Southern Economic
Journal 74, no. 3: 610-43.
Goetzmann, William M., and Frank Newman. 2010. ―Securitization in the 1920s.‖ NBER
Working Paper 15650. National Bureau of Economic Research.

44

Gordon, Myron J. "Dividends, earnings, and stock prices." 1959. The Review of Economics and
Statistics: 99-105.
Goodman, John L., and John B. Ittner. 1992. "The accuracy of home owners' estimates of house
value." Journal of Housing Economics 2, no. 4: 339-357.
Grant, Charles S. 1955. "Land Speculation and the Settlement of Kent, 1738-1760." The New
England Quarterly 28, no. 1: 51-71.
Graves, Philip E. 1980. ―Migration and Climate.‖ Journal of Regional Science 20: 227-237.
Greer, Thomas H. 1948. "Economic and Social Effects of the Depression of 1819 in the Old
Northwest." The Indiana Magazine of History: 227-243.
Greve, Charles Theodore. 1904. Centennial History of Cincinnati and Representative Citizens.
Vol. 1. Biographical Publishing Company.
Grubb, Farley. 2009. Land Policy: Founding Choices and Outcomes, 1781-1802. No. w15028.
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hansen, Bruce E. 2007. "Least Squares Model Averaging," Econometrica, Econometric Society,
vol. 75 (4): 1175-1189.
Hansen, Lars Peter, John Heaton, and Ravi Jagannathan. 1992. "Econometric Evaluation of
Intertemporal Asset Pricing Models Using Volatility Bounds." Manuscript. Chicago: Univ.
Chicago, Dept. Econ.; Cambridge, Mass.: NBER.
Harding, J. P., Rosenthal, S. S., & Sirmans, C. F. 2007. ―Depreciation of housing capital,
maintenance, and house price inflation: Estimates from a repeat sales model.‖ Journal of urban
Economics, 61(2):193-217
Harley, C. Knick. 1978. "Western Settlement and the Price of Wheat, 1872-1913." Journal of
Economic History 38, no. 4: 865-878.
Himmelberg, Charles, Christopher Mayer, and Todd Sinai. 2005. Assessing high house prices:
Bubbles, fundamentals, and misperceptions. No. w11643. National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Thomas J. Holmes. 1998. ―The Effects of State Policies on the Location of Industry: Evidence
from State Borders.‖ Journal of Political Economy 106: 667.
Homer, Sidney, and Richard Sylla. 1991. A history of interest rates (3rd ed.) New Brunswick:
Rutgers University Press.
Howe, Daniel Walker. 2007. What Hath God Wrought: The Transformation of America, 18151848 (The Oxford History of the United States, Vol. 5). Oxford University Press.
Hoyt, Homer. 1933. One Hundred Years of Land Values in Chicago. Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press.
45

.

Jackson, Jerry R. 1979. "Intraurban variation in the price of housing." Journal of Urban
Economics 6, no. 4: 464-479.
Joint Committee on Taxation. 1938. Reports of the New York State Commission for the revision
of the tax laws, 1916-1938. New York: J.B. Lyon Company.
Kahneman, Daniel. 2003. "A perspective on judgment and choice: mapping bounded
rationality." American psychologist 58, no. 9 (2003): 697.
Kindleberger, Charles Poor. 1978. Economic Response: Comparative Studies in Trade, Finance,
and Growth. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Krainer, John, Stephen F. LeRoy and Munpyung O. 2009. ―Mortgage Default and Mortgage
Valuation.‖ Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2009-20.
Lewis, Michael. 2010. The Big Short: Inside the Doomsday Machine. WW Norton.
Lindert, Peter H. 1998. "Long-run trends in American farmland values." Agricultural History 62,
no. 3: 45-85.
Malenbaum, W. 1953. The world wheat economy, 1885-1939 (Vol. 92). Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Marshall, Alfred. 1890. Principles of economics. London: Macmillan.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2009. "The consequences of mortgage credit expansion: Evidence
from the US mortgage default crisis." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, no. 4: 14491496.
Mills, Edwin S. 1967. "An aggregative model of resource allocation in a metropolitan area." The
American Economic Review 57, no. 2: 197-210.
Mitchell, Brian R. 1988. British Historical Statistics. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Muth, Richard F. 1964. "The derived demand curve for a productive factor and the industry
supply curve." Oxford Economic Papers: 221-234.
Najafi, Mohammad, Rayman Mohamed, A. K. Tayebi, Soji Adelaja, and Mary Beth Lake. 2007.
"Fiscal impacts of alternative single-family housing densities." Journal of Urban Planning and
Development. 133, no. 3: 179-187.Officer, Lawrence H. 1983. "Dollar-Sterling Mint Parity and
Exchange Rates, 1791-1834." Journal of Economic History 43, no. 3: 579-616.
Nathanson, Charles G., and Eric Zwick. 2012. "Arrested Development: A Theory of Supply-Side
Speculation in the Housing Market. Manuscript.
Nicholas, Tom and Anna Scherbina. 2011. ―Real Estate Prices During the Roaring Twenties and
the Great Depression.‖ UC Davis Graduate School of Management Research Paper No. 18-09.
Olmstead, Alan L., and Paul W. Rhode. 2002. The red queen and the hard reds: Productivity
growth in American wheat, 1800-1940. No. w8863. National Bureau of Economic Research.

46

Polinsky, A. Mitchell, and David T. Ellwood. 1979. "An empirical reconciliation of micro and
grouped estimates of the demand for housing." The Review of Economics and Statistics 61, no. 2:
199-205.Poterba, James M. 1984. "Tax subsidies to owner-occupied housing: an asset-market
approach." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 99, no. 4: 729-752.
Poterba, James. 2004. Taxation and corporate payout policy. No. w10321. National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Preston, Howard H. 1922. "Branch banking with special reference to California conditions." The
Journal of Political Economy: 494-517.
Quigley, John M. 2006. Federal Credit and Insurance Programs: Housing. University of
California, Berkeley.
Ricardo, David. 1822. On protection to agriculture. J. Murray
Roback, Jennifer. 1982. "Wages, rents, and the quality of life." The Journal of Political
Economy: 1257-1278.
Rohrbough, Malcolm J. 1968. The land office business: the settlement and administration of
American public lands, 1789-1837. Oxford University Press, USA.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1979. ―Wage-Based Indexes of Urban Quality of Life‖. In Current Issues in
Urban Economics, edited by Peter Mieszkowski and Mahlon Straszheim. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press.
Rothbard, Murray N. 2007 The panic of 1819: Reactions and policies. Ludwig von Mises
Institute.
Rousseau, Peter L. 2000. Jacksonian monetary policy, specie flows, and the panic of 1837. No.
w7528. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Saiz, Albert. 2003. "Room in the kitchen for the melting pot: Immigration and rental prices."
Review of Economics and Statistics 85, no. 3: 502-521.
Saiz, Albert. 2010. "The geographic determinants of housing supply." The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 125, no. 3: 1253-1296.
Samuelson, Paul A. 1965. "Proof that properly anticipated prices fluctuate randomly." Industrial
management review 6, no. 2.
Scammon, Jonathan Young. 1839. The public and general statute laws of the state of Illinois.
Illinois: S.F. Gale.
Schmitz, Adrienne. 2003. The new shape of suburbia : trends in residential development.
Washington, D.C.:Urban Land Institute.
Shiller, Robert J. 2008. ―Historic Turning Points in Real Estate.‖ Eastern Economic Journal 34:
1-13.

47

Shleifer, Andrei, and Larry H. Summers. 1990. The noise trader approach to finance. The
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 4 (2): 19-33.
Silberling, Norman J. 1919. "British Financial Experience 1790-1830." The Review of
Economics and Statistics 1, no. 4: 282-297.
Sonstelie, Jon, Eric Brunner, and Kenneth Ardon. 2000. For better or for worse?: School
Finance Reform in California. Public Policy Institute of California.
Stein, Clarence S. 1923. Report of Commission of Housing and Regional Planning to Governor
Alfred E. Smith and the Legislature of the State of New York on the present status of the housing
emergency. Albany: J.B. Lyon.
Taylor, George Rogers. 1951. The Transportation Revolution. Rinehart.
Temin, Peter. 1968. ―The Economic Consequences of the Bank War.‖ Journal of Political
Economy , Vol. 76, No. 2: 257-274.
Treat, Payson Jackson. 1910. The National Land System 1785-1820. E.B. Treat and Co.
Von Thunen, Johann Heinrich. 1826. Der isoli[e]rte Staat in Beziehung auf Landwirtschaft und
Nationalökonomie. Hamburg: Perthes.
Walters, William D. 2010. Selling Location: Illinois Town Advertisements, 1835-1837.
Department of Geography-Geology, Illinois State University.
Warner, Sam Bass. 1962. Streetcar Suburbs: The Process of Growth in Boston, 1870–1900.
Cambridge, MA.
Watkins, James Lawrence. 1908. King Cotton: a historical and statistical review, 1790 to 1908.
JL Watkins & Sons.
Wheaton, William C., Mark S. Baranski, and Cessarina Templeton. 2006. 100 Years of
Commercial Real Estate Prices in Manhattan. MIT Center for Real Estate.
Wilkinson, Norman B. 1953. ―Robert Morris and the Treaty of Big Tree.‖ The Mississippi Valley
Historical Review 40 (2): 257-278.

48

Table 1
Rural Land Values
Where was
the boom?

What happened to land
prices?

What was the
uncertainty?

What was the credit market
like?

Were the prices
reasonable?

Why did it end?

Western New
York in the
1790s

Gorham and Phelps acquire 2.6
million acres for less than
$125,000 : less than 5
cents/acre (~$1.30 in 2012 $)

Political risks:
rival states, Native
American
ownership

Personal borrowing and
mortgages, access to European
lenders. Generally rising
interest rates.

Morris overextended
himself. Effective
discount rates too high to
buy and hold. Panic of
1797.

Morris buys over 1 million
acres for ₤30,000: ~13.5
cents/acre (~$3.30). Resells
land for Pulteney associates for
₤75,000 : ~26 cents/acre
(~$6.40)

Transportation
Costs and the
Related Migration
Possibilities

Securitization in Holland.

Hamilton’s valuation was 30
cents an acre (~$7.50) in the
early 1790s, and by 1796
Congress considered a
$2/acre (~$35) minimum
price reasonable.
Blodget Value is $2.20/acre
(~$43) in 1804

Buys 4 million acres from Mass
for less than 15 cents/acre
(~$3.70) and resells to Holland
Land Company for close to 30
cents/acre (~$5.22).

Frontier
Land 18151819:
Huntsville

1817: Madison County Public
Land is $2 (~$35 in 2012 $)
per acre (twice national
unimproved norm)
1818: Madison Land is $7.40
($134) per acre

Value in 1850 is $29/acre
(~$854) (Linder/2) - 9%
return.

Cotton prices,
cotton yields,
transportation
costs

25 percent down-payment to
the government. Six percent
interest rates.

Four years to pay off the
remaining debt.

US
Farmland,
1880-1933:
Iowa

96 dollars ($2,330 in 2012
dollars) per acre (for buildings
and land) in 1910.

$138 per acre for buildings and
land in 1916 ($2,900 in 2012
$)

$68 per acre in 1933 (~$1,200
in 2012 $)

Cotton prices,
cotton yields,
transportation
costs

5% interest and 50% downpayment was common

Growth rate in real wheat
prices is 3.3 percent since
1895. Growth rate in real
wheat yields in Iowa is 1.4
percent
Transportation costs also
declining significantly.

49

The richest land was yielding Cotton prices fall by 50
were 800-1000 pounds per
percent, as global supply
acre.
increases. Bank of the
United States tightens
credit and the panic of
1819.
Prices were over 30
After the panic land price
cents/pound ($5 in 2012
fall dramatically--1850
dollars) in 1817-18. Costs
Alabama price is 17 cents
were about 15 cents per
($5) per acre.
pound ($2.70 in 2012
dollars) in 1819.
Wheat yields averaged 18
bushels per acre. Prices are
99 cents ($24)/bushel in
Chicago; and operating costs
are 40% of revenues. Prices
are 76 cents ($18)/bushel in
Iowa.
Growth rate in real wheat
prices is 3.3 percent since
1895. Growth in yields is 1.4
percent.

Wheat yields increases
stopped for 20 years.
Wheat prices in 1933 were
43 percent of their values
in 1916. Global wheat
supply increased.

Capitalization rate of 16 is
compatible with reasonable
growth and interest rates.

Capitalization rate had
fallen from 16 to 12.5,
which is compatible with
an increase in discountgrowth rates of 1.75%.

Great Depression.

Table 2
Value of Free Default Options
Boom/Bust

Annual Log
Trend (Boom)

Standard
Deviation Log
Price Changes

Mortgage
Rate

Down
Payment

Implied
Default
Premium
(.5*rate)

Implied
Default
Premium (no
growth)

0.029
(-0.0017)

0.18

5%

50%

6.0%

8.9%

1.05

1.2

10%

50%

41%

65%

New York,
1832-1840,
peak=1837

0.095
(0.05)

0.5

7%

50%

26%

32%

Los Angeles,
1880-1889,
peak=1888

0.31
(0.05)

0.4

10%

30%

10.20%

Chicago,
1873-1931,
peak=1928

0.06
(0.013)

0.14

6%

50%

1.00%

4.00%

New York,
1920-1933,
peak=1929

0.045
(0.07)

0.25

6%

10%

32%

46%

California,
1984-1994,
peak=1989

0.047
(0.005)

0.065

5%

5%

3%

11%

0.066

5%

1%

6%

17%

Rural Land,
1880-1933,
peak=1914
Chicago,
1830-1841,
peak=1836

USA,
1996-2012,
peak=2006

0.045
(.001)

Note: Down payment effects are calculated assuming one percent property tax rate and one percent depreciation.
Standard deviations are based on column two. Growth rates are either zero or one-half the previously realized growth rates in column one.

50

29%

Table 3
Urban Land Values
Where was the
boom?

What happened to land
prices?

What was the
uncertainty?

What was the credit
market like?

Were the prices reasonable?

Why did it end?

Chicago Loop Real
Estate: 1830-1841

Price per acre in 1830 is $32
($800 in $2012)

Transportation
technology (canal
improvements), the
western movement of
the U.S. population,
and the possibility of
becoming a major city.

10% interest/50% downpayment was common

If Chicago had a 50 percent
chance of becoming like NYC
or Cincinnati, most prices
were reasonable.
Andreas (1884) gives one data
point with a capitalization rate
of 12.5.

Panic of 1837. Bank
lending collapses. Bank of
Illinois goes bankrupt.

Price per acre in 1836 is
$13,000 ($327,000 - tops
out over $1 million – in
2012 $)
Price per acre in 1841 is
$1,400 ($38,000 in 2012 $).
By 1856, prices are well
above 1836 levels.
Los Angeles in the
1880s

New York City
(Nicholas/Scherbina)
:1920-1933

Real (2012 $) median price
per square foot in non-urban
land rise from 1.8 cents per
square foot in 1882 to 2.8
cents in 1885, to 6.9 cents in
1886, to 9.3 cents in 1887,
and to 18 cents in 1888,
then falling to 12 cents in
1889.
In the urban core, price per
front foot was $1,333
(~$32,000 in 2012 $) in
1887. By 1888, the largest
recorded transaction price
was $1,700-$2,000
(~$41,000-$49,000) per
front foot.

Growth rates are not
estimable in this context.

An unpriced default
option (state bank)could
have increased prices by
50 percent.

Illinois stops internal
improvements, such as
canals.

Ex post annual returns were 9
percent.

Increased competition
between railroad
companies reduced
transport costs.

10% interest rates. Down- A house that cost $4,000 in
payments as low as 30%. land and construction could
net $420 per year, a decent
ratio assuming 2.5 percent
growth.

Prices declined after 1888,
but Southern California
continued to grow, and
eventually prices recovered.
No financial collapse.

The western movement
of the U.S. and the
chance of becoming a
major city.

No public default option,
but sellers provided
financing and probably
built the option's value
into the sale price.

Buyers of outlying urban
lots did not see prices
recover.

Price per square foot in 1920 Demand for central city
is $2.70 ($31 in 2012 $)
space -- agglomeration
economies- and
aggregate fundamentals.

Price per square foot in 1929 Construction
is $4 ($54 in 2012 $), then
technology and supply
falls to $1.7 ($30 in 2012 $)
in 1933.

51

Top commercial real estate in
Los Angeles is $1,333 per
front foot, as opposed to
$3,000 (~$73,000) in
Cleveland and $6,000
(~$146,000) in Chicago.

6% interest rates and 50% Building and land costs of $25
down-payments were
(~$328 in 2012 $) per
common
rentable square foot in the
1920s produce $1.75 (~$23 in
2012 $) in net revenues,
compatible with six percent
interest rates.
Builders were able to
New York prices are higher
securitize mortgages
than elsewhere, but output per
(Goetzman and Newman) worker is 72 percent higher.

Prices start falling with
excess supply. Wall Street
Crash– Economic
Depression.

Suburbanization

Table 4
Metropolitan Land Values
Where was
the boom?

What happened to
housing prices?

What was the
uncertainty?

What was the credit
market like?

Were the prices
reasonable?

Why did it end?

US-wide
post-World
War II: 19501970

Prices increased less
than construction
costs.

Post-war
economic boom,
increased credit
availability.

After 1934, the Federal
Housing Administration
(FHA) required only a 20%
down payment. The FHA
and Veteran's Administration
increased credit availability
after 1944.

In California, prices started
to rise dramatically in the
1970s.

California:
1970s and
1980s

In 1970, housing
values in California
were 26 percent
higher than the U.S.
In 1990, housing
values were 140
percent higher.
Los Angeles real
prices (FHFA Index)
rose 156 percent,
between 1975 and
1990, and then fell by
37 percent between
1990 and 1996.

Decrease in new
supply due to
increased land
use regulation.

Twenty percent and less
down-payments.

Reduction in
property taxes
due to
Proposition 13.

Real interest rates undulated
in the late 1970s and early
1980s and then rose steadily
through 1980.

Supply kept pace with
demand. In the 1950s, the
US permitted 11.84
million housing units,
which was roughly the
same amount the US
permitted from 1920 to
1945.
Price to rent ratios range
from 25-38 in expensive
metro areas in 1990.
Reasonable parameters,
and expected growth of 2.5
percent generates a
predicted ratio of 31.
Unique California
attributes bedevil
comparisons with metro
areas elsewhere.

Across the US as a
whole, real prices
increased by 53
percent between 1996
and 2006, and fell 28
percent between 2006
and 2011.

Few dramatic
episodes of
economic
uncertainty
during this boom.
Land shortage
claims in Las
Vegas.

Interest rates were low, loan
approval rates were high, and
required down payments
were under five percent.
But changes seem modest.

Price-rent ratios hit 38 in
higher cost areas.
Reasonable parameter
values and expected
growth rates generate 2.5
percent user costs, which
predicts a ratio of 40.

Slowing price growth may
have led to a reassessment
of future price growth.

The Great
Housing
Convulsion:
1996-2012

52

Supply increased in
California, and by 1990,
inventory was no longer
scarce. Assessment of
future growth fell.

Recession hit the U.S.

Table 5
Social Costs of the Housing Boom
Using adjusted housing prices. Sample is MSAs with populations over 500,000

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Extra
Building
(2004-2006)
/ Housing
Stock in
2010

Benefit from
the Extra
Building (20042006) /
Housing Stock
in 2010

Extra Building
Costs due to
Extra Building
(2004-2006) /
Housing Stock
in 2010

Extra Supply
Costs due to
Extra Building
(2004-2006) /
Housing Stock
in 2010

BenefitsCosts /
Housing
Stock in 2010

0.05
0.04
0.02
0.02
0.04
0.02
0.03
0.01
0.05
0.02

6,108.14
5,424.95
1,568.83
2,003.39
4,282.42
2,855.07
2,834.52
878.30
6,381.28
2,561.95

7,015.02
5,838.80
2,260.61
2,590.60
4,770.27
3,436.80
3,287.87
1,328.32
6,584.80
2,877.84

217.24
556.58
25.74
87.47
183.93
79.62
77.65
20.06
222.94
84.87

-1,124.11
-970.43
-717.52
-674.69
-671.79
-661.35
-531.00
-470.08
-426.45
-400.75

-0.04
0.02
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.02

-5,790.19
1,568.83
878.30
2,003.39
1,200.83
287.09
732.37
568.14
59.68
2,855.07

-4,552.11
1,837.24
1,074.51
2,125.14
1,236.97
321.44
755.02
587.32
69.21
2,781.60

-224.25
25.74
20.06
87.47
42.94
12.19
12.84
4.91
0.93
79.62

-1,013.83
-294.15
-216.27
-209.23
-79.08
-46.55
-35.49
-24.09
-10.46
-6.15

Bottom 10 MSAs
(calculated using luxury costs)
Bakersfield, CA MSA
Las Vegas, NV-AZ MSA
Toledo, OH MSA
Memphis, TN-AR-MS MSA
San Antonio, TX MSA
Kansas City, MO-KS MSA
Oklahoma City, OK MSA
Detroit-Livonia-Dearborn, MI (MSAD)
Houston-Galveston-Brazoria, TX CMSA
Omaha, NE-IA MSA
Bottom 10 MSAs
(calculated using average costs)
Ann Arbor, MI PMSA
Toledo, OH MSA
Detroit-Livonia-Dearborn, MI (MSAD)
Memphis, TN-AR-MS MSA
Wichita, KS MSA
Fort Wayne, IN MSA
Dayton-Springfield, OH MSA
Pittsburgh, PA MSA
Youngstown-Warren, OH MSA
Kansas City, MO-KS MSA

53

Figure 1:
Housing Price Growth for Warm vs. Cold MSAs, 1980-2012
160

150

140

130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

Prices in Colder MSAs

Prices in Warmer MSAs

Note: FHFA-corrected housing values indexed to 1980 (1980=100)
Source: Data from the U.S. Census and the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA)
http://www.fhfa.gov/Default.aspx?Page=87

54

-1

-.5

0

.5

Figure 2:
Mean Reversion in MSA Housing Prices
2000-2006 and 2006-2012

0

.2
.4
.6
Log FHFA Index Change, 2000-2006

Source: Price data from the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA)
http://www.fhfa.gov/Default.aspx?Page=87

55

.8

Figure 3
Correct Model Price

Naive Capitalization Price

200

150

100

50
0

20

40

60

Years

Note: This figure simulates the price patterns as described by the model. The steeper line reflects the
prices implied if buyers are naive Gordonians who extrapolate future rent growth .5 percent per year. The
flatter line reflects the prices implied by more rational buyers. Prices are in thousands of dollars.

56

Figure 4:
Real Land Values Per Acre in the United States, 1850-1970
1,600

1,400

1,200

2012 Dollars

1,000

800

600

400

200

0
1850

1860

1870

1880

1890

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

Real Value of Land and Buildings per Acre

Real Value of Land per Acre

Real Value of Land and Buildings per Acre, from State Level Data

Real Value of Land per Acre, from State Level Data

1960

1970

Source: Farm Real Estate Historical Series Data: 1850-1970, from the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
June 1973.

57

500

Figure 5:
Mean Reversion in Land Values 1890-1933
Connecticut
Massachusetts

-500

0

Florida

New Jersey

New
York
Maryland
Alabama
Maine
New Mexico
Pennsylvania
Louisiana
Delaware
Texas
Virginia California
Tennessee
Arkansas
Oregon
MichiganNorth Carolina
Kentucky
Georgia
Wisconsin
South Carolina
Ohio
Missouri

-1000

Indiana

-1500

Illinois

Iowa

0

500
1000
Land Value Change 1890-1910

1500

Source: Farm Real Estate Historical Series Data: 1850-1970, from the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
June 1973.

58

Figure 6:
Wheat Prices over Time
40
1917

Real Wheat Prices per Bushel (2012 $)

35
1918
1916
1919

30

25

1909
1908

1877

1882
1881

1904
1910 1914
1915
1905
1911
1891
1898
1890
1897
1912
1888
1913
1907
1889
1903
1892
1885
1902
1906
1884
1899
1901
1900
1886
1887
1893 1896
1895
1894

1920

1880
1879 1883
18761878

20

15

1925

1924
1926
1927
1929
1928
1921
1922
1923

10

1936
1937
1934
1935
1933
1939
1940
1938

1930

1932
1931

5

Source: USDA Economic Research Services http://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/wheatdata.aspx#25377

59

1940

1938

1936

1934

1932

1930

1928

1926

1924

1922

1920

1918

1916

1914

1912

1910

1908

1906

1904

1902

1900

1898

1896

1894

1892

1890

1888

1886

1884

1882

1880

1878

1876

0

1500

Figure 7:
Land Value Changes 1890-1910 and Longitude
Iowa

1000

Illinois

Indiana

500

Missouri
Wisconsin
Ohio

0

Kentucky
Arkansas Mississippi TennesseeGeorgia
Alabama
Michigan

-95

-90

-85

South Carolina
North
Carolina New Jersey
Virginia
Maryland
Delaware
New York
Vermont
Pennsylvania

-80
longitude

-75

Maine

-70

Source: Farm Real Estate Historical Series Data: 1850-1970, from the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
June 1973.

60

-400

-300

-200

-100

0

Figure 8:
Mean Reversion in the Chicago Boom of 1830-1836 and 1836-1841

0

100

200
300
Change in Value 1830-1836

Source: Data from Hoyt (1933)

61

400

0

100

200

300

Figure 9:
Distance from the Chicago River and the Price Boom

0

2

4
6
North South Block

Source: Data from Hoyt (1933)

62

8

10

Figure 10:
Prices in Los Angeles
2

2012 $

1

0

-1

1882

1883

1884

1885

1886

1887

Year and Quarter
Median Price per Square Foot (x10)

Median Log Price Residual

Source: Sales data from the Los Angeles Times, compiled by the author

63

1888

1889

Figure 11:
Log Coefficient Regression Results, New York City and Chicago
0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

-0.2

-0.4

-0.6

-0.8
1885

1890

1895

1900

1905

1910

1915
NYC

1920

1925

1930

1935

1940

Chicago

Source: New York data from Nicholas and Scherbina (2011). Chicago data from Hoyt (1933).

64

1945

-1

-.5

0

.5

1

Figure 12:
Mean Reversion in Chicago 1877-1931

2

3
4
Change in Log Values, 1877-1910

Source: Data from Hoyt (1933)

65

5

Figure 13: Mean Reversion across Zip Codes (Mean Residuals from Hedonic Regression)
Log Value Change 1928-1935

.

0

10040

10012

10010

-.2
10009

10039
10023
10032
10011
10026
10017
10003
10030
10036
10021
10029
10025
10016
10027
10024
1000210035
10128
10028
10033
10019 10037
10007
10075
10031
10013
10022
10014
10001
10065
10034

-.4

10004

10006

10018
10005

10038

10020

-.6
.1

.2

.3
Log Value Change 1921-1928

Source: Data from Nicholas and Scherbina (2011)

66

.4

.5

Figure 14:
1970 Price vs 1950 Price plus Increase in Construction Cost for 1500 sq ft
250000

Real 1970 Median Housing Value, 2012$

200000

150000

100000

1950 Median
Housing Value +
1950 Const. Cost
50000

45 Degree Line

0
0

50000

100000

Real 1950 Median Housing Value, 2012$

Source: Price data from the U.S. Census and cost data from R.S. Means

67

150000

Figure 15:
Log FHFA Index Change 1989-1994

.

.4

.2

0

-.2

-.4
-.5

0
Log FHFA Index Change 1984-1989

Source: Data from the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA)
http://www.fhfa.gov/Default.aspx?Page=87

68

.5

Figure 16:
Housing Price-Rent Ratios for 266 MSAs, 1996-2012
40

35

30

Price-Rent Ratio

25

20

15

10

5

0
1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

10th Percentile

2003

2004
Median

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

90th Percentile

Source: Price data from the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA)
http://www.fhfa.gov/Default.aspx?Page=87
Rent data from HUD’s Fair Market Rents http://www.huduser.org/portal/datasets/fmr.html

69

2011

2012

