NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IMPACT OF CARTELIZATION, MONEY, AND PRODUCTIVITY SHOCKS
ON THE INTERNATIONAL GREAT DEPRESSION
Harold L. Cole
Lee E. Ohanian
Working Paper 18823
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18823

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013

There have been too many people who contributed to this paper to thank them all. However, we particularly
thank Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde, Ellen McGrattan and Edward Prescott. We also thank Ron Leung
and Giang Ho for exceptional research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Harold L. Cole and Lee E. Ohanian. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Impact of Cartelization, Money, and Productivity Shocks on the International Great Depression
Harold L. Cole and Lee E. Ohanian
NBER Working Paper No. 18823
February 2013
JEL No. F1,N12
ABSTRACT
This study exploits panel data from 18 countries to assess the contributions of cartelization policies,
monetary shocks, and productivity shocks on macroeconomic activity during the Great Depression.
To construct a parsimonious and common model framework, we use the fact that many cartel policies
are observationally equivalent to a country-specific labor tax wedge. We estimate a monetary DSGE
model with cartel wedges along with productivity and monetary shocks. Our main finding is that cartel
policy shocks account for the bulk of the Depression in the countries that adopted significant cartel
policies, including the large depressions in the U.S., Germany, Italy, and Australia, and that the estimated
cartel policy shocks plausibly coincide with the actual evolution of policies in these countries. In contrast,
cartel policy shocks in the countries that did not significantly change policies were small and account
for little of their Depressions.

Harold L. Cole
Economics Department
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
160 McNeil Building
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
colehl@sas.upenn.edu
Lee E. Ohanian
8283 Bunche Hall
UCLA, Department of Economics
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
ohanian@econ.ucla.edu

1

Introduction

Cole and Ohanian (1999, 2004) and Ohanian (2009) present theory and evidence that
cartelization policies that distort incentives and reduce competition in product and labor
markets contributed signi…cantly to the U.S. Great Depression. This paper analyzes how
much cartelization policies contributed to the world depression of the 1930s, as other countries, including Italy under Mussolini, and Germany under Hitler, expanded cartel policies
signi…cantly during the 1930s.
We exploit the fact that there are large cross-country di¤erences in the severity of these
policies during the Depression. Speci…cally, while the U.S., Germany, and Italy substantially expanded cartel policies in the 1930s relative to the 1920s, other countries, such as
the United Kingdom and Canada did not. These large cross-country policy di¤erences facilitate estimating their contribution to the world depression of the 1930s. At the same time,
we also estimate the contribution of two other shocks, monetary shocks and productivity
shocks. This allows us to assess the roles played by these three shocks in impacting output,
consumption, investment, employment and other variables during the Depression.
We construct a macroeconomic panel dataset for 18 countries. Nearly all countries have
consistent time series of real GNP, the GNP de‡ator, the money supply, real consumption,
and real investment. We focus the analysis on the seven countries that also have consistent
aggregate employment and capital data: Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, U.S.
and the U.K. We use the other 11 countries to assess the robustness of the …ndings.
Our main …nding is that the estimated cartel shocks are quantitatively very important
for the cartelized countries, as they account for more than 80 percent of employment change
in the U.S., Germany, Italy, and Australia. Moreover, the size of the estimated cartel
shocks, and their evolution over time, are in line with the evolution of actual cartel policies
across these countries. Speci…cally, the estimated cartel shocks are large and negative in the
countries that signi…cantly expanded cartel policies and they increase in size around the same
time that actual cartel policies expand. In contrast, the estimated cartel shocks in countries
that did not substantially change cartel policies are small. In these non-cartel countries, the
cartel shock accounts for less than 20 percent of the change in employment, with monetary
and productivity shocks accounting for most of the change. Aggregating the results over
all seven countries, we …nd that cartel policies account for about 60 percent of the change
in labor and about 40 percent of the change in output. We also …nd interesting interactions
between cartel policies and monetary shocks that re‡ects nominal price and wage …xing in
conjunction with de‡ation.
To our knowledge, this analysis makes new contributions in that it is the …rst crosscountry general equilibrium analysis of the Depression, it analyzes the contributions of
multiple shocks, in contrast to the single-shock models that are common within the general equilibrium Depression literature, and the analysis presents a new model of monetary
nonneutrality that facilitates the empirical analysis and provides new estimates on the quantitative importance of monetary shocks during the 1930s.
Exploiting the large cross-country di¤erences in cartel policies noted above requires a
common model framework. To construct a parsimonious and common model framework, we
use the fact that many cartel policies, including those of the U.S., Italy, and Germany, are
2

observationally equivalent to a country-speci…c wedge in the …rst order condition equating
the marginal rate of substitution (MRS) between consumption and leisure to the marginal
product of labor. Maximum likelihood is used to estimate the parameters of the MRS shock,
which we hereafter refer to as the cartel shock, as well as other model parameters. The key
hypothesis is that the countries that signi…cantly increased cartel policies should have large
and persistent negative cartel shocks that evolve over time according to the time variation in
actual cartel policies, while the countries that did not pursue these policies will have cartel
shocks that are around zero.
The model includes two additional shocks analyzed in the literature; monetary shocks
operating through imperfectly ‡exible wages, as featured in Eichengreen and Sachs (1985)
and Bernanke and Carey (1996), and productivity shocks, which have received attention in
the recent literature (see Cole and Ohanian (1999) and Kehoe and Prescott (2002)). Wage
in‡exibility arises from imperfect information in which households must infer real wage
changes from nominal wage changes, so that the size of the monetary nonneutrality can take
on a range of values from a purely neutral model, to a model with a large nonneutrality. We
estimate the size of the nonneutrality, which to our knowledge is new within the Depression
literature, and more broadly, is new within the business cycle literature. Two versions of the
model are analyzed, one with standard …xed capital utilization, and another with variable
capital utilization. The latter model accounts for the possibility that the Solow Residual
may re‡ect capital input mismeasurement.
The model …t for both the endogenous variables and for the money and productivity
shocks is assessed using Kalman smoothing. Both versions of the model …t the data very
well, accounting for on average more than 80 percent of the squared change in output, consumption, employment, investment, the money supply, and TFP. The maximum likelihood
estimate of the size of the nonneutrality is fairly small in the …xed capacity version of the
model, re‡ecting the fact that de‡ation is only modestly correlated with real variables, while
the nonneutrality is larger in the variable capacity model, because monetary shocks account
for some of the Solow Residual.
We conduct counterfactual experiments to assess two policy questions: (1) How much
did cartel policies depress economic activity? (2) How much did leaving the gold standard
promote recovery? We …nd that leaving gold earlier fostered a modestly faster recovery, but
the gold departure date does not account for the fact depression continued in several countries
after all countries were re‡ating. We …nd that cartel policies were a major depressing factor,
particularly for understanding the di¤erences in economic performance after 1932. If cartel
policies had not been adopted, the Depressions in those countries would have been much
milder and economic recovery would have been much faster.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the motivation for a common model
and shows how cartel policies can be modelled as a marginal rate of substitution wedge that
facilitates developing such a common model. Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 presents
the model economy. Section 5 presents the quantitative methodology and section 6 presents
the …ndings. Section 7 conducts the two counterfactual experiments, and Section 8 concludes.

3

2

Modeling Cartelization Policies as Marginal Rate of
Substitution Distortions

Exploiting the large variability in these panel data is facilitated by using a model that is
common across countries. This section shows that the di¤erent cartelization policies used in
the U.S., Germany, Italy, and Australia, map into a marginal rate of substitution distortion
that can be easily incorporated into a simple, common model framework. We …rst summarize
the major cartel policies that were present in these countries, including (1) industrial cartels,
(2) nominal wage and price …xing, and (3) changes in worker bargaining power.
For the US, these policies were present under Presidents Hoover (see Ohanian (2009)
and Rose (2010)), and Franklin Roosevelt (see Cole and Ohanian (2004)). Both Presidents
promoted monopoly and helped raise real wages above the levels that would have prevailed
under competition. Hoover oversaw a high level of industrial cartelization, and developed
a nominal wage maintenance policy that required that …rms maintain nominal wages, even
with declining prices, in order to receive protection from union organization. FDR continued cartelization policies once de‡ation ended with the National Industrial Recovery Act
(NIRA), which provided industry with explicit monopoly power if …rms immediately and
substantially raised wages and agreed to collective bargaining. After the NIRA was declared
unconstitutional in 1935, these policies continued with the Wagner Act, which led to large
increases in unionization. Real wages rose signi…cantly during this period, as did the relative
prices of output from cartelized sectors.
Wage …xing and monopoly were also operative in Germany, under Hitler’s New Plan, and
in Italy, under Mussolini’s Corporatist Plan. Regarding Italy, Giordano et al (2011) documents Fascist government intervention in Italian labor and product markets and the impact
of those interventions on prices and wages. Italian policies fostered substantial cartelization,
including laws that forbid expanding plants or creating new plants, and created obligatory,
government-run labor unions that set wages by region. Tooze (2007) describes substantial
intervention in German labor and product markets Hitler froze wages and salaries at Summer, 1933 levels, and regional labor trustees decided on future wage increases. Hitler also
broke independent unions that year and expanded industry cartels.
To see how these policies can be mapped into a common framework of marginal rate
of substitution distortions, note that in many competitive models e¢ cient time allocation
between market and non-market activities equates the marginal rate of substitution between
consumption and leisure to the marginal product of labor, which in turn is equated to the
real wage, W=P; and which in turn equates labor supply (Ls ) and labor demand (Ld ) :
M RS = M P L = W=P
L = Ls = Ld
First, consider the impact of product market cartelization. Any deviation from perfect
competition in product markets breaks this equality, since the relevant …rm e¢ ciency condition with imperfect competition equates the marginal revenue product to the wage, and
not the marginal product, and thus depresses employment relative to competition. Thus,
expanding product market monopoly increases this wedge, with W=P = M RS < M P L;
though the labor market is clearing with L = Ls = Ld :
4

Second, consider the union-cartel policies adopted by the United States, which increase
worker bargaining power, as in Cole and Ohanian (2004). Expanding unionization also
drives a wedge into this equation as higher worker bargaining power raises the wage and
lowers employment. This means that labor is demand-determined, as households would
choose to work more at the cartel wage if this was feasible, thus M RS < M P L = W=P; and
L = Ld < Ls:
Third, consider the case of nominal wage …xing. If the nominal wage is …xed such that
the real wage is above the competitive level, then the result is the same as in the case of
expanding unionization, with labor being demand-determined and households are at a corner
in terms of labor supply. If the nominal wage is …xed such that the real wage is below market
clearing, then labor demand exceeds labor supply, and employment is supply-determined.
This also generates a wedge as employment is low relative to the marginal product of labor,
thus W=P = M RS < M P L and L = Ls < Ld: :
Finally consider a policy of price …xing, in which …nal goods prices are …xed below the
market clearing price and there is rationing. In this case, the marginal utility of consumption
is greater than the price of the …nal good and M RS < W=P: Given this price and assuming
competitive …rms, then M RS < M P L = W=P:
Each of these distortions creates a wedge between the MRS and the MPL. Thus, time
variation in the severity of a variety of cartelization policies will generate country-speci…c
time variation in this wedge. We use this observational equivalence between these policies
and the MRS wedge to construct a common model, and we use maximum likelihood to
estimate the stochastic process for this wedge and their realizations across time and across
countries. We use the timing and the degree of changes in cartelization policies to interpret
these estimated wedges. Our hypothesis is that these wedges will be large in countries that
adopted cartelization policies, that their size will evolve over time as actual policy evolves,
and that the wedges will be roughly zero in countries that did not expand these policies.
Finally, note that …xing the price of labor either above or below its competitive level generates
a wedge which is observationally equivalent to an increase in labor income taxation.

3

Data

We analyze data from 18 countries. We focus on countries from North America and Europe,
as they are two regions that are most widely studied in the literature. In terms of European
countries, we began with roughly the same countries as in Bernanke and Carey (1996) and
Bernanke (1995), and we then narrowed the list of countries to those that have consistent
time series data for real GNP, the GNP de‡ator, the money stock (M1), and at least some
of the following other standard macroeconomic variables: aggregate labor, consumption, investment, and TFP. This yielded 15 European countries and also the U.S., Canada, Australia
and Japan.1
1

In terms of selecting countries for the panel, we do not include Latin American countries. These
countries di¤er along a number of dimensions, including very di¤erent long-run growth paths and large
di¤erences in the composition of output. Moreover, there is not as much availability for the data we require
from Latin American countries. However, it would be interesting to study Latin America as there were
signi…cant institutional changes in some Latin American countries around this time that created considerable

5

Data are available for all of these variables for seven countries: Australia, Canada, France,
Germany, Italy, U.K., and the U.S. We hereafter call this group the main seven countries,
which includes four countries with particularly large depressions: Canada, France, Germany,
and the U.S. For the other 11 countries (Austria, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Finland, Hungary, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland), consumption is available
for 15 of 18 countries, investment is available for 17 of 18 countries, M1 is available for all of
our countries, except for Austria in 1931 and 1936, and aggregate employment is available
for only one country outside of the main 7 (Japan). We focus the analysis on the seven
main countries with all data available, because this provides the most discipline in …tting
the model to the data. We assess the robustness of these results by comparing them to those
from the other 11 countries.
The dataset begins in 1929, which is around the start of the depression for most countries,
and continues through 1936. We do not extend the analysis beyond 1936 because this is when
anticipations of possible World War begin, and 1936 is also the start of the Spanish Civil
War.2 For this 1929-36 period, all countries experienced a decline in economic activity and
all experience at least some economic recovery. All of the output series are measured in per
capita terms and are detrended using a 2 percent annual growth rate.
Figures 1 - 3 summarize the dispersion in these variables by plotting cross-country data for
output, labor, and the de‡ator in the main seven countries, and output and prices are plotted
for all countries in the appendix. The most striking feature of these data is their enormous
cross-country dispersion in all of these variables. Speci…cally, real output change ranges from
a cumulative decline of less than four percent (Denmark), to a 50 percent decline (Canada),
nominal price changes ranges from modest in‡ation (Spain) to a 40 percent cumulative price
decline (France), and labor ranges from around a …ve percent cumulative decline (UK) to a 30
percent cumulative decline (U.S.). This large variation is also present in the other variables.
The substantial data variation in this panel of countries provides a strong test of how
well a parsimonious, common model framework can account for these large di¤erences in the
pattern and severity of depression across countries.

4

The Model

This section develops a very parsimonious model with three shocks, each of which follows
from a theme within the literature: a monetary/de‡ation shock (operating through in‡exible
nominal wages, as in Bernanke and Carey (1996), among others), a TFP shock, as in Cole
and Ohanian (1999) and Kehoe and Prescott (2002), among others, and a cartelization
shock that creates a marginal rate of substitution wedge, as in Cole and Ohanian (2004),
and Ohanian (2009), among others.3
non-market and cartel policies. Finally, as we note below, the countries that are in the panel do provide
substantial variation in the pattern of depression and de‡ation across countries.
2
Tooze (2007) notes that by the end of 1936, the threat of war had become so clear that Lloyds of
London ceased trading in war cover on property (p.203). We do not extend the analysis beyond 1936 as this
anticipation of war may impact the estimated contributions of the three shocks that are modeled.
3
The model does not include other monetary/…nancial channels, because the estimated model …ts the
data very well, including the money supply and the Solow Residual. It would be of interest, however, to

6

Money is introduced using a standard cash-credit good formulation and nominal wage
in‡exibility arises from an information imperfection, which yields a parameter that governs
the size of the nonneutrality of money in the model. This parameter can take values ranging
from a purely neutral model to a model with a very large nonneutrality. This parameter is
estimated when we …t the model to the data. To our knowledge, estimating the size of monetary nonneutrality has not been done in the depression literature and thus the quantitative
magnitude of this shock remains an open question. While we view imperfect information as a
plausible channel for generating monetary nonneutrality during this time period, this model
of nonneutrality can be more broadly considered as a simple way through which monetary
shocks depress employment and that also drive a wedge between the MRS and the MPL.
Note that the model has two sources of the MRS/MPL wedge; the monetary shock, and
a cartel shock, which is represented as a time varying tax on labor income. We consider two
variants of the model for the contribution of TFP, one with standard …xed capacity, and
one with variable capacity. We include the variable capacity model since it allows monetary
shocks to account for some of the Solow Residual and thus will increase the explanatory
power of money/de‡ation for real variables.
There is a large number of identical households who have preferences over sequences of
a cash good, a credit good, and leisure. Preferences are given by:
E

1
X
t=0

t

n
log([ c1t + (1

1=

)c2t ]

) + log(1

o
ht ) ;

(1)

where c1 is the cash good, c2 is the credit good, and 1 h is non-market time. Money is used
to acquire cash goods, and is the sum of initial money holdings mt and the transfer that it
receives from the government. The household maximizes (1) subject to a wealth constraint
and the cash-in-advance (CIA) constraint:
mt + wt Xt ht + rt kt + (Tt

1)Mt + (1
pt c1t

Xt )wt Ht

mt + (Tt

mt+1 + pt [c1t + c2t + kt+1

kt ] ;

1)Mt :

The household’s labor income wt nt is subject to what we call a cartel policy shock Xt ; which
as noted above is modeled a labor tax, and in which Xt < 1 denotes an increase in the
labor tax. The proceeds of the labor tax shock are rebated to the household lump sum,
denoted as (1 Xt )wt Ht , where Ht denotes per capita labor, which in equilibrium coincides
with the representative individual’s labor choice ht : Nominal wealth is the sum of initial
cash holdings mt ; labor income wt Xt ht ; capital income rt kt , a lump-sum monetary transfer
(Tt 1)Mt where Tt is the gross growth rate of the money stock, and the rebate (1 Xt )wt Ht :
extend this study and analyze whether the estimated Solow Residual declines may re‡ect …nancial factors,
as a number of recent models of …nancial imperfections focus on their impact on productivity (see Buera,
Kaboski and Shin (2011), and Mendoza (2010)). We pursued this by measuring the correlation between the
Solow Residual and the standard cross-country measure of …nancial distress for the 1930s, which is from
Bernanke and James (1990). However, we found that the correlation between the Bernanke-James variable
and the Solow Residual is close to zero. This …nding indicates the that analyzing possible connections
between the Solow Residual and …nancial factors requires detailed, country-speci…c analyses that extend
well beyond the scope of this paper.

7

The rental price of capital, rt , is measured net of depreciation. The household …nances cash
carried forward, mt+1 and purchases of cash goods, credit goods, and investment (pt [c1t +
c2t + kt+1 kt ]):
Output is given by:
Yt = Zt (Ut Kt ) Ht1 ;
where Ut denotes capital utilization, Kt is the capital stock, Nt is labor input, and Zt is a
technology shock that follows a …rst-order lognormal autoregressive process:
Zt = ez^t ; z^t =

^t 1
zz

+ "zt ; "zt

N (0;

2
z ):

The resource constraint is
C1t + C2t + Xt

Yt :

The transition rule for capital is
Kt+1 = (1

(Ut ))Kt + Xt ;

where (Ut ) is the depreciation function, and it is assumed that (U ); 0 (U ) and 00 (U ) are all
positive for the variable capacity model, otherwise is constant. Monetary policy is given by
exogenous changes in the gross growth rate of money.4 The money stock follows a …rst-order
lognormal autoregressive process:
Tt = e^t ; where ^t =

^t

1

+ "t ; "t

N (0;

2

):

The change in the money stock at the beginning of the period is (Tt 1)Mt ; and the total
money stock at the beginning of the period is: Mt+1 = Tt Mt :
The cartel policy shock follows a …rst-order lognormal autoregressive process:
Xt = ex^t ; where x^t =

^t 1
xx

+ "xt ; "xt

N (0;

2
x ):

Households choose labor supply at the beginning of the period without full information of
the state, and this information imperfection generates monetary nonneutrality. Households
observe the nominal wage and all of the aggregate state variables except the current realization of the innovations to the monetary and productivity shocks. Thus, they don’t know
the price level at the time they choose labor supply decisions, and face a signal extraction
problem in inferring the real wage from the nominal wage.
We now describe the timing of information and transactions. The state of the economy is
St = (Kt ; z^t 1 ; ^t 1 ; "zt ; "t ; x^t ): The lagged shocks and their current innovations are included
separately because the model requires that households choose labor supply before they observe ("zt ; "t ): There are two sub-periods. In the initial sub-period, the household knows
its own state (kt ; mt ), observes a subset of the state vector, St = (Kt ; ^t 1 ; z^t 1 ; xt ), and
observes the nominal wage. However, households do not know the realizations of the money
4

Our speci…cation of exogenous, contractionary monetary shocks is consistent with the view stressed in
the International Depression literature that de‡ation was caused by exogenous monetary shocks resulting
from the gold standard (see Bernanke (1995) and Eichengreen (1992)).

8

supply or technology innovations. The representative …rm knows the full state vector.5 The
labor market opens, and households and …rms make their labor market choices. In the second sub-period, the full state (St ) is revealed, households receive monetary transfer from
the government, output is produced, and households acquire consumption and investment
goods.
The …rm’s maximization problem includes the choice of utilization, where the rental
payment for capital is net of depreciation. The static optimization problem is:
max pt Zt (Ut Kt ) (Ht )1

wt Ht

Kt ;Nt

rt Kt

pt (Ut )Kt :

The conditions for labor and capital are standard, and the …rst condition for utilization is
pt Zt (

Ht 1
)
Ut Kt

pt 0 (Ut ): = 0;

which implies that utilization will be decreasing in the capital-to-labor ratio and increasing
in productivity, Zt . All of the shocks will lead to changes in utilization, and thus will change
the Solow Residual, which is Zt Ut :
To construct a recursive formulation, we denote the law of motion for aggregate state
denoted by G(St ); and we divide all date t nominal variables by Mt 1 Tt 1 ; which means that
the normalized beginning of period money stock is one (mt = 1); and implies the following
relationship between the household’s money choice in period t (m
~ t+1 ) and the quantity of
money they have at the beginning of period t + 1 (mt+1 ) :
mt+1 = m
~ t+1 =Tt :
This transition rule implies that the money stock is constant over time, and we denote this
constant stock as M:6
The Bellman equation for the household is:
V (mt ; kt ; St ; wt ) =
max E(St ;wt )
nt

maxc1t ;c2t ;mt+1 ;kt+1 log([ c1t + (1
)c2t ]1= ) + log(1
+ ESt V (mt+1 ; kt+1 ; St+1 ; wt+1 )

ht )

subject to
mt + wt ht Xt + rt kt + (Tt

1)M + (1

Xt )wt Ht

5

mt+1 Tt + pt [kt+1

kt + c1t + c2t ]

These assumptions about the household’s information set and the …rm’s information set are natural
to make as we are using this simple environment to stand in for a richer environment with heterogeneous
consumer goods. In this richer environment, …rms care about their product price, the state of their technology,
and the rental prices of labor and capital. The households would care about the entire distribution of prices
in the economy. It seems plausible that households would have imperfect information about the entire
distribution at the start of the period. Therefore, we capture the larger informational frictions faced by
households by assuming that …rms know the full state vector, while households do not.
6
We use this transition equation in the household’s budget constraint, substituting Tt mt+1 for m
~ t+1 ;
which is equivalent to quoting prices relative to money.

9

mt + (Tt

1)M

(2)

pt c1t

and subject to the stochastic processes for the shocks. In the …rst stage, households choose
labor, given St and given the nominal wage. Thus, they optimally forecast the technology
and monetary shocks from their information set (St ; wt ). Their labor choice satis…es:
=(1

ht ) + wt Xt Ef t jwt ; St g = 0

The household equates the marginal utility of leisure to the expected marginal utility of nominal wealth ( t ), scaled by the nominal wage and the cartel policy shock. This expectational
equation is solved using standard signal extraction methods. To conserve space, we omit the
de…nition of equilibrium, and refer the reader to the appendix.7

4.1

The Nonneutrality of Money

This section shows how the information imperfection generates monetary nonneutrality. For
heuristic purposes, we consider an i.i.d. money shock. There are four equations presented in
log-linearized form. The …rst equation is the household’s labor-leisure …rst-order condition:
^ tH
h
=
1 H

w^t + x^t

Ef ^ t jw^t ; st g;

(3)

where capital letters are steady-state values, lower-case letters with carets are log-deviations
from the steady state, and s is the restricted state vector (st = (k^t ; z^t 1 ; ^t 1 )): With imperfect information, the household makes its labor supply decision by forecasting the logdeviation in the marginal value of nominal wealth ( ^ t ), conditioning on the log deviation in
the nominal wage (w^t ) and the restricted state vector, s The second equation is the …rm’s
…rst-order condition for hiring labor,
z^t + (^
ut + k^t

^ t ) = w^t
h

p^t :

(4)

^ t:
)h

(5)

third equation is the production function:
y^t = z^t +

u^t + k^t + (1

The fourth equation is the optimal capital utilization level:
1

u^t =

z^t +

1

^t
h

k^t ;

(6)

where is the elasticity of depreciation with respect to utilization.
To understand the household’s inference/signal extraction problem, note that the loglinearized equation for ^ t is given by
^ t = D k k^t + D z z^t

1

+ D ^t

1

7

+D

z
" z "t

+D

"

"t + D x x^t ;

The online Appendix also considers a standard predetermined wage version of the model which has an
even larger nonneutrality. Because of this larger nonneutrality, this version of the model …ts the data worse
than either of the versions of the model consider in this paper.

10

where D j is the linearized coe¢ cient for state variable j: Similarly, the log-linearized wage
equation is given by
w^t = Dwk k^t + Dwz z^t

1

+ Dw ^t

1

+ Dw"z "zt + Dw" "t + Dwx x^t :

Given st and w^t ; the workers forecast
^t

Ef ^ t jst g = D

z
"z " t

+D

"

"t

from observing
Efw^t jst g = Dw"z "zt + Dw" "t :

w^t

The solution to this standard signal extraction problem is
Ef ^ t jw^t ; st g
where

Ef ^ t jst g = [w^t

Efw^t jst g] ;

is the signal extraction parameter to be de…ned. Rewriting this equation yields
Ef(D

z
"z " t

+D

"

"t )j(Dw"z "zt + Dw" "t )g = (Dw"z "zt + Dw" "t ) :

The optimal forecast of ^ t is given by
Ef ^ t jw^t ; st g = [D k ; D z ; D ; Dw"z ; Dw" D x ] st ;
where, the parameter

(7)

is given by
=

2
"z
2
2
(Dw"z ) "z

D

"z Dw"z

+D

"

2
"

Dw"

+ (Dw" )2

2
"

:

(8)

The parameter is the nonneutrality parameter, and depends on the variances of the
shock innovations and on linearization coe¢ cients. This parameter lies between 0 (maximum
nonneutrality) and 1, in which money is neutral. It is 0 when the variance of money shocks
is 0; with log utility, a productivity shock has no e¤ect on the marginal value of nominal
wealth, and thus D "z = 0: It is 1 when the variance of productivity shocks is 0. In this case
money shocks raise the nominal wage one-for-one, ceteris paribus, and reduce the marginal
value of nominal wealth one-for-one (Dw" = 1; and D "z = 1):
More speci…cally, consider an unanticipated decline in money that ultimately lowers the
price level by 10 percent. This implies that the nominal wage must immediately fall to clear
the labor market. If = 1 ( z = 0) then money is neutral, as the nominal wage also falls
10 percent, which leads workers to raise their forecast of ^ t by 10 percent. Consequently,
there is no change in any real variable. Next, consider the same decline in money, but with
= 0 ( = 0); which is the highest nonneutrality. The nominal wage must fall to clear the
labor market, but in this case the household infers that the lower nominal wage is entirely
due to a negative real shock, rather than a lower money supply. This misperception that
the real wage has declined leads households to reduce labor. Consequently, the equilibrium

11

nominal wage falls less than the price level, the real wage rises, and employment, utilization,
and output all decline.8
We close this section by explaining why money demand shocks, which change the demand
for currency, are not included in the model. We did not add them as it appears that on
average they are quantitatively small. To see this, note that including money demand shocks
modi…es the CIA constraint with a stochastic shifter, t ,that a¤ects the extent that cash is
required to purchase goods, as follows:
t pt c1t

mt + (Tt

1)Mt ;

The term Tt Mt = t is the e¤ective money supply, and ‡uctuations in the e¤ective money
supply work exactly like ‡uctuations in the money supply in the model without t . Thus,
positive money demand shocks will have exactly the same e¤ect as negative money supply
shocks. Therefore, the relevant money object in the model is the e¤ective money supply,
which will be well approximated by the actual money supply if money demand shocks are
small. We will later show that the money supply generated by the model without money
demand shocks accounts for about 80 percent of the actual change in money in the panel
dataset. This suggests that on average M1 money demand shocks are small.
Since the estimation …ts the model money supply to M1 data, it is important to note
that the money demand shocks we consider here are shocks that change the relationship
between real M1, the opportunity cost of holding money, and consumption, rather than the
shocks to the currency-deposit ratio emphasized by Friedman and Schwartz (1963) for the
U.S. Changes in the currency-deposit ratio will show up in our analysis as negative money
supply shocks that reduce M1. Thus small M1 money demand shocks are consistent with
large changes in the currency-deposit ratio.
4.1.1

Distinguishing between MRS wedges created by cartel policies or de‡ationary money shocks

Both cartel policies and unanticipated monetary shocks in the model will drive a wedge
between the marginal rate of substitution and the marginal product of labor. These two
distinct sources of MRS distortions can be separately identi…ed, as the monetary channel
creates this distortion through money shocks, while cartel policies will be identi…ed as the
component of the wedge that cannot be accounted for in the model by money shocks.

8

By comparison, in the predetermined wage model, households forecast the marginal value of nominal
wealth given only the restricted state vector, st ; and the analog of (3) in the predetermined wage model is
given by:
n
^tN
= Ef ^ t j st g:
1 N
In the predetermined wage model, the di¤erence is that households forecast the marginal value of nominal
wealth given only the restricted state vector, st : However, the other equations governing the impact of a
monetary shock, (4-6) are unchanged. The steady state version of (4) is changed to include the mark-up
which is governed by : This means that a contractionary money shock qualitatively works the same way in
the two models.
w
^t + x
^t

12

Speci…cally, an MRS wedge from a money shock operates through the household’s forecast
error for the marginal value of nominal wealth. The di¤erence between the marginal rate of
substitution and the wage depends on the error in forecasting the marginal value of wealth,
which in turn depends on the size of the productivity and money shock innovations and the
linearization coe¢ cients. Equations (7) and (8) yield:
^t

Ef ^ t jw^t ; st g = D "z "zt + D " "t
[Dw"z "zt + Dw" "t ]
= "zt [D "z
Dw"z ] + "t [D "
Dw" ]

Substituting, noting that D
^t

"z

= 0 and noting that D

Ef ^ t jw^t ; st g = "zt [0

"

=

Dw"z ] + "t [ 1

1 yields
Dw" ]

Consider the case of the maximum nonneutrality, = 0: In this case, there is a MRS
wedge, which is equal to the money shock "t : More generally, since the forecast error in the
marginal value of wealth is due to a forecast error in predicting in‡ation/de‡ation, then the
impact of a money shock on this wedge depends on the size of the forecast error.
Identifying the source of MRS distortions as either money shocks or cartel policies is
based on the statistical relationship between de‡ation and the MRS/MPL wedge. If the
correlation between the wedge and de‡ation forecast errors is 1, then the wedge will be
attributed entirely to monetary surprises and not cartelization policies. In contrast, if the
wedge and de‡ation forecast errors are unrelated, then the wedge will be attributed to cartel
policies. We will later see that the correlation between the cartel policy shock and money
shocks are nearly zero, indicating that cartel policies are the key factor.
It is important to note that some cartel policies, such as Hoover’s nominal wage …xing
policy (see Ohanian, 2009), may be identi…ed as nonneutral monetary shocks operating
through the misperceptions channel, rather than cartelization shocks. This would tend to
understate the importance of cartel policies in the model estimation. We address this issue
by comparing the correlation between de‡ation and real variables for countries in which
cartel policies explicitly involved …xing nominal wages and/or prices. We will see that the
correlation between de‡ation and output in the cartel countries is stronger than in other
countries, which is consistent with this view.
Finally, note that our approach of treating the component of the wedge that is unrelated
to monetary shocks as cartelization policies may tend to overstate their importance if the
non-monetary wedge component re‡ects other factors as well. To address this latter issue,
we describe the details of actual cartel policies across countries and how those policies varied
over time to assess the plausibility of interpreting the estimated wedges this way.

5

Quantitative Methodology

Our quantitative methodology consists of choosing parameter values and evaluating the …t of
the model by measuring the percentage of squared change in each variable from 1929 values.
Standard parameter values are used where possible. Other parameters are estimated using
maximum likelihood.
13

The model has a standard state space representation:
t+1

=F

at =
t

"t
at

t

t

+ "t ; " t

+ ut ; u t

i:i:d:N (0; )
i:i:d:N (0; )

= [kt ; zt 1 ; t 1 ; "zt ; "t ; xt ; mt ]0
= ["zt ; "t ; "xt ]0
= [yt ; pt ; ct ; it ; nt ; zt ; mt ] ;

in which are the states, a is the observation vector, " are white noise innovations to the
states, and u are measurement errors. Kalman smoothing is used to assess model …t in
which the values of the states at each date are inferred given the estimated model and the
full history of data. This assesses the …t of both the endogenous variables and the state
variables.
Table 1 shows the values for the parameters which we choose a priori. Of these, the
choices for the parameters that govern capital’s share in production, ; the discount factor,
; market time allocation, ; autocorrelation of the productivity shock, z , the elasticity of
money demand, ; are common in the business cycle literature and are used in both the
…xed and variable capacity versions of the model.
For the …xed capacity version of the model, the depreciation rate, ; is seven percent.
For the variable capacity model, the depreciation rate schedule is given by:
(U ) = BU ;

>1

The parameter ; which governs the elasticity of capital utilization is set to 1:1; which is
recommended by King and Rebelo (1999). We highlight this near-linear value because it
yields a very high elasticity for capital utilization in response to shocks, and means that
monetary shocks may account for a substantial fraction of the Solow residual in the variable
capacity model. The scale parameter B is then set so that the steady state depreciation rate
is also seven percent.
Table 1
z

.33 .95 .50 1.1 .92

2

.80

We estimate the remaining parameters for both versions of the model using maximum
likelihood. The MLE parameters are the autoregressive parameters for the money and cartel
policy process, ; x ; the standard deviations of the three shock processes, z , , and x ;
and the standard deviations of the measurement errors. This is a Kalman …ltering/smoothing
problem. Shumway and Sto¤er’s (1982) algorithm is used, which accommodates the fact that
countries outside of the main seven do not have data on all of the variables. The appendix
presents details of the estimation.
The state shock innovations are speci…ed as independently distributed random variables.
The estimated money innovations will be correlated across countries, however, re‡ecting the
14

unusual event of worldwide de‡ation. This is unimportant for our analysis because the model
with the i.i.d. shock speci…cation is observationally equivalent to the model with shocks that
are correlated across countries, in which the innovations are the sum of a common shock and
a country speci…c shock. The appendix shows this equivalence.
Before turning to the results, we note that the variable capacity model can …t output and
labor perfectly, which partially re‡ects the fact that the depreciation schedule is nearly linear.
We retain the near linearity of depreciation to provide a very elastic capacity utilization
schedule to enhance the quantitative importance of monetary shocks. We therefore follow
the literature and pre-specify the measurement error variances for these two variables. This
approach is recommended by Anderson et al (1996), and has been used by Caldara et al
(2012), and Sargent (1989), among others. We found that the results are not very sensitive
to the size of these measurement error variances over a plausible range.9

6

Findings

This section presents the …t of the model, the estimated parameters, with a focus on the
estimated nonneutrality of money and the cartel policy shock process and the relative importance of each of the shocks for understanding the evolution of real variables and de‡ation.
To summarize, both the …xed and variable capacity versions of the model …t the data
well. The size of the estimated nonneutrality is small in the …xed capacity model, and is
moderate in the variable capacity model. In both models, monetary shocks account for
virtually all of the change in de‡ation, account for a modest amount of the changes in real
variables during the early stages of the depression, but account for very little of the change
in real variables after 1933. Perhaps the most striking …nding is that the cartel policy
variable, rather than productivity shocks or money/de‡ation, is the most important factor
in accounting for changes in employment.

6.1

Model Fit

Table 2 shows the …t of both the …xed and variable capacity models by showing the explained
percentage of the cumulative squared change of each variable from its 1929 value. This
measure of …t is equivalent to an R-square, but without a constant term. Hereafter we call
this measure of …t "pseudo-R square".
Both models …t the data well, with the model accounting for between 70 percent to 99
percent of the squared change across most variables. Recall that we do not feed productivity
and money shocks from the data, as is commonly done in the business cycle literature.
Rather, the Kalman-smoothed productivity and money shocks …t the actual money and
productivity data well. This means that the model estimation infers money and productivity
shocks that are similar to actual money and productivity changes.10 In terms of …tting the
9

We examined the results using di¤erent noise variances on output and labor, ranging from .005, which
is about the size of the estimated noise variances for the de‡ator and consumption, to .03. The …ndings are
very similar.
10
Note that we do not …t the labor policy shock. This is because it is the deviation from a linear
combination of output, consumption, and labor, which are already being …t.

15

model to data, we …t the Solow residual. This corresponds to TFP in the …xed capacity
model but not in the variable capacity model.
Table 2 - Cumulative Explained Share of Squared Variable Change

Output
Prices
Cons.
Inv.
Labor
Solow Residual
Money

Variable Capacity
Main 7
18 Countries
1932 1936 1932 1936
0.97 0.98 0.95 0.97
0.94 0.95 0.93 0.95
0.78 0.88 0.74 0.82
0.62 0.71 0.65 0.71
0.95 0.97 0.95 0.97
0.99 0.99 0.99 0.99
0.82 0.81 0.74 0.78

Fixed
Main 7
1932 1936
0.99 0.99
0.92 0.94
0.84 0.92
0.67 0.74
0.96 0.97
0.96 0.96
0.82 0.78

Capacity
18 Countries
1932 1936
0.98 0.99
0.92 0.95
0.82 0.87
0.67 0.69
0.96 0.97
0.96 0.96
0.75 0.77

The close …t of the model is important because the model and its parameter values
are common across countries, but recall the enormous cross-country dispersion present in
all the variables.11 To further assess the model’s …t, we compare the …t across di¤erent
partitions of the data. First, note that the …t of the model is similar for both the main 7
countries, which include all data, and the entire panel of 18 countries. We …rst partition
the data between the downturn (through 1932) and recovery phases (1933 and after). Table
2 shows that the model …ts these two phases about equally well. We next partition the
data across di¤erent sets of countries. This partition compares the …t between the main
7 countries and all of the countries. Table 2 shows that these …ts are very similar. The
next partition separates countries with large downturns (countries with cumulative output
decline above the median in 1932) from those with smaller downturns. Both models …t
both sets of countries equally well. We also partitioned countries into two other groups, one
with countries that remained on gold until at least mid-1932 and the other with countries
that left gold before that. Both models also …t these two groups equally well. These results
indicate that a parsimonious model that is common across countries provides an empirically
accurate framework for analyzing the very large di¤erences in the size and nature of the
Great Depression across these countries.

6.2

Parameter Estimates

Table 3 reports the autoregressive parameter values and their standard errors for the innovations of the three shocks. There are three particularly noteworthy parameter estimates,
two of which govern the stochastic process for the cartel shock. Speci…cally, the shock is
volatile, with a standard deviation that is larger than money and productivity shocks, and
the cartel shock is also very persistent with an autoregressive parameter of 0.8. Finally, note
that money growth is serially uncorrelated. (^ = 0): This means that changes in money
growth are unperceived, which generates larger money shocks, ceteris paribus, compared to
those with
6= 0: The third key parameter is the nonneutrality parameter, ; which is a
11

Moreover, there are other large cross-country di¤erences, including large di¤erences in per-capita income,
the relative importance of sectoral output, and in trade shares.

16

function of the innovation variances of the money and productivity shocks, and ranges between -1 (neutral) and zero (maximum non-neutrality). It is estimated at -0.93 for the …xed
utilization model, which is nearly neutral. At this value, a 10 percent unexpected de‡ation
reduces output by about 1.5 percent, compared to the maximum possible impact of about 11
percent lower output in this model. In the variable capacity model, a 10 percent unexpected
de‡ation reduces output by 7 percent, compared to the maximum possible impact of about
20 percent lower output when this parameter is at its highest nonneutrality.
Table 3 - Estimated Autoregressive Shock Parameters ( ) and
Innovation Standard Deviations ( " )
Variable Capacity
Fixed Capacity
"
":
z^ 0.80 (…xed a priori) 0.03 0.80 (…xed a priori) 0.04
^ 0.00
0.05 0.00
0.05
x^ 0.80
0.05 0.80
0.05
In the variable capacity model, the estimated cartel policy shocks are uncorrelated with
monetary shocks (-0.04) and negatively correlated with the TFP shock (-0.53), while the
TFP and money shocks are moderately correlated (0.44). In the …xed capacity model, the
labor shock is weakly correlated with the money (0.10) and TFP (-0.26) shocks, but the
money and TFP shocks are correlated (0.66).
It is not surprising that there is correlation between some of the shocks, as this is an unusual period with depressions and unusual economic policies in several countries. However,
note that the cartel policy shock is uncorrelated with the money shock. This lack of correlation is the consequence of ML implicitly decomposing the labor wedge into two uncorrelated
components, one due to de‡ation and another component that we identify as cartel policies.
If the estimated nonneutrality was higher, then the monetary shock would be negative correlated with the cartel policy shock, as otherwise the two pieces would generate too large of
a decline in labor. Similarly, if the nonneutrality was smaller, then the monetary shock and
cartel policy shock would be positively correlated in order to account for labor.
We now discuss the estimated cartel policies in detail, and then discuss the size of the
estimated nonneutrality of money.

6.3

Estimated Cartel Policies and the Relationship with Actual
Policies

The estimation yields a volatile stochastic process for the cartel policy shock that generates
large realizations of this shock for a number of countries. Figures 5 and 6 show plots of
the Kalman-smoothed realizations of the labor shocks in both models. A negative shock
is equivalent to an increasing labor income tax, thus depressing labor. One reason that
the estimated cartel policy shock is quantitatively important in some of these countries is
because money and TFP shocks are not strongly correlated with labor, and thus these latter
two shocks cannot account for the bulk of labor ‡uctuations over the period. Figure …ve
shows that there is a sizeable correlation between labor and de‡ation only in 1931 and 1932,
17

and between labor and TFP only in 1930. We will see in the next subsection that the cartel
policy shock is the primary driver of labor ‡uctuations.
Table 5 - Correlation Between Labor and De‡ation and Labor and TFP
(Main 7 Countries)
1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936
Correlation (l; )
0.17 0.48 0.86 -0.17 -0.49 0.13 -0.14
Correlation (l; tf p) 0.76 0.00 0.22 0.38 0.24 0.00 -0.04
The …gures show that the US, Germany, and Italy have large, negative labor shocks
which grow during the downturn and continue to grow during the recovery. Australia has
a negative shock that grows during the downturn, but then moderates during the recovery,
and the UK, France, and Canada have only small shocks. Note that the cartel policy shock
pattern for Germany, Italy, and the U.S. di¤ers sharply from the average pattern observed
during postwar U.S. business cycles, which is a modest increase in the labor wedge during
a recession, but with a reversal of the labor wedge during recovery (see Ohanian (2010)).
We now show that the estimated cartel policy shocks from this model coincide with actual
cartel policies in the 7 countries for which we have labor data.
United States. Cole and Ohanian (2004) and Ohanian (2009) document wage setting
and cartelization policies under both Hoover and Roosevelt. These papers describe that the
goal of those policies was to raise prices and wages, and they show how those policies are
observationally equivalent to the wage tax in this model. Hoover asked employers to either
maintain nominal wages or raise nominal wages and that in return, Hoover would protect
…rms from union wage demands12 . Roosevelt explicitly pursued cartelization policies with
the National Industrial Recovery Act, which allowed industry to collude provided that they
immediately raises wages. This research also describes how wage and cartelization policies
became more distorting under Roosevelt. This pattern of actual policy shifts dovetails with
the model results, as …gures 5 and 6 show that the model’s cartel policy shock became
increasingly negative after 1933, which coincides with Roosevelt’s New Deal labor and industrial policies, including the National Industrial Recovery Act and the National Labor
Relations Act. Cole and Ohanian (2004) …nd that these policies raised relative prices and
real wages in the cartelized sectors by up to 25 percent by the late 1930s. These results are
consistent with a growing labor wedge featuring high real wages, low consumption, and low
employment.
Germany. Cartels and unions were established, and during the early 1930s, real wages
rose as nominal wages were in‡exible (see Fisher and Hornstein (2002) for a recent discussion). The rising real wage thus dovetails with an increase in estimated labor distortions in
the model. German policies are also consistent with a large wedge after 1933. Labor policies
changed substantially after Hitler took power and created new distortions in the German
labor market both in terms of wage setting and nonmarket allocation of labor. Unions
were dissolved on May 2 1933. Post-1933 wages were set by a political board known as
the "Trustees of Labor" and real wages fell substantially and likely were well below marketclearing levels. For example, James (1986) notes "savage" nominal wage cuts after Hitler
12

Ohanian (2009) documents that many large employers kept nominal wages …xed until late 1931. He
also notes that Ford Motor Company raised nominal wages following Hoover’s meeting.

18

took power, and Bry (1960) reports that real wages under Hitler would ultimately fall to
1913 levels by World War II, despite the fact that productivity had increased considerably
since 1913. .
Hitler also imposed large interventions that further cartelized German industry. Speci…cally, Hitler’s "New Plan" regulated the access of all German …rms to foreign raw materials,
and this in turn led to subsidies that were controlled by compulsory business organizations
created between 1934 and 1935 and that were coupled with a system of price controls.
James (1986) describes how the Trustees of Labor used non-market approaches to deal
with worker scarcity and to allocate workers. Laws were passed in 1934 that prohibited hiring
non-local labor in areas of high unemployment. Married women were o¢ cially discouraged
from working and many were …red, which re‡ected the broad goal of sharply limiting doubleincome households. Unmarried women were o¤ered marriage loans, which became outright
grants if the woman became a "proli…c mother". Workers who were dismissed from their
jobs in the political and racial purge of 1933 could not register as unemployed. Workers
under 25 were dismissed and replaced by men who were family fathers, and 130,000 jobs
were impacted by this policy in 1935. Unemployed young workers were drafted into work
corps and emergency work, which included about 870,000 workers in 1934. In February, 1935
a Work Book was introduced to be retained by employers to make it di¢ cult for a worker
to move to a new job in search of higher wages. In November, 1936 a decree prevented
newspaper advertising for building and metal workers to limit competition.
These labor market distortions in Germany di¤er considerably before and after Hitler.
Prior to Hitler, the key distortion was unions imposing in‡exible nominal wages that raised
wages above market-clearing levels, while after Hitler there were many labor market distortions, including policies that reduced competition for workers, policies that limited opportunities for workers, and policies that …xed wages below market-clearing levels.
Theory predicts that these pre and post-Hitler di¤erences in distortions should result
in systematic pre and post-Hitler di¤erences in real wages. Speci…cally, in‡exible nominal
wages in the early stages of Depression should result in a labor wedge re‡ecting relatively
high real wages, low employment, and low consumption, while the various Hitler distortions,
including …xing wages below market-clearing, combined with limiting opportunities for workers as described above, should result in low real wages relative to labor productivity, low
employment, and low consumption.
The German data are consistent with these predictions. Fisher and Hornstein (2002)
report high real wages in the early stages of the German Depression. By 1936, however,
following the Hitler distortions, real wages are nearly 20 percent below labor productivity.
This suggests that real wages were signi…cantly below market-clearing levels after Hitler, and
that the German labor wedge of the mid-1930s was the result of the Hitler policies.
Italy.
Italy’s Fascist government under Mussolini adopted many cartel interventions in Italian
labor and product markets that signi…cantly impacted those markets, and that were qualitatively similar to those in Germany, including limiting worker mobility, reducing the number
of women workers, and insulating domestic industry from foreign competition.
Giordano et al (2011) document Italian cartelization and labor policies, which we summarize here. As in Germany, Italian policies initially raised real wages through in‡exible union
19

nominal wages and de‡ation. However, policies reduced real wages below market-clearing
levels by the mid-1930s as labor was organized under obligatory Fascist unions whose leaders
were selected by the government. Wages were set across regions and industries, and wages
relative to productivity declined substantially around this time, including a seven percent
mandatory cut in 1934, and the workweek was reduced to a maximum of 40 hours. In 1930
both employers and workers unions were integrated into 22 corporate groups based on their
business activity, which ultimately ended independent unions.
Real wages followed a similar pattern as in Germany. Real wages declined by about 23
percent (Zamagni, 1994) between 1932 and 1936, which resulted in real wages falling by
about 10 percent below labor productivity by 1936. Like Germany, our results suggest that
labor market policies generated a wedge with wages that were above market-clearing levels
in the early 1930s, and with wages that were below market-clearing levels in the mid-1930s.
Labor markets were also impacted by government quotas on the number of women working in particular industries, and the fact that worker mobility was limited, as workers had
to be registered with the local employment o¢ ce to be hired.
Giordano et al note that Italian industry cartels ‡ourished after 1932, which was facilitated by a 1932 law that allowed a company controlling 70 percent of the market to request
that the state impose industry rules on the entire market. In 1933, a law was passed forbidding plant expansion or creating new plants, which restricted entry. Moreover, in 1933
the IRI (Institute for Industrial Recovery) was created to …nance failed companies. The IRI
became a major stockholder in companies representing 40% of the stock market. Giordano
et al show that cartel prices rose during the early 1930s.
The Italian government increased protectionist policies in 1932, and by 1935 the government set quotas for each imported good and also created a government monopsony for
the importing coal, copper, tin and nickel. Following Italy’s 1935 invasion of Ethiopia, the
League of Nations imposed economic sanctions on Italy, which led to an import ban on
products from countries that condemned Italy’s actions in Ethiopia, and controlling raw
material and primary goods export markets. In 1936 the government set a goal of autarky,
and subsidized exploration of oil and gas and development of hydroelectric power. As with
Germany, these policies represent signi…cant distortions in labor and product markets.
Australia. The labor wedge in Australia displays an interesting pattern with a growing
distortion in the early 1930s, but a narrowing distortion afterwards, and policy changes
are also consistent with this pattern. Before the Depression, Prime Minister Stanley Bruce
wanted to eliminate Australia’s collective bargaining and arbitration system so that wages
could respond more quickly to changes in labor market conditions. Since 1907, Australian
wages had been set with a principle of paying "fair and reasonable" wages, at …rst to qualify
for tari¤ protection, and later government tribunals set wages across regions, industries and
occupations.
Bruce was easily defeated in the 1929 election by Labor Party candidate James Scullin,
who had portrayed Bruce as an enemy of high wages and decent working conditions, as
about half of the Australian workforce belonged to a union at that time. The growing labor
wedge in the early 1930s is thus consistent with the incumbent system of wage setting, which
generated rigid nominal wages, along with de‡ation.

20

But rising unemployment and the rigidity of wage setting created the Federal Wage
Judgement of 1931, which called for a 10 percent nominal wage cut. The Attorney General
called for the judgement to be delayed, and de facto, a number of tribunals were very slow
to implement the cut (Shedvin, 1970). Shevdin describes that over time, these nominal wage
cuts were implemented. This fact, together with rising productivity, is clearly consistent with
the decline in Australia’s labor wedge in the mid and late 1930s. Thus, the estimated pattern
of labor distortions that grow during the downturn and then recover later is consistent with
actual Australian labor market policies in the 1930s.
We next describe policies in the countries that did not have signi…cant estimated cartel
policy shocks: UK, Canada, and France.
United Kingdom. The estimated model …nds very little change in cartel policies in the
U.K. relative to the 1929 value. This is consistent with the fact that to our knowledge there
were no major new cartel/labor adopted policies adopted in the U.K. during the period of
study. Speci…cally, Cole and Ohanian (2002) discuss large changes in unemployment bene…ts
that were adopted in the early 1920s and thus would not impact the estimation that begins
in 1929.
Canada. The estimated model …nds no large labor distortion in Canada. This is
consistent with the fact that there were no major cartel/labor policies adopted in Canada
during the Depression. Speci…cally, Amaral and MacGee (2002) report that Canada did try
to adopt cartel policies similar to the U.S. New Deal policies, but the Canadian policies were
declared unconstitutional before they took a¤ect. Amaral and MacGee also note that real
wages declined modestly over the course of the Depression, which stands in sharp contrast to
the very large increase in wages in the U.S. The fact that the estimated model little evidence
of changes in cartel policies in Canada is consistent with the fact that Canada did not adopt
signi…cant cartel/labor policies during this period.
France. The estimation …nds only modest deviations in France through 1936, and we
are unaware of any signi…cant increase in cartel/labor policies through this period. However, the Popular Front was elected in May, 1936, and this led to large changes in labor
policy, including legislated higher wages, restriction on the workweek length, and collective
bargaining rights. However, these factors primarily impacted France after the period which
we analyze. Bridji (2012) studies the impact of the Popular Front on the French economy.
In summary, we …nd a very strong empirical relationship between actual cartel policy
changes in the 1930s and the estimates of such distortions in the model. For the seven
countries for which we have economy-wide measures of labor input, the U.S., Germany, and
Italy all adopted very signi…cant cartel/labor policies that tended to grow over time, and
we estimate large increases in cartel policies in these countries that also tend to grow over
time. Canada, France, and the U.K. did not signi…cantly expand cartel policies, at least
through the period we consider, and we estimate only small changes in cartel policies in
these countries. Australia had widespread union polices in place in the early 1930s, but
these policies were weakened afterwards. We estimate a signi…cant labor distortion in the
model in the early 1930s, but a reversal of that distortion afterwards, which is consistent
with Australian policy.

21

6.3.1

Understanding the Size of the Estimated Nonneutrality

This subsection analyzes the size of the estimated nonneutrality. Figure 4 shows the likelihoods for both the …xed and variable capacity models over the range of possible nonneutralities. The …xed capacity likelihood is steep around its optimum, as the model …t deteriorates
substantially as the nonneutrality gets large. The variable capacity model likelihood is
somewhat ‡atter, but the likelihood also deteriorates at higher nonneutrality values. To
understand the implication of the size of the nonneutrality, we …xed the nonneutrality in the
variable capacity model to nearly its highest value ( = :1); and estimated the other parameters. The …t of the model is poor after 1932, as the explanatory power of money shocks
in this version of the model have a pseudo-R square for labor that is negative in 1935 and
1936. The key reason that the likelihood deteriorates at large nonneutrality values in both
the …xed and variable capacity models is because there is a fairly weak relationship between
de‡ation and real variables in the data, and a higher nonneutrality forces a counterfactually
stronger relationship between these variables in the model.
Table 6 presents information on the weak statistical relationship between de‡ation and
real output that explains why the nonneutrality is not larger. The table shows the …t of
three regressions of real output on de‡ation, and the regression coe¢ cient. The main result
is that de‡ation is quantitatively unimportant in all of the regressions. The …rst regression,
in which the log deviation of output from 1929 is regressed on the log change in the price
level between t 1 and t; roughly approximates the output equation in our economic model,
but without capital, the productivity shock and the cartel shock. The second regression adds
country …xed e¤ects to the …rst regression, in which the …xed e¤ect is a proxy for omitted
factors, such as the productivity and cartel shocks. The third regression includes just the
…xed e¤ect in order to test the importance of de‡ation. All of these regressions are nested
in the following equation:
yit =
t + i + "it ;
in which y is the log-deviation of output from 1929, and is the annual log change in the price
level from period t 1 to t:With just de‡ation (regression 1), the R-squared with de‡ation
is about .08. When the country …xed e¤ect is included in the regression (regressions 2 and
3), de‡ation adds no incremental explanatory power.
Table 6 - Regressions of Output on
with and without Country Fixed
Regression
No Country Fixed E¤ects
0.98
Country Fixed E¤ects
-.13
Country Fixed E¤ects Alone

De‡ation
E¤ects
R2
.08
.846
.845

These …ndings show that de‡ation is not systematically related to output, particularly
when conditioning on the country …xed e¤ect. Speci…cally, note that de‡ation has virtually
no incremental explanatory power beyond the country …xed e¤ect. This indicates why a high
nonneutrality results in a poor …t in the economic model. Speci…cally, a high nonneutrality
forces a strong, positive relationship between log price change and output change, but this
is at variance with the data.
22

Next, we evaluate whether the empirical relationship between output and de‡ation may
be responsible for why money shocks in the model have very little explanatory power after
1932. We calculated the R-squared for each year from the …rst regression presented above
(the panel regression of output on log price change with no …xed e¤ects, see Table 6, …rst
row,
= :98).13 The R-squared is only positive in 1931 and 1932 (R-squared = ,48
and ,39, respectively). The R-squared is negative in 1930, and is also negative in 193336. Moreover, calculating the R-squared using a coe¢ cient that is greater than the OLS
coe¢ cient of 0.98, and which is akin to increasing the monetary nonneutrality in the economic
model, exacerbates the poor explanatory power associated with the 1930 and the post-1932
observations. With a larger coe¢ cient, The R-squared in 1931 and 1932 rises, but the
R-squared becomes much more negative in 1930 and in 1933-36.
Taken together, these statistics show that the empirical relationship between de‡ation
and output is a key reason why the estimated nonneutrality is small in the …xed capacity
model, and is moderate in the variable capacity model (in which monetary shocks account
for some of the Solow Residual). More broadly, these empirical relationships between output
and de‡ation have important implications for the quantitative importance of money shocks,
particularly after 1932, in other classes of models. The weak empirical relationship between
output and de‡ation will also be important in understanding the model’s evaluation of the
impact of going o¤ the gold standard.14

6.4

Contributions of Individual Shocks

This section reports the contributions of each shock individually. The main …ndings are
as follows: monetary shocks account for virtually all of nominal price change, but are less
important in accounting for real variables. They account for about 30 percent of output
‡uctuations in the early stages of the depression (1930-32), but have little explanatory power
for real variables during the recovery (after 1933). TFP shocks are particularly important
in accounting for output and consumption, but are much less important in accounting for
labor. Cartel policy shocks are central in accounting for labor, explaining more than half of
labor ‡uctuations in the latter stages of the Depression15 .
We measure the individual contributions by feeding in each single shock into the estimated
model and then calculate the percentage of squared change in the variables relative to their
1929 values. Tables 7a - 7b show the pseudo-R square for each year and for each of the three
individual shocks. Money is quantitatively less important for real variables, particularly for
the recovery period.
One hypothesis for why money is more important for the early Depression years is because
13

We chose this regression since it provides the most transparent illustration of this feature of the data.
We assessed the robustness of the …ndings presented in Table 5 by assessing whether lagged de‡ation
improves the explanatory power of de‡ation. It does for the regression without …xed e¤ects, in which the
R-squared rises to 0.24. However, the regression with the …xed e¤ect is virtually unchanged when adding
lagged de‡ation. This …nding suggests that the nonneutrality of money in models in which there are lagged
e¤ects of monetary policy may not be much di¤erent than our estimates.
15
Note that some table entries are negative, which means that the one shock in isolation predicts changes
in that speci…c variable that yield larger forecast errors than a forecast of no change in the variable. This is
expected. For example negative productivity shocks in isolation generate in‡ation, not de‡ation.
14

23

cartel/labor policies in the U.S., Germany, Australia, and Italy in the early 1930s impeded
nominal wage adjustment, which means that some of this factor may be accounted for by
monetary shocks, rather than by cartel policy shocks. We assess this by comparing the
correlation between output and de‡ation in two sets of countries, the U.S., Germany, Italy,
and Australia, and for all other countries for 1930-32. If de‡ation was primarily a¤ecting
output through nominal wage …xing policies, then this correlation should be higher in the
group of cartelized countries. We …nd that this is the case, as the correlation between log
output change and log price change is .36 in Germany, Italy, Australia, and the U.S. for
1930-32, but is only -.04 for the other countries. This suggests that cartel policies may in
fact be the key driving factor behind monetary nonneutrality early in the Depression.
Table 7a - Fraction of Variation Accounted for by Individual Shocks
for Seven Main Countries - Variable Capacity
Money
TFP
Cartel
1932 1936 1932 1936 1932 1936
Output
0.25 0.08 0.69 0.75 0.42 0.32
Price Level
0.63 0.73 -0.96 -0.93 -0.32 -0.33
Consumption
0.09 0.08 0.62 0.70 0.23 0.25
Investment
0.13 0.06 0.35 0.43 0.20 0.24
Labor
0.38 0.15 0.08 0.16 0.71 0.67
Solow Residual 0.09 0.00 0.93 0.96 0.10 0.05
Money (M1)
0.82 0.81 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Table 7b - Fraction of Variation Accounted for by Individual Shocks
for Seven Main Countries - Fixed Capacity
Money
TFP
Cartel
1932 1936 1932 1936 1932 1936
Output
0.09 0.05 0.80 0.84 0.49 0.41
Price Level
0.59 0.63 -0.66 -0.96 -0.54 -0.50
Consumption
0.04 0.04 0.49 0.66 0.36 0.38
Investment
0.06 0.04 0.51 0.60 0.23 0.26
Labor
0.17 0.08 0.38 0.37 0.83 0.81
Solow Residual 0.00 0.00 0.96 0.96 0.00 0.00
Money (M1)
0.82 0.78 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
The key di¤erence between the …xed and variable capacity models is the decomposition of
the Solow Residual across di¤erent shocks. In the …xed capacity model, the Solow Residual
is TFP, and the model necessarily infers large declines in TFP in several countries. In
contrast, the variable capacity model allocates some of the Solow Residual to money and
cartel policy shocks, which results in much smaller TFP shocks. Speci…cally, TFP in the
variable capacity model is above its 1929 level in 1933 in 4 of the main 7 countries. For
the other three countries, TFP declines by only two percent in France, compared to a seven
percent decline in the model’s Solow Residual for France, and TFP declines four percent in

24

the U.S. compared to a 16 percent decline in the model U.S. Solow Residual. Only Canada
has a very large TFP decline (13 percent) in the variable capacity model.16
We also examined the robustness of the …ndings using a counterfactually high nonneutrality that had a much lower likelihood than the ML estimate. We …xed the value of to
-0.1, which is nearly the highest nonneutrality in the model, and then estimated the other
parameters. At this value of ; and with our estimated parameters, a 10% de‡ation lowered
output by over 19%. This raised the contribution of money shocks for real variables during
the downturn but had very little e¤ect on the contribution of money after 1932. Speci…cally, money accounts for 17 percent of output and 32 percent of labor through the entire
period (1930-36), which is driven largely by the relationship through 1932, in which money
accounts for 45 percent of the change in output and 67 percent of the change in labor through
1932. The wedge shock remains the dominant factor in accounting for labor after 1933, and
the wedge shocks in the U.S., Germany and Italy are little changed with this alternative
parameterization.

7

The Impact of the Cartel Policies and the Gold Standard

This section conducts two counterfactual experiments: (1) What would have happened to
output and labor in the three major cartel policy countries (US, Germany, Italy) had they
not adopted cartel policies? (2) What would have happened to output and labor in the
countries that left gold early had they instead stayed on gold and followed the monetary
policies of the Gold Bloc countries (France, Netherlands, Switzerland)? We …nd that leaving
gold fostered an earlier recovery with moderately higher output and labor through 1935,
but after that. We …nd a very large and persistent impact of cartel policies on economic
activity, particularly by the mid-1930s when almost all countries are re‡ating signi…cantly.
We discuss the experiments in detail below.

7.1

The Impact of Cartel Policies

To assess the impact of cartel policies, we construct a counterfactual which sets the cartel
policy shock to zero each period in the countries with the most severe cartel policies: the
US, Germany, and Italy. Note that by setting this shock to zero, we may be also eliminating other factors that are impacting the MRS/MPL distortion, and which could overstate
the importance of eliminating cartel policies. However, the fact that there is no sizeable
MRS/MPL distortion in the countries that did not signi…cantly increase cartel policies in
the 1930s suggests that much of this distortion in the U.S., Germany, and Italy may indeed
re‡ect cartel policies.
16

These TFP …ndings may suggest to some that the variable capacity model is more plausible than the
…xed capacity model. However, the ML criterion prefers the …xed capacity model to the variable capacity
model. Similarly, ML picks a very low depreciation elasticity parameter ( ) when we estimate this parameter
in the variable capacity model, which delivers a likelihood that is much closer to that in the …xed capacity
model.

25

We therefore calculate output and labor in the variable capacity model under the counterfactual that the cartel policy shock is zero for each year. The analysis indicates that these
three countries would have had much faster and stronger recoveries had they not adopted
these policies. Speci…cally, removing the MRS/MPL distortion in the counterfactual experiment generates much higher levels of output and labor, particularly during the mid-1930s.
Figure 7 shows predicted output from the variable capacity model for the U.S., Germany,
and Italy with and without the MRS/MPL distortion. This shows that the policy has a
large impact in all of the countries in the model. In the U.S., model output without this
distortion is more than twenty percent above its level with the distortion in 1936. This
predicted di¤erence in the absence of these policies is similar to that reported in Cole and
Ohanian’s (2004) study of New Deal cartel policies. This is noteworthy because Cole and
Ohanian developed an explicit model of New Deal monopoly and union policies, whereas
these policies are modelled here simply as an MRS/MPL distortion in order to preserve the
ability to use a common model in all countries.
Removing cartel policies have similar e¤ects in both Germany and Italy. In Germany,
removing the MRS/MPL distortion generates about an 18 percent di¤erence in output by
1932, and this di¤erence persists through 1936. By this year, the model without the distortion
generates output that is about nine percent above trend, compared to output that is about
eight percent below trend when the distortion is included. For Italy, there is about a 15
percent di¤erence between output without the distortion and output with the distortion.
Speci…cally, output in Italy in the counterfactual returns to trend by 1936, while output
with the MRS/MPL distortion is about 15 percent below trend in 1936.

7.2

The Impact of Leaving the Gold Standard

There are several empirical analyses regarding the timing of leaving gold during the Depression and recovery, including Choudhri and Kochin (1980), Eichengreen and Sachs (1985),
and Bernanke (1995), that document that countries that left gold earlier recovered faster
and had less de‡ation than countries that stayed on gold. The countries analyzed here are
among those that are analyzed in the papers above, and thus share this same empirical
feature regarding recovery and leaving gold.17
Quantifying the impact of leaving gold is challenging because other factors may be changing at the same time, and the timing of when to leave gold may be endogenous. This section
constructs a counterfactual experiment to isolate the impact of di¤erences in monetary policy between on and o¤ gold countries. We do this by imposing the monetary policy of the
on-gold-countries on the o¤-gold countries, taking as given the TFP and cartel policy shocks,
and we then calculate the di¤erences in output under this counterfactual policy.
17

It is important to note that the measures of output and de‡ation analyzed in this paper di¤er from those
used in the literature, and in our view our measures are superior. Real GNP and the GNP de‡ator are used
in this analysis, because they are measures of aggregate output and the nominal price of …nal output. The
literature cited above typically uses industrial production as aggregate output, and a wholesale price index
for the price of this output. Both of these choices are problematic, because these measures do not represent
…nal aggregate output or its nominal price. Moreover, the composition of the components in wholesale price
indices di¤er enormously across countries, and often are measures of raw input prices, not the nominal price
of …nal output.

26

We use the variable capacity model since money shocks have a larger impact on real
variables and because this model closely captures the empirical relationship between output
and prices. Speci…cally, the correlation between actual log output and log price is about 0.3
between 1932 and 1936, and is 0.27 for the model’s Kalman smoothed realizations. Thus, the
variable-capacity version of our model yields virtually the same modest empirical relationship
between output and prices during this period in which some countries were on gold and some
countries were o¤ gold.
We quantify the impact on output and labor in each country outside the gold bloc by
comparing output with their observed price path to that if they had instead followed the
monetary policies of the gold bloc countries that did not leave gold until later. The countries
are split into two groups: the gold bloc (France, Netherlands, Switzerland), and all other
countries. For each of the countries leaving gold early, we de…ne the year that they left gold
as the year in which they were o¤ gold for at least 20 percent of that year. Between the
initial o¤-gold year and 1936, we construct the counterfactual money supply by year so that
each of the earlier leaving countries has the same rate of log price change by year as the
average for France, Netherlands, and Switzerland. We then compare output and labor each
year under the counterfactual gold-bloc monetary policy to that under their observed price
path. We hold …xed the time path of productivity and cartel policy shocks to isolate the
impact of monetary policy.
We …nd that leaving gold early fostered an earlier recovery through a lower de‡ation rate
than in the gold bloc. For example, the country with the smallest di¤erence in de‡ation
compared to the gold bloc was Germany. Germany’s de‡ation rate was only about 1.5
percentage points less per year than the gold bloc, as Germany did not change their gold
parity and instead had to adopt other policies, including foreign exchange controls. Because
German de‡ation was fairly similar to that of the gold-bloc, there is only a small di¤erence in
output and labor under the counterfactual. In contrast, the U.K. had about …ve percentage
points less de‡ation per year than the gold bloc through 1933, which in our model generates
about four percent higher output in 1933 than if they had followed the gold bloc price path.
The average peak output di¤erence across all of the non-gold countries is about two percent,
which also occurs by 1933.
However, the counterfactual also indicates that the on-gold/o¤-gold distinction does not
account for the continued di¤erence in recovery between these two sets of countries after 1933.
Speci…cally, the peak di¤erence in output in the counterfactual between the o¤-gold policy
and on-gold policy occurs for almost all countries in 1933. The di¤erences from leaving gold
early in the counterfactual are nearly gone after 1933, which is because almost all countries
are realizing in‡ation after this date. Table 8 shows the pattern of actual cumulative log
output changes and annual log price changes (annual de‡ation/in‡ation rate) between the on
and o¤-gold countries between 1931 and 1936. The table shows that the o¤-gold countries
have considerably less de‡ation in 1932 and 1933, but both sets of countries have about
three percent in‡ation between 1933 and 1936. Since the o¤-gold countries had already
re‡ated relative to the on-gold countries through 1933, monetary policy could only increase
relative employment and output further in the o¤-gold countries by generating an even higher
in‡ation di¤erence after 1933. This did not occur, however, as both sets of countries had
about the same rate of price change.
27

The di¤erence in post-1933 recovery between the on and o¤-gold countries, given that
they have roughly the same in‡ation rates after 1933, suggests that the cartel and technology
shocks are the primary factors for understanding post-1933 output di¤erences between these
two sets of countries. Speci…cally, the combination of the cartel and TFP shocks in the
variable capacity model (and in which TFP is not the Solow Residual), explains at least
93% of the variation in output and at least 85% of the variation in labor in each year after
1933 for both sets of countries, with the cartel shocks being particularly important for the
U.S., Germany, Italy, and Australia after 1933. Moreover, the fact that monetary shocks are
fairly unimportant in the model after 1933 is not surprising, given that the empirical results
presented earlier showed that the R-squared of output regressed on de‡ation was negative
during these years.
Table 8 - Average Log-Deviations in Output and the Price Level Growth
for Countries On-Gold versus O¤-Gold
(O¤-gold = leaving gold by June, 1932)
Year
1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936
On-Gold Y
-0.12 -0.22 -0.23 -0.25 -0.24 -0.24
O¤-Gold Y
-0.11 -0.17 -0.18 -0.15 -0.14 -0.10
On-Gold p -0.07 -0.07 -0.05 -0.00 -0.02 0.05
O¤-Gold p -0.06 -0.04 -0.01 -0.00 0.02 0.01

8

Summary and Conclusions

This analysis exploited the very large cross-country di¤erences in the severity of the Depression and in the expansion of cartel policies to estimate and test the contributions of these
policies, as well as the contributions of monetary shocks and productivity shocks. Our main
…nding is that cartel policy shocks account for the bulk of the Depression in the countries
that adopted signi…cant cartel policies, including the large depressions in the U.S., Germany, Italy, and Australia, and that the estimated cartel policy shocks plausibly coincide
with the actual evolution of policies in these countries. In contrast, cartel policy shocks
in the countries that did not signi…cantly change policies were small and account for little
of their Depressions. Overall, cartel policies account for about 60 percent of the squared
change in labor and about 40 percent of the squared change in output across all of the seven
countries for which we have aggregate labor data.
We used both …xed and variable capacity utilization versions of an estimated monetary
DSGE model in the analysis. Using Kalman smoothing, we …nd that both estimated versions
of the model are empirically accurate. The models …t real output, consumption, investment,
labor, and the price level closely, and it also …ts the three shocks very well. In particular,
the model accounts for around 80 percent of the money supply and more than 90 percent of
TFP. While we do not have a direct empirical analogue of the cartel shock, the estimated
cartel shock is empirically plausible, as it is estimated to be around zero in the countries
that did not expand cartel policies, and is large, negative and evolves over time that is very
similar to the actual evolution of these policies in the U.S., Germany, Italy, and Australia.
These …ndings indicate that cartel, productivity, and monetary shocks are key factors in
28

accounting for cross-country di¤erences in the Depression. We emphasize that this does
not mean that …nancial factors such as banking crises did not play a role. Rather, banking
and …nancial factors may be contributing to TFP ‡uctuations, as in the models of Buera,
Kaboski, and Shin (2011), and Mendoza (2010). Developing a model of TFP for analyzing
changes in TFP during the Depression through …nancial channels is beyond the scope of this
paper, but would be of interest for future research.
We focus on the variable capacity model since its higher estimated nonneutrality and the
fact that it matches the cross-country pattern of output and price change particularly well,
makes it a better tool for conducting the counterfactual experiments. These two experiments
quanti…ed the impact of leaving the gold standard on fostering recovery, which we found to
be relatively modest, and quanti…ed the impact of cartel policies, which we found to be very
substantial. More speci…cally, leaving gold early does not account for the continuing large
di¤erence in economic performance across countries, because by the mid-1930s, all countries
are re‡ating at roughly the same rate. The Depressions in these countries would have been
milder and shorter-lived in the absence of cartel policies.
The main reason why the cartel shock is quantitatively important, particularly for labor,
is because there are very few years in which either de‡ation or productivity are correlated
with labor. These weak statistical associations means that neither money nor productivity
systematically accounts for labor within the model. We assessed the empirical plausibility
of the estimated cartel shocks by comparing the estimated size of the shocks, and how they
changed over time, to actual cartel policies. Perhaps the most striking …nding is that the
estimated cartel shocks are large in the countries that had major cartel policies - the United
States, Germany, Italy, and Australia, and that the estimated size of the shocks change over
time according to the changes in actual policies. Speci…cally, estimated cartel shocks in the
U.S., Germany, and Italy become larger as the actual policies in these countries expand,
while the estimated cartel shock in Australia declines over time, as Australia reformed union
wage setting policies.
Some of the explanatory power of the cartel shocks, as well as that of the money shocks,
re‡ects complementarity between these two shocks, as policies that increase the rigidity
of wages and prices will have much a larger impact in the presence of a large de‡ation.
Consistent with this view is that the countries that had large cartel shocks also had a
substantially stronger correlation between de‡ation and output than the other countries.
While our …ndings suggest a relatively small direct role for monetary shocks, which re‡ects the fact that there is only a weak cross-country relationship between de‡ation and
real variables in most years, they also suggest a potentially large indirect role for monetary
contraction through a very di¤erent channel than those analyzed in the literature. Speci…cally, there is considerable evidence that falling prices created signi…cant dissatisfaction with
prevailing economic and political structures, which in turn fostered the restriction of competition in a number of countries (see Cole and Ohanian (2004) and Ohanian (2009), Tooze
(2007), Giordano et al (2012)). Thus, the Depression may have been considerably milder
had de‡ation not been so severe, because cartel policies may not have been expanded in
the absence of large de‡ations in these countries. This suggests that the political economy
of cartelization, and the role of de‡ation in advancing cartel policies and magnifying their
impact, are interesting topics for future work.
29

References
[1] Anderson, Evan W., McGrattan Ellen R., Hansen, Lars Peter and Thomas J. Sargent.
1996. Mechanics of forming and estimating dynamic linear economies. Handbook of Computational Economics, in: H. M. Amman, D. A. Kendrick and J. Rust (ed.), Handbook
of Computational Economics, edition 1, volume 1, chapter 4, pages 171-252.
[2] Amaral, Pedro S. and James C. MacGee. 2002. The Great Depression in Canada and the
United States: A Neoclassical Perspective, Review of Economic Dynamics, 5 (January):
45–72.
[3] Bernanke, Ben S. 1995. The Macroeconomics of the Great Depression: A Comparative
Approach. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 27 (February): 1–28.
[4] Bernanke, Ben S., and Kevin Carey. 1996. Nominal Wage Stickiness and Aggregate
Supply in the Great Depression. Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (August): 853–
83.
[5] Bernanke, Ben S., and Harold James. 1990. The Gold Standard, De‡ation, and Financial
Crisis in the Great Depression: an International Comparison. Working Paper 3488,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
[6] Beaudry, Paul, and Frank Portier. 2002. The French Depression in the 1930s. Review of
Economic Dynamics 5 (January): 73–99.
[7] Bridji, Slim. 2012. The French Great Depression: A Business Cycle Accounting Analysis.
University of Zurich Department of Economics Working Paper No. 65
[8] Buera, Francisco, Joseph Kaboski, and Yong Shin. 2011. Finance and Development: A
Tale of Two Sectors. American Economic Review. 101 (5), pp. 1961-2002.
[9] Bry, Gerard. 1960. Wages in Germany, 1871-1945, Princeton University Press.
[10] Caldara, Dario., Fernandez-Villaverde, Jesus, Rubio-Ramirez, Juan and Wen Yao. 2012.
Computing DSGE Models with Recursive Preferences and Stochastic Volatility, Review
of Economic Dynamics 15(2): 188-206.
[11] Choudhri, Ehsan U., and Levis A. Kochin. 1980. The Exchange Rate and the International Transmission of Business Cycle Disturbances: Some Evidence from the Great
Depression. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 12 (November, Part 1): 565–74.
[12] Christiano, Lawrence J., Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno. 2003. The Great
Depression and the Friedman-Schwartz Hypothesis. Proceedings, Federal Reserve Bank
of Cleveland., pages 1119-1215.
[13] Cole, Harold L. and Lee E. Ohanian. 1999. The Great Depression in the United States
from a Neoclassical Perspective. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review
(Winter): 2–24.
30

. 2002. The Great U.K. Depression: A Puzzle and Possible Resolution. Review of Economic Dynamics 5 (January): 19–44.
. 2004. New Deal Policies and the Persistence of the Great Depression, Journal of Political Economy, 112(4), 779-816.
[14] Eichengreen, Barry. 1992. Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression,
1919–1939. NBER Series on Long-Term Factors in Economic Development. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
[15] Eichengreen, Barry, and Je¤rey Sachs. 1985. Exchange Rates and Economic Recovery
in the 1930s. Journal of Economic History 45 (December): 925–946.
[16] Fisher, Jonas D. M., and Andreas Hornstein. 2002. The Role of Real Wages, Productivity, and Fiscal Policy in Germany’s Great Depression: 1928–1937, Review of Economic
Dynamics 5 (January): 100–127.
[17] Giordano, Claire, Gustavo Piga and Giovanni Trovato. 2011. Fascist price and wage
policies and Italy’s industrial Great Depression, forthcoming Macroeconomic Dynamics.
[18] Kehoe, Timothy J., and Edward C. Prescott. 2002. Great Depressions of the Twentieth
Century. Review of Economic Dynamics 5(1): 1–18.
[19] King, Robert G. and Sergio T. Rebelo. 1999. Resuscitating real business cycles, Handbook of Macroeconomics, in: J. B. Taylor & M. Woodford (ed.), Handbook of Macroeconomics, edition 1, volume 1, chapter 14, pages 927-1007.
[20] James, Harold. 1986. German Slump: Politics and Economics 1924-1936. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
[21] Mendoza, Enrique, 2010. Sudden Stops, Financial Crises, and Leverage. American Economic Review, 100(5), pp 1941-1966.
[22] Ohanian, Lee E. 2003. Liquidity Shocks and the Great Depression: Comment on "The
Great Depression and the Friedman-Schwartz Hypothesis" by Lawrence Christiano,
Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Vol.
35, No. 6, Part 2: Recent Developments in Monetary Economics (Dec., 2003), pp.
1205-1215.
. 2009. What - or who -started the great depression?, Journal of Economic
Theory vol. 144(6): 2310-2335.
. 2010. The Economic Crisis from a Neoclassical Perspective, Journal of
Economic Perspectives vol. 24(4): 45-66.
[23] Perri, Fabrizio, and Vincenzo Quadrini. 2002. The Great Depression in Italy: Trade
Restrictions and Real Wage Rigidities. Review of Economic Dynamics 5 (January):
128–151.

31

[24] Rose, Jonathan, 2010, "Hoover’s Truce: Wage Rigidity in the Onset of the Great Depression, Journal of Economic History, vol. 79(4), 843-870.
[25] Sargent, Thomas J. 1989. Two Models of Measurements and the Investment Accelerator,
Journal of Political Economy 97(2): 251-87.
[26] Schedvin, Carl B. 1970. Australia and the Great Depression, Melbourne: Sydney and
Oxford University Press.
[27] Shumway, R. H., and D. S. Sto¤er. 1982. An approach to time series smoothing and
forecasting using the EM algorithm. Journal of Time Series Analysis (3): 253-264.
[28] Tooze, Adam. 2007. The wages of destruction: the making and breaking of the Nazi
Economy. New York, NY: Penguin Group.
[29] Zamagni, V. 1994. Una Ricostruzione dell’Andamento Mensile dei Salari Industriali
edell’Occupazione 1919–39, in Ricerche per la storia della Banca d’Italia (5): 348–378.

9

Appendix
Measurement Error Estimates
Variable Capacity Fixed Capacity
Output
0.0006
0.0078
Price Level
0.0051
0.0035
Consumption 0.0044
0.0028
Investment
0.1828
0.1349
Labor
(0.0100)
(0.0100)
TFP
0.0009
0.0027
Money (M1) 0.0207
0.0277

9.1

Estimation Procedure

The EM algorithm was used to estimate the model with one modi…cation that was required
because of occasional numerical problems in inverting the covariance matrix during some
EM iterations. To address this issue, we placed the autoregressive parameters for the money
and the labor policy shock and for the standard deviations of the shock innovations on a
…ne grid, and for each grid point. EM was used to estimate the measurement error variances
of the states and the endogenous variables. We then chose the parameter combination with
the highest likelihood

9.2

Equivalent Version with Aggregate Shocks

The model as it stands now features three shocks, each of which is normally distributed, and
which is uncorrelated with the other shocks. The shocks are given by:
Vt =

Vt 1 + " t
"~(0; R)
32

where the matrix R is a diagonal matrix, V is a vector stacking the three shocks, and "
is a vector stacking the innovations to the shocks.
Next, we consider our model in which the shocks are correlated, which we accomplish
by introducing a common shock. Consider the innovation to shock i; "i . Under the current
model, the sample (panel) averages of the mean and variance of "i is given by: ("i ; ^ 2i )
Next, consider this innovation as the sum of a common component and an idiosyncratic
component:
"i = c + s i ;
where c is the common component and si is the country-speci…c component. Given that
we are working with Gaussian random variables, we have the following restrictions on the
means and variances, and the following implication for the mean of c: The sum of the means
of c and si is equal to "i ; and:
c = "i ; si = 0; c + si = "i
The sum of the variances of c and si is equal to ^ 2i : 2c + 2s = ^ 2i
Note that these restrictions imply that the likelihood of the model is unchanged by
construction. Speci…cally, the probability of event j occurring in the model with just a
single shock is the same in the world with two shocks. The only di¤erence is that in the
second world, the probability of event j occurring is the product of the two events, consisting
of the common shock and the country-speci…c shock.
Log(L) =

1X
log j M Ptt 1 M 0 +R j
2 t=1

1X
(y M xtt 1 )0 (M Ptt 1 M 0 +R)
2 t=1

1

X

(y M xtt 1 )

t=1

where Ptt 1 is covariance matrix of estimated state conditional on observing y (see equation
7 on page 256) and xtt 1 is the forecast of the state using t-1 information.

9.3

Data

The primary data source of the data is B.R. Mitchell’s International Historical Statistics.
This includes most of the data on real and nominal GDP, industrial wages, production and
prices, as well as the agricultural and industrial shares of GDP. Data on the stock market
and gold parities come from the League of Nations Statistical Yearbooks from 1933 to 1940.
Where available, we have used the latest o¢ cial publications of historical data. This includes
the data for Australia, Canada, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States. We
have also endeavored to use the latest revisions of data where available. This includes the
data for France, Germany, Italy, and Sweden. Listed bellow are the data sources by country.
Unless otherwise indicated, the data used are from B.R. Mitchell and the League of Nations.
Australia
Nominal and real GDP, GDP de‡ator: Butlin, M.W., 1977, A Preliminary Annual Database 1900/01 to 1973/74, Research Discussion Paper 7701, Reserve Bank of Australia.

33

Industrial production, price and wage indices: Australian Historical Statistics (Wray
Vamplew, ed.), New York: Cambridge University Press, 1987.
Canada
Nominal and real GDP, GDP de‡ator, industrial production and wages: Statistics Canada,
Historical Statistics (SC-HS).
(http://www.statcan.ca/english/freepub/11-516-XIE/sectiona/toc.htm)
France
Nominal and real GDP, GDP de‡ator, industrial production: Beaudry, P., and Portier,
F., 2002, The French Depression in the 1930s. Review of Economic Dynamics 5 (January):
73–99
Note that the data provided by Beaudry and Portier were derived from data in Villa,
P., 1993, Une Analyse macro-Economique de la France au XXieme Siecle. Paris: Presses du
CNRS.
Germany
Nominal and real GDP, GDP de‡ator, industrial wages: Fisher, J., and Hornstein, A.,
2002, The Role of Real Wages, Productivity, and Fiscal Policy in Germany’s Great Depression, 1928–1937, Review of Economic Dynamics 5 (January): 100–127
Italy
Nominal and real GDP, GDP de‡ator, industrial wages, production, and prices: Perri,
F., and Quadrini, V., 2002, The Great Depression in Italy: Trade Restrictions and Real
Wage Rigidities, Review of Economic Dynamics 5 (January) 128–151.
Note that the data provided by Perri and Quadrini were based on data in (i) Ercolani,
P., 1978, Documentazione Statistica di Base in (G. Fua), Lo sviluppo Economico in Italia, 3:
388–472, and (ii) Rey, G., 1991, I Conti Economici dell’Italia, Bari: Laterza.
Japan
Industrial prices and wages: (i) Hundred-Year Statistics (100 Years) of the Japanese
Economy, 1966, Statistics Department, Bank of Japan, and (ii) Supplement to HundredYear Statistics of the Japanese Economy (English translation of footnotes).
Sweden
Real GDP, GDP de‡ator, industrial production, prices, and wages: John Hassler’s data
set at (http://hassler-j.iies.su.se/SWEDATA/).
Note that the data used from Hassler’s data set were derived from Krantz, O., and Nilsson, C-A., 1975, Swedish National Product, 1861–1970, Lund.
United Kingdom
Nominal and real GDP, GDP de‡ator, industrial production, prices, and wages: Feinstein,
C.H., 1972, National Income, Expenditure and Output of the United Kingdom, 1855–1965,
Cambridge University Press.
34

United States
Nominal and real GDP, GDP de‡ator for 1919–29: Romer, C., 1989, The Prewar Business
Cycle Reconsidered: New Estimates of Gross National Product, 1869–1908.
Nominal and real GDP, GDP de‡ator for 1929–40: Bureau of Economic Analysis, National Income and Product Accounts, Table 1.2B and Fixed Asset Tables, Table 1.2.
Industrial production: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Bank, series FRB
B50001.
Industrial prices: Historical Statistics of the United States: Colonial Times to 1970, part
1, (HSUS), U.S. Bureau of the Census.
Industrial wages: Hanes, C., 1996, Changes in the Cyclical Behavior of Real Wage Rates,
1870–1990, Journal of Economic History.

35

Log Deviation in Output/Captia relative to 1929 adj for 2% growth

Figure 1: Outputs for the Main 7 Countries
(dotted is mean)
0
-0.05
-0.1
-0.15
-0.2
-0.25
-0.3
-0.35
-0.4
-0.45
-0.5
1929

1930

1931

1932

1933

1934

1935

1936

1934

1935

1936

1934

1935

1936

Figure 2: Prices for the Main 7 Countries
(dotted is mean)
Log Deviation in Prices relative to 1929

0
-0.05
-0.1
-0.15
-0.2
-0.25
-0.3
-0.35
-0.4
-0.45
1929

1930

1931

1932

1933

Log Deviation in Labor Input relative to 1929

Figure 3: Labor Input for the Main 7 Countries
(dotted is mean)
0.05
0
-0.05
-0.1
-0.15
-0.2
-0.25
-0.3
1929

1930

1931

1932

36

1933

Figure 4: Highest Loglikelihood Conditional on Monetary Nonneutrality

Highest Conditional Loglikelihood

1.6
Fixed Capacity
Variable Capacity

1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
-1

-0.9

-0.8

-0.7

-0.6

-0.5
ETA values

-0.4

-0.3

-0.2

-0.1

0

Figure 5: Variable Capacity Model Wedge Shocks
0.05

0

Shocks

-0.05

-0.1

-0.15

Australia
Canada
France
Germany
Italy
UK
US

-0.2
1930

1931

1932

1933
Years

1934

1935

1936

Figure 6: Fixed Capacity Model Wedge Shocks
0.1
0.05

Shocks

0
-0.05
-0.1
-0.15
-0.2
-0.25
1929

Australia
Canada
France
Germany
Italy
UK
US
1930

1931

1932

1933
Years

37

1934

1935

1936

Figure 7: Predicted Output Paths with and without WEDGES
0.2

Deviation in Log Output

0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
-0.5
1929

Pred Y Ger
Adj Y Ger
Pred Y Ita
Adj Y Ita
Pred Y USA
Adj Y USA
1930

1931

1932

38

1933

1934

1935

1936

