                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     IN THE NAME OF THE SON (AND THE DAUGHTER): INTERGENERATIONAL
                 MOBILITY IN THE UNITED STATES, 1850-1930

                                          Claudia Olivetti
                                        M. Daniele Paserman

                                        Working Paper 18822
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18822


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2013




We thank Dara Lee and Laura Salisbury for excellent research assistance; Robert Margo, Andrew
Newman and Marc Rysman for many valuable comments and conversations; and participants at the
NBER Cohort Studies, Development of the American Economy and Income Distribution and Macroeconomics
workshops, the BU/BC Green Line Labor Meetings, the Society for Labor Economics meetings and
seminar participants at Tufts University, University of Michigan, Northeastern University, NORC
at the University of Chicago, the St. Louis Fed, Vanderbilt University, New York University, IIES,
ECARES, LSE and Toulouse for many helpful suggestions. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Claudia Olivetti and M. Daniele Paserman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
In the Name of the Son (and the Daughter): Intergenerational Mobility in the United States,
1850-1930
Claudia Olivetti and M. Daniele Paserman
NBER Working Paper No. 18822
February 2013
JEL No. J11,J62,N31

                                                ABSTRACT

This paper provides a new perspective on intergenerational mobility in the United States in the late
19th and early 20th centuries. We devise an empirical strategy that allows to calculate intergenerational
elasticities between fathers and children of both sexes. The key insight of our approach is that the information
about socio-economic status conveyed by first names can be used to create a pseudo-link not only
between fathers and sons, but also between fathers and daughters. The latter is typically not possible
with historical data.

We find that the father-son elasticity in economic status grows throughout the sample period. Intergenerational
elasticities for daughters follow a broadly similar trend, but with some differences in timing. We argue
that most of the increase in the intergenerational elasticity estimate in the early part of the 20th Century
can be accounted for by the vast regional disparities in economic development, with increasing returns
to human capital contributing to explain the residual. Other mechanisms such as changes in fertility,
migration, and investment in public schooling, appear to have had only a minor role in explaining
the trends.


Claudia Olivetti
Boston University
Department of Economics
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
olivetti@bu.edu

M. Daniele Paserman
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
paserman@bu.edu
1    Introduction
The degree to which economic status is passed along generations is key to understanding
differences across societies and over time in the extent of inequality. A low degree of inter-
generational mobility can undermine the notion of equality of opportunity and may lead to
persistent inequality. Recent research reveals that today intergenerational mobility in the
U.S. is lower than in most other developed countries (Corak, 2013). This finding stands in
contrast with the national ethos and the worldwide perception of the United States as the
land of unlimited opportunity. Was this view ever justified?
    Long and Ferrie (2007, forthcoming) date the “end of American exceptionalism”to the
early decades of the 20th Century. Their analysis is based on the comparison of fathers’ and
sons’ occupational status. This comparison, however, may be missing part of the picture.
Daughters should be included if we want to know how the average well-being of a genera-
tion correlates with that of their parents. If there is a strong stratification in marriage by
social class, assortative mating might magnify individual-level intergenerational persistence.
Moreover, to the extent that mothers play a key role in the human capital accumulation of
their children, investment in daughters could have important consequences on the transmis-
sion of status across multiple generations. Therefore, to reach a fuller understanding of the
transmission of resources across generations, it is important to focus on daughters as well as
sons.
    This paper contributes to the existing literature by measuring the degree of intergener-
ational mobility between fathers and their children of both sexes. Typically, the estimation
of intergenerational income elasticities is based on a regression of an individual’s economic
status at time t on that of his or her own father at time t − k. This requires the use of
longitudinal data sets that link fathers to their offspring. Starting with the seminal work
by Ferrie (1995), historical longitudinal data sets based on Census data have been able to
link fathers and sons by first and last names. However, it is impossible to link fathers and
daughters in this manner because women change last name upon marriage.
    One important contribution of this paper is that it develops an empirical strategy that
enables us to estimate the intergenerational elasticity between fathers and daughters, as
well as between fathers and sons, even when it is impossible to link individuals directly
across generations. Since most married women in the second half of the 19th Century were
not gainfully employed, we measure daughters’ economic well-being using their husbands’
socioeconomic status. The key insight of our approach is that the information about socio-
economic status conveyed by first names can be used to create a pseudo-link between fathers
and sons, as well as fathers and daughters.

                                              1
    To illustrate this idea, consider a simple example. Assume that the only possible names
in the population are Aaron and Zachary. Moreover, assume that high socioeconomic status
parents are more likely to name their child Aaron, while Zachary is more common among low
socioeconomic status parents. If adult Aarons are still more likely to be high socioeconomic
status than adult Zacharys, then we would infer that the degree of social mobility in this
society is relatively low. Importantly, we can easily apply the same idea to girls, and ask
whether the young Abigails (born to high socioeconomic status parents) are more likely to
marry husbands that are themselves high socioeconomic status than the young Zoës (born
to low socioeconomic status parents). It is important to note that this whole exercise will
work only if names do in fact carry information about their parents’ socioeconomic status.
We present evidence that this is indeed the case: between 10 and 15 percent of the total
variation in father’s socioeconomic status can be explained by the variation between names
given to their children.
    Our empirical strategy amounts to creating a “generated regressor” by using one sample
to create a proxy for an unobserved regressor in a second sample. The key assumption is
that the generated regressor can be imputed by first name. This is essentially a “two-sample
two-stage least squares” estimator (TS2SLS, Inoue and Solon, 2010). In the first step, we use
the sample of fathers and regress father’s log earnings on a full set of children’s first name
dummies. In the second step, we use the sample of sons, and regress son’s log earnings on
the cross-sample predicted values from the first step. We sometimes refer to this estimator
as a pseudo-panel estimator, as it is based on the creation of pseudo-links across generations.
    We estimate father/son and father/son-in-law intergenerational income elasticities using
1% IPUMS samples between 1870 and 1930. Thus, we obtain a consistent and continuous
measure of mobility for a relatively long period. This can be used to shed light on the
timing of the decline in intergenerational mobility in the U.S. as well as its demographic and
economic determinants.
    Our results indicate that the intergenerational elasticity between fathers and sons in-
creased by 30% between 1870 and 1930, with most of the increase occurring after the turn
of the century. These results are in accord with the findings of Ferrie (2005) and Long and
Ferrie (2007, forthcoming), who document a marked decrease in intergenerational mobility
in the United States between the late 19th century and the middle of the 20th century. The
intergenerational elasticity between fathers and sons-in-law displays a similar trend although
the timing is slightly different. The father/son-in-law elasticity is higher than the father/son
elasticity in the early part of the period but the two elasticities converge by the turn of
the century. In the last period of the sample the father/son-in-law elasticity dips below the


                                               2
father/son elasticity, a ranking that is similar to that found in modern studies. The main
findings are robust to different methods of imputing income and coding names, to the use
of different outcome variables and to differential mortality across socioeconomic groups and
selection into marriage.
    We also conduct a numerical exercise to study how the pseudo-panel estimator responds
to changes in the name distribution. We augment a standard model of intergenerational
transmission of income with a process that assigns names based on socioeconomic status.
The model parameters are estimated by minimizing the distance between key moments in
the 1860-1880 data and their counterparts in the simulated data. Two important parameters
in the model are the degree of concentration of names, and the extent to which names carry
economic content. We show that the estimated intergenerational elasticity is not sensitive
to these parameters. Therefore, observed movements in our estimator capture changes in
the fundamentals of the income generating process as opposed to changes in features of the
name distribution.
    Finally, we investigate which historical developments may explain the trends and the
gender differentials in intergenerational elasticity. We find that most of the increase in
the intergenerational elasticity can be accounted for by regional differences in economic
development, with increasing returns to human capital contributing to explain the residual.
Other mechanisms such as changes in fertility, migration, and investment in public schooling,
seem less likely to matter. Gender differentials in elasticities can be plausibly explained by
imbalances in the sex ratio due to maternal and infant mortality, and changes in migratory
flows.
    Our paper is related to an extensive literature that studies intergenerational mobility
using modern panel data (see the comprehensive surveys by Solon,1999, and Black and
Devereux, 2011). The bulk of the literature focuses on father-son intergenerational mobility
and finds an intergenerational labor income elasticity hovering around 0.4. Only a very
limited number of papers in this literature have studied the correlations between father-in-
law and son-in-law. Chadwick and Solon (2002) use PSID data to study intergenerational
mobility in the daughter’s family income. They find that for modern US data the father/son
elasticity - estimated to be equal to 0.523 - tends to be somewhat larger than the father/son-
in-law elasticity- estimated at 0.360. Raaum et al. (2007) confirm this result for the US, the
UK, and three Nordic countries. Associated to the increasing labor force participation of
women, recent studies have focused on the father-daughter occupational mobility. Jäntti et
al. (2006) document that in five of six developed countries, the father/son intergenerational
elasticity is higher than the father/daughter one. Hellerstein and Morrill (2011) find that


                                              3
the probability that a woman works in the same occupation as her father has increased over
the course of the 20th Century.
    Closely related to our project is the work by Güell et al. (2007), who use the informative
content of family names to study intergenerational mobility in Spain. They develop a model
whose endogenous variable is the joint distribution of surnames and income, and explore
the relationship between mobility and the informative content of surnames, allowing for
assortative mating to be a determinant of both. They find that the degree of mobility in
Spain has substantially decreased over time. Others have instead exploited the distribution
of surnames in data sets that are centuries apart to estimate long-run social mobility: Clark
and Cummins (2012) use the distribution of surnames in England, and conclude that there is
considerable persistence of status in the UK between 1800 and 2012. Collado et al. (2012),
using data from two Spanish regions, find that socioeconomic status at the end of the 20th
Century still depends heavily on the socioeconomic status of one’s great-great grandparents.1
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section presents a simple model of
marriage and intergenerational mobility that defines the parameters of interest and facilitates
the interpretation of our empirical results. Section 3 describes the econometric methodology.
Section 4 presents the data and discusses measurement issues. The main results are presented
in Section 5. Section 6 provides robustness checks and section 7 explores alternative factors
underlying the trends. Section 8 concludes.


2       An Illustrative Model of Marriage and Mobility
We derive intergenerational links between son’s income and father’s income and between
daughter’s family income and father’s income using utility-maximizing behavior by parents
in the spirit of the model by Becker and Tomes (1979, 1986). A family containing two
parents and two children, one male and one female, must allocate the parents’ lifetime
earnings between the parents own consumption and investment in the earning capacity of
the children.
    Formally, parental utility is defined over own consumption (ct−1 ) and over the expected
family income of their son (YM,t ) and daughter when they are adults (YF,t ). We assume
consensus parental preferences. Parents choose how much of their resources to allocate to
household consumption and how much to invest in their children’s human capital. The
human capital investment affects both earnings on the labor market and spouse’s earnings
    1
    Clark (2013) summarizes similar studies from several other countries and concludes that surnames lose
information about social status at rates much slower than implied by modern studies.



                                                   4
through the marriage market. We assume that only men work in this economy. Consequently,
the investment in the children’s human capital affects the son’s labor income directly and the
daughter’s family income indirectly through her spouse. Parental preferences are described
by: β1 log ct−1 + β2 E [log (YM,t )] + β3 E [log (YF,t )], where β2 and β3 measure parental altruism
towards their son and daughter, respectively. Parents choose ct−1 , the investment in human
capital of their son, HM,t , and daughter HF,t , to maximize utility subject to the budget
constraint: ct−1 + pH (HM,t + HF,t ) ≤ yt−1 where pH is the monetary cost of the investment
in human capital and yt−1 is the father’s labor income.
    Labor Market. Men’s labor income depends on human capital according to the follow-
ing expression:

                                               γ1
                                         yt = HM,t exp (EM,t ) ,                                         (1)
where EM,t represents the combined effect of all determinants, other than human capital, of a
man’s lifetime earnings. As in Becker and Tomes (1979, 1986) this term can be decomposed
in two components:

                                             EM,t = et + ut ,

where et is the child’s “endowment” of earning capacity and the iid stochastic term ut , with
zero mean and variance σu2 , is the son’s luck on the labor market, assumed to be independent
of yt−1 and et . The child’s endowment et follows the first-order autoregressive process:

                                             et = λet−1 + vt ,

where 0 ≤ λ < 1 measures the persistence of the family endowment and vt is serially
uncorrelated with variance σv2 . The key parameter in this equation is γ1 , the rate of return
to human capital on the labor market. Stationarity of the labor income process requires that
γ1 ∈ (0, 1) .
    Marriage market. Women’s spousal income depends on human capital according to
the following expression:
                                                 α1
                                YF,t = ySIL,t = HF,t exp (EF,t ) ,                         (2)
where EF,t represents the combined effect of all determinants, other than human capital, of
the earnings of the woman’s husband.2
   2
     Bhaskar and Hopkins (2012) show that a matching model of the marriage market with non-transferable
utility and pre-marital investment with stochastic returns yield an equilibrium relationship between parental
investments in sons and daughters that mirrors equation (2).


                                                     5
   According to this function a higher investment in daughter’s human capital combined
with a higher family endowment would “earn” a higher income husband (independently
of whether he comes from a high socioeconomic background or he is a “self-made” man).
Similarly to the income generating process on the labor market we assume that:

                                       EF,t = θet + µt ,

where et is the daughter’s endowment of “earning” capacity on the marriage market and
the iid stochastic term µt , with zero mean and variance σµ2 , is the daughter’s luck on the
marriage market, assumed to be independent on yt−1 and et .
    The key parameters in these equations are α1 , the rate of return to (female) human
capital on the marriage market, and θ, the parameter that measures the relative importance
of a daughter’s family endowment on the marriage market. As is common in the literature
on intergenerational mobility (see Lam and Schoeni, 1993, 1994; Chadwick and Solon, 2002;
and Ermisch, Francesconi and Siedler, 2006), we assume the existence of positive assortative
mating in the marriage market, meaning that α1 > 0. We do not make any assumption about
the parameter θ. If θ < 1 family endowment has a greater weight in the labor market than
in the marriage market, and vice versa if θ > 1. The higher are α1 and θ the greater the
degree of assortative matching in the marriage market.
    Under these assumptions about the labor and marriage market opportunities, the optimal
parental human capital investment is obtained by substituting (1) and (2) into the parents’
maximization problem. Due to the assumption of Cobb-Douglas preferences, the optimal
investment in children’s human capital is proportional to the father’s income yt−1 . The factor
of proportionality is a function of parents’ gender preferences and of the rates of return to
human capital on the labor market and on the marriage market. It follows that the son’s
log earnings equation in equilibrium is given by:

                                log yt = γ1 log yt−1 + et + ut .                           (3)
   In addition the model also delivers an equilibrium earnings equation for the son-in-law.
This is given by:

                              log ySIL,t = α1 log yt−1 + θet + µt .                        (4)
   Equations (3) and (4) form the basis of our econometric specification. The goal of the
econometric analysis is to estimate the relationship between son and father log income, and
between son-in-law and father-in-law log income, and how these relationships evolve over
time.

                                               6
    Since the child’s endowment, et , follows a first-order autoregressive process, the least
squares regression of log yt on log yt−1 does not yield consistent estimates of γ1 . Assuming
stationarity, one can show that the probability limit of the least squares coefficient, which
we will refer to as the father-son intergenerational elasticity, is given by:

                            Cov(y
                                d, y )
                                  t t−1                        λ (1 − γ12 )
             ηSON ≡ p lim                  = γ1 +
                             V ar(y
                                d )
                                    t−1
                                                    (1 + γ1 λ) + (1 − γ1 λ) (σu2 /σe2 ) .

    The formula shows that the probability limit of the simple OLS coefficient is equal to
γ1 plus a term that depends on λ, the degree of persistence in the endowment process,
and on σu2 /σe2 , the ratio between the variance of labor market “luck” and the variance in
the endowment. The intuition for these results is straightforward: the more persistent
the endowment process and the larger the variance of the endowment relative to that of
the idiosyncratic shock to labor market earnings, the more likely it is that any differences
in earnings between sons are due to differences in their initial endowment rather than to
differences in investment. Similarly, the least squares regression of log ySIL,t on log yt−1 also
gives inconsistent estimates of α1 . Given equation (4) the expression for the father/son-in-law
intergenerational elasticity is given by:

                                                              λ (1 − γ12 )
                                                                                            !
                        Cov(ySIL,t
                              d ,y )
                                   t−1
         ηSIL ≡ p lim                     = α1 + θ                                     .
                          V ar(y
                             d )
                                 t−1
                                                   (1 + γ1 λ) + (1 − γ1 λ) (σu2 /σe2 )

    The formula shows how the relationship between log ySIL,t and log yt−1 is influenced by
the same determinants of the father-son intergenerational elasticity, ηSON . In addition, ηSIL
is higher the higher is the rate of return to (female) human capital on the marriage market,
α1 , and the relative importance of family endowment for the daughter’s marriage market
outcomes.


3     Methodology
Consider an individual i who is young at time t − 1 and adult at time t. With slight abuse
of notation, let yit be individual i’s log earnings at time t, and yit−1 be his father’s log
earnings at time t − 1. With individually linked data, both yit and yit−1 are observed, and
the intergenerational elasticity estimate is obtained by regressing yit on yit−1 . We will call
this estimator the linked estimator, η̂LIN KED .
     Assume instead that we only observe two separate cross-sections, at times t and t−1, and
it is impossible to link individuals across the two. This means that yit−1 is unobserved, and
it becomes necessary to impute it. Our strategy is to base the imputation on an individual’s

                                                7
first name, which is available for both adults and children in each cross-section. In other
words, for an adult at time t named j, we replace yit−1 with ỹjt−1 , the average log earnings
of fathers of children named j at time t − 1. We have thus created a “generated regressor”
by using one sample to create a proxy for an unobserved regressor in a second sample. The
econometric properties of this two-step estimator are well known (Murphy and Topel, 1985).
As highlighted by Inoue and Solon (2010), this estimator is essentially a “two-sample two-
stage least squares” (TS2SLS) estimator.3 In the first step, we use the sample of fathers and
regress father’s log earnings on a full set of children’s first name dummies. In the second step,
we use the sample of sons, and regress son’s log earnings on the cross-sample fitted values
from the first stage. We rely on these results to calculate appropriate standard errors for our
estimator. Because we are effectively creating a pseudo-panel of individuals linked by first
names, we refer to this estimator as the “pseudo-panel” estimator, and label it η̂P SEU DO .4
     The key requirement for our strategy is that first names carry information about socioe-
conomic status. The higher the informational content of first names, the more accurate is
ỹjt−1 as a predictor of yit−1 . In the limit, if names are distributed randomly in the population,
then the generated regressor would be just noise, and the pseudo-panel estimator would be
asymptotically equal to zero.
     There is abundant empirical evidence supporting the assumption that parents choose first
names partly to signal their own standing in society, or their cultural and religious beliefs.
For example, Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004) document that in a sample of baby names
in Massachusetts there is substantial between-name heterogeneity in the social background
of mothers; similarly, Fryer and Levitt (2004) show that names provide a strong signal of
socioeconomic status for blacks, but also that there are systematic and large differences in
name choices by whites with different levels of education. This practice is also widespread
in other societies, both today and in the past. Head and Mayer (2008) investigate the social
transmission of parental preferences through naming patterns in France. Hacker (1999) and
   3
      The TS2SLS estimator is in itself a special case of a Two-Sample IV estimator (Angrist and Krueger,
1992).
    4
      The second stage has a particularly simple structure because the right hand side variable is constant
for every individual with the same first name. Therefore, in the special case of no additional regressors,
the TS2SLS estimator is equivalent to a weighted least squares regression of ỹjt on ỹjt−1 , where ỹjt is the
average log earnings of adults named j at time t, and the weights are equal to the frequency counts of
first names in the son’s sample. This equivalence highlights the similarity between our approach and the
synthetic cohort method pioneered by Browning et al. (1985) and Attanasio and Weber (1995). In our case,
the synthetic cohorts are defined on the basis of both first names and age. Aaronson and Mazumder (2008)
use an estimation strategy that is also based on synthetic cohorts. They estimate intergenerational mobility
in the US between 1940 and 2000 by imputing father’s income using state of birth.


                                                      8
Haan (2005) document a relationship between first names, religiosity and fertility in Canada
and the US during the 19th Century. Cook et al. (2012) find that distinctively black names
were already common in the post-Civil War period.
    Some of these papers also document that first names can have consequences on economic
outcomes. This may raise the concern that our empirical strategy may be confounded by
parents strategically choosing “aspirational” names for their children. Parents may believe
that by choosing names that are associated with a higher social class they may facilitate
their children’s social mobility. Alternatively, parents might refrain from using ethnic names
to prevent discrimination. These practices would make names a more noisy indicator of
parental socio-economic status. Thus, the pseudo-panel estimator of the intergenerational
elasticity would become more susceptible to attenuation bias, making us less likely to find
any evidence of a significant effect. This can still be a concern for the interpretation of the
trends in intergenerational elasticity, if the degree of strategic naming changes over time. As
we document below, however, the informational content of names has remained remarkably
stable over time. Moreover, we show in Section 7.1 that our estimates is fairly insensitive
to changes in the distribution of names. In sum, we view it as highly unlikely that strategic
naming affects our estimates in a meaningful way.
    The discussion above was presented in terms of the intergenerational elasticity between
fathers and sons. One of the distinct advantages of this methodology is that it can be easily
applied to calculate the correlation in economic status between fathers-in-law and sons-in-
law, where the daughters’ names are used to create the intergenerational link. Our estimator
boils down to a regression of son-in-law’s income on father-in-law’s income, where father-in-
law’s income for men married to women named j is proxied by the average income of fathers
of daughters named j at time t − 1.


4    Data
We now apply our methodology to data from the 1850 to 1930 US Census 1% samples from
IPUMS (Ruggles et al., 2010), when first names are available.
    Measuring Earnings. The first challenge that generally applies to the computation
of historical intergenerational elasticities, is to obtain appropriate quantitative measures of
socioeconomic status. Because income and earnings at the individual level are not available
before the 1940 Census, we are constrained to use measures of socioeconomic status that are
based on individuals’ occupations. There is a long tradition in sociology to focus on measures
of occupational prestige, and these are believed to be better indicators of long-run income


                                              9
(Duncan, 1966; see also the survey by Erikson and Goldthorpe, 1992). On the other hand,
these measures fail to capture the potentially large within-occupation variance in income. In
practice, estimates of intergenerational elasticities based on multi-year averages of father’s
income minimize the impact of measurement error and temporary fluctuations in income
(Solon, 1992) and are quite close to estimates based on predicted income by occupation
(Björklund and Jäntti, 1997).
    One of the advantages of the IPUMS data set is that it contains a harmonized classifica-
tion of occupations, and several measures of occupational status that are comparable across
years. For our benchmark analysis, we choose the OCCSCORE measure of occupational
standing.5 This variable indicates the median total income (in hundreds of dollars) of the
persons in each occupation in 1950. We address the sensitivity of our results to alternative
measures of occupational standing in Section 6.1.6
    Coding of names. The second challenge, specific to our methodology, is how to correctly
match first names across censuses. In our benchmark classification of names we ignore middle
initials (that is, we treat “William” as equivalent to “William J.”) and we treat nicknames
as distinct names (that is, “William” and “Bill” are considered two different names).7 These
choices may raise some issues, since there may be systematic differences in socioeconomic
status between individuals with middle initials or nicknames and those without. We address
the sensitivity of our estimates to these choices in Appendix A. Specifically we examine the
following variants to our basic specification: a) Separating names with and without middle
middle initials; b) grouping the main root of a name with its most common nicknames and
c) using the Soundex phonetic algorithm to deal with potential misspelling of names. All
these different name coding schemes yield the same pattern of results as in the baseline.
    The Distribution of Names. We first document some features of the distribution
of first names in the sample. Table 1 reports the summary statistics for children’s names
in the initial year of the pseudo-panel by gender. Both population (column 1) and the
number of distinct names (column 2) grow between 1850 and 1910, but the average number
of observations per name (column 3) is roughly constant. This pattern is common across
genders. In every decade, a large proportion of names appears only once in the sample
   5
     A number of other papers have used this same variable to measure occupational standing, among them
Abramitsky and Platt-Boustan (2012), Cverk (2012), Jones and Tertilt (2008) and Katz and Margo (forth-
coming).
   6
     For a full description of the construction of harmonized occupational codes in IPUMS and the occupa-
tional standing variables, see http://usa.ipums.org/usa/chapter4/chapter4.shtml#occscore.
   7
     The only exception to this rule is that we transform obvious abbreviations into their correspondent full
name (e.g., “Wm.” becomes “William,” “Geo.” becomes “George,” etc.).



                                                     10
(column 4). However, as shown in column 5, singleton names only account for 6 to 7% of all
names. Furthermore, we can link more than 90% of children’s names across Census decades
(column 6).
    The last two columns of the table present features of the name distribution. Column
7 reports the share of the total population with one of the 50 most popular names. This
describes how concentrated the name distribution is. Both male and female names become
markedly less concentrated over the sample period, with the decline for girls occurring earlier
and being more pronounced. Column 8 reports the R2 coefficient obtained by regressing log
father’s occupational income on a set of name indicators. Note that if names were assigned at
random, and we had a sufficiently large number of occurrences for every name, the between-
name variation would not explain any of the total variation in father’s income, and the R2
coefficient would be equal to zero. The entries in the column show that the between name
variation varies by gender: it accounts for 11% to 13% of the total variation in fathers’ log
earnings for boys and 13% to 15% for girls.8
    Table 2 reports the 5 most prestigious and least prestigious names based on father’s
occupational income, separately for each Census year. The shaded entries in the table refer
to names that appear more than once within the category of most prestigious names (light
gray) and least prestigious names (dark gray). The patterns of shaded areas reveals that
there is indeed persistence both in the top 5 and in the bottom 5 names across Census
decades for both male children and female children. If names were assigned at random, it
would be quite unlikely for a given name to appear more than once in this table. Therefore,
this evidence confirms that names are informative about economic status.


5       Results
Figure 1 and rows 1 and 4 in Table 3 report the results of our benchmark analysis. We
report 20-year elasticities in occupational income for both the father-son and the father in
law-son in law comparisons.
    The intergenerational elasticity between fathers and sons increases by 30% between 1870
and 1930, with most of the increase occurring after the turn of the century. These results are
in accord with the findings of Ferrie (2005) and Long and Ferrie (2007, forthcoming), who
documented a marked decrease in intergenerational mobility in the United States between
    8
    Because of the large number of singleton names, we could observe a positive R2 even if names were
assigned completely at random. To adjust for this, we calculate the R2 that would result if names were as-
                              2
signed completely at random (Rsim ), given the actual distribution of names. We then calculate an “adjusted
  2       2    2
                           2
                              
R ” as R − Rsim / 1 − Rsim . The adjusted coefficient remains sizable.


                                                    11
the late 19th Century and the middle of the 20th Century. The relationship in economic
status between fathers-in-law and sons-in-law displays a similar trend although the timing of
the increase is somewhat different. The father/son-in-law elasticity exhibits a first increase
between 1870 and 1880 and then a further jump between 1900 and 1920, which coincides
with the increase in the father-son elasticity. The two elasticities are almost identical in
1920 but they diverge at the end the period with the father/son-in-law elasticity dipping
below the father/son elasticity. Interestingly, the ranking of son-in-law and son elasticities is
consistent with modern estimates for the US and other developed economies (Chadwick and
Solon, 2002, Raaum et al., 2007). We defer to section 7.2 for a discussion of the historical
developments that can rationalize these findings.
    The remaining rows in Table 3 show how our benchmark estimates are affected by sample
selection issues due to either differences in child mortality by socioeconomic status, or to
differences in the age distribution and marital status of sons and sons-in-law.
    In the second row of each panel we present estimates where we restrict the sample to
children who were aged 5-15 in the earlier census. The incidence of child mortality was still
very high during much of the sample period (Preston and Haines, 1991), so that it is likely
that a non-negligible fraction of children did not survive into adulthood. If child mortality
differs by socioeconomic status, or if healthier children are also more likely to be employed as
adults in high-income occupations, this would lead to a standard sample selection problem
and potentially biased coefficients. Since most child mortality occurred before age 5, restrict-
ing the sample to include only older children should alleviate this problem. The estimated
coefficients for sons are somewhat lower than the benchmark, but the trends in elasticities
are unaffected. The father/son-in-law elasticities are not sensitive at all to the exclusion of
younger daughters.
    In all societies men marry later in life than women and the gender differential in age at
first marriage tends to be largest in more traditional societies. The 19th century US is no
exception. As documented in Ferrie and Rolf, (2008) and Fitch and Ruggles (2000), the
male-female differential in median age at first marriage was quite large in the 19th Century,
peaked in 1900 at more than 4 years, and then declined to about 2 years at the beginning
of the 20th Century. In our samples this implies that sons-in-law are, on average, older
than sons (especially at the beginning of the period) and that a fraction of the sons are
unmarried. Failing to control for differences in the age distribution has the potential to affect
the comparison of father/son-in-law and father/son elasticities. In particular, if the wage-
age profile is concave, and sons are systematically younger than their brothers-in-law, we
would systematically overestimate the father/son-in-law elasticity relative to the father/son


                                               12
elasticity. In the third and sixth rows of Table 3 we attempt to make the son and son-in-law
samples more comparable in terms of their demographic characteristics. In the third row, we
restrict the sons sample to married individuals. In the sixth row, we only include individuals
aged 20 to 35 in the sample of sons-in-law. There is some variation in the point estimates,
but on the whole the results are very similar to the benchmark.
    Finally, the last row of Table 3 presents estimates of the father/son elasticities for the
two 20-year comparisons for which individually linked data are available.9 Not surprisingly,
the individually linked data yields intergenerational elasticities that are 28-33% higher than
those obtained with the pseudo-panel estimator. This is likely because of attenuation bias
induced by measurement error in father’s earnings when we take averages by first names.
Thus, our estimate can be interpreted as a lower bound to the actual intergenerational
elasticities.10


6       Robustness
6.1     Measuring Income
As is well known, the 1950 income distribution was relatively compressed (Goldin and Margo,
1992). Moreover, the 1950 occupational classification may not reflect accurately the relative
standing of occupations that were common during the late 19th Century and early 20th
Century. This issue is important from our standpoint as ‘farmers’ represent a large part
of our sample and farming occupations and farm ownership were associated with higher
socioeconomic status during our sample period than in 1950.11 As pointed out by Xie
and Killewald (2011) measures of occupational mobility during this period of structural
transformation can be sensitive to the treatment of farmers. We address these concerns
by studying whether our estimates are sensitive to alternative imputations of occupational
income, paying special attention to the imputation of farmers’ income. The results are
reported in Table 4. The first row of each panel reproduces the benchmark estimates from
Table 3.
    9
     Source: IPUMS Linked Representative Sample (Ruggles et al., 2010). Since the linking is done using
information on first and last names, no linked data on married women is available. Therefore, we can only
compute father-son elasticities.
  10
     The intergenerational correlation may differ from the elasticity if the dispersion of earnings varies sub-
stantially across generations. We find that this is not the case: the magnitude and trends of intergenerational
correlations are almost identical to the elasticities reported in Table 3.
  11
     The proportion of children whose father is a farmer is as high as 57 percent in 1850, and even though it
declines steadily over the sample period, it is always above 30 percent.


                                                      13
    We start by imputing income using the 1900 occupational-earnings distribution obtained
from the tabulations in Preston and Haines (1991). These tabulations are based on the 1901
Cost of Living Survey, which was designed to investigate the cost of living of families in
industrial locales in the United States. The main advantage of using the 1900 occupational
income distribution is that the list of occupational categories matches more closely the list,
types and ranking of occupations that were common during much of the sample period.
This categorization, however, suffers from two limitations. First, the 1901 survey collected
data for the “typical” urban family, meaning that by construction the resulting income
distribution is more compressed than what one would obtain in a representative sample.
Second, while Preston and Haines do impute income for some agricultural occupations, they
explicitly refrain from imputing an average income for generic farm owners and farm tenants.
We experiment with two different methods for imputing farmers’ income.
    Our first imputation method assigns to all individuals coded as “farmer” in the 1950 cod-
ing scheme a weighted average of income for all farming occupations present in the Preston-
Haines classification. Specifically, we record all the occupations in the 1910 Census that
were coded as farmers in the 1950 occupational classification. We then calculate the average
income (weighted by the sample frequencies in 1910) for the occupations with nonmissing
income data based on the Preston-Haines tabulations, and assign this value ($335.04) to all
farmers (see Appendix Table 1 for the details of the calculation). As an alternative, we im-
pute farmers’ income based on the methodology originally described by Mitchell et al. (1922)
and recently used by Abramitzky et al. (2012). For owner-occupier farmers, we calculate
income as the difference between the value of farm products (augmented by the value of
rent and food consumed by the family) and the total expenditures on labor, fertilizer, feed,
seeds, threshing, taxes and maintenance (this results in an imputed annual income of $576).
For farm tenants, we imputed an income of $334, which is the income for specialized farm
workers (stock raisers, fruit growers, etc.) in the Preston-Haines tabulations. Under this
second imputation rule we assign an income of $475.93 to all “farmers” in the 1950 coding
scheme.
    The intergenerational elasticities estimates based on the different imputation methods
are reported in the second and third rows of each panel in Table 4. The father/son intergen-
erational elasticity is not very sensitive to using the 1900 occupational income distribution
nor to the exact imputation of farmers’ income. The estimate of the father/son-in-law inter-
generational elasticity is very similar to the benchmark under the first imputation method
but the results differ somewhat when we impute farmers’ income using the information on
the value of farm product. In this case, the estimated elasticity is 8 to 9 points lower relative


                                               14
to the benchmark in the first part of the sample period (1870 to 1900), but the difference
becomes smaller over time. On the whole, the results are quite similar to the benchmark
estimates in terms of the levels of the elasticities, how they change over time, and how they
differ between sons and sons-in-law.
    The next two rows of Table 4 show the estimated elasticities if we completely remove
farmers from the analysis, using either the 1950 or the 1900 occupational income distribution.
Both the son and son-in-law intergenerational elasticities are substantially lower than those
in the benchmark analysis. This reflects the unsurprising fact that farming status is highly
correlated across generations so that excluding farmers altogether raises intergenerational
mobility. The trends are similar to the benchmark. In addition, we have also calculated the
father/son elasticities based on the linked sample excluding farmers (see the last row of the
first panel). For the two pair of years in which we can calculate elasticities we find lower
estimates relative to the benchmark of Table 3.
    We conclude from Table 4 that our basic findings of an increasing trend in elasticities is
not affected by the treatment of farmers’ income. Therefore, the decline in intergenerational
mobility does not seem to be driven by the structural transformation of the U.S. economy,
from agricultural to industrial, over this period.
    In Table 5 we assess the robustness of our results to additional alternative measures of
occupational income. In the second row of each panel we replace occupational income with
an individual’s percentile rank in the distribution. The rationale for using rank is that it
does not depend on the, potentially noisy, imputed level of occupational income. We find an
attenuated trend for the father-son elasticity while the father/son-in-law elasticity mirrors
the baseline fairly closely. In the next row we re-estimate the model using average occupa-
tional incomes in 1990. The 1990 distribution has the advantage of being substantially more
dispersed than the 1950 distribution, and therefore allows us to assess whether our measures
of intergenerational mobility are affected by the variance of measured earnings. The esti-
mated elasticities are lower than the benchmark estimates, especially in the first part of the
sample period. This is probably because attempting to match 19th century occupations to
those of the late 20th century introduces a large(r) amount of noise, which attenuates the
results. The remaining rows in the table report the estimates obtained for two additional
measures of income, also based on the recoded 1950 occupational categories. ERSCOR50
assigns the percentile rank of each occupation’s median income based on contemporaneous
earnings data. The Duncan socioeconomic index (SEI) is a well-known measure of occupa-
tional prestige which combines occupational education and occupational income. The results
are qualitatively similar to those of the benchmark.


                                             15
6.2     Life Cycle Effects
A consistent pattern that emerges from the modern literature is that the estimated elasticities
tend to be lower when son’s earnings are measured early in their careers. In our context,
this issue may be somewhat less of a concern. Because investment in formal schooling was
much lower than what it is today, it is reasonable to expect that the age-income profile peaks
at an earlier age during our sample period, so that sons’ occupational income during their
twenties would be more reflective of long-run status than it is today.12 To strengthen this
conclusion, we also reestimate our model with controls for a quadratic function in father’s
and son/son-in-law’s age.
    The results are presented in Table 6. For each year, we present side by side the baseline
estimate (without age controls), and the estimate with age controls. The estimated elastici-
ties are almost completely unaffected by the controls for age, for both sons and sons-in-law.
Interestingly, the controls for son’s age enter the regressions with the expected signs and are
always highly significant. The coefficients indicate that the age-occupational earnings profile
reaches a peak at around 30 years of age in most specifications. A similar pattern is found
for the age-occupational earnings profile of sons-in-law, even though the estimates are not
always as precise and are smaller than for sons. On the other hand, father’s age and age
squared exhibit a mixed pattern of signs and typically come in not significant. The fact that
our basic estimates are not sensitive to the inclusion of age controls suggests that the age at
which occupational income is measured does not matter much for the estimated elasticities.
This result is confirmed when we estimate intergenerational elasticities at 30-year intervals
(see Appendix Table 2).


7      What factors can explain the trends?
7.1      Name distribution
The previous section established that the father-son intergenerational elasticity increased
markedly from 1870 to 1930. Does this increase reflect real changes in the underlying income
generating process or could this be an artifact of changing features of the name distribution?
For example, we have seen in Section 3 that our estimator depends critically on the extent
to which names carry information about socio-economic status. Thus, if names become
more socially stratified this could translate into a higher elasticity even if the underlying
  12
   In fact, Sutch (2011) collects data on wages from a number of industries and states in the 1890s, and
documents that the age earnings profile peaks as early as 25, and stays relatively flat thereafter.


                                                  16
transmission process is unchanged.
    To answer this question we conduct a series of numerical simulations. The goal of this
analysis is to evaluate the sensitivity of the estimator to different assumptions about the
distribution of names in the population, and how they are correlated with socioeconomic
status. Our strategy is to generate simulated data based on the income generating process
described in Section 2 and a specific assumption about the name assignment process. We
then find the values of the parameters that minimize the distance between a set of simulated
moments and their empirical counterparts in 1860 and 1880. We match the following mo-
ments: the intergenerational elasticity of income and the variance of income based on the
individually linked data (Cov(yt , yt−1 )/V (yt−1 ) and V (yt−1 )); the pseudo-panel analogs of
these two moments (Cov (yt , ỹjt−1 ) /V (ỹjt−1 ) and V (ỹjt−1 )); the fraction of the population
having one of the 50 most common names, as a measure of the concentration of names; and
the R2 from a regression of father’s income on a full set of children name dummies, which
we use as our measure of the economic content of names.
    The simulated data. We generate a population of N families. For each family the
income generating process is given by:

                                     yt = γ1 yt−1 + et + ut                                    (5)
                                     et = λet−1 + vt ,                                         (6)

with ut and vt iid normal with variances σu2 and σv2 respectively.
    For the name assignment process we assume that parents of generation t − 1 choose their
children’s first name as a function of the family’s earning endowment et−1 . The dependence
of the naming process on et−1 rather than on actual earnings yt−1 reflects the fact that name
choices are more likely to be affected by the more permanent component of earnings, whereas
yt−1 can be affected by transitory shocks. The probability of choosing name j out of a finite
set {1, 2, ..., J} is given by:
                                             exp (δCON,j + δSES,j et−1 )
                         P (j|et−1 ) = PJ
                                         j 0 =1 exp (δCON,j 0 + δSES,j 0 et−1 )

We assume that δCON,j and δSES,j are normally distributed with mean zero and variance
  2          2
σCON   and σSES  , respectively. Furthermore, they are independent of each other as well as
                                                       2
of all other variables in the model. The parameter σCON     determines the concentration of
                                       2
names in the population: the higher σCON the more likely it is that some names will appear
                                                       2
frequently while others are very rare. The parameter σSES  instead determines the sensitivity
                                                                2
of names to socio-economic status. In the extreme case of σSES      = 0 names are assigned
                         2
randomly. The larger σSES , the more indicative are names of a family’s social standing.

                                                17
     Given the income and name-generating processes, we create a sample of individually
linked fathers and sons, and a pseudo-panel of fathers and sons linked by the son’s first
name. We replicate this process R times, and compute the simulated moments as the aver-
age value of the moments across replications. The benchmark vector of unknown parameters
θ = (γ1 , λ, σu2 , σv2 , σCON
                          2      2
                              , σSES ) is obtained by minimizing the distance between the simulated
moments and their data counterparts. For simplicity, we use equal weighted minimum dis-
tance, and we set R = 15. Further details about the implementation of this method are given
in Appendix B.
     Estimation results. The resulting estimates are presented in Table 7. Since the model
is just identified, we are able to exactly match all the moments. Interestingly, we find that the
returns to human capital investment (γ1 ) play a larger role in the transmission of economic
status than the autoregressive component of the endowment, λ. The variance of shocks to
labor income is about three times as large as that of the endowment. These parameters
imply that a large fraction of the overall variance in income is due to labor market “luck.”
                                          2          2
Finally, the estimated values of σCON           and σSES indicate that the distribution of first names
is fairly concentrated, and names do carry economic content.
     Sensitivity to name distribution. We now fix (γ1 , λ, σu2 , σv2 ) at the values reported in
the bottom panel of Table 7, and show how the pseudo-panel estimator and other moments
                                        2         2
vary over a grid of values for σCON          and σSES . The results are reported in Table 8. The first
entry in each cell represents the estimated pseudo-elasticity η in our simulated samples. The
second and third entries in the cells represent, respectively, the estimated top-50 share and
the R2 from a regression of log father’s income on a full set of name dummies. The cell
corresponding to the SMM estimates is highlighted.
     Going down the columns, we note that the estimator is generally not very sensitive to
                                                                                  2
the parameter determining the concentration of the name distribution σCON             . The estimator
tends to increase as the distribution of names becomes more concentrated, but this increase
                                                         2
is quite modest given the range of variation in σCON          , especially if compared to the range of
variation of the other moments. For example, the top-50 share increases from 0.34 to about
0.84, while the R2 falls by about 40-60% as σCON       2
                                                           rises from 2.5 to 15.
                                                                                                   2
     On the other hand, the estimated elasticity is strongly affected by the parameter σSES           .
                                                                              2
In particular, the estimated value of η is very close to zero when σSES = 0, i.e. names carry
no information about a family’s socio-economic status, as discussed in Section 3. The table
                 2
shows that σSES          should increase by an order of magnitude (from 5.9 to about 30) in order
to generate the increase in the intergenerational elasticity coefficient that is observed in the
                                                                                                    2
data (from 0.313 in 1880 to 0.48-0.50 in 1920-30 – see Table 3). This large increase in σSES


                                                  18
would be associated with an increase in the R2 from 0.105 to 0.172. This is much larger than
the observed change in the R2 over the period (from 0.1108 to 0.1256 – see Table 1, column
8).
    It is also unlikely that the gender differential in elasticities is driven by gender differences
in naming patterns. The last column of Table 1 showed that in 1850 the economic content
of boys’ and girls’ names was essentially identical, but in the following decades girls’ names
carry stronger information about their fathers’ socioeconomic status. While this pattern
may be consistent with the trend in father/son and father/son-in-law elasticities between
1870 and 1880 (the opening of a gender gap in the economic content of names coincides with
a divergence in elasticities), it stands in contrast with our findings for the remainder of the
period – the gap in the economic content of names widens, but the gap in elasticities closes
down and even reverses direction in the last period.
    Table 9 explores whether variation in the main parameters governing the income process
can rationalize the observed increase in η. The structure of the tables is analogous to Table
8, with the SMM estimates highlighted. Both γ1 and λ have fairly large effects on the
estimated father-son elasticity. For example, we can generate the observed increase in η
with an increase in λ from 0.19 to 0.4 and an increase in γ1 from 0.42 to 0.5. Despite these
changes in γ1 and λ, the R2 and the top-50 concentration parameter hardly move at all.
    We conclude that the increase in father-son elasticity cannot be explained by changes
in the degree to which names carry economic content. Instead reasonable changes in the
parameters of the income process are likely to be responsible for the observed increase.


7.2      Fertility and Migration
Changes in fertility. The total fertility rate dropped from 5.42 in 1850 to 2.45 in 1930
(Haines, 2008). The drop in fertility is likely to have affected the ability of parents to invest
in their children’s human capital: a larger family size is associated with a lower human
capital investment per child. The impact of this change on the intergenerational elasticity is
not clear cut and it will depend on how the income-fertility gradient changes over time. The
observed elasticity would increase if the fertility decline occurs earlier for the high income
group than for the low income group. In this case. the resources of high income parents would
be split among fewer children, giving each one an even stronger initial advantage relatively
to children from lower income families. Jones and Tertilt (2008) document that the fertility-
income gradient was negative already for the generation of women born in 1828 and that
the fertility transition did not occur evenly across socio-economic groups. The total fertility
rate for lower-income women hovered around 6 between the 1828 and the 1853 cohorts. It

                                                19
then dropped sharply reaching 3.3 children by the 1898 cohort. In contrast, the fertility
decline for high socio-economic status women (from around 5 to around 2.5) was smoother.
This pattern of change in fertility would imply an increase in intergenerational elasticity
between the 1860 and 1900 cohorts. In fact, the jump in intergenerational coefficient occurs
for cohorts born at the beginning of the 20th century. Thus changes in fertility do not seem
to be able to explain the observed trends.
    We can further assess this point by directly controlling for fertility in our baseline re-
gression. Ideally, to account for changes in fertility and for potential asymmetries in the
allocation of family resources across children, we could control for the number of siblings
and birth order. However, information on these variables is not available in the adult sam-
ple. Therefore, we control for the average number of siblings and the distribution of birth
orders by first name in the children’s sample. The results are reported in Table 10. The
differences relative to the baseline results are minimal, with the possible exception of the
first two cohorts. If anything, accounting for fertility makes the trend in intergenerational
mobility even more pronounced.
    Migration The sample period that we analyze was characterized by dramatic migratory
flows, both from outside of the US and internally. The very notion of the “American dream”
is based on the belief that migration serves as one of the main engines of social mobility.
According to this view, immigrants with very few resources were quickly able to rise through
the social ranks and take advantage of the opportunities available in the New World. It
follows that mobility should be positively correlated with the size of the migration flows.
    While this hypothesis is appealing at first glance, it appears to be inconsistent with the
evolution over time in the intergenerational elasticity estimate. Immigration to the US had
an early peak in the 1880s and then a second, larger peak between 1900 and 1915.13 If
immigration plays a major role in driving the overall level of mobility, and, in particular, the
children of immigrants are the ones who are able to climb up the social ladder most rapidly,
then we should observe a large drop in intergenerational elasticity for the cohorts that came
of age after the turn of the Century. This stands in stark contrast to the large increase in
elasticity that we actually observe for the 1900 and 1910 cohorts.
    It is also possible that immigration contributed to attenuate what would have otherwise
been an even larger decrease in intergenerational mobility. To assess this possibility, we
control directly for the effect of immigration in our basic estimates. These could be downward
biased if immigrant fathers tend to be employed in low-paying occupations, but their children
  13
     U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Office of Immigration Statistics, Yearbook of Immigration Statis-
tics (various years).



                                                    20
quickly rise through the social ranks. It is easy to address these issues by simply controlling
for the immigrant status of sons and, from 1880 onwards, fathers.14 For the son-in-law
specification we control for the immigrant status of both spouses and their fathers.
    The results are presented in the second and third row of Panels A (sons) and B (sons-
in-law) in Table 11. Both father/son and father/son-in-law elasticities are somewhat lower
for the first three cohorts, but are then almost identical to the benchmark estimates for
the latter two cohorts. These results arise because in the early part of the sample period,
immigrants (both fathers and sons) were substantially less likely to be employed in farming
occupations, and hence tended to have higher occupational income. This induces an upward
bias in the estimates of the intergenerational correlations when one does not control for
immigrant status. Overall, controlling for immigrant status has only a very modest effect
on our estimates, and, if anything, the adjusted estimates go in the “wrong” direction. We
conclude that the upward trend in intergenerational elasticity is unlikely to be driven by
changes in immigration over the sample period.15
    Internal mobility Long and Ferrie (forthcoming) argue that residential mobility, either
across state or county lines, is a prime candidate to explain the high level of intergenerational
mobility in the US in the 19th Century, both relative to Britain during the same time period
and relative to the US a century later. The argument is that residential mobility is itself
a form of investment, which can improve a child’s chances for occupational mobility in the
same way as a human capital investment. Moreover, the 19th Century US was characterized
by large opportunities for locational arbitrage, as the degree of regional specialization was
at its peak (Kim, 1998).
    Prima facie, there is some support for the notion that the trends in our estimates can be
explained by patterns of internal mobility. The fraction of individuals aged 20-35 living in a
state different from their state of birth decreased between 1850 and 1900 from 37% to 28%,
but then remained at that level between 1900 and 1930.16 Therefore, the trends in mobility
across states are broadly consistent with the trends in intergenerational elasticity: elasticity
was low when mobility was high, and vice versa.
    If much of intergenerational mobility is driven by children of low socioeconomic status
  14
     We have also estimated the model restricting the whole analysis to exclude all immigrants, or even all
children with immigrant fathers. The results are almost identical.
  15
     One important caveat to this conclusion: our estimates can only capture the degree of intergenerational
mobility in occupational status. We cannot rule out that there was substantial intergenerational mobility
within occupations, e.g., an immigrant father starts out setting up a small construction firm, and the son
goes on to build a large empire in the construction industry.
  16
     Source: our own calculations from the IPUMS samples



                                                    21
“moving to opportunity” by crossing state lines, elasticity estimates that do not account for
internal mobility would be biased downwards. To further investigate this hypothesis, in the
remaining rows of Table 11, we add to our basic specification controls for internal migrant
status of both generations. We define internal migrants as individuals living in a different
state than their state of birth. Contrary to our conjecture, the inclusion of these controls has
essentially no effect on the intergenerational elasticity estimates. If anything, the estimates
in the first part of the sample period seem to be slightly upward biased.
    Based on this evidence it does not appear that inter-state mobility explains much of
the trend in the intergenerational elasticity estimates. However, as documented in Long
and Ferrie (forthcoming), of greater importance for geographic mobility were the movements
across counties within a state. They estimate that between 1870 and 1880 the fraction of 20-
29 years old white, native born males who changed county was twice as large as the fraction
who changed states (50% vs. 26%). Because of lack of data, however, we cannot control for
internal mobility at the county level. Therefore, it could still be the case that the rate of
return to geographic mobility dropped between the second half of the 19th Century and the
first few decades of the 20th Century.


7.3     Regional Differences
The trends in intergenerational elasticity could also be explained by differences in the degree
of economic development. If fathers and sons tend to live in the same region, large economic
disparities across regions will translate into a high correlation between father’s and son’s
income. The period under examination was indeed characterized by large regional disparities.
The industrial revolution did not spread uniformly across the United States. Regional income
diverged significantly in the second half of the 19th Century. Income per capita in the South
fell sharply during the Civil War, absolutely and relatively to other regions, and recovered at
a slow pace. By 1900 income per capita in the South was barely half of the national average
(see Kim and Margo (2004), p. 2991). Moreover, as discussed previously, geographic mobility
was on the decline in the first part of the 20th Century. Therefore, it is possible that the
sharp increase in intergenerational elasticity observed in the latter part of our sample period
reflects these large geographic disparities in economic development.
     To assess this possibility, we include in our basic regressions controls for state of resi-
dence. The results are presented in Table 12. In all years, controlling for state of residence
(second row) substantially lowers the estimated intergenerational elasticity coefficient, but
the decrease is most pronounced in the last two cohorts. Consequently, intergenerational
mobility is no lower in the 1910-1930 period than in the 1850-1870 period.

                                              22
    The third row of the table controls directly for two measures of economic development at
the state level: urbanization rates, and the fraction of workers employed in agriculture. Both
measures capture regional divergence in the second half of the 19th Century. The fraction
of the population living in urban areas in the Northeast climbed from 44% to 68% between
1880 and 1910, but then increased by only 4 additional percentage points between then and
1930; by contrast, the urbanization rate in the South was only 11% in 1880, 21% in 1910, and
32% in 1930. Similarly, the fraction of workers employed in agriculture in 1910 was 11% in
the Northeast, but 57% in the South.17 The results are almost identical to those reported in
the second row. In other words, much of the differences across states can be parsimoniously
summarized by these two variables.
    To further understand the role of regional differences, we also conduct our analysis sep-
arately for each region of birth. Specifically, for every individual born in a specific region
in Census year t, we proxy his father’s income by the average income of fathers of children
with that first name in Census year t − 20, and who lived in the same region. The results
are presented in Table 13. The region-specific intergenerational elasticity is almost always
lower than the national elasticity, providing further support for the notion that a substantial
part of the national estimate is accounted for by regional differences in development. There
is also a fairly stable ranking of regions in terms of elasticity, especially towards the end of
the sample period, with the Northeast being the most mobile, the South the least mobile,
and the Midwest somewhere in between. The trends also differ somewhat across regions: the
father/son elasticity declines in the Northeast over time, stays relatively flat in the Midwest,
and increases markedly in the South after 1880 (the end of Reconstruction). Similar patterns
are observed for the father/son-in-law elasticities, even though the trends are slightly more
mixed.
    The ranking across regions of the elasticity estimates also sheds light on the role of
compulsory schooling and investments in public education in the intergenerational transmis-
sion of economic status. The intergenerational elasticity is lowest in the Northeast, where all
states had compulsory schooling in 1900 (Lingwall, 2010); is highest in the South, where only
3 of 16 states (plus the District of Columbia) had compulsory schooling; and is somewhere
in the middle in the Midwest, where 10 of 12 states had introduced compulsory schooling
by 1900. These results are consistent with Solon (2004), who shows that intergenerational
income elasticity decreases with the progressivity of public investment in human capital.
Intuitively, government investment in public education crowds out some private investment
(from mostly high income families), and at the same time allows some low-income children
 17
      Source: our own calculations from IPUMS data.



                                                  23
to acquire human capital and raise their labor market earnings.


7.4     Returns to Human Capital
What additional factors might contribute to explain the trends in father/son and father/son-
in-law elasticity after accounting for regional differences in economic development and geo-
graphic mobility?
    One possible explanation for the overall increase in the father/son elasticity is the im-
provement in men’s labor market outcomes during this period. In the context of our model,
this can be thought of as an increase in the labor market return to human capital. Cverk
(2012) shows that men’s career prospects, measured by occupational upgrading, improved
substantially between 1880 and 1930. Katz and Margo (forthcoming) document a substantial
increase in the share of white collar jobs in the overall economy between 1850 and 1910 (from
6.9% to 19.7%), and a contemporaneous upward trend in relative wages of white collar work-
ers relative to common laborers and artisans. They argue that these trends combined reveal
an increasing relative demand for more educated workers over the course of the 19th Century.
Margo (2000) provides further evidence of a long-term rise in the returns to educated labor
beginning before the Civil War and continuing until the turn of the 20th Century.18
    Changes in labor market returns to human capital can also explain the trend in father/son-
in-law elasticity. Equation (4) in our model can be interpreted as the reduced form of a
matching tournament model of marriage with pre-marital investment that has stochastic
returns (Bhaskar and Hopkins, 2012). In this framework the rate of return to female hu-
man capital is determined endogenously as a function of male returns to human capital
and marriage market conditions. In a society where women do not work, the incentive to
invest for girls increases with the labor market returns of boys. Thus the improvement in
men’s labor market outcomes would be consistent with our finding that the father-son and
father-daughter elasticity share a common trend over the period of interest.
    However, there are periods where the two elasticities diverge. For example, the father/son-
in-law elasticity is greater than the father/son elasticity between 1880 and 1920 and then
dips below it in 1930. These differences may be driven by changes in the sex ratio (defined
as the ratio of men to women), which affects the relative position of women in the marriage
market. As women become scarce, even lowest quality women become desirable and can
fetch a high quality mate. This would push the return to female human capital down. On
  18
    This was followed by a decline in the returns to education associated with the massive expansion of
secondary schooling dating to the 1910s (Goldin, 1999, and Goldin and Katz, 2008). See Margo and Villaflor
(1987) for an in-depth analysis of wage growth between 1820 and 1865.


                                                   24
the other hand, the increased competition on the male side of the market leads to male
over-investment in human capital and, as a result, an increase in the variance of the quality
of potential husbands. This, in turn, increase women’s incentives to invest in human capital,
pushing up the returns.19 A similar but opposite argument holds if there is a decline in the
sex ratio.
    It follows that trends in fecundity and immigration over the sample period that affected
the sex ratio may help explain differences in the evolution of the father-son and father-
daughter elasticity. Differential fecundity by gender implies that marriageable women are
scarce and this affects their relative power in the marriage market.20 The scarcity of fecund
women is especially important when infant and maternal mortality are high and people have
more children. Both infant mortality and fertility were very high in 1850 but plummeted by
the early decades of the 20th Century (Haines, 2008).21 Maternal mortality declined from
850 deaths per 100,000 births in 1900 to 660 by 1917 (Loudon, 1992). These developments
would lead to an increase in the number of eligible women and thus to a decline in the sex
ratio, and, consequently, a higher return to female investment.
    The large migratory flows during this period may also have generated an imbalance in
the sex ratio and increased heterogeneity of the pool of marriageable men. Haines (1996)
shows that immigration to the US peaked in the opening decades of the 20th Century and
was heavily skewed towards white males. Bandiera, Rasul and Viarengo (2012) show that
the ratio of male to female immigrants spiked after the 1917 Immigration Act, which led
to relatively higher barriers to entry for women. By raising the sex ratio this development
may have lowered women’s return to investment. This is consistent with the dip in the
father/son-in-law elasticity in 1930.


8      Conclusion
In this paper we have provided a new perspective on intergenerational mobility in the United
States in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. We devised an empirical strategy that
links cohorts across Census years on the basis of first names, and allows us to calculate
intergenerational elasticities for both sons and sons-in-law. We find that the father/son
elasticity increased markedly between 1850 and 1930, consistent with previous studies. The
father/son-in-law elasticity broadly follows the same trend, with some differences in timing,
  19
    Bhaskar and Hopkins (2012) show that the net effect on female returns to human capital is negative.
The sex ratio imbalance induces a greater investment by the abundant sex.
 20
    See Siow (1998) and Bergstrom and Bagnoli (1993) for alternative mechanisms underlying this relation.
 21
    The infant mortality rate was 216.8 per 100,000 births in 1850, 110.8 in 1900 and 60 in 1930.


                                                   25
and drops below the father/son elasticity at the end of the sample period. An exploration of
historical demographic and economic trends reveals that divergence in the degree of economic
development across US regions, coupled with a decrease in geographic mobility, can account
for almost all of the changes in the degree of intergenerational mobility over time. This is not
to say that there were no changes in intergenerational mobility over the sample period: on
the contrary, the US became a less mobile society in part because there was less geographic
mobility, and in part because the different regions were experiencing a different growth
trajectory.


References
 [1] Aaronson, Daniel and Bhashkar Mazumder (2008). “Intergenerational Economic Mo-
     bility in the United States, 1940 to 2000,” Journal of Human Resources, 43(1), pp.
     139-172.

 [2] Abramitzky, Ran; Leah Platt Boustan and Katherine Eriksson (2012). “Europe’s Tired,
     Poor, Huddled Masses: Self-Selection and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass
     Migration,” American Economic Review, 102(5), pp. 1832-1856.

 [3] Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger (1992). “The Effect of Age at School Entry on
     Educational Attainment: An Application of Instrumental Variables with Moments from
     Two Samples,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 87(418), pp. 328-36.

 [4] Attanasio, Orazio P. and Guglielmo Weber (1995). “Is Consumption Growth Consistent
     with Intertemporal Optimization? Evidence from the Consumer Expenditure Survey,”
     Journal of Political Economy, 103(6), pp. 1121-1157.

 [5] Bandiera, Oriana; Imran Rasul and Martina Viarengo (2012). “The Making of Modern
     America: Migratory Flows in the Age of Mass Migration,” Journal of Development
     Economics, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jdeveco.2012.11.005.

 [6] Becker, Gary S. and Nigel Tomes (1979). “An equilibrium theory of the distribution
     of income and intergenerational mobility,” Journal of Political Economy, 87(6), pp.
     1153-89.

 [7] Becker, Gary S. and Nigel Tomes (1986). “Human Capital and the Rise and Fall of
     Families,” Journal of Labor Economics, 4(3), pp. S1-39.



                                              26
 [8] Bergstrom, Ted and Mark Bagnoli (1993). “Courtship as a Waiting Game,” Journal of
     Political Economy, 101(1), pp. 185-202.

 [9] Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan (2004).“Are Emily and Greg more Em-
     ployable than Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination,
     ” American Economic Review, 94(4), pp. 991-1013.

[10] Bhaskar, V. and Ed Hopkins (2012) “Marriage as Rat Race: Noisy Pre-Marital Invest-
     ments with Assortative Matching,” manuscript, University College London.

[11] Björklund, Anders and Markus Jäntti (1997). “Intergenerational Income Mobility in
     Sweden Compared to the United States.” American Economic Review, 87(5), pp. 1009-
     1018.

[12] Black, Sandra E. and Paul J. Devereux (2011). “Recent Developments in Intergenera-
     tional Mobility.” in (O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics,
     Volume 4B, pp. 1487-1541, Amsterdam: North-Holland.

[13] Browning, Martin; Angus Deaton and Margaret Irish (1985). “A Profitable Approach
     to Labor Supply and Commodity Demands over the Life-Cycle,” Econometrica, 53(3),
     pp. 503-544.

[14] Chadwick, Laura and Gary Solon (2002). “Intergenerational Income Mobility among
     Daughters,” American Economic Review, vol. 92(1), pp. 335-44.

[15] Clark, Gregory (2013) “What is the True Rate of Social Mobility? Evidence from the
     Information Content of Surnames,” manuscript, UC Davis.

[16] Clark, Gregory and Neil Cummins (2012) “What is the True Rate of Social Mobility?
     Surnames and Social Mobility in England, 1800-2012,” manuscript, UC Davis.

[17] Collado, M. Dolores; Ignacio Ortuño Ortı́n and Andrés Romeu (2012). “Long-run In-
     tergenerational Social Mobility and the Distribution of Surnames,” manuscript, Univer-
     sidad de Alicante.

[18] Cook, Lisa D.; Trevon D. Logan and John M. Parman (2012) “The Long-Term Conse-
     quences of Distinctively Black Names: Evidence from the American Past,” manuscript,
     Michigan State University.




                                            27
[19] Corak, Miles (2013). “Inequality from Generation to Generation,” in (R. Rycroft, ed.)
     The Economics of Inequality, Poverty, and Discrimination in the 21st Century, ABC-
     CLIO.

[20] Cvrcek, Tomas (2012) “America’s Settling Down: How Better Jobs and Falling Immi-
     gration led to a Rise in Marriage, 1880-1930” Explorations in Economic History, 49(3),
     pp. 335-351.

[21] Duncan, Otis D. (1966). “Methodological Issues in the Analysis of Social Mobility,” in
     (N. J. Smelser, S. M. Lipset, eds.) Social Structure and Mobility in Economic Develop-
     ment, pp. 51-97, Chicago: Aldine.

[22] Erikson, Robert and John H. Goldthorpe (1992). The Constant Flux: A Study of Class
     Mobility in Industrial Societies. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

[23] Ermisch, John; Marco Francesconi and Thomas Siedler (2006). “Intergenerational Mo-
     bility and Marital Sorting,” Economic Journal, 116(513), pp. 659-679.

[24] Ferrrie Joseph P. (1995). “A New Sample of Americans Linked from the 1850 Public
     Use Micro Sample of the Federal Census of Population to the 1860 Federal Census
     Manuscript Schedules,” NBER Historical Working Paper No. 71.

[25] Ferrie, Joseph P. (2005). “History Lessons: The End of American Exceptionalism?
     Mobility in the United States since 1850,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19(3), pp.
     199-215.

[26] Ferrie, Joseph P. and Karen Rolf (2008). “The May-December Relationship since 1850:
     Age Homogamy in the United States”, manuscript, Northwestern University.

[27] Fitch, Catherine A. and Steven Ruggles (2000). “Historical trends in marriage for-
     mation: The United States 1850-1990,” in (L.J. Waite, C. Bachrach, M. Hindin, E.
     Thomson and A.Thornton, eds.) The Ties that Bind: Perspectives on Marriage and
     Cohabitation, pp. 59-88, Hawthorne: Aldine de Gruyter.

[28] Fryer, Roland G. and Steven D. Levitt (2004). “The Causes and Consequences of Dis-
     tinctively Black Names.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (3), pp.767-805.

[29] Goldin, Claudia (1999). “Egalitarianism and the Returns to Education during the Great
     Transformation of American Education,” Journal of Political Economy 107 (December):
     S65-S94.

                                            28
[30] Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz (2008). The Race between Education and Technol-
     ogy. Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

[31] Goldin, Claudia and Robert A. Margo (1992). “The Great Compression: The Wage
     Structure in the United States at Mid-century,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107
     (1), pp. 1-34.

[32] Güell, Maia; José V. Rodrı́guez-Mora and Chris Telmer (2007). “Intergenerational Mo-
     bility and the Informative Content of Surnames,” manuscript, University of Edinburgh.

[33] Haan, Michael (2005). “Studying the Impact of Religion on Fertility in Nineteenth-
     Century Canada: The Use of Direct Measures and Proxy Variables,” Social Science
     History, 29 (3), pp. 373-411.

[34] Hacker, J. David (1999). “Child Naming, Religion, and the Decline of Marital Fertility in
     Nineteenth-Century America,” The History of the Family: An International Quarterly,
     4 (3): pp. 339-65.

[35] Haines, Michael R. (1996). “Long-Term Marriage Paterns in the United States from
     Colonial Times to the Present,” The History of the Family, 1 (1): pp. 15–39.

[36] Haines, Michael (2008). “Fertility and Mortality in the United States,” in (R. Whaples
     ed.) EH.Net Encyclopedia, http://eh.net/encyclopedia/article/haines.demography.

[37] Head, Keith and Thierry Mayer (2008). “Detection Of Local Interactions From The
     Spatial Pattern Of Names In France,” Journal of Regional Science, 48(1): pp. 67-95.

[38] Hellerstein, Judith K. and Melinda S. Morrill (2011). “Dads and Daughters: The
     Changing Impact of Fathers on Women”s Occupational Choices,” Journal of Human
     Resources, 46(2): pp. 333-372.

[39] Inoue, Atsushi and Gary Solon (2010). “Two-sample Instrumental Variables Estima-
     tors,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(3), pp. 557-561.

[40] Jäntti, Markus; Brent Bratsberg, Røed Knut; Oddbjørn Raaum; Robin A. Naylor; Eva
     Österbacka; Anders Björklund and Tor Erkisson (2006). “American Exceptionalism
     in a New Light: A Comparison of Intergenerational Earnings Mobility in the Nordic
     Countries, the United Kingdom and the United States,” Discussion Paper no. 1938,
     Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA), Bonn.



                                             29
[41] Jones, Larry E. and Michle Tertilt (2008). “An Economic History of Fertility in the
     United States: 18261960,” in (Peter Rupert ed.) Frontiers of Family Economics, Volume
     1, pp. 165-230, Emerald Press.

[42] Katz, Lawrence F. and Robert A. Margo. Forthcoming. “Technical Change and the
     Relative Demand for Skilled Labor: The United States in Historical Perspective,” in
     (L. Boustan, C. Frydman, and R. A. Margo eds.) Human Capital in History: The
     American Record, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research Conference
     Volume.

[43] Kim, Sukko (1998). “Economic Integration and Convergence: U.S. Regions, 1840-1990,”
     Journal of Economic History, 58 (3): pp. 659-683.

[44] Kim, Sukko and Robert A. Margo (2004). “Historical Perspectives on U.S. Economic
     Geography,” in (V. Henderson and J. Thisse, eds.) Handbook of Regional and Urban Eco-
     nomics, Volume 4: Cities and Geography, pp. 2982-3019, Amsterdam: North-Holland.

[45] Lam, David A. and Robert F. Schoeni (1993). “Effects of family background on earnings
     and returns to schooling: evidence from Brazil,” Journal of Political Economy, 101(4),
     pp. 710-40.

[46] Lam, David A. and Robert F. Schoeni (1994). “Family ties and labor market in the
     United States and Brazil,” Journal of Human Resources, 29(4), pp. 1235-58.

[47] Lingwall, Jeff (2010). “Compulsory Schooling, the Family, and the ‘Foreign Ele-
     ment’ in the United States, 1880-1900, ”manuscript, Carnegie Mellon University,
     http://www.heinz.cmu.edu/research/372full.pdf.

[48] Long, Jason and Joseph P. Ferrie (2007). “The Path to Convergence: Intergenerational
     Occupational Mobility in Britain and the US in Three Eras,” Economic Journal, 117
     (519), pp. C61-C71.

[49] Long, Jason and Joseph P. Ferrie (forthcoming). “Intergenerational Occupational Mo-
     bility in Britain and the U.S. Since 1850,” American Economic Review.

[50] Loudon, Irvine (1992). Death in Childbirth: An International Study of Maternal Care
     and Maternal Mortality 1800-1950, Oxford: Clarendon Press.

[51] Robert A. Margo and Georgia C. Villaflor (1987). “The Growth of Wages in Antebellum
     America: New Evidence,” The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 47 (4): 873-895.

                                            30
[52] Robert A. Margo (2000). “The History of Wage Inequality in America, 1920 to 1970,”
     Macroeconomics 0004035, EconWPA.

[53] Mitchell, Wesley; Willford I. King, Frederick R. Macaulay and Oswald W. Knauth
     (1922). Income in the United States, Its Amount and Distribution, 1909-1919, New
     York: National Bureau of Economic Research.

[54] Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. Topel (1985). “Estimation and Inference in Two-Step
     Econometric Models,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 3(4), pp. 370-379.

[55] Preston, Samuel H. and Michael R. Haines (1991). Fatal Years: Child Mortality in Late
     Nineteenth Century America, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

[56] Raaum, Oddbjørn; Bernt Bratsberg, Knut Røed, Eva Österbacka, Tor Eriksson, Markus
     Jäntti and Robin A. Naylor (2007). “Marital Sorting, Household Labor Supply, and
     Intergenerational Earnings Mobility across Countries,” The B.E. Journal of Economic
     Analysis & Policy, Vol. 7: Iss. 2 (Advances), Article 7.

[57] Ruggles, Steven; J. Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B.
     Schroeder, and Matthew Sobek (2010). Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version
     5.0 [Machine-readable database], Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.

[58] Siow, Aloysius (1998). “Differential Fecundity, Markets, and Gender Roles,” Journal of
     Political Economy, vol. 106(2), pp. 334-354.

[59] Solon, Gary R. (1992). “Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United States,” Amer-
     ican Economic Review, 82 (3), pp. 393-408.

[60] Solon, Gary R. (1999). “Intergenerational Mobility in the Labour Market,” in (O. Ashen-
     felter and D. Card, eds.) Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3A, pp. 1761-800,
     Amsterdam: North-Holland.

[61] Solon, Gary R. (2004). “A Model of Intergenerational Mobility Variation over Time and
     Place,” in (M. Corak, ed.) Generational Income Mobility in North America and Europe,
     Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

[62] Sutch, Richard (2011). “Hard Work, Nonemployment, and the Wealth-Age Profile: Ev-
     idence of a Life-Cycle Strategy in the United States during the Nineteenth Century,”
     manuscript presented at NBER Development of the American Economy, Program Meet-
     ing, http://users.nber.org/confer/2011/DAEs11/Sutch.pdf.

                                            31
[63] Xie, Yu and Alexandra Killewald (2011). “Has Social Mobility in America Declined?
     Data, Methods, and Farming,” manuscript, University of Michigan.



Appendices
A        Name coding
In this Appendix we assess the robustness of our results to different name coding schemes.
In the benchmark specification, for the purpose off aggregating results by name, we treated
each individual occurrence of a first name as a separate name, ignoring middle names or
middle initials and common abbreviations. In Appendix Table 3 we relax this restriction.
    The first row of each panel in the table reproduces the benchmark estimates from Table 3.
The second row presents the intergenerational elasticities when we take into account middle
initials as well as the first name (so, for example, “William,”.“William J.” and “William H.”
are treated as three separate names). The third row presents results when we group together
the main root of a name with its most common nicknames (so, for example, “William,” “Bill,”
“Billy” and “Willie” are all treated as separate instances of the same name).
    In the next row, we deal with the potential misspelling of names by using the Soundex
algorithm.22 Coding names this way results in a substantial reduction in the number of
names, and an increase in the average number of occurrences per name. This can have
two opposite effects on the estimated elasticity. On one hand, it reduces the occurrence
of uncommon names and therefore, by the law of large numbers, the average income is a
more accurate measure of actual father’s income. This tend to reduce the attenuation bias
and raise the estimate of the elasticity. One the other hand, the Soundex algorithm groups
together names that may belong to very different socioeconomic groups (for example, Michael
and Miguel) which may exacerbate measurement error.
    The trends in father-son-elasticities are not much affected by the different name coding
schemes. The point estimates in row 2 and 3 are quite similar to the benchmark, while
based on the Soundex algorithm the father-son elasticity are higher by 6 to 13 percentage
points. As for the father-son-in-law elasticities in all specifications there is less evidence of
an upward trend. This is driven by fluctuations in the point estimates in the first part of
the sample while all specifications exhibit a sharp decline in the elasticity in 1930.
  22
    The Soundex is a phonetic algorithm that indexes names by sound, and is specifically designed to assign
the same numeric code to similar sounding names (NARA 2007).


                                                    32
B        Numerical Simulations
We generate a population of N families. We generate incomes for each family for T periods
based on the income transmission process described in equations (5) and (6). We draw
the initial values of income and family endowment for each family based on the long run
distributions of yt and et . We keep only the last two generations, in order for the observed
distribution of income not to be affected by the initial conditions.23
    The names of generation t children are assigned on the basis of a probabilistic process.
The probability of choosing name j out of a finite set {1, 2, ..., J} is given by:

                                                  exp (δCON,j + δSES,j et−1 )
                            P (j|et−1 ) = PJ                                                              (7)
                                              j 0 =1 exp (δCON,j 0 + δSES,j 0 et−1 )

We assume that δCON,j and δSES,j are normally distributed with mean zero and variance
  2          2
σCON   and σSES , respectively.
    We then extract two samples: the individually linked sample is a 10% extract from this
population; the pseudo-panels are obtained by taking two independent 10% extracts, one
from the father’s generation and one from the son’s generation.
    We use these two samples to calculate the six simulated moments that will be matched to
                                                                                            2
the data. Starting from an initial guess for the parameter vector θ = (γ1 , λ, σu2 , σv2 , σCON    2
                                                                                                , σSES )
we replicate this process R = 15 times, and compute the simulated moments as the average
value of the moments across replications. We then iterate this process until convergence.
    The original population size N is set to 500, 000. This value is chosen to approximately
match the number of white males aged 0-15 in the 1860 1% Census sample.24 The number
of distinct names in the census is 4350. However, a careful examination of the data reveals
that many of the distinct names are typos (e.g. “???”) or slight spelling variations of the
same root name (“Michaal” or “Micheal”). More than 3000 names appear only once in the
data, and only 800 appear three times or more. Our solution is to start with a pool of
J = 1500 distinct root names, and then to artificially misspell each name with probability
p. To calibrate the misspelling probability, we first group names by their Soundex code, and
then calculate the fraction of names within each Soundex code that are not equal to the
most common spelling of the name. Averaging across all Soundex codes, we obtain p = 0.09.
  23
     In practice, preliminary simulations showed that T = 14 was sufficient to guarantee that the initial
conditions had no effect on the distributions.
  24
     Ideally, we would have wanted to generate a population equivalent in size to the population of the United
States in 1860, and then draw a 1% sample to make our simulated data exactly analogous to the Census data.
Because of computational limitations, we instead generated a smaller population and drew a 10% sample.
The results are not sensitive to small modifications in the percentage drawn from the original population.

                                                     33
   Figure 1: Father/Son and Father/Son in Law Elasticities in
                     Occupational Income
   .5
   .45
   .4
   .35
   .3




         1860   1870    1880     1890      1900     1910      1920     1930
                                         Year

                           Father/Son             Father/Son-in-Law


Note: The figure presents point estimates and 90% confidence intervals for the
father/son and father-son-in-law intergenerational elasticities. The values on the
horizontal axes represent the year from which the son's (son-in-law's) sample are
drawn. The elasticities are obtained from a regression of son (son-in-law) log
occupational income on imputed father's (father-in-law's) log occupational income.
See text for details of the imputation procedure. Occupational income is based on
average earnings in the occupation in 1950.




                                           34
                                     Table 1. Summary Statistics for Children's Names: 1850-1910

              (1)            (2)              (3)              (4)                   (5)             (6)             (7)               (8)

                                                                                                                                  Share of total
                                                                                               Percent of
          Number of      Number of      Mean number      Percent of            Percent of                    Share with          variation in log
                                                                                              children with
           children       distinct     of observations names that are        children with                     top-50          earnings explained
                                                                                             names linked 20
          ages 0-15       names           per name       singletons          unique names                       name           by between name
                                                                                               years later
                                                                                                                                    variation

Year                                                                         Males
1850         35,597         3,524            10.1             71.9                   7.1            92.6           0.6919            0.1343
1860         48,114         4,083            11.8             70.5                   6.0            93.7           0.6946            0.1108
1870         58,039         4,582            12.7             69.4                   5.5             -             0.6978            0.1053
1880         75,004         6,589            11.4             69.4                   6.1            92.9           0.6529            0.1119
1900        103,817         9,696            10.7             71.0                   6.6            92.8           0.5638            0.1265
1910        117,612         9,818            12.0             69.5                   5.8            94.1           0.5342            0.1256
                                                                          Females
1850         34,272         3,442            10.0             71.9                   7.2            92.4           0.6984            0.1357
1860         46,874         4,488            10.4             70.7                   6.8            92.8           0.6573            0.1320
1870         55,739         5,206            10.7             71.1                   6.6             -             0.6193            0.1356
1880         72,160         7,161            10.1             69.0                   6.8            92.0           0.5475            0.1331
1900        101,516        10,081            10.1             70.9                   7.0            92.3           0.4744            0.1526
1910        114,074        10,103            11.3             69.3                   6.1            93.5           0.4726            0.1545

                                                                                                                              2
Note: Column (7) shows the share of children that have one of the 50 most popular names, by gender. Column (8) shows the R from a regression of
father's log occupational income on a full set of name dummies. Unless noted otherwise, the source for this and all following Tables are the 1850 to
1930 Integrated Public Use Micro Samples of the US decennial population censuses (Ruggles et al., 2010).




                                                                        35
           Table 2: Common Names Given to Children, Ranked by Mean Father's Occupational Income
                                               1850-1930.

                    1850           1860          1870         1880          1900         1910          1920          1930
                                                                    Males

Rank:          Most Prestigious
    1            Edward           Walter        Harry          Paul       Donald       Abraham        Jerome         Irving
    2           Frederick         Frank        Walter         Harry       Kenneth         Max          Irving      Frederick
    3             Edwin           Willie       Herbert      Frederick      Harold       Nathan          Jack        Richard
    4            Charles          Louis       Theodore        Ralph        Morris       Vincent       Nathan         Roger
    5            Franklin          Fred        Edward         Philip        Max        Edmund        Abraham        Robert
               Least Prestigious
      1            Jesse          Levi          Jesse        Luther         Luther       Jessie       Willie          Jose
      2           Hiram          Isaac         Franklin        Ira          Dewey         Otis         Loyd           Loyd
      3            Isaac       Benjamin         Isaac         Isaac          Perry      Luther        Luther         Willie
      4           Daniel        Andrew          Hiram         Willis         Virgil      Eddie        Jessie         Ervin
      5            David         Jacob          Martin       Charley          Ira       Charley        Otis          Archie
                                                                   Females

Rank:          Most Prestigious
    1             Emma              Ada         Bertha        Bessie      Dorothy      Eleanor        Betty         Jeanne
    2              Alice            Kate        Jessie        Mabel       Marion       Marian         Jean           Jane
    3              Anna            Lizzie       Grace         Helen        Helen       Dorothy        Jane          Carolyn
    4            Isabella          Clara        Carrie        Ethel        Louise      Marion        Kathryn          Ann
    5           Josephine          Fanny        Helen        Blanche       Marie       Virginia       Muriel         Joan

               Least Prestigious
      1            Sally       Amanda           Nancy        Nancy          Nancy       Sallie         Lela          Eula
      2            Nancy         Nancy         Lucinda        Viola          Ollie      Addie         Maggie        Lorene
      3           Lucinda       Rachel         Rebecca      Martha          Nannie       Ollie         Ollie        Dortha
      4           Martha       Lucinda         Amanda        Rachel          Sallie     Mattie         Effie         Willie
      5            Lydia        Martha         Martha       Amanda            Alta       Iva           Eula          Opal

               Exact name, nickname or alternative spelling appears more than once (most prestigious).
               Exact name, nickname or alternative spelling appears more than once (least prestigious).

Notes: Entries in the table represent the five children names with the highest and lowest average father occupational score, by
gender and Census year. Only names that appear at least 20 times are considered for the ranking.



                                                              36
                   Table 3. Intergenerational Elasticities in Occupational Income, 1850-1930.

                                             (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)              (5)
                                         1850-1870        1860-1880         1880-1900         1900-1920        1910-1930
Sample:
Sons: baseline                             0.3500            0.3133           0.3440            0.4953           0.4760
                                           (0.0239)          (0.0200)         (0.0166)          (0.0152)         (0.0118)
                                        [37077, 1182]     [50847, 1478]    [80255, 2234]    [109079, 3253]    [122468, 3720]

Son's Age 5-15                             0.3286            0.3050           0.3574            0.4527           0.4199
                                           (0.0293)          (0.0243)         (0.0203)          (0.0173)         (0.0134)
                                         [24336, 984]     [32657, 1257]    [53629, 1860]     [76365, 2782]    [83920, 3257]

Married Sons                               0.2868            0.3433           0.3805            0.4715           0.4428
                                           (0.0312)          (0.0260)         (0.0223)          (0.0178)         (0.0133)
                                         [17912, 891]     [24510, 1155]    [36521, 1641]     [57570, 2586]    [67137, 3051]


Sons in law: baseline                      0.3402            0.4009           0.3992            0.4932           0.4136
                                           (0.0213)          (0.0191)         (0.0183)          (0.0131)         (0.0100)
                                          [23280, 976]     [30081, 1376]    [45804, 2063]     [68439, 2888]    [79314, 3326]


Daughter's Age 5-15                        0.3440            0.3991           0.3918            0.5013           0.4186
                                           (0.0256)          (0.0232)         (0.0214)          (0.0152)         (0.0116)
                                         [17019, 839]     [22037, 1203]    [34712, 1825]     [52967, 2565]    [61308, 2979]

Sons in law 20-35                          0.3283            0.4394           0.3860            0.4889           0.4143
                                           (0.0250)          (0.0224)         (0.0218)          (0.0151)         (0.0116)
                                         [15404, 840]     [20383, 1197]    [30533, 1712]     [46762, 2479]    [54600, 2885]

Sons: Individually linked data                               0.4654           0.4751
                                                             (0.0175)         (0.0120)
                                                              [3947]           [8847]

Notes: Entries in the rows 1-6 represent OLS coefficients from a regression of son's (son-in-law's) log occupational income on
imputed father's (father-in-law's) log occupational income. Standard errors in parentheses. In brackets, the number of
observations used in each regression, and the number of distinct first names used to impute father's (father-in-law's) income.
Row 7 represent the OLS coefficients from a regression of son's occupational income on father's occupational income using the
IPUMS Linked Representative Samples, 1860-1880 and 1880-1900. Standard errors in parentheses, number of observations in
brackets.



                                                             37
                             Table 4. Intergenerational Elasticities 1850-1930.
                              1900 Income Distribution and Farmers' Income.

                                                   (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)

                                              1850-1870 1860-1880 1880-1900 1900-1920 1910-1930

Log occupational income in:                                              A: Fathers-Sons

1950                                            0.3500          0.3133        0.3440        0.4953          0.4760
                                                (0.0239)        (0.0200)     (0.0166)       (0.0152)       (0.0118)

1900                                            0.3502          0.3542        0.3823        0.4471          0.4436
                                                (0.0222)        (0.0189)     (0.0155)       (0.0121)       (0.0101)

1900, imputed farmer wage                       0.3467          0.2879        0.3634        0.4660          0.4701
                                                (0.0284)        (0.0229)     (0.0196)       (0.0150)       (0.0127)

1950 excluding farmers                          0.1899          0.1561        0.1463        0.2540          0.2922
                                                (0.0476)        (0.0359)     (0.0280)       (0.0322)       (0.0277)

1900 excluding farmers                          0.2487          0.2075        0.2320        0.2992          0.2954
                                                (0.0460)        (0.0374)     (0.0329)       (0.0312)       (0.0259)
1950 ex. farmers                                                0.2860        0.3266
    (linked sample)                                             (0.0495)     (0.0340)

N, no. of names: 1950                        [37077, 1182] [50847, 1478][80255, 2234][109079, 3253 [122468, 3720]
N, no. of names: 1950 ex. Farmers             [26988, 741] [36460, 943] [65726, 1529][92664, 2337] [109830, 2845]

                                                                   B: Fathers-Sons in Law
1950                                            0.3402          0.4009     0.3992     0.4932                0.4136
                                                (0.0213)        (0.0191)     (0.0183)       (0.0131)       (0.0100)


1900                                            0.3115          0.4229        0.4120        0.4900          0.4387
                                                (0.0203)        (0.0192)     (0.0182)       (0.0126)       (0.0100)


1900, imputed farmer wage                       0.2509          0.3161        0.3166        0.4415          0.4221
                                                (0.0242)        (0.0205)     (0.0208)       (0.0146)       (0.0120)


1950 excluding Farmers                          0.2150          0.2003        0.1802        0.3270          0.3220
                                                (0.0465)        (0.0303)     (0.0284)       (0.0288)       (0.0227)


1900 excluding Farmers                          0.1986          0.2290        0.2224        0.3490          0.3744
                                                (0.0403)        (0.0316)     (0.0297)       (0.0289)       (0.0248)



N, no. of names: 1950                         [23280, 976] [30081, 1376][45804, 2063][68439, 2888] [79314, 3326]
N, no. of names: 1950 ex. Farmers             [22586, 697] [29344, 1004][44917, 1547][67488, 2313] [78026, 2724]

Notes: Entries in the table represent OLS coefficients from a regression of son's (son-in-law's) log occupational income
on imputed father's (father-in-law's) log occupational income. Different rows use different measures of occupational
income. See text for details of the 1900 occupational income measure, and the imputation procedure for farmer's
income. Standard errors in parentheses. The number of observations used in each regression, and the number of
distinct first names used to impute father's (father-in-law's) income are reported in brackets at the bottom of each
panel.




                                                           38
                              Table 5. Intergenerational Elasticities 1850-1930.
                                Alternative Measures of Occupational Income.

                                          (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)

                                     1850-1870        1860-1880        1880-1900        1900-1920        1910-1930
                                                                   A: Fathers-Sons
1950 (baseline)                        0.3500           0.3133           0.3440           0.4953           0.4760
                                       (0.0239)         (0.0200)         (0.0166)         (0.0152)         (0.0118)
1950 rank                              0.3161           0.3637           0.3621           0.4250           0.4033
                                       (0.0165)         (0.0167)         (0.0137)         (0.0110)         (0.0088)

1990                                   0.2571           0.2069           0.2388           0.3585           0.4159
                                       (0.0260)         (0.0217)         (0.0187)         (0.0163)         (0.0140)

ERSCOR50                               0.2870           0.3584           0.3427           0.4154           0.4005
                                       (0.0197)         (0.0203)         (0.0142)         (0.0115)         (0.0091)

SEI                                    0.2695           0.2979           0.3062           0.4597           0.4684
                                       (0.0204)         (0.0189)         (0.0157)         (0.0135)         (0.0118)


N, no. of names                     [37077, 1182]    [50847, 1478]    [80255, 2234] [109079, 3253] [122468, 3720]

                                                               B: Fathers-Sons in Law
1950 (baseline)                        0.3402           0.4009           0.3992           0.4932           0.4136
                                       (0.0213)         (0.0191)         (0.0183)         (0.0131)         (0.0100)

1950 rank                              0.3087           0.4429           0.4266           0.4902           0.4074
                                       (0.0157)         (0.0171)         (0.0160)         (0.0118)         (0.0092)

1990                                   0.2137           0.2685           0.2586           0.4418           0.3997
                                       (0.0229)         (0.0211)         (0.0218)         (0.0161)         (0.0128)

ERSCOR50                               0.3031           0.4746           0.4228           0.4934           0.4105
                                       (0.0196)         (0.0218)         (0.0175)         (0.0123)         (0.0096)

SEI                                    0.1887           0.3243           0.3244           0.5097           0.4879
                                       (0.0200)         (0.0203)         (0.0213)         (0.0147)         (0.0124)

N, no. of names                      [23280, 976]    [30081, 1376]    [45804, 2063]    [68439, 2888]    [79314, 3326]

Notes: Entries in the table represent OLS coefficients from a regression of son's (son-in-law's) log occupational income
on imputed father's (father-in-law's) log occupational income. Different rows use different measures of occupational
income. ERSCOR50 reports the percentage of persons in occupations having lower standardized median earnings than
the respondent's occupation. SEI is a constructed measure that assigns a Duncan Socioeconomic Index (SEI) score to
each occupation using the 1950 occupational classification. Standard errors in parentheses. The number of observations
used in each regression, and the number of distinct first names used to impute father's (father-in-law's) income are
reported in brackets at the bottom of each panel.




                                                          39
                                                                           Table 6. Intergenerational Elasticities 1850-1930.
                                                                                             Age Controls.

                                (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)                 (5)               (6)              (7)               (8)                (9)              (10)

                                      1850-1870                            1860-1880                             1880-1900                          1900-1920                            1910-1930

Variable:                                                                                                A: Fathers-Sons
Father's Income               0.3500            0.3523             0.3133            0.3307            0.3440        0.3466                 0.4953            0.4855            0.4760             0.4605
                             (0.0239)          (0.0240)           (0.0200)          (0.0199)          (0.0166)      (0.0164)               (0.0152)          (0.0151)          (0.0118)           (0.0117)
Father's age                                    0.0096                               0.0009                              0.0289                               0.0196                               0.0183
                                               (0.0093)                             (0.0080)                            (0.0060)                             (0.0055)                             (0.0043)
Father's age squared                            -0.0001                             -0.0001                             -0.0004                              -0.0002                              -0.0002
                                               (0.0001)                             (0.0001)                            (0.0001)                             (0.0001)                             (0.0001)
Son's age                                       0.1075                               0.0879                              0.1014                               0.0907                               0.1174
                                               (0.0069)                             (0.0058)                            (0.0048)                             (0.0044)                             (0.0039)

Son's age squared                               -0.0017                             -0.0013                             -0.0015                              -0.0014                              -0.0018
                                               (0.0001)                             (0.0001)                            (0.0001)                             (0.0001)                             (0.0001)

N, no. of names                    [37077, 1182]                       [50847, 1478]                        [80255, 2234]                       [109079, 3253]                      [122468, 3720]


                                                                                                     B: Fathers-Sons in Law
Father's Income               0.3402            0.3330             0.4009            0.3873            0.3992       0.3987                  0.4932            0.4869            0.4136             0.4077
                             (0.0213)          (0.0219)           (0.0191)          (0.0192)          (0.0183)     (0.0183)                (0.0131)          (0.0134)          (0.0100)           (0.0102)

Father's age                                    0.0062                               0.0106                              0.0016                               0.0093                               0.0046
                                               (0.0100)                             (0.0085)                            (0.0073)                             (0.0059)                             (0.0040)
Father's age squared                            -0.0001                             -0.0002                              -0.0000                              -0.0001                             -0.0001
                                               (0.0001)                             (0.0001)                            (0.0001)                             (0.0001)                             (0.0000)

Son's age                                       0.0447                               0.0328                               0.0282                              0.0179                               0.0249
                                               (0.0029)                             (0.0020)                            (0.0018)                             (0.0013)                             (0.0013)
Son's age squared                               -0.0006                             -0.0004                             -0.0004                              -0.0002                              -0.0003
                                               (0.0000)                             (0.0000)                            (0.0000)                             (0.0000)                             (0.0000)

N, no. of names                    [23280, 976]                        [30081, 1376]                        [45804, 2063]                       [68439, 2888]                        [79314, 3326]

Notes: Entries in the table represent OLS coefficients from a regression of son's (son-in-law's) log occupational income on imputed father's (father-in-law's) log occupational income. Son's age is taken from
the individual level data. Father's age is imputed using the average father's age by son's first name in the earlier sample. Standard errors in parentheses. The number of observations used in each regression,
and the number of distinct first names used to impute father's (father-in-law's) income are reported in brackets at the bottom of each panel.




                                                                                                      40
                          Table 7. Moments and Parameters Used in the Simulations

Moments                               Simulation                        Data             Source

                                           0.464                        0.465            1860-1880 Linked sample
                                           0.158                        0.160            1860-1880 Linked sample
                                           0.314                        0.313            1860 and 1880 1% samples
                                           0.011                        0.011            1860 1% sample
Share of top 50 names                      0.695                        0.695            1860 1% sample
R-squared                                  0.105                        0.111            1860 1% sample


                                         Distance minimizing parameters
                         γ₁          λ              σ2u          σ² v          σ 2 CON     σ 2 SES
                       0.421       0.191           0.092        0.031          7.833       5.958

Notes: Entries in the top part of the table represent the data moments and the simulated moments at the distance-
minimizing parameters reported in the bottom part of the table. The parameter estimates are obtained using equal-
weighted minimum distance. See text for details of the simulation.




                                                           41
                       Table 8. The Effects of the Features of the Name Distribution on Estimated Elasticities
                                                         Simulation Results.

                                  (1)                  (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)                   (7)

 Concetration of
     the name                                         Socio-economic content of names (σ2ses)
distribution (σ2con)
                                   0                    1                3             5.958              10               20                    30



         2.5                  η=0.0345              0.1131           0.2301           0.3107           0.3735           0.4343                0.4662
                        [share50= 0.3444]           [0.344]         [0.3437]         [0.3452]         [0.3468]         [0.3542]              [0.3651]

                            (R2=0.1078)            (0.1139)         (0.1269)         (0.1421)         (0.1592)         (0.1897)               (0.209)

          5                    0.0275               0.1073           0.2203           0.3087           0.3757           0.4385                0.4616
                              [0.5526]             [0.5524]         [0.5521]         [0.5517]          [0.552]         [0.5542]              [0.5584]
                              (0.0894)             (0.0967)         (0.1084)         (0.1232)         (0.1406)         (0.1718)              (0.1901)

        7.833                  0.0139               0.1160           0.2246           0.3144           0.3794           0.4494                0.4746
                              [0.6976]             [0.6965]         [0.6958]         [0.6952]         [0.6949]         [0.6947]              [0.6972]
                              (0.0713)             (0.0774)         (0.0898)         (0.1053)         (0.1215)         (0.1519)              (0.1716)

          10                   0.0146               0.1169           0.2324           0.3148           0.3890            0.457                  0.48
                              [0.7638]             [0.7638]         [0.7636]         [0.7623]         [0.7615]         [0.7609]               [0.761]
                              (0.0605)             (0.0666)         (0.0774)         (0.0922)         (0.1098)          (0.138)              (0.1596)

          15                   0.0122               0.1209           0.2419           0.3385           0.4009           0.4703                0.4892
                              [0.8444]             [0.8447]         [0.8438]         [0.8428]          [0.842]         [0.8408]              [0.8396]
                              (0.0441)             (0.0498)         (0.0599)         (0.0736)           (0.09)         (0.1191)              (0.1394)

Notes: The entries in the table represent the estimated moments based on 15 simulated pseudo-panels. The first number in each cell is the
intergenerational elasticity; the second number (in parentheses) is the population share of the 50 most popular names; and the third number (in
square brackets) is the R2 in a regression of father's socioeconomic status on a full set of name fixed effects. The parameters γ1, λ, σ2u and σ2v are
                                                                                                                                  2
set to the minimizing values listed in the bottom panel of Table 7. The entry in bold represents the minimizing combination of σ      SES   and σ2CON.




                                                                         42
                    Table 9. The Effects of Changes in the Income Generating Process on Estimated Elasticities
                                                        Simulation Results.

                             (1)                  (2)                  (4)                   (5)                  (6)                   (7)


 Persistence of                                                  Persistence of income shock (λ):
  income (γ1):
                              0                   0.1                 0.191                  0.3                  0.4                  0.5


        0.1              η=0.0502               0.1070               0.1543               0.2239                0.2931               0.3763
                    [share50=0.6953]           [0.6952]             [0.6952]              [0.695]              [0.6956]             [0.6948]
                        (R2=0.105)             (0.1057)             (0.1081)             (0.1109)              (0.1168)             (0.1268)

        0.2                0.1024               0.1591               0.2080               0.2796                0.3496               0.4340
                          [0.6953]             [0.6952]             [0.6952]              [0.695]              [0.6956]             [0.6948]
                          (0.1039)             (0.1053)             (0.1081)             (0.1115)              (0.1182)             (0.1292)

        0.3                0.1518               0.2084               0.2591               0.3330                0.4039               0.4897
                          [0.6953]             [0.6952]             [0.6952]              [0.695]              [0.6956]             [0.6948]
                          (0.1022)             (0.1041)             (0.1074)             (0.1113)              (0.1186)             (0.1305)
      0.421                0.2049               0.2613               0.3144               0.3915                0.4641               0.5522
                          [0.6953]             [0.6952]            [0.6952]               [0.695]              [0.6956]             [0.6948]
                          (0.0992)             (0.1016)            (0.1053)              (0.1097)              (0.1175)             (0.1303)

        0.5                0.2331               0.2892               0.3438               0.4233                0.4975               0.5878
                          [0.6953]             [0.6952]             [0.6952]              [0.695]              [0.6956]             [0.6948]
                          (0.0967)             (0.0993)             (0.1031)             (0.1077)              (0.1156)             (0.1289)
        0.6                0.2582               0.3137               0.3701               0.4526                0.5291               0.6236
                          [0.6953]             [0.6952]             [0.6952]              [0.695]              [0.6956]             [0.6948]
                          (0.0928)             (0.0956)             (0.0994)              (0.104)              (0.1118)             (0.1251)

Notes: The entries in the table represent the estimated moments based on 15 simulated pseudo-panels. The first number in each cell is the pseudo-
elasticity; the second number (in parentheses) is the population share of the 50 most popular names; and the third number (in square brackets) is
the R2 in a regression of father's socioeconomic status on a full set of name fixed effects. The parameters σ2SES, σ2CON, σ2u and σ2v are set to the
minimizing values listed in the bottom panel of Table 7. The entry in bold represents the minimizing combination of γ1 and λ.




                                                                        43
                                          Table 10. Fertility and Birth order

                                               (1)             (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)

                                          1850-1870       1860-1880         1880-1900         1900-1920        1910-1930
                                                                         A: Fathers-Sons

Baseline                                    0.3500           0.3133           0.3440            0.4953            0.4760
                                            (0.0239)         (0.0200)         (0.0166)          (0.0152)          (0.0118)

Control for number of siblings              0.2836           0.2735           0.3444            0.5024            0.4740
                                            (0.0255)         (0.0214)         (0.0168)          (0.0157)          (0.0121)

Control for birth order                     0.3277           0.2860           0.3433            0.4974            0.4642
                                           (0.0247)         (0.0207)         (0.0166)          (0.0154)          (0.0119)

N, no. names (baseline)                  [37077, 1182] [50847, 1478]       [80255, 2234]    [109079, 3253] [122468, 3720]




                                                                     B: Fathers-Sons in Law
Baseline                                    0.3402           0.4009           0.3992            0.4932            0.4136
                                            (0.0213)         (0.0191)         (0.0183)          (0.0131)          (0.0100)

Control for number of siblings              0.2920           0.3044           0.3949            0.4651            0.3815
                                            (0.0239)         (0.0210)         (0.0190)          (0.0140)          (0.0109)

Control for birth order                     0.3289           0.3659           0.3962            0.4734            0.3951
                                           (0.0215)         (0.0197)         (0.0184)          (0.0133)          (0.0104)
N, no. names (baseline)                   [23280, 976]    [30081, 1376]    [45804, 2063]     [68439, 2888]     [79314, 3326]

Notes: Entries in the table represent OLS coefficients from a regression of son's (son-in-law's) log occupational income
on imputed father's (father-in-law's) log occupational income. Number of siblings is imputed using the average number of
siblings for individuals with a given first name. Controls for birth order are the share of individuals with a given first name
that are first-born, second-born, and higher order. Standard errors in parentheses. The number of observations used in
each regression, and the number of distinct first names used to impute father's (father-in-law's) income are reported in
brackets at the bottom of each panel.




                                                              44
                                       Table 11. Immigration and Internal Migration

                                                      (1)                  (2)               (3)                (4)                (5)

                                                 1850-1870          1860-1880          1880-1900           1900-1920          1910-1930
                                                                                    A: Fathers-Sons

Baseline                                            0.3500            0.3133              0.3440             0.4953             0.4760
                                                   (0.0239)           (0.0200)            (0.0166)           (0.0152)           (0.0118)
Control for immigrant status:
          Son                                       0.2992            0.2769              0.3247             0.4705             0.4659
                                                   (0.0235)           (0.0198)            (0.0165)           (0.0151)           (0.0118)

              Son and father                                          0.2367              0.2883             0.4420             0.4368
                                                                      (0.0195)            (0.0163)           (0.0150)           (0.0117)

Control for internal migrant status:
          Son                                       0.2984            0.2766              0.3249             0.4708             0.4667
                                                   (0.0235)           (0.0198)            (0.0164)           (0.0151)           (0.0118)

              Son and father                                          0.2328              0.2862             0.4387             0.4342
                                                                      (0.0195)            (0.0163)           (0.0150)           (0.0117)

N, no. names (baseline)                         [37077, 1182] [50847, 1478] [80255, 2234] [109079, 3253] [122468, 3720]



                                                                                 B: Fathers-Sons in Law

Baseline                                            0.3402            0.4009              0.3992             0.4932             0.4136
                                                   (0.0213)           (0.0191)            (0.0183)           (0.0131)           (0.0100)
Control for immigrant status:
          Son-in-law, daughter                      0.2720            0.3625              0.3676             0.4773             0.4086
                                                   (0.0211)           (0.0190)            (0.0182)           (0.0131)           (0.0101)

              Son-in-law, daughter                      -             0.3254              0.3122             0.4433             0.3815
              and fathers                                             (0.0188)            (0.0180)           (0.0131)           (0.0101)

Control for internal migrant status:
          Son-in-law, daughter                      0.2722            0.3619              0.3640             0.4733             0.4043
                                                   (0.0211)           (0.0190)            (0.0182)           (0.0131)           (0.0100)

              Son-in-law, daughter                      -             0.3215              0.3051             0.4372             0.3743
              and fathers                                             (0.0188)            (0.0180)           (0.0130)           (0.0100)


N, no. names                                    [37077, 1182] [50847, 1478] [80255, 2234] [109079, 3253] [122468, 3720]

Notes: Entries in the table represent OLS coefficients from a regression of son's (son-in-law's) log occupational income on imputed father's
(father-in-law's) log occupational income. Immigrants are defined to be all those born outside of the United States. Internal migrants are
those who live in a state different from their state of birth. Immigrant status and internal migrant status are taken from the individual level
data. Father's immigrant status was not available in the 1870 Census. Standard errors in parentheses. The number of observations used in
each regression, and the number of distinct first names used to impute father's (father-in-law's) income are reported in brackets at the
bottom of each panel.




                                                                      45
                          Table 12. Differences in Economic Development across U.S. States

                                                       (1)               (2)           (3)              (4)              (5)

                                                  1850-1870           1860-1880     1880-1900      1900-1920        1910-1930
                                                                                  A: Fathers-Sons

All                                                  0.3500            0.3133        0.3440           0.4953          0.4760
                                                     (0.0239)          (0.0200)      (0.0166)        (0.0152)         (0.0118)

Control for state of residence                       0.2765            0.1943        0.2108           0.2746          0.2799
                                                     (0.0228)          (0.0189)      (0.0156)        (0.0142)         (0.0111)

Control for %urban, %agriculture                     0.2784            0.1975        0.2013           0.2633          0.2656
                                                     (0.0228)          (0.0188)      (0.0156)        (0.0142)         (0.0110)


N, no. names (all)                                [37077, 1182] [50847, 1478]      [80255, 2234] [109079, 3253] [122468, 3720]

                                                                            B: Fathers-Sons in Law
All                                                  0.3402            0.4009      0.3992       0.4932                0.4136
                                                     (0.0213)          (0.0191)      (0.0183)        (0.0131)         (0.0100)


Control of state of residence                        0.2474            0.2947        0.2509           0.3199          0.2600
                                                     (0.0205)          (0.0182)      (0.0175)        (0.0127)         (0.0099)

Control for %urban, %agriculture                     0.2513            0.2988        0.2517           0.3177          0.2550
                                                     (0.0204)          (0.0181)      (0.0174)        (0.0127)         (0.0098)

N, no. names                                      [23280, 976]    [30081, 1376]    [45804, 2063]   [68439, 2888]   [79314, 3326]

Notes: Entries in the table represent OLS coefficients from a regression of son's (son-in-law's) log occupational income on imputed
father's (father-in-law's) log occupational income. Percent urban and percent agriculture are the percentage of the whole state
population who are urban and employed in agriculture, respectively. Standard errors in parentheses. The number of observations
used in each regression, and the number of distinct first names used to impute father's (father-in-law's) income are reported in
brackets at the bottom of each panel.




                                                                 46
                                 Table 13. Intergenerational Elasticities by Region of Birth.

                                                         (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)              (5)

                                                    1850-1870         1860-1880          1880-1900         1900-1920         1910-1930
                                                                                    A: Fathers-Sons

All                                                    0.3500            0.3133             0.3440            0.4953            0.4760
                                                       (0.0239)          (0.0200)          (0.0166)           (0.0152)         (0.0118)


Northeast                                              0.2948            0.2539             0.1677            0.2187            0.1918
                                                       (0.0383)          (0.0337)          (0.0310)           (0.0279)         (0.0224)

Midwest                                                0.1499            0.2521             0.2677            0.2771            0.2701
                                                       (0.0468)          (0.0368)          (0.0315)           (0.0279)         (0.0230)

South                                                  0.4593            0.1591             0.2878            0.3081            0.3641
                                                       (0.0564)          (0.0337)          (0.0311)           (0.0293)         (0.0229)


N, no. names (all)                                 [37077, 1182] [50847, 1478]          [80255, 2234] [109079, 3253][122468, 3720]
N, no. names (northeast)                            [11461, 580]      [14846, 672]       [19327, 727]      [23818, 891] [29959, 1040]
N, no. names (midwest)                               [7091, 442]      [12713, 629]      [25372, 1039] [35418, 1406] [38069, 1589]
N, no. names (south)                                 [7709, 474]      [11481, 607]       [16570, 973]      [23490, 1558] [30305, 1965]


                                                                             B: Fathers-Sons in Law
All                                                    0.3402            0.4009       0.3992      0.4932                        0.4136
                                                       (0.0213)          (0.0191)          (0.0183)           (0.0131)         (0.0100)

Northeast                                              0.2014            0.2221             0.3111            0.2743            0.2100
                                                       (0.0380)          (0.0382)          (0.0409)           (0.0333)         (0.0261)


Midwest                                                0.3471            0.3811             0.3289            0.3371            0.3015
                                                       (0.0520)          (0.0353)          (0.0337)           (0.0238)         (0.0183)

South                                                  0.3975            0.3303             0.3192            0.4649            0.3791
                                                       (0.0478)          (0.0286)          (0.0306)           (0.0252)         (0.0178)

N,   no.   names   (all)                            [23280, 976]      [30081,   1376]   [45804, 2063] [68439, 2888] [79314, 3326]
N,   no.   names   (northeast)                       [6602, 448]       [8102,   559]      [9741, 602]  [12819, 769] [16865, 923]
N,   no.   names   (midwest)                         [4877, 354]       [7883,   586]     [14957, 964] [22529, 1340] [24911, 1457]
N,   no.   names   (south)                           [5337, 408]       [7200,   587]     [10413, 926] [16556, 1335] [21104, 1625]

Notes: Entries in the table represent OLS coefficients from a regression of son's (son-in-law's) log occupational income on imputed father's
(father-in-law's) log occupational income. Standard errors in parentheses. The region-specific elasticities are obtained by imputing father's
income as the average income of fathers of children with a given first name who lived in the same region. At the bottom of each panel, the
number of observations used in each regression, and the number of distinct first names used to impute father's (father-in-law's) income.




                                                                          47
                                  Appendix Table 1. Calculation of 1900 Wage Assigned to Farmers

                                                                 Percent of "farmers" Default weight assigned to               1901 wage
 Name of 1910 occupation assigned 1950 occupation                with this occupation  this occupation's wage                assigned to this
              of "farmer" at least once                                in 1910                (out of 1)                     1910 occupation
          Farmers, general farms (owners)                              57.55%                                                      576
          Farmers, general farms (tenants)                             35.97%                                                      334
             Farm laborers, home farm                                   2.07%                   0.384                              255
                      Gardeners                                         1.37%                   0.253                              413
                    Dairy farmers                                       1.05%                                                      576
                     Stock raisers                                      0.75%                   0.139                              334
                     Fruit growers                                      0.73%                   0.135                              334
                    Poultry raisers                                     0.17%                   0.032                              334
                         Florists                                       0.15%                   0.028                              593
             Farm laborers, working out                                 0.04%                   0.008                              255
                     Nurserymen                                         0.04%                   0.007                              593
            Dairy foremen, general farms                                0.03%                   0.006                              750
                 Sugar cane farmer                                      0.02%                                                      576
                        Apiarists                                       0.02%                   0.003                              334
        Livery stable keepers and managers                              0.01%                   0.002                              502
                    Coffee farmers                                      0.01%                                                      576
        Stock herders, drovers, and feeders                             0.01%                   0.001                              334
           Other and not specified pursuits                             0.01%                   0.001                              334
                   Garden laborers                                      0.00%                   0.001                              255
            Orchard and nursery laborers                                0.00%                   0.001                              255
   Corn shellers, hay balers, grain threshers, etc.                     0.00%                   0.000                              255
                       Policemen                                        0.00%                   0.000                              887
              Default wage to farmers:                                                                                            335.04
       Wage to farmers with income imputation:                                                                                    475.93

Notes: The table records all the occupations in the 1910 Census that were coded as farmers in the 1950 occupational classification scheme, and
the fraction of each occupation out of the total. Column (2) shows the weights used to calculate the default average wage for farmers. This is the
average wage assigned to all farmers in Table 4, second row of each panel. Column (3) records the income data for specialized farming occupations
from Preston and Haines (1991). See text for details on the calculation of income for owner-occupier farmers and farm tenants.




                                                                        48
                             Appendix Table 2: 30-year elasticities

                                        (1)                 (2)                (3)             (4)

                                   1850-1880            1870-1900         1880-1910        1900-1930
Sample:
Sons: baseline                        0.2311              0.3108             0.3189          0.3871
                                     (0.0185)             (0.0165)          (0.0156)         (0.0123)


N, no. names                       [37778, 1240]        [64972, 1645]    [83447, 2240]   [115713, 3313]

Sons in law: baseline                 0.2913              0.3315             0.3726          0.4144
                                     (0.0189)             (0.0167)          (0.0174)         (0.0108)


N, no. names                       [26311, 1093]    [43954, 1655]       [56494, 2105]    [87271, 3152]

Notes: Entries in the table represent OLS coefficients from a regression of son's (son-in-law's) log
occupational income on imputed father's (father-in-law's) log occupational income. Standard errors in
parentheses. The number of observations used in each regression, and the number of distinct first names
used to impute father's (father-in-law's) income are reported in brackets at the bottom of each panel.




                                                   49
                       Table A3. Sensitivity to Different Name Coding Schemes.

                                    (1)            (2)               (3)             (4)               (5)

                                1850-1870      1860-1880         1880-1900       1900-1920         1910-1930

                                                            A: Fathers-Sons
Name concept:
All                               0.3500         0.3133            0.3440          0.4953            0.4760
                                  (0.0239)       (0.0200)          (0.0166)        (0.0152)          (0.0118)

Middle initials                   0.3400         0.3112            0.3291          0.4189            0.4389
                                  (0.0230)       (0.0191)          (0.0156)        (0.0136)          (0.0111)

Nicknames                         0.3673         0.3310            0.3412          0.4489            0.4268
                                  (0.0246)       (0.0207)          (0.0176)        (0.0159)          (0.0123)

Soundex codes                     0.4212         0.4041            0.4771          0.5571            0.5530
                                  (0.0304)       (0.0250)          (0.0223)        (0.0184)          (0.0155)


N, no. names (All)             [37077, 1182] [50847, 1478]       [80255, 2234] [109079, 3253][122468, 3720]
N, no. names (M.I.)            [36685, 1419] [50243, 1789]       [79227, 2676] [107721, 3910][120706, 4605]
N, no. names (Nicknames) [37172, 1138] [50947, 1415]             [80315, 2107] [109098, 3111][122501, 3581]
N, no. names (Soundex)          [39262, 887]   [54941, 995]      [84686, 1248] [116154, 1595][130274, 1623]

                                                     B: Fathers-Sons in Law
All                               0.3402         0.4009            0.3992          0.4932            0.4136
                                  (0.0213)       (0.0191)          (0.0183)        (0.0131)          (0.0100)


Middle initials                   0.3441         0.3619            0.3771          0.4249            0.3834
                                  (0.0208)       (0.0179)          (0.0170)        (0.0122)          (0.0096)


Nicknames                         0.4360         0.4152            0.4135          0.4551            0.3882
                                  (0.0258)       (0.0204)          (0.0189)        (0.0140)          (0.0107)


Soundex codes                     0.5907         0.5543            0.5570          0.6122            0.4944
                                  (0.0305)       (0.0257)          (0.0256)        (0.0176)          (0.0134)


N,   no.   names   (All)        [23280, 976] [30081, 1376]       [45804, 2063]   [68439,   2888]   [79314,   3326]
N,   no.   names   (M.I.)      [22954, 1142] [29682, 1644]       [45239, 2459]   [67637,   3496]   [77963,   4083]
N,   no.   names   (Nicknames) [23627, 945] [30152, 1309]        [45814, 1958]   [68445,   2787]   [79322,   3227]
N,   no.   names   (Soundex)    [25482, 566] [32626, 705]         [48695, 855]   [72906,   1113]   [84541,   1198]

Notes: Entries in the table represent OLS coefficients from a regression of son's (son-in-law's) log
occupational income on imputed father's (father-in-law's) log occupational income. Standard errors in
parentheses. The "middle initials" row groups separately names with and without middle initials: "John" is a
separate category from "John M.," but "John M." and "John H." belong to the same category. The
"nicknames" row groups together common nicknames associated to a given first name: "Johnny" is the
same as "John". The "Soundex codes" row groups together all names that have the same Soundex code. At
the bottom of each panel, the number of observations used in each regression, and the number of distinct
first names used to impute father's (father-in-law's) income.



                                                            50
