NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GROWTH OPTIONS AND FIRM VALUATION
Holger Kraft
Eduardo S. Schwartz
Farina Weiss
Working Paper 18836
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18836
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013

We thank participants of the 12th Colloquium on Financial Markets in Cologne, the Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco Seminar, the 20th Annual Meeting of the German Finance Association and
the Arne Ryde Workshop in Financial Economics in Lund for helpful comments and suggestions.
We also thank Vikas Agarwal, Michael Brennan, Thomas Dimp, Dieter Hess,˛and Paul Soederlind
for valuable comments and discussions. Finally, we thank an anonymous referee and John A. Doukas
(the editor) for their suggestions which we feel improved the quality of the paper. All remaining errors
are of course our own. Holger Kraft gratefully acknowledges financial support by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG) as well as the Center of Excellence SAFE, funded by the State of Hessen initiative for research
LOEWE. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Holger Kraft, Eduardo S. Schwartz, and Farina Weiss. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Growth Options and Firm Valuation
Holger Kraft, Eduardo S. Schwartz, and Farina Weiss
NBER Working Paper No. 18836
February 2013, Revised April 2017
JEL No. G12
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the relation between firm value and a firm's growth options. We find strong empirical
evidence that (average) Tobin's Q increases with firm-level volatility. The significance mainly comes
from R&D firms, which have more growth options than non-R&D firms. By decomposing firm-level
volatility into its systematic and unsystematic part, we document that only idiosyncratic volatility has
a significant effect on valuation. Second, we analyze the relation of stock returns to realized contemporaneous
idiosyncratic volatility and R&D expenses. Single sorting on idiosyncratic volatility yields a significant
negative relation between portfolio alphas and contemporaneous idiosyncratic volatility for non-R&D
portfolios, whereas in a four-factor model the portfolio alphas of R&D portfolios are all positive. Double
sorting on idiosyncratic volatility and R&D expenses also reveals these differences between R&D
and non-R&D firms. To control for several explanatory variables simultaneously, we also run panel
regressions of firm-level alphas which confirm the relative importance of idiosyncratic volatility that
is amplified by R&D expenses. Finally, we show that our results are robust to the definition of idiosyncratic
volatility. We tease out the "true" idiosyncratic volatilities by performing a principal-component analysis
on the residuals of Fama-French regressions and find that our main results still hold for this alternative
definition of idiosyncratic volatility.
Holger Kraft
Goethe University
Grueneburgplatz 1
65323 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
holgerkaft@finance.uni-frankfurt.de
Eduardo S. Schwartz
Anderson Graduate School of Management
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
eduardo.schwartz@anderson.ucla.edu

Farina Weiss
Goethe University
Frankfurt, Germany
Farina.Weiss@hof.uni-frankfurt.de

1

Introduction

The market value of a firm is the sum of the present value of the cash flows generated by the
assets in place and its growth options.1 Real option theory suggests that values of growth
options are positively related to the volatility of firm value (or a firm’s cash flows).2 Everything
else equal, we thus expect the market value of a firm to increase in volatility. Depending on
whether a firm belongs to a growing or mature industry, this dependance is more or less strong.
For instance, R&D as opposed to non-R&D firms are supposed to have more growth options
and in turn should be more affected by volatility. In this paper, we first study the relation of
firm value and volatility and find empirical evidence that Tobin’s Q is positively related to a
firm’s stock volatility that serves as a proxy for the volatility of the underlying growth options.3
As suggested by real options theory, we document that this relation is much stronger for R&D
firms than for non-R&D firms.
Volatility however consists of a systematic and an unsystematic (idiosyncratic) part. By definition, the systematic part should be priced and thus expected returns should be affected
by systematic volatility. In contrast standard capital-market theory suggests that idiosyncratic
risk has no effect on expected returns.4 Therefore, the effects of these two volatility components
on firm value are different: Although both components increase the value of growth options,
systematic volatility also increases discount rates that are used to discount future cash flows of a
firm. Hence, the effect of systematic volatility on firm value is ambiguous. We thus decompose
volatility into its systematic and unsystematic part. Our line of argument so far suggests that
the effect of unsystematic volatility should be stronger than the effect of systematic volatility.
Besides, the effect of unsystematic volatility should be the strongest for firms that have a lot
of growth options (e.g. R&D firms). Our empirical results support these predictions: Whereas
Tobin’s Q is hardly affected by systematic volatility, there is a pronounced effect for unsystem1

See, e.g., Berk, Green, and Naik (1999).
Brennan and Schwartz (1985) and McDonald and Siegel (1986).
3
See, e.g., Grullon, Lyandres, and Zhdanov (2012).
4
There are however models where unsystematic risk is priced. For instance, Merton (1987) sets up a model
2

where investors hold undiversified portfolios and thus demand a risk premium for unsystematic risk.

1

atic volatility. In particular, the effect for R&D firm observations is significantly stronger than
for non-R&D firm observations.
Importantly, we also extend the existing literature by addressing concerns about missing factors
in the Fama-French model (see, e.g., Chen and Petkova (2012)). We perform a principalcomponent analysis (PCA) on the residuals of the Fama-French regressions that are used to
calculate the idiosyncratic volatillity. This allows us to tear out the systematic part of these
residuals and to compute the “truly” idiosyncratic volatility which is the idiosyncratic volatility
after subtracting the first two factor of the PCA.5 On average the first factor explains about 2%
of the remaining variation. Since there is not much systematic variation left in the residuals of
the Fama-French regressions, it turns out that our above described results stand even for this
alternative definition of idiosyncratic volatility.
Finally, we analyze the relation of realized stock returns to realized contemporaneous idiosyncratic volatility (ivol) and R&D expenses where we again split the whole sample into subsamples of R&D and non-R&D observations. Single sorting on idiosyncratic volatility yields
a significant negative relation between abnormal stock returns and contemporaneous ivol for
non-R&D portfolios,6 whereas in a four-factor model the portfolio alphas of R&D portfolios
are all positive. This confirms the intuition that the values of growth options increase in (idiosyncratic) volatility and thus a larger ivol leads to higher contemporaneous returns. We also
document that, although for R&D portfolios the average Tobin’s Q and R&D expenses increase
in average ivol, the relation is flat for non-R&D portfolios.7 In other words, both sub-samples
are very distinct with respect to the sizes and patterns of R&D expenses and Tobin’s Q. On the
5

We thank an anonymous referee for this suggestion. This is similar to Herskovic, Kelly, Lustig, and Nieuwer-

burgh (2016), but they perform a PCA on the excess returns, whereas we run it on the residuals of Fama-French
regressions.
6
Notice that we consider a contemporaneous relation between the two. This should not be confused with the
so-called “ivol anomaly” which refers to the empirical finding that stocks with high (low) idiosyncratic volatility
have abnormally low and negative (high and positive) expected average returns. See, e.g., Ang, Hodrick, Xing,
and Zhang (2006).
7
By definition, R&D expenses are zero for non-R&D portfolios so that these portfolios have trivially a flat
relation for R&D expenses.

2

contrary, the average ivols of the portfolios are similar. This finding is in line with our panel regression results that idiosyncratic volatility is particularly pricing relevant when it is interacted
with an R&D dummy. Double sorting on idiosyncratic volatility and R&D expenses supports
our findings for portfolio alphas: For high R&D observations all (three and four-factor) alphas
are positive, whereas for low or zero R&D observations alphas in general are postive for low-ivol
portfolios and negative for high-ivol portfolios. Besides, all difference portfolios (high minus
low or zero R&D for given ivol level) have positive alphas where 17 out of 20 are individually
significant.
Since a single-sort on ivol simultaneously leads to orderings with respect to other variables (e.g.
size, leverage, firm-level volatility, skewness), we also run panel regressions of firm-level alphas
where we can simultaneously control for several explanatory variables. Our results suggest
that firm-level alphas depend on firm-level volatility, but predominately via its idiosyncratic
part. These effects are amplified for R&D observations. Again we address concerns about
missing factors in the Fama-French model. We thus run our main regressions using the “true”
idiosyncratic volatilities (after performing a PCA) and confirm that the results essentially also
hold for this alternative definition of ivol.
Our paper is related to an increasing literature on the cross-sectional relation between returns
and volatility or idiosyncratic volatility. Duffee (1995) documents a positive relation between
stock returns and volatility at the firm level. Concerning idiosyncratic volatility, several empirical studies find evidence that expected returns vary systematically with idiosyncratic risk.
This is in contrast to standard capital-market models such as the CAPM and the Fama-French
model, which predict no relation between expected returns and idiosyncratic volatility. Ang,
Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2006, 2009) measure idiosyncratic volatility relative to the FamaFrench model and find a negative relation between expected returns and idiosyncratic risk
(ivol anomaly). By measuring volatility in a different way, Fu (2009) and Fink, Fink, and He
(2012) find that expected returns and idiosyncratic volatility are positively related. Our paper
adds to this extensive literature. Motivated by the work from Cochrane (2011), we study the
cross-sectional price variation and first concentrate on firm value. In contrast to the existing

3

literature, we then study the contemporaneous relation between (abnormal) returns and idiosyncratic volatility, which complements our analysis for values. Similar to our results, Fink,
Fink, and He (2012) find empirical evidence for a positive contemporaneous ivol-return relation.
Our paper is also related to the real option pricing literature that started with the papers
by Brennan and Schwartz (1985) and McDonald and Siegel (1986). Option values increase
in volatility (both systematic and idiosyncratic), which indicates why idiosyncratic volatility
might be priced if a firm has growth options.
Several papers have examined the effect of volatility on returns (but not the effect of volatility
on prices) and use real option theory to explain their observations. Grullon, Lyandres, and
Zhdanov (2012) find evidence that expected returns increase in (firm-level) volatility. This
relation is much stronger for firms with more real options. An important difference with our
paper is however that they consider expected returns and do not decompose volatility into a
systematic and an idiosyncratic part. Chen and Petkova (2012) consider idiosyncratic volatility
and focus on the ivol anomaly. They suggest that their observed negative relation between
idiosyncratic volatility and return in the Fama-French model arises from a missing factor. By
introducing a new factor (a component of aggregated market variance), they can explain the
ivol anomaly and relate this factor to a firm’s growth options. In our paper, we also examine
the effect of contemporaneous volatility on firm values and propose a growth option explanation
for cross-sectional differences in firm values. We find clear evidence that firm value increases
in firm-level volatility and this effect is stronger for firms with higher R&D expenses. These
results are in line with the findings of Connolly and Hirschey (2005) and Czarnitzki, Hall, and
Oriani (2006), who show that the amount of R&D expenses is a significant determinant of firm
value.
Cao, Simin, and Zhao (2008) provide a link between growth options and the value-weighted
average of idiosyncratic firm-level volatility. They show that average aggregated idiosyncratic
volatility is positively related to growth options and that these options can explain the increasing aggregate idiosyncratic volatility over the last decades. Bekaert, Hodrick, and Zhang
(2013) study aggregate idiosyncratic volatility in 23 countries and document that it is highly

4

correlated across countries. They find that idiosyncratic volatility can be explained by growth
opportunities and a business cycle sensitive risk indicator. These findings are in line with our
results that firm values increase in (idiosyncratic) volatility due to growth options.
Pastor and Veronesi (2003) develop a framework for valuing stocks whose average future profitability is unknown. They find that uncertainty about a firm’s average profitability increases
its idiosyncratic return volatility. This uncertainty is especially large for the newly listed firms.
Kogan and Papanikolaou (2012) develop a theoretical model in which a firm’s sensitivity to
technological shocks is a function of the ratio between growth opportunities and firm value.
Firms with more growth options benefit more from positive technological shocks than firms
with limited investment opportunities. Hence, differences in the ratio between growth opportunities and firm value lead to difference in returns, and technological shocks lead to differences
in stock returns across firms.
Finally, our paper is related to the q-theory of investment that studies the relation between
investment decisions and firm value. Belo and Zhang (2010) combine q-theory and asset pricing
literature. They develop a neoclassical model to study the determinants of firm value and focus
on the investment-to-capital ratio to explain cross-sectional differences in firm value.8
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 discusses the economic hypotheses. Section 3 describes the data set and introduces definitions of variables. Section 4
presents results of benchmark panel regressions. Section 5 studies how these results change
when we decompose volatility into a systematic and an idiosyncratic part. Section 6 analyzes
the relation of R&D expenses and realized idiosyncratic volatility with contemporaneous stock
returns. To address concerns about missing factors in the Fama-French model, Section 7 decomposes the idiosyncratic firm-level volatility of the Fama-French model into a part that is
explained by a principal-component analysis and a residual that is still unexplained. We redo
our main analyses using these residuals and confirm that our main findings still stand. Section
8 concludes.
8

For further literature that studies the effect of real investment decisions on asset prices and returns see,

e.g., Chan, Lakonishok, and Sougiannis (2001), Desai, Wright, Chuang, and Charoenwong (2003), Aguerrevere
(2009), Carlson, Fisher, and Giammarino (2010), and Hackbarth and Johnson (2012).

5

2

Economic Hypotheses

Following Berk, Green, and Naik (1999), we posit that firm value is the sum of the present
value of cash flows of assets in place and the value of a firm’s growth options (call options).
Tobin’s Q is then defined as the ratio of firm value and book value.
Our first analysis consists in panel regressions of Tobin’s Q on the variables that affect the value
of the growth options, controlling for other factors that may have an impact on firm valuation.
Our regressions involve long-term interest rates that affect discount rates and call option prices,
but in different directions. Present values decrease in discount rates, whereas call option prices
increase. Additionally, interest rates also vary with the business cycle. Therefore, the overall
effect of interest rates on firm value is not obvious.
Motivated by the findings of Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2006) that aggregate volatility
risk is priced, we add the volatility of the S&P 500 index to our regressions. Since market
volatility is a measure of global risk, we expect Tobin’s Q to be negatively related to market
volatility.
On the contrary, individual stock volatility is directly related to the volatility of firm value. On
the one hand, discount rates increase in systematic volatility, which in turn has a negative effect
on firm value. On the other hand, growth options increase in both systematic and idiosyncratic
volatility. We thus expect that for firms with a lot of growth options (e.g. R&D firms) firm
value and firm-level volatility are positively related. The effect should be particularly strong
for idiosyncratic volatility, which should not affect discount rates. Furthermore, firm-level
skewness and Tobin’s Q should be positively related, since a larger skewness leads to larger
values of growth options.
Roll, Schwartz, and Subrahmanyam (2009) proxy for investment opportunities by including
capital expenditures, but disregard R&D expenses. On the other hand, Connolly and Hirschey
(2005) and Czarnitzki, Hall, and Oriani (2006) find that R&D expenses affect firm values
positively. We thus include both variables. Whereas R&D expenses create growth options,
capital expenditures are a direct measure of investment opportunities actually undertaken, i.e.
exercised growth options. Therefore, we expect Tobin’s Q to increase with R&D expenses. This
6

is also inline with Kogan and Papanikolaou (2012) who theoretically show that Tobin’s Q is
positively related to growth opportunities. The effect of capital expenditures is however not
obvious, since capital expenditures destroy growth options, but can also create new ones.9
Following Roll, Schwartz, and Subrahmanyam (2009), among others, our regressions involve
several control variables. We use turnover of a firm’s shares as a liquidity proxy. Since investors
are willing to pay a premium for liquid assets, the market value of a firm and thus Tobin’s Q
should increase in stock turnover. Besides, we include market capitalization as a size measure
and expect Tobin’s Q to increase with market capitalization due to the size effect. We also
control for leverage. Depending on whether leverage is a proxy for default risk or whether debt
might make managers more careful about investments (see Jensen and Meckling (1976)) the
effect can be positive or negative. Besides, return on assets is used a profitability measure. The
relation to Tobin’s Q could be positive since profitable firms might have more growth options.
On the other hand, the relation could be negative if mature firms with few growth options are
more profitable. Finally, we include a dividend dummy that proxies for capital constraints.
Firms that pay dividends may have more free cash flow, which may potentially be used to
overinvest in marginal projects. This would lead to a negative relation to Tobin’s Q. This could
also be due to a tax effect, since taxes on dividends are higher than on capital gains.

3

Data

Since we are interested in analyzing the effect of volatility on Tobin’s Q and stock returns, we
distinguish firms with more growth options (R&D firms) from firms with less growth options
(non-R&D firms). Therefore, our sample period starts in 1975 (ranging until 2015). Before 1975
firms were allowed, but not required to capitalize R&D expenses. Since 1975 there are stricter
rules and it is required that all R&D expenses are expensed in the period incurred (with a few
exceptions). Consequently, the year 1975 is the natural starting point of the sample. Notice that
9

Notice that capital expenditure increase not only the physical capital, but also the option to invest further

and can thus create new growth options. See, e.g., Carlson, Fisher, and Giammarino (2010).

7

it is not straightforward to distinguish between R&D and non-R&D firms.10 For this reason,
we are going to split the observations into firm-year observations in which R&D expenses are
reported and into firm-year observations where this is not the case (missing or zero). We have
also tried alternative ways to identify R&D vs. non-R&D firms (e.g. more than 90% firm-year
observations in the past with R&D) and the results were very similar to the results reported
below.
The data comes from several sources. Firstly, we use two macro variables, the 10y Treasury
yield and the historical volatility of the S&P 500 index. The Treasury yield comes from the
database of the FED St. Louis. The S&P 500 index data is reported by CRSP. At the end of
every month of the sample period we calculate the historical index volatility by computing the
daily standard deviation of the returns over the year up to that month.11 The volatility is then
√
annualized by multiplying by 250. The average treasury yield is about 6.6% and the average
historical volatility of the S&P 500 index is 15.9%.12
The firm data comes from Compustat and CRSP. The sample is selected by deleting any firmyear observations with missing accounting data. Financial firms and utilities are excluded
from the sample as well. Our benchmark results presented in Section 4 are based on 156,938
observations coming from 16,732 firms over 41 years. There are 74,544 observations including
R&D expenses and 82,394 observations not including R&D expenses. Figure 1 depicts the
percentage of observations with R&D expenses per Fama-French industry, both for the whole
sample and after cleaning the data (referred to as ’benchmark’). It can be seen that the
frequencies are similar in the ’benchmark’ sample and in the whole sample. The industries
in which close to 90% or more of the observations involve R&D expenses are Measuring and
Control Equipment, Pharmaceutical Products, Computers, Medical Equipment, and Electronic
Equipment.
10

For instance, there are firms that initially do not report R&D expenses and then start to do so or vice versa.

In particular, one has to be careful not to use any forward-looking criteria.
11
We use the returns excluding distributions, but our results do not change if we use returns including
distributions.
12
VIX data is not available for the whole time period and thus we decided to use historical volatility.

8

[INSERT FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE]
The relevant data includes the following items derived from Compustat: Tobin’s Q is defined as
the ratio between (i) the sum of book value of assets plus the difference between market value
and book value of equity minus deferred taxes (Compustat: at + prcc f × csho - ceq - txdb),
where we set deferred taxes equal to zero if they are missing,13 and (ii) book value of assets
(Compustat: at). Invest denotes the investments of a firm defined as capital expenditures
(Compustat: capx) over sales (Compustat: sale).14 Size is defined as the logarithm of real
market capitalization that is obtained by dividing nominal market capitalization (Compustat:
prcc f × csho) by the Consumer Price Index from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The return
on assets, ROA, is given as the ratio between income before extraordinary items plus total
interest and related expense (Compustat: ib plus xint) and lagged book value of total assets
(Compustat: lag of at). Leverage is long-term debt over total assets (Compustat: dltt/at).
RDexp is defined as the ratio between R&D expenses (Compustat: xrd) and sales. Missing
R&D expenses are set to zero. A dummy variable for whether the firm pays a dividend is
included in most regressions as well.
We also calculate the annualized historical volatility and skewness of a firm’s stock returns
using the CRSP daily stock file for every firm fiscal year (excluding distributions).15 Firm-level
volatility and skewness are denoted by Vol firm and Skew firm.16 The turnover of a firm’s share
is given as the average daily turnover of shares divided by the number of outstanding shares.
13
14

Our results are robust to this assumption.
There are few observations with negative sales where we set sales to missing. Notice that our regression

results are very similar if we divide by lagged sales. In order to make our results easier comparable to Roll,
Schwartz, and Subrahmanyam (2009), we divide by sales.
15
We have calculated volatility and skewness using all available return observations and setting missing return
observations to zero. As a robustness check, however, we have tried several alternatives to deal with missing
observations. We have calculated the firm-level volatilities by disregarding days where return is missing. Then
we have only used days where trading volume is positive and returns are not missing. Besides, we have also
used daily returns including distributions. Our regression results only marginally change, though.
16
In contrast to the firm-level volatility that is annualized the firm-level skewness is not annualized. This is
√
because the annualized skewness equals the daily skewness multiplied by 250· 250, which leads to inconveniently
large number.

9

We use the information about volume as reported in CRSP with the following exceptions. If
volume and return are missing, then volume is replace by zero. The same is true if volume
is missing and return is zero. If volume is missing, but return is non-zero, then we keep the
missing value of volume. However, our results hardly change if we disregard missing volume
information altogether.
[INSERT TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE]
Table 1 reports summary statistics of the firm specific variables. It also provides these statistics
for the sub-samples of firm-year observations involving R&D expenses and not-involving R&D
expenses. It can be seen that R&D observations have higher Tobin’s Q, higher firm-specific
volatility, lower skewness and are related to more liquidity as measured by turnover. Furthermore, the relative capital expenditures are lower, size is bigger, and profitability and leverage
are smaller. Besides, the probability of a dividend payment is smaller.
[INSERT TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE]
Table 2 summarizes the correlations between the variables involved in our analysis. First, note
that – except for few correlations close to zero – all signs of the correlations are the same
for the full sample and the two sub-samples. Furthermore, the S&P volatility is negatively
related indicating that it proxies for global risk. On the contrary, firm-level volatility and
skewness are positively related to Tobin’s Q, which suggests that growth options are indeed
relevant for pricing. Both capital expenditures and R&D expenses are positively related to
Tobin’s Q, where the latter relation is reported in Panel B of Table 2. The positive relation
of capital expenditures is even true for R&D observations, which points in the direction that
the effect of creating new growth options dominates the effect of destroying existing ones. As
we will see later on, this relation reverses in multi-dimensional regressions where we control
for both R&D expenses and capital expenditures at the same time. The control variables size
and turnover have the expected positive relation to Tobin’s Q. Profitability as measured by
ROA is negatively correlated suggesting that mature firm’s with less growth options are more
profitable. Leverage is also negatively related indicating that leverage proxies for default risk.
10

This is also true for the dividend dummy and the effect is more pronounced for R&D firms,
i.e. for those firms dividend payments seem to particularly damaging.17 Finally, Tobin’s Q is
negatively related to the Treasury yield, so its role as discount rate seems to dominate in the
data.18 To summarize, the relations between Tobin’s Q and the volatility or skewness variables
have the expected signs. Besides, the controls have the same signs as in Roll, Schwartz, and
Subrahmanyam (2009). While these are one-dimensional results, in the following sections we
will run panel regressions controlling simultaneously for several factors and distinguishing more
clearly between the effects that are pricing relevant for R&D and non-R&D observations.

4

Benchmark Results

In this section we examine the relation of Tobin’s Q to the joint explanatory variables discussed
above. We run several panel regressions that use all the information contained in the crosssection of firms and in the time-series. The residuals of the cross-sectional regressions are
likely to be serially correlated. Furthermore, there might be cross-sectional dependance as
well. To overcome these potential problems, we correct our t-statistics using the approach
outlined in Driscoll and Kraay (1998). They assume an error structure that is heteroscedastic,
autocorrelated up to some lag, and possibly correlated between the units.19 The resulting
standard errors are heteroscedasticity consistent as well as robust to very general forms of
cross-sectional and temporal dependance. As a robustness check we have also corrected the
standard errors by double clustering as discussed in Petersen (2009). The benchmark results
are however almost identical.20
[INSERT TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE]
17

This result is in line with Tobin and Brainard (1977) who suggest that firms with high market-to-book

values (R&D firms) should undertake investments.
18
This will however change if we control for several variables simultaneously in panel regressions.
19
In our regressions, the maximum lag is two years.
20
The corresponding regression results are available upon request.

11

Table 3 reports our benchmark results. In regressions (1)-(3) we include a dummy variable if
R&D expenses are positive, whereas regressions (4)-(6) involve R&D expenses that are set to
zero if they are missing. In regressions (2), (3), (5), and (6) we include interaction variables
that are the product of an R&D dummy and firm-level volatility or firm-level skewness. For
instance, RD vol firm equals firm-level volatility if the particular observation also involves R&D
expenses. Otherwise it is set zero. There are several interesting findings: First, index volatility
is significantly negative in all regressions, i.e. more global risk leads to lower firm values. This
result is consistent with the findings of Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2006) that aggregate
volatility risk is inversely related to stock prices. However, the situation is very different for firmlevel volatility that is significantly positive in regressions (1)-(6). Notice that the significance
decreases and the point estimate goes down by almost 50% if we include the interaction variable
RD vol firm. Instead, this interaction variable turns out to be highly significant with larger
coefficients than firm volatility in regressions (1) and (4). This shows that firm-level volatility
matters significantly more for R&D observations. The result supports our hypothesis that
firm values are positively related to firm-level volatility due to growth options. Besides, we
document that firm-level skewness (Skew firm) is highly positively significant in all regressions.
If we include the interaction variable RD skew firm, the coefficient of Skew firm goes down by
50%. The loading of RD skew firm is more than twice as high as the loading for non-R&D
observations (in regressions (3) and (6) measured by Skew firm).21
We also find that capital expenditures (Invest) are only significant if we do not include the
actual size of R&D expenses, which are very significant in the last three regressions. Therefore,
creating growth options via R&D expenses is more pricing relevant than any of the effects
that could be attributed to capital expenditures (see Section 2).22 Notice also that, although
the R&D dummy becomes insignificant in regressions (2) and (3) where we include interaction
variables with this dummy, the significance of the amount of the R&D expenses is not affected
21

Chen and Petkova (2012) also suggest that firms with high skewness are likely to have growth options/

R&D expenditures. However, they examine the relation between R&D expenses and stock returns.
22
McConnell and Muscarella (1985) find evidence that the announcement of capital expenditures positively
affects firm values, but they do not control for R&D expenses.

12

if we include the interaction variables in regressions (5) and (6). This documents the relative
importance of R&D expenses in this context.
Furthermore, the Treasury yield is significant and positive. Since this result holds no matter
how we control for effects of R&D expenses, the Treasury yield seems to proxy for business
cycles.23 The other controls have the expected signs and go in the same directions as in Roll,
Schwartz, and Subrahmanyam (2009):24 Tobin’s Q increases with size and decreases with ROA
and leverage. This suggests that there is a size effect in the cross-section. Besides, since ROA
is negatively significant, mature firm’s with less growth options seem to be more profitable.
The loading of leverage is negative. Therefore, the interpretation of leverage as a measure of
distance to insolvency appears to be more important than its disciplinary effect as discussed
by Jensen and Meckling (1976). Finally, the dividend dummy is highly negatively significant,
which suggests that firms that pay dividends waste money on non-profitable projects due to
non-binding financial constraints and/or are mature firms with less growth options.

5

Systematic vs. Idiosyncratic Volatility

In the previous section, we have documented that Tobin’s Q of an R&D observation has a
significantly positive loading on firm-level volatility and that the corresponding loading for
non-R&D observation is significantly smaller. In this section, we explore whether this positive
dependance can be attributed to systematic or idiosyncratic firm-level volatility. We also study
whether there is a difference between R&D and non-R&D observations. The main reason for
decomposing firm-level volatility is that for the valuation of (growth) options both systematic
and idiosyncratic volatility matter, whereas idiosyncratic volatility is not priced according to
the CAPM or APT. Therefore, the idiosyncratic part of firm-level volatility might be a cleaner
measure than firm-level volatility, since the idiosyncratic part only influences the values of
growth options and not discount rates. Furthermore, if R&D firms have more growth options
23
24

Notice that this is still true if we use the real Treasury yield (= Treasury yield minus inflation).
An exception is turnover. Here the comparison is more complicated since Roll, Schwartz, and Subrah-

manyam (2009) include two liquidity variables, stock turnover and option trading activity.

13

than non-R&D firms, they should have a higher and positive loading on idiosyncratic volatility.
In the following, we briefly discuss how firm-level volatility can be decomposed into a systematic
and an idiosyncratic part. First, notice that this decomposition is model-dependent. We thus
implement two models: a Fama-French three-factor model and a CAPM-style one factor model.
In the three-factor model, we run for every firm fiscal year the following regression on daily
data
rti − rtf = αi + β M,i (rM − rf )t + β SM B,i SM Bt + β HM L,i HM Lt + εit ,

(5.1)

where rti is the daily return of firm i, rtf is the Fama riskfree rate, and (rM − rf )t , SM Bt ,
and HM Lt denote the returns on the three Fama-French factor portfolios (market, size, book).
Following Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2006), among others, the idiosyncratic volatility
(ivol) of year y is then defined as
σyunsys

q
= Var(εit ),

(5.2)

where t is in year y. Analogously, the systematic volatility of year y is given by
q
sys
σy = Var(rti − rtf − εit ).
Notice that σy2 = (σysys )2 + (σyunsys )2 , where σy is the volatility of firm i in year y. The one-factor
model includes the market factor rM − rf only. Since our regressions already control for size
and leverage that are closely related to the size and book factor of the Fama-French model,
considering a one-factor might be a reasonable alternative.
[INSERT TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE]
Table 4 reports the regression results when we decompose firm-level volatility (Vol firm) into a
systematic part (Vol ff sys or Vol capm sys) and an unsystematic part (Vol ff unsys or Vol capm unsys)
using the Fama-French model and the CAPM. The regressions labeled (2: FF) and (2: CAPM)
should be compared with regression (2) repeated from Table 3, which involves an R&D dummy.
Accordingly, regressions labeled (5: FF) and (5: CAPM) should be compared with regression
(5) repeated from Table 3, which involves the actual amount of R&D expenses (set to zero if
missing) instead of an R&D dummy.
14

It turns out that all variables involving idiosyncratic volatility are highly significant with the
expected (positive) sign. These results clearly indicate that volatility predominately matters
through its idiosyncratic parts. Since the interaction variables RD vol ff unsys and RD vol capm unsys
are strongly significant, the effect is the strongest for R&D firms that have a lot of growth options. Notice that the all point estimates of the systematic part of firm volatility (Vol ff sys
and Vol capm sys) are negative, which is not unreasonable since this part shall involves risk
that affects discount rates.
Finally, notice that our previous results concerning the relevance of capital expenditures and
R&D expenses are still intact: The size of R&D expenses is highly relevant and knocks out the
significance of capital expenditures when we include the actual amount in the regressions. This
can be seen in regressions (5), (5: FF), and (5: CAPM).

6

Stock Returns

In the previous sections, we have documented that firm value increases with idiosyncratic firmlevel volatility where the effect is the strongest for R&D observations. In this section, we
study the relation between (idiosyncratic) firm-level volatility and stock returns for R&D and
non-R&D observations. Following a similar line of argument as before, the (contemporaneous)
stock return of a firm with a lot of growth options should be positively related to idiosyncratic
volatility. This is because a larger volatility increases the values of the growth options, which
should materialize in positive stock returns. As already discussed in the introduction, Ang,
Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2006) document the so-called ivol anomaly showing that valueweighted high ivol portfolios have significantly lower expected returns, i.e. lower returns in
future periods.25 Since we focus on growth options where from an option pricing point of
view the relation between volatility and value or returns is contemporaneous,26 we consider
contemporaneous realized stock returns. Therefore, we relate volatility to returns of the same
25
26

See Fu (2009) for measurement issues in this context.
See, e.g., Brennan and Schwartz (1985). In the model of Kogan and Papanikolaou (2012) there is also a

relation between expected returns and growth opportunities.

15

period for which (idiosyncratic) volatility is calculated. This is in line with the previous panel
regressions where we relate firm values to contemporaneous firm-level volatilities. We focus
on firms in our sample that have a fiscal year ending in December and match monthly stock
returns from CRSP to our data set. The Fama-French factors as well as the momentum factor
stem from Kenneth French’s website.
We expect that firms with more growth options should have higher returns than firms with less
growth options and thus the contemporaneous relation of idiosyncratic volatility and abnormal
returns should be higher for firms with more growth options, i.e. R&D firms. In the following,
we first perform single sorts on ivol and double sorts on ivol and R&D expenses to study the
properties of the resulting portfolio alphas. Then we run panel regressions of firm-level alphas
on the same explanatory variables that we used in Sections 4 and 5 on Tobin’s Q.
[INSERT TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE]
We start with the sorts: The firms are grouped into equal-weighted portfolios since this approach
is similar to the weighting scheme of panel regressions. Each year we form equal-weighted
portfolios on the basis of the size of idiosyncratic volatility computed from a Fama-French
model. The ivol portfolios are arranged from low ivol to high ivol. Table 5 reports the alphas
from regressions of the monthly excess portfolio returns on the three Fama-French factors for
the fiscal year whose data is used to calculate the ivol on which the portfolios are based. This
is performed for the whole sample and two sub-samples, R&D and non-R&D firm observations.
We also report the results for a four-factor model with momentum.27 Table 5 provides evidence
that there is no significant contemporaneous ivol-return relation for the whole sample if we use
the four-factor model since the alpha of the difference portfolio is not significant. For the three
factor model, there is a significant effect.28 In both cases, the alphas appear to be ordered.
To put these findings into perspective, we now consider sub-portfolios. For R&D observations,
the ordering of the alphas goes away. If anything, the alphas show a hump-shaped pattern. For
the four-factor model all alphas are positive and the point estimate of the difference portfolio
27
28

See Carhart (1997).
Bali and Cakici (2008) show that this is also true for expected returns and equal-weighted portfolios.

16

is close to zero. On the other hand, for non-R&D observations we find the opposite: Alphas
are ordered and the alphas of the difference portfolio are significantly negative. Panel C of
Table 5 also reports the robust Newey-West t-statistics of the diff-in-diff portfolio (difference
portfolio of the difference portfolios) that is -1.76 for the three-factor model and -2.16 for the
four-factor model. These results indicate that there is significantly negative contemporaneous
ivol-return relation for non-R&D observations. Notice that these findings are driven by the
two highest ivol deciles of the non-R&D observations. To summarize, our results support our
above prediction that firms with growth options should have higher contemporaneous returns
than firms with less growth options and that the contemporaneous ivol-return relation should
be higher for firms with more growth options.
Table 5 also reports sample averages of several variables for each portfolio. Here in every month
we calculate the equal-weighted average of the corresponding variable and then calculate the
equal-weighted average across months.29 All variables are defined as in Section 3. It can be seen
that sorting on ivol leads to several interesting patterns. Size is decreasing with idiosyncratic
volatility both for R&D and non-R&D observations, which is in line with Bali and Cakici (2008)
who consider the whole sample. Besides, R&D firms are bigger than non-R&D firms where the
difference is the largest for low ivol and slightly U-shaped. Second, the sort on ivol also leads
to a monotonous relation for firm-level volatility in both panels.
For R&D observations the ivol portfolios are also monotonously ordered with respect to R&D
expenses and high (idiosyncratic) volatilities go together with high R&D expenses.30 Notice
however that R&D observations do not systematically have higher idiosyncratic volatility than
non-R&D observations. In particular, the average ivol in the highest ivol portfolio is larger for
non-R&D observations.
Tobin’s Q shows a very similar pattern as R&D expenses: The mean values of all R&D portfolios
29

Accounting data is only annual, i.e. does not change within a year. Therefore, for these variables one

can just calculate the equal-weighted averages over December averages. But also for the other variables the
differences are negligible.
30
This is in line with the finding of Chen and Petkova (2012) who do not report results for non-R&D observations.

17

are larger than of the non-R&D portfolios. Besides, they are monotonously increasing for the
R&D observations (except for the second portfolio), whereas they are almost flat around 1.6
for non-R&D observations. Therefore, the portfolio with the highest average ivol (non-R&D
portfolio 10 in Panel C) has a smaller average Tobin’s Q than 8 out of 10 R&D portfolios. In
particular, its average ivol is much larger than the average ivol of the first R&D portfolio which
has a Tobin’s Q of similar size. Notice however that for the whole sample Tobin’s Q is (almost)
monotonously increasing with ivol, which is also reported by Chen and Petkova (2012).
Furthermore, capital expenditures are systematically for non-R&D observations. Turnover
increases in ivol and R&D firm observations have higher turnovers than non-R&D observations.
Skewness is smaller for R&D firm observations and has the tendency to increase with ivol for
both sub-samples. Besides, R&D firms have less leverage and for non-R&D firms leverage is
increasing in ivol, whereas there is no clear pattern for R&D firms. Finally, ROA is decreasing
in ivol for both sub-portfolios and R&D firms have smaller ROA than non-R&D firms. This
difference substantially widens from low ivol to high ivol portfolios.
To summarize, a single-sort on ivol leads to several systematic patterns for other firm-specific
variables31 and these patterns have different forms for R&D and non-R&D firm observations.
Furthermore, in equal-weighted portfolios there is only a significantly negative contemporaneous
ivol-return relation (relative to a four factor model) when we focus on non-R&D observations.
Here the significantly negative alphas of the two highest ivol portfolios in Panel C of Table 5
drive the results. Focusing on the portfolio with the highest ivol and most negative alpha in
Panel C, this portfolio consists of firms without contemporaneous R&D expenses that at the
same time are on average the smallest, have the highest leverage and the highest idiosyncratic
volatility of all portfolios (non-R&D as well R&D).
[INSERT TABLE 6 ABOUT HERE]
31

These findings are related to the results of Kogan and Papanikolaou (2012). They show that that firm

characteristics such as Tobin’s Q, investment rates, earnings-to-price ratio, and ivol are correlated with firms’
exposures to the same common risk factor, which generates a significant share of variation in realized portfolio
returns and captures cross-sectional differences in their risk premia.

18

Since there is a strong relation between firm-level volatility and R&D expenses, we now double
sort firms, first with respect to idiosyncratic volatility then with respect to R&D expenses. This
allows us to control for (idiosyncratic) volatility and to study the impact of R&D expenses on
contemporaneous stock returns. We expect that for a given level of idiosyncratic volatility
returns increase in R&D expenses since firms with high R&D expenses presumably have more
growth options. Table 6 reports portfolio alphas when we sort observations into 60 portfolios:32
Every ivol portfolio is sorted into six sub-portfolios (zero R&D and five R&D portfolios). Since
approximately half of our observations are non-R&D observations, the five R&D portfolios
together are approximately as big as the zero R&D portfolio. It can be seen that our intuition
is confirmed: In all cases, high R&D observations have higher alphas than low R&D or zero
R&D observations. Additionally, in 17 out of 20 cases, the differences are even individually
significant.
Furthermore, note that the individual alphas of all high R&D portfolios are positive. This
is in sharp contrast to the whole sample and zero or low R&D portfolios where the portfolio
alphas are positive (negative) for low (high) ivol portfolios and with few outliers monotonously
decreasing over ivol portfolios. These findings provide additional evidence that R&D firms have
larger positive alphas.
[INSERT TABLE 7 ABOUT HERE]
Although our double sorts control for idiosyncratic firm-level volatility, there might be other
variables that systematically affect alphas. To control for additional variables, we now extract
annual averages of firm-level alphas. More precisely, we calculate the monthly alphas via FamaFrench regressions and then compute annual averages by averaging over these monthly alphas
for a particular year in the sample. We use all explanatory variables that are included in
the regressions of Table 4. and focus on firms in our sample that have a fiscal year ending in
December. Table 7 reports the corresponding panel regressions. It can be seen that the loadings
of all variables involving firm-level volatility have similar signs and significance levels as in the
32

We use a Fama-French three-factor model. The results involving a momentum factor are similar and

available upon request.

19

previous panel regressions. In particular, the loadings of variables involving ivol are positive
and very significant. These finding support our previous results that idiosyncratic volatility
matters the most for firms with a lot of growth options.

7

Decomposition of Idiosyncratic Volatility

The issue with idiosyncratic volatility as defined in Section 5 is that from a theoretical point of
view there can be a systematic relation between returns and idiosyncratic volatility if there is an
omitted variable in the Fama-French model. To address this concern, we take the residuals of
the Fama-French regression (5.1) as starting point. Then for every year we perform a principalcomponent analysis (PCA) on these residuals and extract the first two factors.33 This allows
us to calculate idiosyncratic volatilities after subtracting these factors. Using these adjusted
ivols, we then redo our main analysis, i.e. Tables 4 and 7. As in the latter table, we concentrate
on firms with fiscal year ending in December. Since a PCA is sensitive to missing values and
singularities, we only consider firm year observations where there are no missings for the stock
return observations and at most 75 return observations per year are zero.34 As we are going to
report below, the bottom line of this section is that our main results stand also for the more
sophisticated ivol definition.
More precisely, performing a PCA allows us to decompose the unexplained variance (σyunsys )2
of the Fama-French model into a component (σyf it )2 that is explained by the factors of the PCA
33

This is similar, but not the same as in Herskovic, Kelly, Lustig, and Nieuwerburgh (2016). They perform

a PCA on excess returns, whereas we perform a PCA on the residuals coming from Fama-French regressions.
This is the reason why we use two factors only, which amounts to five factors if the Fama-French factors are
counted as well.
34
The original sample has 156,938 observations where about 91,767 are for firm years ending in December.
Disregarding observations with sparce return observations, our sample consists of about 67,300. To make sure
that this sample is still similar to the original sample, we have rerun the regressions of Tables 4 and 7 with the
ivol definition (5.2). As can be seen below, the results of the relevant variables essentially do not change.

20

and a component (σyres )2 that is still unexplained.35 Formally, we obtain
(σyunsys )2 = (σyf it )2 + (σyres )2 .
Therefore, we define the systematic part of the total variance (after performing the PCA) as
the sum of the components that are explained by the Fama-French factors and the first ten
components of the PCA,
(σysys,pca )2 = (σysys )2 + (σyf it )2 ,
and the unsystematic part of the total variance as the remaining residuals,
(σyunsys,pca )2 = (σyres )2 .

(7.3)

√
√
The annualized systematic and unsystematic volatilities are σysys,pca 250 and σyunsys,pca 250.
[INSERT TABLE 8 AND 9 ABOUT HERE]
Table 8 reports the correlations of these volatility components with our explanatory variables. Notice that the unsystematic part Vol ff pca unsys is highly correlated with the total
firm volatility Vol firm, which is however also true for the ivol definitions Vol ff unsys and
Vol ff capm that we have applied previously. This means that unsystematic volatility is high
if total volatility is high as well.
Table 9 reports the regression results for the new ivol definition and should be compared with
Table 4. First we compare the regressions labeled (2: FF) of both tables. In both cases, we
apply the original ivol definition (5.2) and run the same regressions, but in Table 9 on the smaller
sample (fiscal year December, no sparse returns) that we use to perform the PCA. Apparently,
the signs of all explanatory variables are the same, although some controls (Treasury yield,
turnover, and leverage) are not significant any more. Additionally, the important variables
related to firm-level volatility are now all significant with the expected signs. If we regress
35

It turns out that on average the first component explains only 2% of the variation of the residuals of the

Fama-French regressions. The first ten components explain about 11.6%. This indicates that there is not much
systematic variation left. Only during the crisis years 2007-2009 these numbers are higher. For instance, in the
year 2008, the first component explains about 6% and the first ten components about 21%.

21

on the actual R&D expenses (instead of an R&D dummy), then only the variables related to
ivol are significant. This can be seen in columns (5: FF). The results become clearer if we
use the new ivol definition as reported in column (2: FF&PCA) and (5: FF&PCA). Then
systematic volatility has a significantly negative effect, whereas both variables related to ivol
have significantly positive effects.
[INSERT TABLE 10 ABOUT HERE]
Finally, we reconsider Table 7. The columns (a2: FF) and (a5: FF) report the results if we rerun
regressions (a2: FF) and (a5: FF) of Table 7 on the smaller sample. Apparently, this sample
delivers similar results. Only the interaction variable RD vol ff unsys is not significant any
more in regression (a5: FF), although the sign stays the same. More importantly, regressions
(a2: FF&PCA) and (a5: FF&PCA), which involve the volatility variables derived from the
PCA, yield almost the same results.

8

Conclusion

This paper studies to what extend firm value is related to growth options. We find strong
evidence that Tobin’s Q is significantly increasing in firm-level volatility. More importantly, by
splitting the sample into R&D and non-R&D observations we show that this relation is to a
large extend driven by the idiosyncratic part of firm-level volatility and is concentrated within
R&D firm observations. These results complement earlier findings that idiosyncratic volatility
is significantly priced in the cross-section of stock returns. On the other hand, we document
that Tobin’s Q is negatively related to index-level volatility as measured by the volatility of the
S&P 500, which proxies for global risk.
Furthermore, we find that firm-level skewness is positively related to Tobin’s Q which is also
consistent with real options theory. Hence, our results provide strong empirical evidence that
firm value is significantly affected by growth options. We also document that the actual amount
of R&D expenses is more important for firm valuation than capital expenditures, which are not

22

significant in regressions where both variables are included. This indicates that R&D expenses
are a better proxy for the creation of growth options.
Besides, we study the relation of stock returns to realized contemporaneous idiosyncratic volatility and R&D expenses. In this case, there is a significantly negative relation for non-R&D
observations, whereas for R&D observations the portfolio alphas are all positive if we use a
four-factor model with momentum. We also document that the sub-samples of R&D and nonR&D observations are very distinct with respect to the sizes and patterns of R&D expenses
and Tobin’s Q. On the contrary, the average ivols of the portfolios are similar, which is in line
with our previous result that the pricing effect of ivol matters the most if we interact ivol with
an R&D dummy.
Double sorts controlling for ivol show that for high R&D observations all sub-portfolio alphas
are positive and that all alphas of difference portfolios between high and low or zero R&D
observations are positive as well. Running panel regressions of firm-level alphas on firm-level
volatility as well as its idiosyncratic and systematic parts shows that volatility matters, but
predominately through its idiosyncratic part. Besides, we again confirm that this effect is
amplified via R&D expenses.

References
Aguerrevere, F. L., 2009, Real options, product market competition, and asset returns, Journal
of Finance 64, 957–983.
Ang, A., R. J. Hodrick, Y. Xing, and X. Zhang, 2006, The cross-section of volatility and
expected returns, Journal of Finance 61, 259–299.
Ang, A., R. J. Hodrick, Y. Xing, and X. Zhang, 2009, High idiosyncratic volatility and low
returns: International and further U.S. evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 91, 1–23.

23

Bali, T. G., and N. Cakici, 2008, Idiosyncratic volatility and the cross section of expected
returns, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43, 29–58.
Bekaert, G., R. J. Hodrick, and X. Zhang, 2013, Aggregate idiosyncratic volatility, Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis forthcoming.
Belo, F., C. Xue, and L. Zhang, 2010, Cross-sectional Tobin’s Q, Working Paper, NBER.
Berk, J. B., R. C. Green, and V. Naik, 1999, Optimal investment, growth options, and security
returns, Journal of Finance 54, 1553–1607.
Brennan, M. J., and E. S. Schwartz, 1985, Evaluating natural resource investment, Journal of
Business 58, 135–157.
Cao, C., T. Simin, and J. Zhao, 2008, Can growth options explain the trend in idiosyncratic
risk?, Review of Financial Studies 21, 2599–2633.
Carhart, M. M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52,
57–82.
Carlson, M., A. Fisher, and R. Giammarino, 2010, SEO risk dynamics, Review of Financial
Studies 23, 4026–4077.
Chan, L. K. C., J. Lakonishok, and T. Sougiannis, 2001, The stock market valuation of research
and development expenditures, Journal of Finance 56, 2431–2456.
Chen, Z., and R. Petkova, 2012, Does idiosyncratic volatility proxy for risk exposure?, Review
of Financial Studies 25, 2745–2787.
Cochrane, J. H., 2011, Presidential address: Discount rates, Journal of Finance 66, 1047–1108.
Connolly, R. A., and M. Hirschey, 2005, Firm size and the effect of R&D on Tobin’s q, R&D
Management 35, 217–223.

24

Czarnitzki, D., B. H. Hall, and R. Oriani, 2006, Market valuation of US and European intellectual property, Management Of Intellectual Property. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar pp.
111–131.
Desai, A., P. Wright, K. H. Chuang, and C. Charoenwong, 2003, Impact of changes in strategic
investments on shareholder returns: The role of growth opportunities, Journal of Applied
Business Research 19, 41–55.
Driscoll, J. C., and A. C. Kraay, 1998, Consistent covariance matrix estimation with spatially
dependent panel data, Review of Economics and Statistics 80, 549–560.
Duffee, G. R., 1995, Stock returns and volatility a firm-level analysis, Journal of Financial
Economics 37, 399–420.
Fink, J. D., K. E. Fink, and H. He, 2012, Expected idiosyncratic volatility measures and
expected returns, Financial Management 41, 519–553.
Fu, F., 2009, Idiosyncratic risk and the cross-section of expected stock returns, Journal of
Financial Economics 91, 24–37.
Grullon, G., E. Lyandres, and A. Zhdanov, 2012, Real options, volatility, and stock returns,
Journal of Finance 67, 1499–1537.
Hackbarth, D., and T. C. Johnson, 2012, Real options and risk dynamics, Working Paper.
Herskovic, B., B. Kelly, H. Lustig, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh, 2016, The Common Factor
in Idiosyncratic Volatility: Quantitative Asset Pricing Implications, Journal of Financial
Economics 119, 249–283.
Jensen, M. C., and W. H. Meckling, 1976, Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency
costs and ownership structure, Journal of Financial Economics 5, 305–360.
Kogan, L., and D. Papanikolaou, 2012, A theory of firm characteristics and stock returns: The
role of investment-specific shocks, .

25

McConnell, J. J., and C.J. Muscarella, 1985, Corporate capital expenditure decisions and the
market value of the firm, Journal of Financial Economics 14, 399–422.
McDonald, R., and D. Siegel, 1986, The value of waiting to invest, Quarterly Journal of Economics 101, 707–728.
Merton, R. C., 1987, A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete information,
Journal of Finance 42, 483–510.
Pastor, L., and P. Veronesi, 2003, Stock valuation and learning about profitability, Journal of
Finance 58, 1749–1789.
Petersen, M. A., 2009, Estimating standard errors in finance panel data sets: Comparing
approaches, Review of Financial Studies 22, 435–480.
Roll, R., E. S. Schwartz, and A. Subrahmanyam, 2009, Options trading activity and firm
valuation, Journal of Financial Economics 94, 345–360.
Tobin, J., and W. C. Brainard, 1977, Asset markets and the cost of capital, Economic Progress,
Private Values and Public Policy, Essays In Honor of William Fellner, North-Holland pp.
235–262.

26

Sample

Benchmark

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
06
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45 47

Figure 1:

Percentage of R&D Observations per FF-Industry. This figure depicts the percentage of observations reporting
R&D expenses per Fama-French industry. Sample refers to the whole sample, benchmark refers to the observations included in our
regressions.

27

28

1.337
2.528
2.329
1.526
3.226
1.590
1.213
1.580

Median

Std. Dev.

Mean

Median

Std. Dev.

Mean

Median

Std. Dev.

0.412

1.395

0.186

0.176

0.587
0.481

1.363

0.402

0.186

0.125

0.613
0.522

1.380

0.407

0.186

Invest

Size

2.297

0.042

0.265
2.241

-0.290

-0.132

0.022

0.003

0.007
2.259

0.042

0.229
2.285

-0.137

0.087

Panel B: R&D Observations

0.017

0.003

0.006

Panel A: All Observations

Turn firm

0.011

0.002

0.005
2.329

0.042

0.298

2.182

-0.436

-0.329

Panel C: Non-R&D Observations

0.152

0.600
0.500

Skew firm

Vol firm

0.320

0.069

0.032

0.555

0.059

-0.065

0.450

0.065

-0.014

Roa

0.225

0.221

0.253

0.192

0.119

0.165

0.214

0.169

0.211

Leverage

0.489

0.000

0.394

0.476

0.000

0.346

0.483

0.000

0.371

Div dum

0.000

0.000

0.000

12.226

0.048

1.326

8.452

0.000

0.630

RDexp

Summary Statistics for Firm Specific Variables. This table provides summary statistics for the firm specific variables. Tobin is the ratio of market
value to book value. Vol firm is a firm’s historical volatility of the stock returns. Skew firms is a firm’s historical skewness of the stock returns. Turn firm is the daily
turnover of the shares of stock as a percentage of stocks outstanding. Invest is the ratio between capital expenditures and sales of a firm. Size is the logarithm of a
firm’s market capitalization deflated by CPI as reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Roa is the return on assets defined as income before extraordinary items plus
interest divided by lagged book value. Leverage is ratio between long-term debt and book value of assets. Div dum is an indicator variable for whether a firm pays a
dividend. RDexp is the ratio between RD expenses and sales. Invest, Roa, Leverage, and RDexp at the 0.1% level. There are 156,938 observations coming from 16,732
firms. We have 74,544 observations including R&D expenses and 82,394 observations not including R&D expenses. The observations range from 1975 to 2015.

Table 1:

1.941

Mean

Tobin

29
-0.056

Div dum

0.085

-0.044

0.037

-0.329

0.005

-0.247

0.111

-0.066

-0.213

1.000

-0.062

0.160

0.024

0.078

-0.235

-0.053

0.034

-0.031

0.033

0.005

0.075

-0.064

0.175

1.000

0.001

-0.070

0.012

-0.031

0.005

0.004

0.034

-0.019

-0.140

0.215
-0.061

0.077

-0.099

-0.222

1.000

-0.062

0.123

1.000

0.020

-0.032

0.021

0.004

0.046

-0.063

0.195

1.000

Vol sp

-0.001

0.066

-0.287

-0.005

-0.170

0.096

-0.083

-0.217

1.000

Treasury10

-0.392

0.053

-0.218

-0.455

0.048

0.078

0.055

1.000

0.068

-0.444

-0.017

-0.281

-0.464

0.044

0.093

0.083

1.000

-0.417

0.016

-0.248

-0.454

0.046

0.084

0.068

1.000

Turn firm

-0.063

-0.024

-0.057

0.139

0.006

1.000

-0.056

0.011

-0.127

-0.019

1.000

Invest

-0.011

-0.005

-0.018

-0.019

-0.077

-0.004

-0.013

1.000

0.013

-0.071

-0.028

-0.055

0.110

0.010

1.000

0.648

-0.054

-0.001

-0.159

-0.017

1.000

Panel B: R&D Observations

0.000

-0.012

-0.004

-0.075

-0.002

-0.024

1.000

Panel A: All Observations

Skew firm

0.003

-0.015

0.013

-0.071

-0.001

-0.047

1.000

-0.051

0.007

-0.043

0.202

0.003

1.000

-0.060

0.015

-0.097

-0.019

1.000

Panel C: Non-R&D Observations

Vol firm

0.394

0.041

0.167

1.000

-0.033

0.433

0.045

0.164

1.000

0.406

0.022

0.149

1.000

Size

0.154

-0.005

1.000

-0.214

0.206

0.016

1.000

0.183

0.029

1.000

Roa

-0.075

1.000

-0.012

0.046

1.000

-0.012

1.000

Leverage

1.000

-0.077

1.000

1.000

Div dum

1.000

RDexp

Table 2: Correlation Matrix for R&D and Non-R&D Observations. This table reports the correlations between the relevant variables. The correlations are
calculated on the basis of 74,544 observations including R&D expenses and 82,394 observations not including R&D expenses. The observations range from 1975 to 2015.
Invest, Roa, Leverage, and RDexp are winsorized at the 0.1% level.

-0.072

0.061

Invest

Leverage

0.085

Turn firm
0.152

0.025

Skew firm

-0.114

0.037

Vol firm

Roa

-0.038

Vol sp

Size

1.000
-0.042

0.098

RDexp

Tobin

-0.164

Treasury10

-0.043

0.107

Turn firm

Div dum

0.063

Skew firm

Leverage

0.128

Vol firm

-0.278

-0.019

Vol sp

Roa

-0.062

Treasury10

0.076

1.000

Tobin

Size

-0.124

Div dum

0.065

-0.078

Leverage

Invest

-0.250

0.109

Turn firm

Roa

0.043

Skew firm
0.057

0.093

Vol firm

0.109

-0.021

Vol sp

Size

-0.060

Treasury10

Invest

1.000

Tobin

Tobin

Treasury10
Vol sp
Vol firm
Skew firm
Turn firm
Invest
Size
Roa
Leverage
Div dum
RD dum

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

4.380**

4.429***

4.469***

4.602***

4.552***

4.595***

(3.28)

(3.33)

(3.35)

(3.43)

(3.41)

(3.43)

-1.875***

-1.930***

-1.922***

-1.861***

-1.917***

-1.909***

(-4.57)

(-4.76)

(-4.75)

(-4.62)

(-4.68)

(-4.67)

0.582***

0.321***

0.329***

0.611***

0.315**

0.324**

(4.24)

(4.06)

(4.07)

(4.37)

(2.95)

(3.00)

0.089***

0.088***

0.044***

0.088***

0.088***

0.043***

(7.73)

(7.82)

(5.66)

(7.43)

(7.77)

(5.55)

7.505***

7.248***

7.245***

7.641***

7.257***

7.254***

(3.91)

(3.73)

(3.73)

(3.99)

(3.73)

(3.73)

0.025***

0.026***

0.026***

0.002

0.009

0.009

(5.41)

(5.44)

(5.45)

(0.30)

(1.50)

(1.47)

0.285***

0.287***

0.287***

0.300***

0.288***

0.288***

(6.83)

(6.84)

(6.84)

(6.98)

(6.96)

(6.96)

-1.272***

-1.244***

-1.243***

-1.283***

-1.219***

-1.217***

(-10.65)

(-10.43)

(-10.42)

(-10.72)

(-10.06)

(-10.04)

-0.731***

-0.712***

-0.713***

-0.909***

-0.713***

-0.714***

(-4.68)

(-4.63)

(-4.63)

(-5.66)

(-4.86)

(-4.88)

-0.775***

-0.771***

-0.772***

-0.806***

-0.771***

-0.773***

(-10.27)

(-10.54)

(-10.57)

(-10.71)

(-10.75)

(-10.78)

0.392***

0.035

0.035

(7.21)

(0.39)

(0.38)

0.600***

0.578***

0.620***

0.596***

(3.71)

(3.65)

(7.08)

(7.05)

RD vol firm
RD skew firm

0.095***

0.097***

(6.54)
RDexp
Intercept
R2

(6.72)
0.013***

0.011***

0.011***

(5.74)

(5.13)

(5.19)

1.815***

1.969***

1.968***

2.015***

1.971***

1.970***

(13.28)

(18.10)

(17.84)

(16.49)

(15.19)

(15.21)

0.134

0.137

0.137

0.130

0.138

0.138

Table 3:

Benchmark Regressions. The table reports the results of panel regressions of Tobin’s Q on selected variables. All
regressions are based on 156,938 observations coming from 16,732 firms. There are 74,544 observations including R&D expenses
and 82,394 observations not including R&D expenses. Financial firms and utilities are excluded from the sample. The sample
ranges from 1975 to 2015. Invest, Roa, Leverage, and RDexp are winsorized at the 0.1% level. Robust Driscoll-Kraay t-statistics
are reported in brackets. Asterisks correspond to the following p-values: ∗p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.001.

30

Treasury10
Vol sp

(2)

(2: FF)

(2: CAPM)

(5)

(5: FF)

(5: CAPM)

4.429***

4.335**

4.386***

4.552***

4.452***

4.504***

(3.33)

(3.31)

(3.38)

(3.41)

(3.36)

(3.44)

-1.930***

-1.994***

-1.621***

-1.917***

-1.978***

-1.603***

(-4.76)

(-4.92)

(-4.15)

(-4.68)

(-4.87)

(-4.08)

Skew firm

0.088***

0.088***

0.086***

0.088***

0.089***

0.087***

(7.82)

(7.59)

(7.60)

(7.77)

(7.50)

(7.51)

Turn firm

7.248***

7.110***

7.440***

7.257***

7.146***

7.470***

(3.73)

(3.52)

(3.77)

(3.73)

(3.55)

(3.79)

Invest

0.026***

0.026***

0.026***

0.009

0.009

0.009

(5.44)

(5.43)

(5.44)

(1.50)

(1.52)

(1.51)

0.287***

0.284***

0.297***

0.288***

0.284***

0.297***

(6.84)

(6.89)

(6.92)

(6.96)

(7.04)

(7.05)

Roa

-1.244***

-1.240***

-1.242***

-1.219***

-1.215***

-1.217***

(-10.43)

(-10.33)

(-10.45)

(-10.06)

(-9.99)

(-10.10)

Leverage

-0.712***

-0.704***

-0.707***

-0.713***

-0.697***

-0.701***

(-4.63)

(-4.69)

(-4.62)

(-4.86)

(-4.90)

(-4.82)

Div dum

-0.771***

-0.760***

-0.773***

-0.771***

-0.759***

-0.772***

(-10.75)

(-11.20)

(-10.92)

Size

(-10.54)

(-11.09)

(-10.84)

RD dum

0.035

-0.040

-0.019

(0.39)

(-0.34)

(-0.16)

Vol firm

0.321***

RD vol firm

0.315**

(4.06)

(2.95)

0.600***

0.620***

(3.71)
Vol ff sys
Vol ff unsys
RD vol ff sys
RD vol ff unsys

(7.08)
-0.143

-0.090

(-0.46)

(-0.29)

0.344***

0.364**

(3.79)

(3.25)

0.969

0.870*

(1.85)

(2.48)

0.488***

0.444***

(3.99)

(6.51)

Vol capm sys

-0.602*

Vol capm unsys

(-2.15)

0.374***

0.390***

RD vol capm sys
RD vol capm unsys

-0.576*

(-2.09)
(4.44)

(3.56)

0.741

0.687*

(1.58)

(2.17)

0.565***

0.532***

(3.87)
RDexp
Intercept
R2

(6.86)
0.011***

0.011***

0.011***

(5.13)

(5.13)

(5.17)

1.969***

1.997***

1.971***

1.971***

1.964***

1.948***

(18.10)

(18.68)

(19.02)

(15.19)

(14.87)

(15.09)

0.137

0.137

0.137

0.138

0.138

0.138

Table 4:

Regressions with Volatility Decomposition. The table reports the results of panel regressions of Tobin’s Q on
selected variables. Firm volatility is decomposed into a systematic and an unsystematic part. Regressions (2: FF) and (5: FF)
uses a decomposition coming from a three-factor Fama-French model, whereas regressions (2: CAPM) and (5: CAPM) uses a
decomposition coming from a one-factor CAPM. The results can be compared with regressions (2) and (5) where volatility is not
decomposed (also reported in Table 3). All regressions are based on 156,938 observations coming from 16,732 firms. There are
74,544 observations including R&D expenses and 82,394 observations not including R&D expenses. Financial firms and utilities
are excluded from the sample. The sample ranges from 1975 to 2015. Invest, Roa, Leverage, and RDexp are winsorized at the 0.1%
level. Robust Driscoll-Kraay t-statistics are reported in brackets. Asterisks correspond to the following p-values: ∗p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ p <
0.01, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.001.

31

32
0.091

Roa

0.260

0.090

0.244

0.122

0.004

1.545

0.139

0.000

0.295

0.086

0.260

0.129

0.005

1.533

0.179

0.000

0.346

0.310

1.058

(2.95)

0.002**

4

5

6

0.057

0.219

0.109

0.006

1.826

0.214

0.431

0.469

0.428

0.298

(3.06)

0.003**

(2.82)

0.002**

0.001

0.028

0.210

0.141

0.006

1.946

0.275

0.639

0.536

0.495

-0.144

(2.07)

0.002*

(1.37)

0.023

0.157

0.085

0.007

2.276

0.181

0.871

0.490

0.446

0.370

(3.40)

0.004***

(2.55)

0.004*

0.003

-0.025

0.152

0.105

0.007

2.405

0.271

1.523

0.558

0.514

-0.103

(2.44)

0.004*

(1.82)

0.081

0.265

0.153

0.005

1.504

0.218

0.000

0.396

0.359

0.678

(3.10)

0.003**

(2.46)

0.002*

0.077

0.266

0.121

0.005

1.493

0.273

0.000

0.449

0.412

0.272

(1.86)

0.002

(1.74)

0.002

0.066

0.271

0.159

0.005

1.469

0.275

0.000

0.511

0.474

-0.115

(0.64)

0.001

(0.29)

0.000

Panel C: Non-R&D Observations

0.050

0.166

0.050

0.006

2.068

0.148

0.617

0.428

0.382

0.873

(2.77)

0.003**

(1.99)

0.002*

Panel B: R&D Observations

0.073

0.223

0.107

0.005

1.687

0.176

0.116

0.408

0.368

0.738

(3.45)

0.003***

(2.77)

0.002**

Panel A: All Observations

0.042

0.266

0.131

0.005

1.512

0.323

0.000

0.583

0.548

-0.587

(-0.22)

-0.000

(-1.00)

-0.001

-0.081

0.148

0.083

0.007

2.496

0.265

2.032

0.632

0.592

-0.541

(1.19)

0.002

(0.25)

0.000

-0.016

0.204

0.105

0.006

2.028

0.296

1.006

0.611

0.573

-0.577

(0.74)

0.001

(-0.17)

-0.000

7

0.012

0.275

0.174

0.005

1.490

0.449

0.000

0.683

0.652

-1.011

(-1.28)

-0.003

(-2.09)

-0.004*

-0.164

0.149

0.116

0.007

2.562

0.478

3.206

0.722

0.687

-0.985

(0.52)

0.001

(-0.56)

-0.001

-0.080

0.206

0.149

0.006

2.117

0.439

1.393

0.707

0.674

-1.001

(-0.29)

-0.000

(-1.46)

-0.002

8

-0.004

0.279

0.286

0.005

1.752

0.535

0.000

0.843

0.816

-1.629

(-1.70)

-0.004

(-2.70)

-0.007**

-0.237

0.168

0.203

0.006

2.678

0.435

3.423

0.856

0.827

-1.464

(0.20)

0.001

(-0.83)

-0.002

-0.129

0.219

0.245

0.006

2.317

0.517

2.220

0.855

0.827

-1.567

(-0.82)

-0.002

(-2.11)

-0.004*

9

-0.114

0.304

0.524

0.006

1.693

0.621

0.000

1.343

1.321

-2.496

(-1.52)

-0.006

(-2.11)

-0.008*

-0.344

0.186

0.510

0.008

2.936

0.377

3.820

1.273

1.251

-2.233

(0.31)

0.001

(-0.60)

-0.002

-0.231

0.246

0.522

0.007

2.275

0.524

2.064

1.318

1.296

-2.388

(-0.64)

-0.002

(-1.49)

-0.005

High

(-2.10)

-0.008*

(-2.61)

-0.011**

(-0.26)

-0.001

(-1.07)

-0.004

(-1.28)

-0.005

(-2.02)

-0.007*

HL

-0.006

(-2.16)

-0.007*

(-1.76)

Table 5: Alphas of Portfolios Constructed on the Basis of Ivol. Equal-weighted portfolios are formed each year on the basis of the size of idiosyncratic volatility
computed from a Fama-French model. The ivol portfolios are arranged from Low ivol to High ivol. The table reports the alphas, Alpha ff3, from contemporaneous
regressions of the monthly excess portfolio returns on the three Fama-French factors for the fiscal year whose data is used to calculate the ivol on which the portfolios are
based. Also reported are the alphas of a four-factor model with momentum, Alpha ff4. HL refers the difference portfolio between high ivol firms and low ivol firms. In
column HL of Panel C (right-hand side of alpha of HL), we also report the alpha of the diff-in-diff portfolio (HL of non-RD observations minus HL of RD observations).
Sample averages of other variables are also reported. All variables are defined as in Table 1. The sample period is from 1975 to 2015. Only firms with fiscal year ending
in December are included. Robust Newey-West t-statistics are reported in brackets. Asterisks correspond to the following p-values: ∗p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.001.

0.229

Leverage

Tobin
0.003

1.595

Invest

0.118

0.108

RDexp

Skew firm

0.000

Vol total

Turn firm

0.191
0.221

Vol ff unsys

1.529

(3.77)

(3.33)
1.879

0.003***

0.003***

(3.08)

(3.21)

(2.62)

0.002**

0.002**

0.178

0.003**

Size

Alpha ff4

Alpha ff3

0.191

0.053

0.005

1.770

0.077

0.146

0.074

0.096

0.030

0.005

1.667

0.065

0.062

0.361

0.299

1.439
0.318

0.255

2.255

(3.04)

0.002**

0.082

0.186

Roa

1.722

Tobin

Leverage

0.066

Invest
0.004

0.044

RDexp

0.024

0.230

Vol total

Skew firm

0.188

Turn firm

3.112

(2.16)

(3.50)

Vol ff unsys

0.002*

0.002***

(1.61)

(2.73)

(1.93)

0.001

0.001

0.002**

Size

Alpha ff4

Alpha ff3

0.225

0.074
0.219

0.005
0.087

0.004

0.079

0.094

Roa

1.605

0.138

0.028

0.351

1.599

0.104

0.029

0.296

1.253
0.311

1.866
0.257

0.089

0.207

Leverage

1.658

Tobin
0.003

0.086

Invest

0.075

0.022

RDexp

Skew firm

0.226

Vol total

Turn firm

0.189

(3.14)

(3.65)
2.530

0.002**

0.002**

0.002***

Vol ff unsys

(2.40)

(2.48)

(3.12)
(2.94)

0.002*

0.002*

0.002**

Size

Alpha ff4

Alpha ff3

3

2

Low

Six R&D Expenses Sub-Portfolios
Portfolio:

Zero R&D

Low R&D

High R&D

HL R&D

0.003**

0.002

0.003**

0.001

0.000

(3.07)

(1.93)

(3.09)

(1.19)

(0.48)

0.002**

-0.001

0.005***

0.006***

0.003*

(2.59)

(-0.55)

(3.60)

(3.31)

(2.09)

3

0.002*

-0.002

0.005***

0.007**

0.003

(2.31)

(-1.59)

(3.82)

(3.30)

(1.73)

4

0.002*

-0.003

0.008***

0.011***

0.006**

1
2

HZ R&D

(2.39)

(-1.71)

(4.61)

(3.91)

(3.11)

5

0.002

-0.003*

0.010***

0.013***

0.008*

(1.75)

(-1.99)

(3.46)

(3.62)

(2.50)

6

-0.001

-0.001

0.011***

0.012***

0.012***

(-0.83)

(-0.78)

(4.31)

(3.68)

(3.96)

7

-0.003

-0.006**

0.008*

0.014***

0.011*

(-1.27)

(-3.06)

(2.57)

(3.50)

(2.52)

8

-0.005*

-0.003

0.007*

0.010*

0.012**

(-2.11)

(-1.00)

(2.00)

(2.12)

(2.69)

-0.006

-0.009**

0.008

0.017**

0.014*

(-1.79)

(-2.74)

(1.51)

(2.71)

(2.18)

-0.008

-0.008

0.005

0.014*

0.013*

(-1.94)

(-1.70)

(0.85)

(2.28)

(2.01)

9
10

Table 6:

Alphas of Double-sorted Portfolios Constructed on the Basis of Ivol and R&D. Equal-weighted portfolios
are formed each year on the basis of the size of idiosyncratic volatility computed from a Fama-French model and R&D expenses
(normalized by lagged book value). The ivol portfolios are arranged from Low ivol to High ivol (in rows). The alphas of the
R&D portfolios are in columns. HL R&D (HZ R&D) denotes the difference portfolio of high R&D observations minus low R&D
observations (observations with zero R&D). The alphas come from contemporaneous regressions of the monthly excess portfolio
returns on the three Fama-French factors for several periods relative to December of the end of the fiscal year whose data are used
to calculate R&D expenses and the ivol on which the portfolios are based. The sample period is from 1975 to 2015. Only firms
with fiscal year ending in December are included. Robust Newey-West t-statistics are reported in brackets. Asterisks correspond
to the following p-values: ∗p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.001.

33

Treasury10
Vol sp
Skew firm
Turn firm
Invest
Size
Roa

(a2)

(a2: FF)

(a2: CAPM)

(a5)

(a5: FF)

(a5: CAPM)

0.115*

0.113*

0.113*

0.113*

0.113*

0.114*

(2.20)

(2.21)

(2.21)

(2.14)

(2.16)

(2.17)

0.007

0.011

0.013

0.008

0.011

0.014

(0.35)

(0.53)

(0.63)

(0.43)

(0.55)

(0.67)

0.010***

0.010***

0.010***

0.010***

0.010***

0.010***

(15.35)

(15.14)

(15.12)

(15.32)

(15.04)

(15.03)

0.116

0.120

0.123

0.123

0.125

0.129

(1.27)

(1.32)

(1.34)

(1.33)

(1.37)

(1.39)

0.000

0.000

0.000

-0.000

-0.000

-0.000

(0.36)

(0.36)

(0.35)

(-0.58)

(-0.60)

(-0.59)

0.007***

0.007***

0.007***

0.006***

0.007***

0.007***

(8.35)

(8.74)

(8.99)

(8.19)

(8.65)

(8.93)

0.009***

0.009***

0.009***

0.009***

0.010***

0.010***

(5.99)

(6.03)

(5.93)

(6.15)

(6.15)

(6.08)

Leverage

-0.018***

-0.018***

-0.018***

-0.017***

-0.017***

-0.018***

(-9.87)

(-10.32)

(-10.18)

(-8.82)

(-9.79)

(-9.69)

Div dum

-0.007***

-0.007***

-0.007***

-0.007***

-0.007***

-0.007***

(-4.37)

(-4.37)

(-4.40)

(-4.26)

(-4.35)

(-4.38)

RD dum

-0.009***

-0.010***

-0.009***

(-4.61)

(-4.44)

(-4.09)

Vol firm

0.015***

RD vol firm

0.019***

(4.46)

(5.11)

0.015***

0.004*

(4.70)
Vol ff sys
Vol ff unsys
RD vol ff sys
RD vol ff unsys

(2.72)
-0.003

0.008

(-0.22)

(0.74)

0.015***

0.018***

(4.52)

(5.13)

0.013

-0.008

(0.90)

(-0.67)

0.013***

0.007*

(4.04)

(2.45)

Vol capm sys
Vol capm unsys

-0.003

0.006

(-0.25)

(0.54)

0.015***

0.018***

RD vol capm sys
RD vol capm unsys

(4.59)

(5.32)

0.005

-0.014

(0.38)

(-1.40)

0.015***

0.007***

(4.82)
RDexp
Intercept
R2

(3.62)
0.000*

0.000*

0.000*

(2.21)

(2.19)

(2.19)

-0.013**

-0.013**

-0.014**

-0.017***

-0.018***

-0.018***

(-3.04)

(-3.06)

(-3.22)

(-3.76)

(-3.95)

(-4.02)

0.118

0.118

0.118

0.116

0.117

0.117

Table 7:

Regressions of Firm-level Alpha with Volatility Decomposition. The table reports the results of panel
regressions of annual averages of firm-level alphas on the same explanatory variables as in Table 4. Every year the average is
formed over monthly alphas. Firm volatility is decomposed into a systematic and an unsystematic part. Regressions (a2: FF) and
(a5: FF) uses a decomposition coming from a three-factor Fama-French model, whereas regressions (a2: CAPM) and (a5: CAPM)
uses a decomposition coming from a one-factor CAPM. The results can be compared with regressions (a2) and (a5) where volatility
is not decomposed. All regressions are based on 91,273 observations coming from 10,419 firms. There are 44,236 observations
including R&D expenses and 47,037 observations not including R&D expenses. Financial firms and utilities are excluded from the
sample. Only firms with fiscal year ending in December are included. The sample ranges from 1975 to 2015. Invest, Roa, Leverage,
and RDexp are winsorized at the 0.1% level. Robust Driscoll-Kraay t-statistics are reported in brackets. Asterisks correspond to
the following p-values: ∗p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.001.

34

35

-0.005
0.560

-0.061
-0.264

0.096

-0.014

0.009

Vol ff pca sys

Vol ff pca unsys

0.223

0.984

0.512

0.091

0.988

0.553

0.986

0.534

Vol firm

Turn firm
0.307
0.150

0.054

0.291
0.026

0.170

0.034
0.628

0.063

0.118

-0.037
0.121

0.326
0.044

0.061

Panel C: Non-R&D Observations

-0.013

0.120

-0.023

Panel B: R&D Observations

0.118

-0.030

0.045

Invest

Panel A: All Observations

Skew firm

-0.617

0.003

-0.074

-0.609

-0.060

-0.609

-0.028

Size

-0.371

-0.163

-0.229

-0.384

-0.167

-0.363

-0.160

Roa

0.060

0.109

-0.001

-0.047

0.002

-0.004

0.046

Leverage

-0.421

-0.181

-0.096

-0.494

-0.279

-0.460

-0.232

Div dum

0.357

1.000

0.034

0.428

1.000

0.395

1.000

Vol ff pca sys

1.000

0.094

1.000

1.000

Vol ff pca unsys

1.000

RDexp

Table 8: Volatility Correlations for the PCA Subsample. This table reports the correlations between the relevant variables and the volatility parts derived
from a PCA with two components. All regressions are based on 67,290 observations coming from 8,522 firms. There are 34,336 observations including R&D expenses
and 32,954 observations not including R&D expenses. Financial firms and utilities are excluded from the sample. The sample ranges from 1975 to 2015. Additional
information on the sample can be found in Section 7. Invest, Roa, Leverage, and RDexp are winsorized at the 0.1% level.

-0.075

0.237

0.540

RDexp

-0.137

-0.225

0.067

0.230

-0.107

0.129

0.549

-0.244

Vol ff pca unsys

Vol ff pca unsys

Vol sp

Treasury10

Vol ff pca sys

0.047

0.097

Vol ff pca sys

Tobin

Treasury10
Vol sp
Skew firm
Turn firm
Invest
Size
Roa
Leverage
Div dum
RD dum
Vol ff sys
Vol ff unsys
RD vol ff sys
RD vol ff unsys

(2: FF)

(2: FF&PCA)

(5: FF)

0.788

0.735

0.863

0.812

(0.60)

(0.62)

(0.63)

(0.67)

-2.021***

-1.638***

-2.004***

-1.631***

(-7.78)

(-6.36)

(-7.62)

(-6.30)

0.104***

0.102***

0.106***

0.103***

(10.08)

(10.09)

(10.41)

(10.48)

4.256

5.077

4.245

5.041

(1.48)

(1.70)

(1.47)

(1.68)

0.012

0.013

-0.010

-0.009

(1.41)

(1.55)

(-1.72)

(-1.61)

0.295***

0.308***

0.296***

0.308***

(10.37)

(10.28)

(10.09)

(10.01)

-1.910***

-1.908***

-1.861***

-1.859***

(-7.06)

(-7.07)

(-6.89)

(-6.89)

-0.505

-0.503

-0.499

-0.500

(-1.68)

(-1.66)

(-1.73)

(-1.72)

-0.687***

-0.696***

-0.687***

-0.695***

(-8.73)

(-8.60)

(-8.77)

(-8.68)

-0.018

0.009

(-0.09)

(0.05)

-0.697**

-0.669

(-3.37)

(-1.67)

0.392***

0.416***

(4.04)

(4.48)

0.656*

0.613

(2.43)

(1.98)

0.583**

0.546***

(3.21)
Vol ff pca sys

(9.64)
-0.975***

Vol ff pca unsys

-0.962*

(-4.41)

(-2.44)

0.496***

0.507***

(4.85)

(5.80)

RD vol ff pca sys
RD vol ff pca unsys

0.358

0.367

(1.42)

(1.22)

0.615**

0.599***

(3.26)
RDexp
Intercept
R2

(5: FF&PCA)

(7.93)
0.010***

0.010***

(4.79)

(4.72)

2.119***

2.075***

2.094***

2.065***

(11.78)

(11.97)

(22.98)

(24.56)

0.127

0.129

0.129

0.130

Table 9:

Regressions with Volatility Decomposition Involving a PCA. The table reports the results of panel regressions
of Tobin’s Q on selected variables. Firm volatility is decomposed into a systematic and an unsystematic part where the ivol
definition (7.3) is applied with two components. Apart from that the regressions are using the same variables as the ones in
Table 4. All regressions are based on 67,290 observations coming from 8,522 firms. There are 34,336 observations including R&D
expenses and 32,954 observations not including R&D expenses. Financial firms and utilities are excluded from the sample. The
sample ranges from 1975 to 2015. Additional information on the sample can be found in Section 7. Invest, Roa, Leverage, and
RDexp are winsorized at the 0.1% level. Robust Driscoll-Kraay t-statistics are reported in brackets. Asterisks correspond to the
following p-values: ∗p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.001.

36

Treasury10
Vol sp
Skew firm
Turn firm
Invest

(a2: FF)

(a2: FF&PCA)

(a5: FF)

(a5: FF&PCA)

0.094*

0.094*

0.094*

0.093*

(2.12)

(2.16)

(2.06)

(2.10)

0.003

0.011

0.003

0.011

(0.13)

(0.51)

(0.13)

(0.51)

0.009***

0.009***

0.009***

0.009***

(12.12)

(11.98)

(12.06)

(11.93)

0.099

0.130

0.103

0.133

(0.75)

(0.99)

(0.78)

(1.01)
-0.000*

-0.000

-0.000

-0.000*

(-1.45)

(-1.37)

(-2.48)

(-2.46)

Size

0.007***

0.007***

0.007***

0.007***

(8.82)

(9.05)

(8.76)

(9.00)

Roa

0.016***

0.016***

0.016***

0.016***

(5.76)

(5.66)

(5.95)

(5.84)

Leverage

-0.017***

-0.017***

-0.016***

-0.016***

(-8.44)

(-8.40)

(-8.23)

(-8.19)

Div dum

-0.007***

-0.007***

-0.007***

-0.007***

(-4.84)

(-4.92)

(-4.77)

(-4.82)

RD dum

-0.010***

-0.011***

(-4.01)

(-4.09)

Vol ff sys
Vol ff unsys
RD vol ff sys
RD vol ff unsys

-0.002

0.010

(-0.12)

(0.74)

0.024***

0.027***

(5.08)

(6.16)

0.020

-0.002

(1.13)

(-0.19)

0.012**

0.005

(3.17)

(1.42)

Vol ff pca sys
Vol ff pca unsys

-0.012

-0.001

(-0.81)

(-0.07)

0.026***

0.030***

(6.17)

(7.36)

RD vol ff pca sys
RD vol ff pca unsys

0.024

0.001

(1.28)

(0.10)

0.011*

0.003

(2.52)

(0.92)

RDexp
Intercept
R2

0.000*

0.000*

(2.53)

(2.44)

-0.016***

-0.016***

-0.021***

-0.022***

(-3.68)

(-3.88)

(-4.74)

(-4.98)

0.143

0.145

0.141

0.142

Table 10: Regressions of Firm-level Alpha with Volatility Decomposition Involving a PCA. The table reports
the results of panel regressions of annual averages of firm-level alphas on selected variables. Firm volatility is decomposed into a
systematic and an unsystematic part where the ivol definition (7.3) with two components is applied. Apart from that the regressions
are using the same variables as the ones in Table 7. All regressions are based on 67,323 observations coming from 8,527 firms.
There are 34,343 observations including R&D expenses and 32,980 observations not including R&D expenses. Financial firms and
utilities are excluded from the sample. The sample ranges from 1975 to 2015. Additional information on the sample can be found
in Section 7. Invest, Roa, Leverage, and RDexp are winsorized at the 0.1% level. Robust Driscoll-Kraay t-statistics are reported in
brackets. Asterisks correspond to the following p-values: ∗p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.001.

37

ADDITIONAL TABLES

38

Treasury10
Vol sp
Skew firm
Turn firm
Invest
Size
Roa
Leverage
Div dum
RD dum
Vol ff sys
Vol ff unsys
RD vol ff sys
RD vol ff unsys

(2: FF)

(2: FF&PCA)

(5: FF)

0.788

0.743

0.863

0.821

(0.60)

(0.62)

(0.63)

(0.67)

-2.021***

-1.637***

-2.004***

-1.631***

(-7.78)

(-6.32)

(-7.62)

(-6.23)

0.104***

0.102***

0.106***

0.103***

(10.08)

(10.19)

(10.41)

(10.60)

4.256

5.086

4.245

5.048

(1.48)

(1.72)

(1.47)

(1.70)

0.012

0.013

-0.010

-0.009

(1.41)

(1.57)

(-1.72)

(-1.59)

0.295***

0.308***

0.296***

0.308***

(10.37)

(10.29)

(10.09)

(10.02)

-1.910***

-1.908***

-1.861***

-1.859***

(-7.06)

(-7.07)

(-6.89)

(-6.89)

-0.505

-0.505

-0.499

-0.501

(-1.68)

(-1.67)

(-1.73)

(-1.74)

-0.687***

-0.695***

-0.687***

-0.694***

(-8.73)

(-8.59)

(-8.77)

(-8.68)

-0.018

0.010

(-0.09)

(0.05)

-0.697**

-0.669

(-3.37)

(-1.67)

0.392***

0.416***

(4.04)

(4.48)

0.656*

0.613

(2.43)

(1.98)

0.583**

0.546***

(3.21)
Vol ff pca sys

(9.64)
-0.944***

Vol ff pca unsys

-0.930*

(-4.06)

(-2.29)

0.542***

0.552***

(4.83)

(6.11)

RD vol ff pca sys
RD vol ff pca unsys

0.352

0.360

(1.43)

(1.18)

0.608**

0.593***

(3.25)
RDexp
Intercept
R2

Table 11:

(5: FF&PCA)

(6.63)
0.010***

0.010***

(4.79)

(4.72)

2.119***

2.071***

2.094***

2.061***

(11.78)

(11.85)

(22.98)

(23.91)

0.127

0.129

0.129

0.130

Regressions with Volatility Decomposition Involving a PCA. TABLE 9 with 5 components.

39

Treasury10
Vol sp
Skew firm
Turn firm
Invest

(a2: FF)

(a2: FF&PCA)

(a5: FF)

(a5: FF&PCA)

0.094*

0.094*

0.094*

0.093*

(2.12)

(2.17)

(2.06)

(2.11)

0.003

0.012

0.003

0.012

(0.13)

(0.58)

(0.13)

(0.58)

0.009***

0.009***

0.009***

0.009***

(12.12)

(11.95)

(12.06)

(11.89)

0.099

0.135

0.103

0.137

(0.75)

(1.00)

(0.78)

(1.02)
-0.000*

-0.000

-0.000

-0.000*

(-1.45)

(-1.31)

(-2.48)

(-2.41)

Size

0.007***

0.007***

0.007***

0.007***

(8.82)

(9.23)

(8.76)

(9.20)

Roa

0.016***

0.016***

0.016***

0.016***

(5.76)

(5.65)

(5.95)

(5.83)

Leverage

-0.017***

-0.017***

-0.016***

-0.016***

(-8.44)

(-8.37)

(-8.23)

(-8.13)

Div dum

-0.007***

-0.007***

-0.007***

-0.007***

(-4.84)

(-4.94)

(-4.77)

(-4.82)

RD dum

-0.010***

-0.011***

(-4.01)

(-4.08)

Vol ff sys
Vol ff unsys
RD vol ff sys
RD vol ff unsys

-0.002

0.010

(-0.12)

(0.74)

0.024***

0.027***

(5.08)

(6.16)

0.020

-0.002

(1.13)

(-0.19)

0.012**

0.005

(3.17)

(1.42)

Vol ff pca sys
Vol ff pca unsys

-0.013

-0.002

(-0.89)

(-0.13)

0.027***

0.031***

(6.59)

(7.71)

RD vol ff pca sys
RD vol ff pca unsys

0.025

0.002

(1.38)

(0.19)

0.010*

0.003

(2.08)

(0.73)

RDexp
Intercept
R2

Table 12:

0.000*

0.000*

(2.53)

(2.44)

-0.016***

-0.016***

-0.021***

-0.022***

(-3.68)

(-3.97)

(-4.74)

(-5.07)

0.143

0.145

0.141

0.142

Regressions of Firm-level Alpha with Volatility Decomposition Involving a PCA. TABLE 10 with 5

components.

40

